


                                                               J. Postel
IEN 121                                                              ISI
                                                         25 October 1979



        Internet Meeting Notes - 10, 11, 12 & 13 September 1979




I.  INTRODUCTION TO UCL - Jones

   Ron welcomed us to UCL and discussed the arrangements for facilities,
   refreshments, and lunch.

II.  OVERVIEW AND OBJECTIVES - Cerf

   Vint reviewed the need for a working internet system and cited the
   performance of the system as a key issue.  The development of
   procedures to measure and test the performance of the internet are
   now important.  Vint has pointed out that several conceptual design
   issues need to be resolved, for example, protocol support for voice
   conferencing in the internet.

III.  STATUS REPORTS

   A.  DARPA - Cerf

      Vint reported that the Director of the ARPA Information Processing
      Techniques Office, Col. Dave Russell retired on 31 August.  The
      new Director is Dr. Robert Kahn.

      The standardization of IP and TCP for use as the DOD networks
      protocol is progressing.  Dr. Robert Lyons at DCEC is the
      Executive Agent.  The only changes that are necessary are to
      incorporate mechanisms to pass the security and precedence
      information between the application program and TCP, and between
      TCP and IP.  There already is an IP option to carry that
      information in the internet.

      There is a need for a way to test TCP implementations and
      applications that use TCP without taking a service machine down.
      For TOPS20s this will be satisfied by using BBNF.  BBNF is
      currently only on the BBN RCCNET but will be connected to the
      ARPANET for October through December 1979.

      Vint acknowledged that there have been hardware delivery delays
      that have had a substantial impact on the internet program.  The
      delivery schedules from manufactures are very long.





Postel                                                          [Page 1]

                                                                 IEN 121
Internet Meeting Notes



      The program managers in the ARPA office are coordinating to have
      all new applications use internet protocols.

   B.  BBN - Haverty, Plummer, Strazisar, McNeill, Flood Page

      Jack reported that the BBN-Unix TCP is in regular use.  Currently
      work is in progress to provide a user interface to the IP layer.
      The IP support is available as a subroutine package.  The
      interface will be similar to the TOPS20 interface documented in
      IEN 108.  BBN is also working on a VAX UNIX with the goal of
      having the current 11/70 UNIX and VAX UNIX be compatible at the
      applications level.

      Bill reported on the plan to attach BBNF to the ARPANET for ease
      in testing TCP and TCP using applications.  In doing this testing
      it is preferred to have one person at a time to simplify the
      identification of problems.  Note that one will have to use new
      1822 (96-bit leaders) to access BBNF since it will be on IMP 67.
      The latest IP and TCP and Telnet are installed at ISID and ISIE
      TOPS20 Systems.  In the last month or two several bugs have been
      identified and fixed.  The next major step is to complete the
      TENEX version of TCP-4 and to eliminate any remaining instances of
      TCP-2.5.  It is assumed that both the Packet Radio Project and UCL
      have completed their conversion to version 4, and that as soon as
      the SATNET project completes its conversion version 2.5 can be
      eliminated. The LDRSRV program was converted to use IP in a few
      hours.  An FTP on TCP, based on ARPA FTP, is in debugging.

      Ginny reported that several gateways are running, most are MOS
      based.  It is planned to phase out the remaining ELF based
      gateways.

         MOS Gateways

            at UCL between UCLNET and SATNET
            at NDRE between ARPANET and SATNET
            at BBN between ARPANET and SATNET
            at SRI between PRNET and ARPANET

         ELF Gateways

            at Ft. Bragg between PRNET and ARPANET

      It is planned to install a gateway at COMSAT between SATNET and
      the COMSAT local net.  There is a new monitoring system.  A
      configuration with a port expander and a gateway in the same
      machine is planned, it will be a tight fit.

      Dale reported on the SATNET conversion to use IP.  There are still



Postel                                                          [Page 2]

                                                                 IEN 121
Internet Meeting Notes



      a number of programs to be converted, but it could be completed in
      about a month.  Most of the remaining programs are used for
      maintenance or error recover.  A weekend test was conducted using
      IP only.  The major event impacting SATNET will be the removal of
      the NORWAY-LONDON ARPANET line at the end of September.  This
      means all the LONDON ARPANET traffic will be routed via SATNET.

      David noted that the scheduled GMCC demonstration will be a
      presentation, since there is nothing to demonstrate.

   C.  COMSAT - Mills

      Dave reported that the ETAM and GOONHILLY PSPs are in the field
      and the TANUM PSP will be shipped soon.  There have been some
      minor problems, for example, the software checksum and the
      hardware checksum do not agree.  It is expected that the PSPs will
      be on the air next month.

      Much of the COMSAT activity during the last few months has been
      directed to the NTC Demo in November and development of the Demo
      Terminal software. Currently, we have made arrangements for a
      suitable room and are now planning installation of lines,
      terminals and other gear. The demo will include speech, fax and
      the usual interactive and bulk transfers between ARPANET hosts and
      the Demo Terminal.

      The Demo Terminal software has been checked out at UCL using an
      LSI-11, floppy disk, LPCM and Port Expander connected to UCLNET
      (net 13). TCP/Telnet was tested with ISIE via UCLNET, SATNET and
      ARPANET. FTP was checked out in loopback mode via the UCL Gateway.
      The LPCM was operated in expensive dictaphone mode only, since
      support is not yet complete for SATNET streams. This software will
      play with the Demo Terminal software at COMSAT and at the NTC
      Demo.

      At COMSAT a Dacom 450 FAX machine has been delivered. This will be
      connected to the Demo Terminal and taken to the NTC site. Software
      to support this machine is now in frenzied development. When
      complete an update will be distributed to UCL. For local testing
      we are trying to arrange a direct connection to ARPANET (avoiding
      the SATNET for the time being) for debugging.

   D.  DCA - Cain

      Ed reported that DCEC has a small (2-page) "C" program running in
      an 11/34 with two 1822 interfaces which implements a gateway.






Postel                                                          [Page 3]

                                                                 IEN 121
Internet Meeting Notes



   E.  DOD - McFarland

      Ray noted that mid October is the target date for the draft DOD
      Standards IP/TCP document.  These documents will be rewritten to
      military document conventions.

   F.  ISI STATUS - Postel

      Jon noted that ISI is not implementing any IP, TCP or Gateways.
      ISI did attempt to write a program that used TCP on TOPS20.  This
      program did not work (TOPs'20 crashed).  Debugging is in progress
      with Bill Plummer and the ISI systems staff.  ISI is working on an
      Internet Message Program.  This is in an early testing phase and
      will be using TCP for inter module communication.

   G.  LL - Forgie

      Jim noted that the main Lincoln effort has been on the ST protocol
      to be discussed later and described in IEN 119.

      Experiments with ARPANET-SATNET speech have been conducted with
      one source/destination in the ARPANET and another in the SATNET.
      There have been unexpectedly large delays in the SATNET streams,
      and in matching the ARPANET to the SATNET in the special purpose
      Gateway.

   H.  MIT - Clark, Chiappa

      Dave discussed the status of the LSCNET.  There is a 5 node system
      up and running.  The development of a version 2 interface is in
      progress.  There has been difficulty getting an LSCNET/ARPANET
      gateway working due to low level hardware problems.  A Trivial
      File Transfer has been implemented directly on IP.  In Multics the
      IP layer will act as a gateway.  MIT  will be involved in the
      XEROX Grant program.  Dave will be involved in integrating the
      Xerox equipment into the LCS environment.  A PDP-11 based gateway
      between LCSNET and the ETHERNET is contemplated.

      Noel commented that he saw a need for an effort to be made to
      convince groups to use IP rather than invent their own protocols.

   I.  NDRE - Stensby

      NDRE has been assisting in the preparations for the speech demo.
      The protocol status is nearly the same as last reported.  This is
      due to VDH connection problems.  Much work has been done on
      debugging the connection.  Possible bugs have been very difficult
      to track down because we lack control of vital parts of the
      system.  A couple of bugs have been found and corrected in the



Postel                                                          [Page 4]

                                                                 IEN 121
Internet Meeting Notes



      NORD-10 VDH software without any substantial effect.  The real
      problem seems to be that at certain times when the TIP has sent a
      packet out of sequence, it keeps retransmitting this packet
      instead of retransmitting the packet that is really missing.

   J.  RSRE - Davies

      Brian reported that RSRE has programmed a gateway (based on
      IEN 30) and attempted to bring it up as a catenet gateway between
      UCLNET and RSRENET.  RSRE will be bringing up a host with IP and
      TCP in about a month.

   K.  SRI - Kunzelman, Mathis

      Ron reported that SRI is now operating two PRNETs in the San
      Francisco bay area, and one PRNET at Ft. Bragg, North Carolina.
      The net at Ft. Bragg is now eight terminals on two TIUs, and will
      grow to forty terminals.

      Jim reported that the LDRSRV at SRI-KA which now uses TCP-2.5 will
      be changed to use version 4 soon, tested at BBNF, and installed at
      ISID and ISIE.  Jim is also working on a Port Expander and Mini
      Gateway combined.

   L.  UCL - Kirstein, Jones, Treadwell, Cole, Bennett, Higginson

      Peter gave a brief overview of the UCL effort, then let various
      members of the UCL group give reports on their activities.

      Ron discussed the problems of including network software in a
      small Unix system.  There was also some discussion of port
      expanders and X.25/IP interfaces.

      Steve reported on the situation with the FAX experiment.  The main
      problems seem to be with the timing constraints of the device, and
      matching these to the flow control constraints of TCP.  This
      system currently uses TCP-2.5 but will convert to version 4 soon.

      Bob reported on the development of a "C" to MOS linkage.

      Chris discussed the prototype NIFTP service that allows FTPs from
      EPSS to Tenex and vice versa.  A Unix version of NIFTP has been
      implemented.

      Peter discussed the many flavors of X.25 one finds when building
      X.25/XXX interfaces.






Postel                                                          [Page 5]

                                                                 IEN 121
Internet Meeting Notes



   M.  IRIA & CELAR - Zimmerman

      Hubert said that IRIA and CELAR would like to explore the
      possibility of cooperative research on the interconnection of
      networks.  IRIA is working on local networks and interconnection
      with TRANSPAC and CYCLADES.

   N.  UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER - Lantz

      Keith gave a brief overview of the environment at the University
      of Rochester and indicated the interest in becoming part of the
      internet system.

IV.  ACTION ITEMS

   A.  DOCUMENTATION STATUS - Postel

      Jon reviewed the IENs issued since the last meeting.

         IEN     Author          Title
         ---     ------          -----

         108     Plummer         Internet User Queues

            Describes the TOPS20 user interface to the IP.

         109     Strazisar       How to Build a Gateway

            Describes the messages Gateways exchange with each other and
            with hosts, i.e., the Gateway-Gateway protocol.  The main
            focus is on the computation of connectivity and routing
            information.  Replaces IEN 30.

         110     Cerf            Internet Addressing and Naming in a
                                 Tactical Environment

            Presents several addressing problems, particularly the
            "flying packet radio" problem.

         111     Postel          Internet Protocol
         112     Postel          Transmission Control Protocol

            The latest editions of the IP and TCP specifications.  Not
            intended to be a change to the protocols but a better
            documentation of them.  Replaces IENs 80 and 81.







Postel                                                          [Page 6]

                                                                 IEN 121
Internet Meeting Notes



         114     Postel          Protocol Options

            Summarizes the option available with IP and TCP.  Replaces
            IEN 92.

         115     Postel          Address Mappings

            Shows how the addresses of various networks are carried in
            the Internet Address format.  Replaces IEN 91.

         116     Postel          Internet Name Server

            Specifies the Internet Name Server, including same new
            features suggested by John Pickens.  Replaces IEN 89.

         117     Postel          Assigned Numbers

            Lists the assigned number for various protocol fields, e.g.
            Networks, Sockets or Ports.  Replaces IEN 93.

         118     Postel          Internet Protocol Handbook
                                 Table of Contents

            A one page list of the IENs that specify the current
            internet protocols.  Replaces IEN 94.

         119     Forgie          ST - A Proposed Internet
                                 Stream Protocol

            The description of a Internet level protocol for voice
            conferencing.  Includes features for establishing
            multi-addressee connections.

      The discussion that followed suggested several things that should
      be documented.  For example, the higher level protocols (Telnet,
      FTP) should be in the internet protocol handbook, the procedure
      for determining parameters (e.g. retransmission timeout) should be
      documented, what to do in exception conditions should be
      described, testing procedures should be discussed (especially an
      acceptance test).

      Concern was expressed that the new editions of the IP and TCP
      specification were not suitably reviewed by the implementors.  It
      was suggested that a version with changes marked would be useful
      (see Appendix B).







Postel                                                          [Page 7]

                                                                 IEN 121
Internet Meeting Notes



   B.  EXPECTED DOCUMENTS

      1.  IP Generic Services - Do the two documents 1) the IP Spec by
          Jon (IEN 111), and 2) the Gateway Spec by Ginny (IEN 109),
          supply the information needed?

      2.  SATNET IP Services - Dale McNeill is working with Dave Mills
          (currently the only user).  When the current experiments are
          completed a document will be produced.

      3.  Transition Plan - Vint will discuss the issues in a small
          group meeting and appoint a task force to prepare the plan.

      4.  Host IP Services - Bill Plummer will prepare a document based
          on his talk on How to Build a Host IP.

   C.  XNET - It seems that XNET is not yet fixed to work with IP due to
       a technical disagreement between Jim Mathis and Ray Tomlinson.
       The solution to this is to be reported on at the next meeting.

   D.  Hack IP at SRI-KA and LDRSRV - This is working according to Jim
       Mathis.

V.  INTERNET TRAFFIC EXPERIENCE - Davies

   RSRE has conducted some experiments sending messages looped back to
   themselves, with the loopback being located at various places, and
   using several input speeds and block sizes.

   At RSRE there is a multi-terminal TIU with some modifications to
   perform measurements.  The TIU measures the time between the TCP
   segment first being sent and the acknowledgment arriving, a kind of
   round-trip time.

   The path is TIU via 2.4Kb line to PIXIE to PORT Expander to TIP into
   ARPANET. The input was either typing, a 1 octet segment traffic
   generator, or a 128 octet segment traffic generator. Histograms of
   performance under various inputs and loopback points were presented.

   The results indicate lower than expected performance and the
   speculation was that the limiting factor was the program interrupt
   1822 interface (either in PIXIE or the Port Expander).

   It was noted that when two traffic generators were run sending
   segments to each other, ACKs were piggybacked 100% of the time both
   at the TCP level and at the X.25 level (recall the RSRE to PIXIE line
   operates the X.25 level 2 link protocol).





Postel                                                          [Page 8]

                                                                 IEN 121
Internet Meeting Notes



VI.  HOW TO BUILD A GATEWAY - Strazisar

   Ginny discussed the way gateways determine how to do routing.  The
   actual messages used are documented in IEN 109.

   A gateway gathers information on network connectivity by polling its
   network interfaces and known neighbor gateways.  The polling is done
   by sending a message, currently every 30 seconds.  There is an
   algorithm to decide if a net or gateway is up or down based on the
   results of the polling.  The routing algorithm is based on a distance
   measure, a directly connected network is zero distance, an
   unreachable network is infinite distance.  The gateways exchange with
   neighbors their distance tables (substituting infinity in entries
   where the distance to the destination is greater than the distance
   from the neighbor).  Routing information is sent only when something
   changes.  A new gateway can join the system as long as old gateways
   can add a row to their tables dynamically.

   Note that "smart gateways" do all this routing and connectivity work,
   "dumb gateways" do not.  Smart gateways try to route things to other
   smart gateways, but if that can't be done they may fall back to using
   compiled in fixed routes to dumb gateways.

   Danny Cohen suggested that there may be problems with this algorithm
   as the number of networks gets large.

VII.  HOW TO BUILD A HOST IP - Plummer

   Bill presented the general flow of processing in a Host IP.  In
   general datagrams arrive from the connected network interfaces.  Any
   fragmented datagrams are reassembled.  Complete datagrams are entered
   into a queue.  Datagrams addressed to other hosts may be forwarded if
   this host is acting as a gaweway, otherwise they are discarded.
   Datagrams addressed to this host are delivered to waiting protocol
   modules or user processes.  User processes or protocol modules may
   create datagrams to be sent, these are queued and based on the
   destination address sent via one of the connected network interfaces.

   During the processing of arriving datagrams several checks must be
   made:

      1.  check the IP version number
      2.  verify the checksum
      3.  see that the length field and the amount received are
          consistent (amount received may be slightly greater due to
          padding)
      4.  check time to live
      5.  assemble fragments




Postel                                                          [Page 9]

                                                                 IEN 121
Internet Meeting Notes



   When sending a datagram the IP fills in several fields and makes a
   routing decision:

      1.  Insert source address
      2.  Insert any IP options called for
      3.  Insert time to live
      4.  Insert checksum
      5.  Make a routing decision, select an output interface, generate
          local net header and interpret type of service.
      6.  Queue for transmission

   The routing decision can be based on a table of network - gateway
   correspondences.  For each network a gateway on a directly connected
   network is listed.  If the host is notified to use a different
   gateway for that destination network the table can be updated.  If a
   gateway breaks and the host can tell (e.g., receives a "destination
   dead" response)  then switch to an alternate gateway.  It is
   suggested that a heuristic for switching destination gateway is to do
   it when the higher level protocol (e.g., TCP) retransmits a segment.
   (However it is not clear the IP can tell a new transmission from a
   retransmission).

   In the area of congestion control Bill suggests that it is the rate
   that must be controlled which may be considered to determine an
   internet datagram interval.  If a gateway tells a host to slow down,
   increase the internet datagram interval to, say, 130% of its former
   value.  To avoid being stuck at a too large value for the internet
   datagram interval, reduce it to 95% of its former value every 30
   seconds or so.

   There is an issue of fairness in any congestion control.  How can the
   IP properly allocate the available transmission capacity among the
   higher level protocol modules and users?

   The discussion suggested the need for a "Trace Datagram" that causes
   each gateway and the destination host to send back a note, a kind of
   "multi-echo."

   IP modules should provide a handle on the user side to explicitly
   cause a new routing to be calculated.

   The congestion control parameters may be very critical and sensitive.
   Dave Clark has done some simulation experiments and will prepare an
   IEN on this topic.  There may be some interaction between
   source-destination host pairs in this area.







Postel                                                         [Page 10]

                                                                 IEN 121
Internet Meeting Notes



VIII.  STREAMS AND CONFERENCING - Forgie

   Jim presented the proposed ST protocol which is documented in IEN 
   119.  The goals of ST are:  (1) to provide a good base for
   point-to-point and conference packet speech, (2) to support research
   on effective traffic control techniques, (3) to support a
   demonstration of cost-effective speech, and (4) to operate as an
   extension of internet protocol.

   Jim indicated four requirements and corresponding approaches for
   meeting them:  (1) guaranteed data rate - know requirement in advance
   and assign loads to links statistically, (2) controlled delay
   (predictable dispersion) - prevent congestion by controlling access
   on a call basis, (3) small quantity of speech per packet - use
   abbreviated header and aggregate small packets for efficiency, and
   (4) efficiency equal to or better than circuit switching without TASI
   (packet efficiency * link utilization > 45%) - abbreviated headers
   for packet efficiency and high link utilization with effective
   traffic control.

   One of the key decisions is to consider ST connections to be full
   duplex.  The claim is made that this allows faster connection setup
   for conferences.  There was some discussion on this point and the
   issue will be examined further.

   Another issue is the sharing of transmission capacity between speech
   (ST) and data (IP) in the internet.

   Also discussed was the identification of the route by a list of
   gateways rather than by a list of networks.  The resources to be
   reserved are controlled by networks not gateways.

   One very interesting feature of ST is its mechanism for flexible
   multi-addressing and routing of messages such that each addressee
   receives at most one copy of a message.

   Jim presented the message formats and worked through an example of
   connection setup.  There was some concern expressed about the effects
   of delayed duplicate control messages, and how ST operates under
   failure conditions.  Also concern that several conference setups in
   competion may result is a deadlock similar to reassembly lock up.











Postel                                                         [Page 11]

                                                                 IEN 121
Internet Meeting Notes



IX.  SOURCE ROUTING & PROTOCOL MULTIPLEXING - Cohen

   Danny reviewed the proposed source routing procedure described in
   IEN 95.  This mechanism provides a list of addresses for the datagram
   to pass through.  Normal routing is used to move the datagram between
   these points.  The route information for sending a datagram from A
   through B and C to D is expressed by A as TO: B, SR: C,D.  At B this
   is changed to TO: C, SR: D, and at C it is changed to TO: D.  The key
   is that the next address must be interpretable at the point it is
   used.  This means that local (rather than internet) addresses may be
   used.

   The discussion focused around the issue of non internet addresses in
   the source route and how (if at all) to mark them.  It seems
   desirable to let a source route contain any of the following in any
   order:

      1.  Internet Address.
      2.  Local Address (prefixed with an escape code and a length).
      3.  Network Address (Network part only).
      4.  Here - an address value that means this host, this net (or any
          host, or every host).

   Alternately one could have each address in the source route have a
   prefixed "op-code" that indicates what kind of address it is.

   Danny did not discuss the multiplexing of protocols (due to time
   pressures) but urged everyone to review IEN 90.  It appeared that the
   multiplexing protocol was accepted (at least in principle).

X.  GATEWAY MONITORING & CONTROL CENTER - Flood Page

   David described the GMCC organization and the types of information
   that will be reported.

   The operation is much like the ARPANET NCC except that gateways are
   the objects of interest rather than IMPs.

   Gateways will communicate with a set of monitoring and control
   processes (running on a TOPS20 somewhere).  These monitoring and
   control processes will update a central data base.  The data in this
   data base may be accessed by Terminal Processes (i.e., User Interface
   Programs).

   A terminal process may take control of a gateway, but a gateway may
   only be controlled by one terminal process at a time.

   Three types of controls may be exercised:  start or stop reports,
   inquiries, enable or disable traps.  The reports give throughput



Postel                                                         [Page 12]

                                                                 IEN 121
Internet Meeting Notes



   statistics and interface up/down status.  The inquiries give the
   gateway description (name, connectivity), echo response, or routing
   data.  The traps give changes in the interface up/down status, or
   neighbor gateway up/down status.

   The information stored for each gateway in the central data base
   includes:  the latest regular report, the interface address, the
   neighbor gateways, the reporting and trap status, the gateways own
   up/down status, and the process currently controlling the gateway (if
   any).

   In the future the GMCC will provide summary reports on traffic and
   up/down status.

   Other future topics are Performance Measures, Higher Level Fault
   Diagnosis, Accounting Information, and inclusion of information from
   NCCs.

   To use the GMCC facilities one would login to the GMCC host and run a
   terminal process.  There was some discussion of the access control on
   people taking control of gateways.  Also some concern about the
   artifact introduced into the measurement by accessing the GMCC via
   the gateway being measured, and also the effect on other gateways (or
   their statistics) of relaying the measurement messages to the GMCC
   host.

   David will prepare reports on:  (1) GMCC Message Formats, (2) How to
   use a Terminal Process.

XI.  DISCUSSION OF SPEECH DEMO - Forgie

   Jim described the configuration for the speech demo.  There are four
   sites involved:  Lincoln Laboratory and ISI on the ARPANET and NDRE
   and UCL on the SATNET.  There is a special purpose gateway at BBN.
   This gateway is a PDP 11/34 ELF system.  The basic data rate for one
   site is 5 packets/sec, at this rate the gateway must handle 15
   packets/sec.

   In the ARPANET section of the conference the mode of operation is
   centralized control and distributed data.  In the SATNET section the
   mode is distributed control and distributed data.  The SATNET section
   uses a SATNET shared stream.

XII.  DISCUSSION OF FAX SYSTEM - Treadwell

   Steve described the configuration and operation of the FAX-Network
   system.  The FAX machine is a DACOM 6000.  It is connected to an
   LSI-11 (MOS operating system).  The LSI-11 contains an interface to




Postel                                                         [Page 13]

                                                                 IEN 121
Internet Meeting Notes



   the DACOM, a TCP, and a controlling program.  The controlling program
   interacts with a user at a display terminal.

   There is also a server FAX program on BBNC that accepts input and
   stores it in the file system, or on request sends stored FAX data
   from the file system.

   The operation is for the user to type on the controlling programs
   terminal a request to send FAX data to a file.  A TCP connection is
   established between the LSI-11 and FAX server at BBNC.

   Pages are input through the DACOM and data is sent to BBNC and stored
   in the file.  To move FAX data from the file to paper, the user
   enters a retrieve request on the controlling programs terminal.

   This system currently uses TCP-2.5.  The next step will be to convert
   to using version 4.  Also to change the address so the transmission
   will be through an internet gateway.

   There have been several problems in getting this working.  Primarily
   the timing requirements of the DACOM and the flow control of TCP.  A
   typical page results in 300,000 bits (with wide variance).  The DACOM
   sends 585 bit blocks and if not accepted with in 6 seconds aborts the
   page.  The total transmission path must support at least 100 bits/sec
   on the long term average.

   ISI is getting a RAPICOM 450 FAX machine and will use it in a similar
   way.  (A RAPICOM 450 and a DACOM 6000 are identical machines).  At
   ISI the FAX machine will be treated as a device (a peculiar terminal
   on TOPS20) rather than as a host.

XIII.  ADDRESSING ISSUES - Cerf

   Vint described several situations where a host may have several
   possible addresses and may wish to change between them dynamically
   without losing ongoing communications.

   A host may be dual (or multiply) homed, i.e., have two (or more)
   interfaces to the same net.  A host may be connected to more than one
   net.  Or a host may change nets.

   This last case is illustrated by a flying packet radio, passing over
   a series of ground PRNETs each connected to the internet via a
   gateway.  The flying packet radio is for a time in the range of
   PRNET-1, then passes out of that range into the range of PRNET-2,
   etc.

   Another problem is partitioning.  That is a network breaks into two
   (or more) parts which continue to function independently.  Can a host



Postel                                                         [Page 14]

                                                                 IEN 121
Internet Meeting Notes



   in one part communicate with a host in another part via gateways and
   other networks?

   Does source routing solve the partitioning problem?  Or is a scheme
   needed to dynamically assign unique addresses to each partition so
   that the ordinary gateway dynamic routing will solve the problem?

   Another proposal is to drop the requirement that connection be
   identified by the total address.  By using only the pair of ports to
   identify a connection one could accept as a continuation of a
   conversation messages from a different host if it had the same pair
   of ports (and the expected sequence number).

XIV.  PARTITIONING - Plummer

   Bill discussed the problems of multiply connected hosts.  If a host
   is connected to two networks, which are also interconnected via
   gateways, the host has alternate routes to use in sending messages.
   The internet gateways can exchange connectivity information.  A
   multiply connected host cannot take full advantage of this without
   being a gateway itself and calling the host a network.  Another
   problem is for a destination to answer a message from a multi-
   connected host.  The multi-connected host would like to allow any of
   its interfaces to be used to receive the reply.  To do this it could
   use a pseudo network number and act as if those interfaces were
   gateway connections.

   This use of network numbers for pseudo nets may use up the network
   numbers too quickly.  Bill proposes what he calls host-group routing
   which uses a 32 bit address as if it were a network number.  A host
   chooses one of its internet addresses as its "name".  Gateways treat
   that name as a network name for connectivity and routing purposes.  A
   mask can be used to allow groups of hosts to be routed based on one
   entry.  Bill gave an example of how this might work and showed a
   routing table for a pseudo net at BBNC.

   This topic is to be discussed again at the next meeting.

XV.  RIG - Lantz

   Keith reported on the network environment at the University of
   Rochester.  The key is a multi-machine multi-net system started in
   1974.  All communication between processes in this system is via
   messages.  The system is based on Feldman's experience and other
   papers on message communication.

   The equipment involved includes:  4 Altos, 2 Eclipses, an Ethernet, 9
   terminals, 1 PDP-10, 1 VAX, and an ARPANET.  The applications
   include:  editing, compiling, file management.  An important



Postel                                                         [Page 15]

                                                                 IEN 121
Internet Meeting Notes



   development is the virtual terminal model, which allows several
   processes to interact with a terminal using multiple possibly
   overlapping windows.

   The process level communication involves a name to address conversion
   by lookup in a name server, and an address to route conversion
   supported by a local kernel and network communication modules.  Three
   communication styles are supported:  atomic transactions, connections
   or streams, and asynchronous messages.

   One problem area is protocols.  There are too many:  U of R Ethernet,
   PARC Ethernet, ARPANET, DECNET, internet.  Can all these live in
   harmony?

XVI.  SUMMARY OF SMALL GROUP MEETINGS

   1.  PERFORMANCE MEASUREMENT SMALL GROUP MEETING - Kunzelman

      This group discussed the need for performance measurements of the
      internet protocols at all levels.  The group reviewed the current
      work, discussed performance metrics, measurement tools, and
      documentation of measurement methods and results.

      The group recommends that specifications of performance measures
      for IP and TCP be written, that a set of tests for IP, TCP, and
      higher level protocols be defined, and that a bibliography on
      performance measurement be prepared.

      Please see Appendix C for further detail on this group meeting.

   2.  UNIX SMALL GROUP MEETING - Cain

      Three topics were addressed in the UNIX small group meeting:

      1. Use of network UNIX on small PDP-11's
         (specifically, the 11/34 and the 11/40).
      2. MOS work on UNIX systems.
      3. Use of UNIX on VAX machines.

      For PDP-11's which do not support the separation of instruction
      and data space, incorporating the widely distributed NCP programs
      into the UNIX kernel usually produces an object which is barely
      small enough to boot, even after greatly reducing various system
      parameters. Processes like TCP and Telnet have to share the scarce
      remaining space, and are bound to perform poorly because of
      swapping. Noel Chiappa is about to obtain, from NOSC, a version of
      UNIX which has no disk buffers in the kernel data space, and will
      attempt to install the NCP kernel software. Performance of this




Postel                                                         [Page 16]

                                                                 IEN 121
Internet Meeting Notes



      version of UNIX is uncertain, but a mailing list (see Appendix A)
      has been established for those interested in the outcome.

      UCL, MIT, and BBN are all interested in doing MOS work in a UNIX
      environment. The problem is that there is a variety of file types
      (a.out, .obj, .rel, .lda) which must somehow be combined into an
      object which is loadable into an LSI-11, and is understandable by
      DDT or a similar debugger. UCL has "C" interfaces to MOS system
      calls and some utilities which Noel Chiappa will attempt to put in
      a "nice" UNIX environment, and make them available for others. A
      mailing list (see Appendix A) was established for those who wish
      to follow his progress.

      Keith Lantz discussed a meeting with ARPA, Rochester, CMU, and
      others associated with ARPA-funded research involving VAX
      machines. At the meeting, the decision was made to use UNIX on the
      VAX machines, specifically the version of UNIX modified at
      Berkeley to take advantage of the VAX paging hardware. The source
      of support for the VAX UNIX is not yet named. Rochester and CMU
      are both interested in implementing TCP and IP on their VAX
      machines. A mailing list (see Appendix A) was established for
      those interested.

   3.  TCP VERSION 4 AND TIU SMALL GROUP MEETING - Haverty

      The small group meeting on the status of the new TCP
      implementation and TIU also covered some general issues of TCP
      support for MOS-based systems in general.

      Jim Mathis reported that recent work on the MOS TCP version 4
      implementation involved separating the code into individual
      modules, to isolate the network- and operating-system-dependent
      sections of the code. The major part of the TCP code is now in the
      TV4PRO module.   Operating system support code exists in TV4MOS or
      TV4ELF, depending on the operating system involved.   The
      "released" versions of this implementation are available on the
      SRI-KL machine in the MOS-DEVEL directory, but they will be moved
      soon to PKT-LSI-11.

      Ongoing work with the TCP involves addition of an internet layer
      which will be accessible to user processes using entry points to
      be defined.  This will occur in a later release of the software,
      which is not expected to involve any changes to the TCP interface
      to user processes. The internet layer will also implement some of
      the gateway-gateway protocol functions.

      In addition, the software can be extended to support multiple
      hardware interfaces, to permit multi-homing of hosts on multiple
      networks. This work however is not yet in progress.



Postel                                                         [Page 17]

                                                                 IEN 121
Internet Meeting Notes



      The discussions which followed identified a need for two new
      mechanisms within the user community.  The first is simply an
      announcement mechanism, to inform users of the SRI software of new
      releases, the changes which have been made, functions added, and
      location of the code itself.   A second mechanism involves
      integration of changes developed at user sites into the
      SRI-maintained sources.  For example, software to support other
      network types must be done at the site running the network, but
      should then be integrated into the standard sources.

      Because of the need for sites other than SRI to implement
      network-interface software, the internal interface between the TCP
      and internet layer and the local-net module must be clearly
      defined and stabilized.  MIT is likely to be the first site to
      implement a new local-net module.

      Further discussion explored details of the functionality of the
      existing TCP implementation, and requirements which various user
      projects expect to have in the future.   Some of the facilities
      not yet implemented include:

         o ability to have multiple connections in one MOS process
         o reassembly of internet fragments
         o full processing of EOL
         o processing of "rubber EOL"
         o user access to URGENT functions
         o full functionality at the Telnet user interface

      The last area explored identified the need for additional work on
      the Telnet implementation, to, for example, provide the ability to
      send remote RESETs.

      A short discussion of "coming attractions" followed, including the
      following expected changes:

         o internet layer in Bliss, probably by the end of 1979
         o use of the internet name server by Telnet
         o XNET server within MOS, to debug MOS processes remotely

      The TCP software is currently written in MACRO-11.  It is a
      candidate for conversion to Bliss, but this will not be done until
      the Port-expander software is converted.

      One possible performance limitation was identified during the
      discussion.  Currently, data is ACKed when it is accepted by a
      user process.  Since this can be significantly later than the
      actual receipt of the data from the network, throughput might be
      improved by modifying the TCP to ACK data on receipt from the
      network.



Postel                                                         [Page 18]

                                                                 IEN 121
Internet Meeting Notes



      A short discussion of TIU issues identified the need for
      determining how many terminals can be supported by a TIU at once,
      in two cases.  In a heavy-use situation, the limitation on number
      of active, high-throughput terminals should be determined.  This
      number is probably limited by the raw speed of the LSI-11, and may
      be increased by conversion to faster hardware such as the
      PDP-11/23 when it is available.  A second case involves the
      limitation on support of low-usage terminals.  This limit involves
      primarily how many serial interfaces can be connected to the
      LSI-11 and configured in the packaging.

      The meeting also demonstrated a need for better interchange of
      information among the participants and general community of users
      of MOS, TIUs, and related hardware and software.  A mailing list
      is being set up, called MOS-TCP, for this kind of activity (see
      Appendix A).

   4.  LONDON-NORSAR LINE AND SATNET SMALL GROUP MEETING - McNeill

      Dale said that loading of the Goonhilly SIMP and the london TIP
      over the satellite channel is operational.  Monitoring and control
      paths exist for all SIMPs; sufficient backup paths exist through
      use of the satellite channel and gateways connected to other
      SIMPs.

      Vint announced that beginning January 1, l980, the NORSAR-SDAC
      circuit will become a military circuit for operational data only.
      Seismic data traffic from the NORSAR TIP will continue to be sent
      on this line.

      Funding for the London-NORSAR circuit ceases October 1, 1979.
      Peter anticipates that the ARPANET direct connection circuit via
      SATNET (line 77 between London and SDAC) will be needed to provide
      ARPANET connectivity to the London TIP until some time after
      October l980.  This circuit will continue to provide ARPANET
      service to the Rutherford Lab, EPSS, and the London TIP.  The
      long-term goal is to have internet service to London only using
      the UCL gateway attached to SATNET. Prerequisite is a change of
      the London TIP to a host (TCP TIP).  The mechanism of internet
      loading and support of London machines must be developed.

      In conflict with the maintenance of operational service to London
      is the introduction and checkout of PSP Terminals, the checkout
      and release of new SIMP software, and the checkout and performance
      of the NTC demonstration.  Hardware and software development will
      be restricted to after 1400 EDT, while operational service will be
      maintained from 0200 to 1400 EDT, daily.





Postel                                                         [Page 19]

                                                                 IEN 121
Internet Meeting Notes



   5.  NTC DEMO PLANNING SMALL GROUP MEETING - Mills

      The principal results from that meeting were a revised plan for
      network connectivity and a change in the way speech would be
      handled. Specifically, it was decided that Jim Forgie's software
      would be used in the BBN and UCL gateways with the LPCM operated
      from Washington via appropriate data lines to the BBN Gateway. Jim
      has already made provision for this in the LPCM design, but it has
      not been operated in this mode before.

      Datagram traffic for the Demo is planned to be sent via
      Clarksburg, with a backup to Etam via a backdoor connection via
      the Clarksburg SIMP internal gateway and the RCC or other suitable
      hack. UCL will participate in the Demo from London with live
      speech and fax. Participation by NDRE will depend on a PSP
      Terminal being installed there.

      Jim mentioned a couple of minor problems with the LPCM hardware.
      Correcting these will probably involve sending ROMs to the various
      sites. There is a question of Gateway reliability which leaves all
      of us nervous

   6.  IP/TCP FLOW CONTROL SMALL GROUP MEETING - Clark

      This meeting was a fairly informal discussion among the
      implementors of TCP and gateways. Several topics were discussed.
      1) How to manage RFNMs on internet link.
      2) A simple simulation of a host responding to quench messages.
      3) How to perform quenching experiments, given the current level
         of internet operation.
      4) Should the TCP-IP or application-TCP interface be
         specified/standardized with respect to flow control?

      While the discussion was fruitful, no substantial conclusions were
      drawn.

   7.  X.25 GATEWAY SMALL GROUP MEETING - Binder

      The purpose of this meeting was to review various factors
      impacting the development of an ARPANET/X.25 gateway using an
      LSI-11 to provide a 50 Kbps full duplex service. The meeting
      basically covered only the issue of hardware interfacing to the
      X.25 network. Three different interfaces were discussed: a
      byte-interrupt device, a non-DMA packet-interrupt device, and a
      full DMA device.

      The byte-interrupt interface and related level 2 and 3 X.25
      software has been developed by UCL and is now available for use.
      Although precise throughput measurements have not yet been made,



Postel                                                         [Page 20]

                                                                 IEN 121
Internet Meeting Notes



      experience with the LSI-11/MOS system by meeting attendees
      indicated that a byte-interrupt configuration would not achieve 50
      Kbps full duplex operation. In particular, measurements by SRI
      have indicated a maximum of about 50 Kbps through a looped-back
      1822 byte-interrupt interface on a MOS system running only a
      message generator (no gateway or second network interface).

      The packet-interrupt interface is being developed by RSRE, and
      along with level 2 software is expected to be checked out in 6-8
      weeks. This interface contains 4K bytes of buffering, shared among
      input and output. Operation consists of copying packets between
      the interface memory and main memory, with a single interrupt
      associated with each packet.

      UCL plans to develop a full DMA interface, but this is not
      expected to be available until anywhere from 8 to 12 months from
      now.

      A framing issue presently exists in that both IPSS and Telenet
      X.25 networks now use bi-sync framing. However, both are expected
      to make HDLC bit-oriented framing available this fall.

   8.  PORT EXPANDER SMALL GROUP MEETING NOTES - Davies

      1.  Hardware Delivery Outlook.

         SRI has fifteen systems on its order book and enough components
         to build only two complete ones at this time.  Some of the
         hardware bottlenecks are:
            a) Boxes from DEC - deliveries up to January '80.
            b) Low power Schottky chips for 1822 DMA boards.
            c) Cable connectors for 1822 units - Amphenol.
            d) Control Panels.

         Delivery of port expander units would continue at a slow rate
         at least until the end of the year with Vint Cerf nominating
         the recipient of each system as it rolls off the production
         line.

         A postscript on the hardware discussion concerned the
         robustness card which may have to be reprogrammed for automatic
         loading from nets which are not on the ARPANET. The robustness
         card uses UV erasable PROMS. Mathis said that there would be
         documentation supplied with the robustness card indicating how
         this should be done. The cards themselves were just coming back
         from the printed circuit facility and although one or two types
         of chip for this board were in short supply, it was hoped that
         board delivery would begin at the end of September.




Postel                                                         [Page 21]

                                                                 IEN 121
Internet Meeting Notes



      2.  Software Developments.

         Most of the discussion centered around the new facilities which
         would be offered with the SRI supported BLISS-11 version of the
         PORT Expander code. Some of these features are:
            a) Provision of NOP handling.
            b) Provision of IMP padding.
            c) Flow control facility.
            d) Facility to simulate RFNMs internally.

         There were still some open ended problems like what  should a
         port expander do when the NCP host crashes. One possible
         approach is to offer two different solutions to this problem
         and select one at configuration time.
         Possible release dates for the BLISS-11 version of the port
         expander were mid October if Mathis can get an IMP port for
         debugging or up to a month after depending on the priority of
         the work.

         Finally Strazisar joined the meeting for a discussion on
         integrating the mini-gateway code and port expander code into
         the same machine. Clark suggested that this integration problem
         would become almost trivial if someone wrote a null 1822 driver
         under MOS which allowed buffers to be passed across the driver
         without copying. Strazisar volunteered to take a debugged copy
         of Mathis' port expander code and integrate it into the
         mini-gateway with an optimistic delivery date of the End of
         November.

   9.  TCP IMPLEMENTATION SMALL GROUP MEETING - Cerf

      The discussion focused on the changes to IP required by DCA to
      satisfy the DOD security and precedence needs.  The existing IP
      option for S/P/T does most of what's needed, but in addition the
      TOS field will be redefined slightly to be:

          0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
         +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
         |     |S|   |S|S|
         | PRC |/|Rel|/|P|
         |     |D|   |R|D|
         +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+

      That is:

         Bits 0-2:  Precedence
         Bit 3:     Stream or Datagram
         Bits 4-5:  Reliability
         Bit 6:     Speed or Reliability



Postel                                                         [Page 22]

                                                                 IEN 121
Internet Meeting Notes



         Bit 7:     Speed

      This information has to be passed up and down the layers of
      protocol.  Enforcement of the security and precedence is up to
      each host.  There needs to be a specification of how to interpret
      and implement these functions.  Preemption rules must be specified
      too, for the higher level protocols.

      There was some discussion of the unauthorized use of security and
      precedence features.  The basic rule is to act on it speedily now
      and to log the header of the message so one can ask later if the
      originator was authorized.

   10. TCP APPLICATIONS SMALL GROUP MEETING - Postel

      This group discussed problems in programming application programs
      that use TCP.  Postel had a problem figuring out how to use the
      user/TCP interface (JSYSs) to create a successful TCP using
      program.  The problem may be with the documentation.  Haverty has
      the problem that programs don't work but don't crash either.
      Clark said his TCP can't tell the user anything more specific than
      "it didn't work."

      What is needed is better documentation, fault isolation tools, and
      user level debugging aids.  Also a memo on what is available,
      e.g., a traffic generator at BBN-UNIX.

   11. ST PROTOCOL SMALL GROUP MEETING - Hoversten

      This group first made up a detailed agenda of issues to discuss.
      In general the topics included:

         Connectivity
         Routing
         Stability
         Protocol Layering
         Resource Allocation
         Information Exchange

      Further discussion of the role of ST in resource allocation is
      needed.  It is agreed that ST provides a structure to support
      multi-addressing and a resource allocation policy.

      The relationship of ST to IP is that ST is experimental, will be
      implemented at a small number of sites, and will have IP imbedded
      in it.






Postel                                                         [Page 23]

                                                                 IEN 121
Internet Meeting Notes



   12. 1822 BOARD PROBLEM SMALL GROUP MEETING - Mathis

      The problem with 1822 boards is being worked on at SRI.  Software
      for the TIU which circumvents the problem will be made available.
      A hardware fix is being studied.















































Postel                                                         [Page 24]

                                                                 IEN 121
Internet Meeting Notes



XVII.  AGENDA FOR NEXT TIME

   The next meeting is February 4-6 at SRI International in Menlo Park.
   Ron Kunzelman is the contact.

   Agenda Items:

      1.  Kirstein, Davies, Frankel - Internet Performance Experience

      2.  Flood Page - Longterm Gateway Statistics

      3.  Cerf - Schedule & Milestones Review

      4.  Forgie - ST Protocol

      5.  Cohen - ST Performance

      6.  McQuillan - Internet Routing

      7.  Cain, McFarland, Cerf - IP/TCP Acceptance Testing

      8.  Plummer, Tomlinson - Higher Level Protocols FTP & Integration
                               with TCP

      9.  Postel - Internet Message Handling Interim FTP Based Multi
                               Media Supporting

      10. Deutsch - BBN - FAX & Text Message System

      11. Cerf - Multi Homing & Partitioning

      12. Plummer - Host Group Routing

      13. Demos:

         A.  GMCC Monitoring - Flood Page

         B.  Fault Isolation in TIU - Mathis

         C.  Internet Message Transport - Postel

   Action Items:

      1.  Milestones - each contractor is to provide a list of
          milestones to Cerf.  The intention is to quantize tasks and
          identify increments in capability.  The goal is to make
          progress easily detectable.  The combined milestones will be
          distributed to the internet group, and will be reviewed at the
          next meeting.



Postel                                                         [Page 25]

                                                                 IEN 121
Internet Meeting Notes



      2.  Monthly Reports - each contractor is to provide a monthly
          report to Postel.  The report should note accomplishments,
          progress on milestones, unusual events, problems.  A summary
          of all reports will be distributed to the internet group.

      3.  XNET - to be converted to version 4 by Jim Mathis and Ray
          Tomlinson.

      4.  Host IP Document - Bill Plummer is to write an IEN on how to
          build a host IP.

      5.  GMCC - David Flood Page will write an IEN on GMCC message
          formats and an IEN on how to use a terminal process .

      6.  Congestion Control - Dave Clark will write an IEN on
          simulation experiments in IP congestion control.

   Future Meetings Schedule

      1980
         FEB - SRI
         MAY - MIT
         SEP - RSRE
      1981
         JAN - ISI
         MAY - ARPA
         SEP -UCL

XVIII.  DOCUMENTS DISTRIBUTED

   IEN        Author       Title
   ---        ------       -----
   109        Strazisar    How to Build a Gateway
   110        Cerf         Internet Addressing and Naming in a Tactical
                           Environment
   119        Forgie       ST - A Proposed Internet Stream Protocol
















Postel                                                         [Page 26]

                                                                 IEN 121
Internet Meeting Notes



XIX.  ATTENDEES

   Vint Cerf                ARPA               Cerf@ISIA
   Robert E. Kahn           ARPA               KAHN@ISIA
   Dick Binder              BBN                BINDER@BBNE
   Jack Haverty             BBN                JHAVERTY@BBND
   Dale McNeill             BBN                DMCNEILL@BBNE
   David Flood Page         BBN                DFLOODPAGE@BBNE
   William Plummer          BBN                Plummer@BBNA
   Virginia Strazisar       BBN                STRAZISAR@BBNA
   Hoi Y. Chong             COMSAT             Mills@ISIE
   David Mills              COMSAT             Mills@ISIE
   Chip Bumgardner          CTEC               CHIPS@BBNC
   Jack Hammett             DARPA-IPT          Hammett@ISIA
   Ed Cain                  DCA                Cain@EDN-UNIX
   Ray McFarland            DoD                McFARLAND@ISIA
   Michel L. Audren         French Ministry    Observer
   Dominique A. Truchetet   of Defense         Observer
   Hubert Zimmerman         IRIA               HZim@BBNC
   Danny Cohen              ISI                Cohen@ISIB
   Jon Postel               ISI                Postel@ISIB
   Estil Hoversten          Linkabit           Hoversten@ISIA
   Noel Chiappa             MIT                JNC@MIT-AI
   Dave Clark               MIT                Clark@MIT-MULTICS
   Jim Forgie               Lincoln Lab        FORGIE@BBN
   Frank Deckelman          NAVELEX            DECKELMAN@ISIA
   Aage Stensby             NDRE               AAGE@SRI-KA
   Andrew Bates             RSRE               RSRE-T4@ISIA
   Brian Davies             RSRE               RSRE-T4@ISIA
   Allan J. Fox             RSRE               RSRE-T4@ISIA
   John Laws                RSRE               RSRE-T4@ISIA
   Ron Kunzelman            SRI                KUNZELMAN@SRI-KL
   Jim Mathis               SRI                Mathis@SRI-KL
   Robert Cole              UCL                UKSAT@ISIE
   Sunil K. Das             UCL                PKT-UCL@SRI-KL
   Peter L. Higginson       UCL                UKSAT@ISIE
   Andrew Hinchley          UCL                UKSAT@ISIE
   Ron Jones                UCL                UKSAT@ISIE
   Peter Kirstein           UCL                Kirstein@ISIA
   Alan J. Mayne            UCL                UKSAT@ISIE
   Steve Treadwell          UCL                UKSAT@ISIE
   David Lloyd              UCL/UKMOD          LLOYD@ISIA
   Keith A. Lantz           U of R             LANTZ@SRI-KL









Postel                                                         [Page 27]

                                                                 IEN 121
Internet Meeting Notes



APPENDIX A

   The following special interest group mailing lists have been set up
   by Noel Chiappa at MIT-ML.  To use them, send to <group>-PEOPLE at
   MIT-ML [or just <group> (DON'T include the "<"'s)].

   If you want to be on one or more of these mailing lists please send a
   note to Noel, JNC@MIT-AI (not to the whole group).

   If you get a message from Person and to a mailing list, DO NOT send
   your reply to the mailing list AND Person; the MIT-ML mailer isn't
   smart enough to notice and will send duplicate copies to Person.

      MOS-UNIX             MOS support on UNIX

      SMALL-UNIX           UNIX on small machines

      VAX-UNIX             UNIX on VAX

      MOS-TCP              MOS, TIU and the MACRO-11 TCP

      MOS-PE               Port expander / Minigateway

      NET-UNIX             Network support on any UNIX




























Postel                                                         [Page 28]

                                                                 IEN 121
Internet Meeting Notes



APPENDIX B

   IP and TCP Specification Differences

   The following is a brief description of the difference between IEN-80
   and IEN-111 (IP), and between IEN-81 and IEN-112 (TCP).

   In both cases the new documents are intended to simply be better
   documents, and no significant changes to the protocols are intended.
   There are many minor changes of wording, punctuation, or spacing, so
   that a source compare would catch many many paragraphs in which there
   is no significant change.  It is intended that the text added (or in
   some cases deleted) lead to an easier to understand description of
   the protocols.

   IP Differences

      1. A much more specific description of a fragmentation and
      reassembly procedure is included.

      2. Some Options are changed or added:

         a. Three options are added for use by the BCR protocol.

         b. A Stream-ID option is added.

         c. The Source Route option is changed to conform with IEN-95.

         d. The Return Route option is added to conform with IEN-95.

         e. The Error Report option is expanded to have several specific
         error codes., and a standardized IP header for error reporting.

   TCP Differences

      1. Two additional States are introduced in the connection closing
      sequence.

      2. The EOL sequence number fixup procedure is changed to be based
      on remembering the sequence number of the beginning of the most
      recent buffer rather that the initial sequence number of the
      connection.

      3. In many cases the RST is not required to acknowledge that
      segment that caused the reset to be generated, and in many cases
      it is not necessary to check the ACK value to verify a RST.






Postel                                                         [Page 29]

                                                                 IEN 121
Internet Meeting Notes



   APPENDIX C

      Minutes of Internet Subgroup Meeting for Performance Measurement

      Present:  Ron Kunzelman (SRI) (Chairman), Noel Chiappa (MIT),
      Brian Davies (RSRE), Stephen Edge (UCL), David Flood Page (BBN),
      Andrew Hinchley (UCL), Ron Jones (UCL), Bob Kahn (ARPA), Peter
      Kirstein (UCL), Alan Mayne (UCL) (Minute-taker), Ray McFarland
      (DOD)

      Kunzelman pointed out that there is need for performance
      measurement at different levels of protocol, including
      measurements on Telnet and FTP at the user level, TCP at the
      transport level, and datagrams at the internet level.  The meeting
      then considered various specific aspects of measurement.

      Measurement Work Now Being Done or Being Planned

      BBN (Flood Page) will do some performance measurements at the
      datagram level on traffic passing through gateways; no tests are
      envisaged.  The BBN gateway will monitor IP traffic going through
      the gateway.  BBN is looking at CPU utilization, and can also
      extract interface information by address pairs.  BBN (Wingfield)
      is doing some performance tests on TCP.  Throughput and delays
      have been investigated.

      SRI is measuring Telnet throughput (bits/sec) from TOPS20 and
      TENEX hosts.

      UCL is trying to time FAX transmissions, and NIFTP transmissions
      at the user level.  UCL would like to measure individual
      performances end-to-end, to see if there is any destructive
      interference.  For ARPANET-SATNET-ARPANET transmissions, there is
      a need to know the best ARPANET performance, the best gateway
      performance, and the best Satnet performance, and then compare the
      combination of these with the best actual ARPANET-SATNET-ARPANET
      performance, to see whether they are comparable or differ by an
      order of magnitude.

      RSRE (Davies) has previously measured with old PIXIE, and would
      now like to repeat some of these measurements with new PIXIE.
      Measures have been made of round-trip TCP ack times.  The
      measurement techniques consist mainly of turning the traffic
      generator on for about five minutes at a time, then obtaining a
      delay histogram.







Postel                                                         [Page 30]

                                                                 IEN 121
Internet Meeting Notes



      Performance Metrics

      The following metrics have been used to measure ARPANET
      performance:

         1.  ARPANET has problems of low bandwidth, hence uses
             throughput metrics such as packets/sec and user-bits/sec.

         2.  SATNET has long delays, hence measures mean transmission
             time.

         3.  PRNET is liable to high loss, hence measures the percentage
             of missing packets.

         4.  Packet efficiency is the ratio of information packets
             received to total packets received (the difference being
             due to control and retransmission overhead).

      Kirstein stressed the need for better individual metrics, and then
      for developing algorithms for combining them.  For example, both
      bits/sec and packets/sec are important.

      He also raised the question of how the performance varies when
      going through different combinations of networks.

      Measurement Tools

      Tools currently being used in Arpanet include:

         1.  At the user level, FTP + "stopwatch" for bandwidth and
         Telnet + "stopwatch" for measurements of remote echo time and
         bandwidth.

         2.  Timestamps in pickup packets.

         3.  Echo server in gateways.

         4.  Traffic generators and sinks.

         There is also a possibility of using synchronized clocks to
         measure one-way times and asymmetric delays as well as round
         trip times.  Hinchley is looking at interval times between
         successive packet streams, as a method of measuring delays.

      Measurement Needs

      Kunzelman pointed out that there is currently no measurement at
      the transport level in the ARPANET.  Statistics are needed for the
      distribution of user traffic, which can be measured on entry to



Postel                                                         [Page 31]

                                                                 IEN 121
Internet Meeting Notes



      the internet system.  There is also a need to have statistics for
      the distribution of packet sizes.

      More measurement is needed of round-trip TCP ack times:  so far,
      this has been done only by RSRE.  Also in TCP, measurements are
      needed of retransmissions and checksum errors.  TCP-specific
      measures should be separated from general network and gateway
      measures, although such separation might be difficult to achieve
      in practice.

      Mayne would be grateful to anyone who would send him empirical
      data that would be useful to help validate his proposed simulation
      and theoretical studies, especially on problems of joint
      ARPANET-SATNET operation.  It was pointed out that McQuillan has a
      large amount of empirical data.

      Some Problem Areas

      Kahn pointed out the need to isolate problem areas, such as
      optimization and tuning, for which measurements are needed.  Some
      of these problems relate to research and development about
      networks, including obtaining insights about their behavior,
      others are concerned with the operational control of networks, and
      there is also the problem of persuading some network users that
      they actually have problems!

      Kirstein said that a big problem is to put uniform methods of
      measurement into the internet environment; this is very difficult
      and requires much thought.

      Kahn asked if we could do absolute performance measurements, or
      whether they are all relative.

      Kahn said that measurements could contribute to the understanding
      of various problem areas, for example:  performance tuning and
      other parameter optimization, retransmission strategies,
      alternative routing strategies, minimum delays for
      interactive-type traffic, cost considerations, robustness and
      recoverability.

      Mayne mentioned two important incentives for carrying out
      comprehensive measurements:

         1.  Validation of simulation runs and theoretical models.

         2.  Obtaining insights into what is happening, especially in
         network operating problems of crucial practical importance.





Postel                                                         [Page 32]

                                                                 IEN 121
Internet Meeting Notes



      Documentation

      Mayne said that is would be valuable to prepare a comprehensive
      list of all documents relevant to network measurement, including
      papers on methods and tools, measurement software and write-ups of
      that software, and collections and summaries of actual performance
      data.  He suggested that each organization participating in the
      internet, should contribute relevant entries, and he himself will
      prepare an annotated bibliography of relevant UCL literature.  He
      is also willing to act as a mailbox for collecting information
      from the other organizations.

      It was pointed out that important documents in this area have been
      written by Kleinrock, McQuillan, and Wingfield, and also at UCL.

      Recommendations for Further Action

         1.  Study network performance in relation to types of network
         subsystem, including network as a whole, gateways, hosts,
         operating systems.

         2.  Write specifications of performance measures for TCP (it
         was suggested  that this might be done by Wingfield), user
         level protocols, and IP.

         3.  Define a set of tests for IP, Datagram, TCP, higher level
         protocols, etc.

         4.  More work needs to be done on IP, for example, using GGP
         and echo packets and measuring round trip times, also
         investigating loss rates including numbers of duplicate packets
         and packets out of order.

         5.  Prepare and adequate bibliography of documents on
         performance measurements, and keep it up to date.

















Postel                                                         [Page 33]
