              Current Internet-Drafts

   This summary sheet provides a short synopsis of each Internet-Draft
available within the "internet-drafts" directory at the shadow
sites directory.  These drafts are listed alphabetically by working
group acronym and start date. Generated 2022-03-19 20:07:59 UTC.


IPv6 over Networks of Resource-constrained Nodes (6lo)
------------------------------------------------------

  "Transmission of IPv6 Packets over Near Field Communication", Younghwan
  Choi, Yong-Geun Hong, Joo-Sang Youn, Dongkyun Kim, JinHyeock Choi,
  2020-08-23, <draft-ietf-6lo-nfc-17.txt>

      Near Field Communication (NFC) is a set of standards for smartphones
      and portable devices to establish radio communication with each other
      by touching them together or bringing them into proximity, usually no
      more than 10 cm apart.  NFC standards cover communications protocols
      and data exchange formats, and are based on existing radio-frequency
      identification (RFID) standards including ISO/IEC 14443 and FeliCa.
      The standards include ISO/IEC 18092 and those defined by the NFC
      Forum.  The NFC technology has been widely implemented and available
      in mobile phones, laptop computers, and many other devices.  This
      document describes how IPv6 is transmitted over NFC using 6LoWPAN
      techniques.

  "IPv6 over Constrained Node Networks (6lo) Applicability & Use cases",
  Yong-Geun Hong, Carles Gomez, Younghwan Choi, Abdur Sangi, Samita
  Chakrabarti, 2022-01-25, <draft-ietf-6lo-use-cases-12.txt>

      This document describes the applicability of IPv6 over constrained
      node networks (6lo) and provides practical deployment examples.  In
      addition to IEEE Std 802.15.4, various link layer technologies such
      as ITU-T G.9959 (Z-Wave), Bluetooth Low Energy, DECT-ULE, MS/TP, NFC,
      and PLC are used as examples.  The document targets an audience who
      would like to understand and evaluate running end-to-end IPv6 over
      the constrained node networks for local or Internet connectivity.

  "Transmission of IPv6 Packets over PLC Networks", Jianqiang Hou, Bing Liu,
  Yong-Geun Hong, Xiaojun Tang, Charles Perkins, 2022-02-17,
  <draft-ietf-6lo-plc-10.txt>

      Power Line Communication (PLC), namely using the electric-power lines
      for indoor and outdoor communications, has been widely applied to
      support Advanced Metering Infrastructure (AMI), especially smart
      meters for electricity.  The existing electricity infrastructure
      facilitates the expansion of PLC deployments due to its potential
      advantages in terms of cost and convenience.  Moreover, a wide
      variety of accessible devices raises the potential demand of IPv6 for
      future applications.  This document describes how IPv6 packets are
      transported over constrained PLC networks, such as ITU-T G.9903, IEEE
      1901.1 and IEEE 1901.2.

  "IPv6 Neighbor Discovery Multicast Address Listener Registration", Pascal
  Thubert, 2022-03-03, <draft-ietf-6lo-multicast-registration-04.txt>

      This document updates RFC 8505 to enable a listener to register an
      IPv6 anycast or and subscribe to an IPv6 multicast address; the draft
      updates RFC 6550 (RPL) to add a new Non-Storing Multicast Mode and a
      new support for anycast addresses in Storing and Non-Storing Modes.
      This document extends RFC 9010 to enable the 6LR to inject the
      anycast and multicast addresses in RPL.

IPv6 Maintenance (6man)
-----------------------

  "Operations, Administration, and Maintenance (OAM) in Segment Routing
  Networks with IPv6 Data plane (SRv6)", Zafar Ali, Clarence Filsfils, Satoru
  Matsushima, Dan Voyer, Mach Chen, 2022-01-23,
  <draft-ietf-6man-spring-srv6-oam-13.txt>

      This document describes how the existing IPv6 mechanisms for ping and
      traceroute can be used in an SRv6 network.  The document also
      specifies the OAM flag in the Segment Routing Header (SRH) for
      performing controllable and predictable flow sampling from segment
      endpoints.  In addition, the document describes how a centralized
      monitoring system performs a path continuity check between any nodes
      within an SRv6 domain.

  "IPv6 Minimum Path MTU Hop-by-Hop Option", Robert Hinden, Gorry Fairhurst,
  2022-02-28, <draft-ietf-6man-mtu-option-13.txt>

      This document specifies a new IPv6 Hop-by-Hop option that is used to
      record the minimum Path MTU along the forward path between a source
      host to a destination host.  The recorded value can then be
      communicated back to the source using the return Path MTU field in
      the option.

  "IPv6 Application of the Alternate Marking Method", Giuseppe Fioccola,
  Tianran Zhou, Mauro Cociglio, Fengwei Qin, Ran Pang, 2021-10-22,
  <draft-ietf-6man-ipv6-alt-mark-12.txt>

      This document describes how the Alternate Marking Method can be used
      as a passive performance measurement tool in an IPv6 domain.  It
      defines a new Extension Header Option to encode Alternate Marking
      information in both the Hop-by-Hop Options Header and Destination
      Options Header.

  "Representing IPv6 Zone Identifiers in Address Literals and Uniform
  Resource Identifiers", Brian Carpenter, Stuart Cheshire, Robert Hinden,
  2022-02-08, <draft-carpenter-6man-rfc6874bis-03.txt>

      This document describes how the zone identifier of an IPv6 scoped
      address, defined as <zone_id> in the IPv6 Scoped Address Architecture
      (RFC 4007), can be represented in a literal IPv6 address and in a
      Uniform Resource Identifier that includes such a literal address.  It
      updates the URI Generic Syntax and Internationalized Resource
      Identifier specifications (RFC 3986, RFC 3987) accordingly, and
      obsoletes RFC 6874.

  "IPv6 Hop-by-Hop Options Processing Procedures", Robert Hinden, Gorry
  Fairhurst, 2022-01-29, <draft-ietf-6man-hbh-processing-00.txt>

      This document specifies procedures for how IPv6 Hop-by-Hop options
      are processed.  It modifies the procedures specified in the IPv6
      Protocol Specification (RFC8200) to make processing of IPv6 Hop-by-
      Hop options practical with the goal of making IPv6 Hop-by-Hop options
      useful to deploy and use in the Internet.  When published, this
      document updates RFC8200.

  "Limits on Sending and Processing IPv6 Extension Headers", Tom Herbert,
  2022-01-31, <draft-ietf-6man-eh-limits-00.txt>

      This specification defines various limits that may be applied to
      receiving, sending, and otherwise processing packets that contain
      IPv6 extension headers.  The need for such limits is pragmatic to
      facilitate interoperability amongst hosts and routers in the presence
      of extension headers and thereby increasing the feasibility of
      deployment of extension headers.  The limits described here establish
      the minimum baseline of support for use of extension headers in the
      Internet.  If it is known that all communicating parties for a
      particular commumication, including end hosts and any intermediate
      nodes in the path, are capable of supporting more than the baseline
      then these default limits may be freely exceeded.

  "Carrying Virtual Transport Network (VTN) Identifier in IPv6 Extension
  Header", Jie Dong, Zhenbin Li, Chongfeng Xie, Chenhao Ma, Gyan Mishra,
  2022-03-05, <draft-ietf-6man-enhanced-vpn-vtn-id-00.txt>

      Virtual Private Networks (VPNs) provide different customers with
      logically separated connectivity over a common network
      infrastructure.  With the introduction and evolvement of 5G and other
      network scenarios, some existing or new customers may require
      connectivity services with advanced characteristics comparing to
      traditional VPNs.  Such kind of network service is called enhanced
      VPNs (VPN+).
      
      A Virtual Transport Network (VTN) is a virtual underlay network which
      consists of a set of dedicated or shared network resources allocated
      from the physical underlay network, and is associated with a
      customized logical network topology.  VPN+ services can be delivered
      by mapping one or a group of overlay VPNs to the appropriate VTNs as
      the virtual underlay.  In packet forwarding, some fields in the data
      packet needs to be used to identify the VTN the packet belongs to, so
      that the VTN-specific processing can be performed on each node the
      packet traverses.
      
      This document proposes a new Hop-by-Hop option of IPv6 extension
      header to carry the VTN Resource ID, which is used to identify the
      set of network resources allocated to a VTN for packet processing.
      The procedure for processing the VTN option is also specified.

Authentication and Authorization for Constrained Environments (ace)
-------------------------------------------------------------------

  "Authentication and Authorization for Constrained Environments (ACE) using
  the OAuth 2.0 Framework (ACE-OAuth)", Ludwig Seitz, Goeran Selander, Erik
  Wahlstroem, Samuel Erdtman, Hannes Tschofenig, 2021-11-08,
  <draft-ietf-ace-oauth-authz-46.txt>

      This specification defines a framework for authentication and
      authorization in Internet of Things (IoT) environments called ACE-
      OAuth.  The framework is based on a set of building blocks including
      OAuth 2.0 and the Constrained Application Protocol (CoAP), thus
      transforming a well-known and widely used authorization solution into
      a form suitable for IoT devices.  Existing specifications are used
      where possible, but extensions are added and profiles are defined to
      better serve the IoT use cases.

  "Datagram Transport Layer Security (DTLS) Profile for Authentication and
  Authorization for Constrained Environments (ACE)", Stefanie Gerdes, Olaf
  Bergmann, Carsten Bormann, Goeran Selander, Ludwig Seitz, 2021-06-04,
  <draft-ietf-ace-dtls-authorize-18.txt>

      This specification defines a profile of the ACE framework that allows
      constrained servers to delegate client authentication and
      authorization.  The protocol relies on DTLS version 1.2 for
      communication security between entities in a constrained network
      using either raw public keys or pre-shared keys.  A resource-
      constrained server can use this protocol to delegate management of
      authorization information to a trusted host with less severe
      limitations regarding processing power and memory.

  "OSCORE Profile of the Authentication and Authorization for Constrained
  Environments Framework", Francesca Palombini, Ludwig Seitz, Goeran
  Selander, Martin Gunnarsson, 2021-05-06,
  <draft-ietf-ace-oscore-profile-19.txt>

      This document specifies a profile for the Authentication and
      Authorization for Constrained Environments (ACE) framework.  It
      utilizes Object Security for Constrained RESTful Environments
      (OSCORE) to provide communication security and proof-of-possession
      for a key owned by the client and bound to an OAuth 2.0 access token.

  "EST over secure CoAP (EST-coaps)", Peter van der Stok, Panos Kampanakis,
  Michael Richardson, Shahid Raza, 2020-01-06,
  <draft-ietf-ace-coap-est-18.txt>

      Enrollment over Secure Transport (EST) is used as a certificate
      provisioning protocol over HTTPS.  Low-resource devices often use the
      lightweight Constrained Application Protocol (CoAP) for message
      exchanges.  This document defines how to transport EST payloads over
      secure CoAP (EST-coaps), which allows constrained devices to use
      existing EST functionality for provisioning certificates.

  "Additional OAuth Parameters for Authorization in Constrained Environments
  (ACE)", Ludwig Seitz, 2021-09-07, <draft-ietf-ace-oauth-params-16.txt>

      This specification defines new parameters and encodings for the OAuth
      2.0 token and introspection endpoints when used with the framework
      for authentication and authorization for constrained environments
      (ACE).  These are used to express the proof-of-possession key the
      client wishes to use, the proof-of-possession key that the
      Authorization Server has selected, and the key the Resource Server
      uses to authenticate to the client.

  "Key Provisioning for Group Communication using ACE", Francesca Palombini,
  Marco Tiloca, 2021-12-23, <draft-ietf-ace-key-groupcomm-15.txt>

      This document defines how to use the Authentication and Authorization
      for Constrained Environments (ACE) framework to distribute keying
      material and configuration parameters for secure group communication.
      Candidate group members acting as Clients and authorized to join a
      group can do so by interacting with a Key Distribution Center (KDC)
      acting as Resource Server, from which they obtain the keying material
      to communicate with other group members.  While defining general
      message formats as well as the interface and operations available at
      the KDC, this document supports different approaches and protocols
      for secure group communication.  Therefore, details are delegated to
      separate application profiles of this document, as specialized
      instances that target a particular group communication approach and
      define how communications in the group are protected.  Compliance
      requirements for such application profiles are also specified.

  "Key Management for OSCORE Groups in ACE", Marco Tiloca, Jiye Park,
  Francesca Palombini, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-ietf-ace-key-groupcomm-oscore-13.txt>

      This document defines an application profile of the ACE framework for
      Authentication and Authorization, to request and provision keying
      material in group communication scenarios that are based on CoAP and
      secured with Group Object Security for Constrained RESTful
      Environments (OSCORE).  This application profile delegates the
      authentication and authorization of Clients that join an OSCORE group
      through a Resource Server acting as Group Manager for that group.
      This application profile leverages protocol-specific transport
      profiles of ACE to achieve communication security, server
      authentication and proof-of-possession for a key owned by the Client
      and bound to an OAuth 2.0 Access Token.

  "Message Queuing Telemetry Transport (MQTT)-TLS profile of Authentication
  and Authorization for Constrained Environments (ACE) Framework", Cigdem
  Sengul, Anthony Kirby, 2022-03-01, <draft-ietf-ace-mqtt-tls-profile-15.txt>

      This document specifies a profile for the ACE (Authentication and
      Authorization for Constrained Environments) framework to enable
      authorization in a Message Queuing Telemetry Transport (MQTT)-based
      publish-subscribe messaging system.  Proof-of-possession keys, bound
      to OAuth2.0 access tokens, are used to authenticate and authorize
      MQTT Clients.  The protocol relies on TLS for confidentiality and
      MQTT server (broker) authentication.

  "Pub-Sub Profile for Authentication and Authorization for Constrained
  Environments (ACE)", Francesca Palombini, Cigdem Sengul, 2021-12-29,
  <draft-ietf-ace-pubsub-profile-04.txt>

      This specification defines an application profile for authentication
      and authorization for Publishers and Subscribers in a constrained
      pub-sub scenario, using the ACE framework.  This profile relies on
      transport layer or application layer security to authorize the pub-
      sub clients to the broker.  Moreover, it describes the use of
      application layer security to protect the content of the pub-sub
      client message exchange through the broker.  The profile covers pub-
      sub scenarios using either the Constrained Application Protocol
      (CoAP) [I-D.ietf-core-coap-pubsub] or the Message Queue Telemetry
      Transport (MQTT) [MQTT-OASIS-Standard-v5] protocol.

  "An Authorization Information Format (AIF) for ACE", Carsten Bormann,
  2022-03-15, <draft-ietf-ace-aif-07.txt>

      Information about which entities are authorized to perform what
      operations on which constituents of other entities is a crucial
      component of producing an overall system that is secure.  Conveying
      precise authorization information is especially critical in highly
      automated systems with large numbers of entities, such as the
      "Internet of Things".
      
      This specification provides a generic information model and format
      for representing such authorization information, as well as two
      variants of a specific instantiation of that format for use with REST
      resources identified by URI path.

  "Admin Interface for the OSCORE Group Manager", Marco Tiloca, Rikard
  Hoeglund, Peter van der Stok, Francesca Palombini, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-ietf-ace-oscore-gm-admin-05.txt>

      Group communication for CoAP can be secured using Group Object
      Security for Constrained RESTful Environments (Group OSCORE).  A
      Group Manager is responsible to handle the joining of new group
      members, as well as to manage and distribute the group keying
      material.  This document defines a RESTful admin interface at the
      Group Manager, that allows an Administrator entity to create and
      delete OSCORE groups, as well as to retrieve and update their
      configuration.  The ACE framework for Authentication and
      Authorization is used to enforce authentication and authorization of
      the Administrator at the Group Manager.  Protocol-specific transport
      profiles of ACE are used to achieve communication security, proof-of-
      possession and server authentication.

  "CoAP Transfer for the Certificate Management Protocol", Mohit Sahni,
  Saurabh Tripathi, 2021-11-08, <draft-ietf-ace-cmpv2-coap-transport-04.txt>

      This document specifies the use of Constrained Application Protocol
      (CoAP) as a transfer mechanism for the Certificate Management
      Protocol (CMP).  purpose of certificate creation and management.
      CoAP is an HTTP like client-server protocol used by various
      constrained devices in the IoT space.

  "EAP-based Authentication Service for CoAP", Rafael Marin-Lopez, Dan
  Garcia-Carrillo, 2021-12-07, <draft-ietf-ace-wg-coap-eap-06.txt>

      This document specifies an authentication service that uses the
      Extensible Authentication Protocol (EAP) transported employing
      Constrained Application Protocol (CoAP) messages.  As such, it
      defines an EAP lower layer based on CoAP called CoAP-EAP.  One of the
      main goals is to authenticate a CoAP-enabled IoT device (EAP peer)
      that intends to join a security domain managed by a Controller (EAP
      authenticator).  Secondly, it allows deriving key material to protect
      CoAP messages exchanged between them based on Object Security for
      Constrained RESTful Environments (OSCORE), enabling the establishment
      of a security association between them.

  "Notification of Revoked Access Tokens in the Authentication and
  Authorization for Constrained Environments (ACE) Framework", Marco Tiloca,
  Ludwig Seitz, Francesca Palombini, Sebastian Echeverria, Grace Lewis,
  2022-03-07, <draft-ietf-ace-revoked-token-notification-01.txt>

      This document specifies a method of the Authentication and
      Authorization for Constrained Environments (ACE) framework, which
      allows an Authorization Server to notify Clients and Resource Servers
      (i.e., registered devices) about revoked Access Tokens.  The method
      allows Clients and Resource Servers to access a Token Revocation List
      on the Authorization Server, with the possible additional use of
      resource observation for the Constrained Application Protocol (CoAP).
      Resulting (unsolicited) notifications of revoked Access Tokens
      complement alternative approaches such as token introspection, while
      not requiring additional endpoints on Clients and Resource Servers.

  "Extension of the CoAP-DTLS Profile for ACE to TLS", Olaf Bergmann, John
  Mattsson, Goeran Selander, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-ietf-ace-extend-dtls-authorize-02.txt>

      This document updates the CoAP-DTLS profile for ACE
      [I-D.ietf-ace-dtls-authorize] by specifying that the profile applies
      to TLS as well as DTLS.

Automated Certificate Management Environment (acme)
---------------------------------------------------

  "TNAuthList profile of ACME Authority Token", Chris Wendt, David Hancock,
  Mary Barnes, Jon Peterson, 2021-03-27,
  <draft-ietf-acme-authority-token-tnauthlist-08.txt>

      This document defines a profile of the Automated Certificate
      Management Environment (ACME) Authority Token for the automated and
      authorized creation of certificates for VoIP Telephone Providers to
      support Secure Telephony Identity (STI) using the TNAuthList defined
      by STI certificates.

  "ACME Challenges Using an Authority Token", Jon Peterson, Mary Barnes,
  David Hancock, Chris Wendt, 2021-10-25,
  <draft-ietf-acme-authority-token-07.txt>

      Some proposed extensions to the Automated Certificate Management
      Environment (ACME) rely on proving eligibility for certificates
      through consulting an external authority that issues a token
      according to a particular policy.  This document specifies a generic
      Authority Token challenge for ACME which supports subtype claims for
      different identifiers or namespaces that can be defined separately
      for specific applications.

  "ACME End User Client and Code Signing Certificates", Kathleen Moriarty,
  2021-09-29, <draft-ietf-acme-client-04.txt>

      Automated Certificate Management Environment (ACME) core protocol
      addresses the use case of web server certificates for TLS.  This
      document extends the ACME protocol to support end user client, device
      client, and code signing certificates.

  "ACME Integrations", Owen Friel, Richard Barnes, Rifaat Shekh-Yusef,
  Michael Richardson, 2021-12-17, <draft-ietf-acme-integrations-06.txt>

      This document outlines multiple advanced use cases and integrations
      that ACME facilitates without any modifications or enhancements
      required to the base ACME specification.  The use cases include ACME
      integration with EST, BRSKI and TEAP.

  "Automated Certificate Management Environment (ACME) Delay-Tolerant
  Networking (DTN) Node ID Validation Extension", Brian Sipos, 2022-03-02,
  <draft-ietf-acme-dtnnodeid-09.txt>

      This document specifies an extension to the Automated Certificate
      Management Environment (ACME) protocol which allows an ACME server to
      validate the Delay-Tolerant Networking (DTN) Node ID for an ACME
      client.  The DTN Node ID is encoded as a certificate Subject
      Alternative Name (SAN) of type otherName with a name form of
      BundleEID and as an ACME Identifier type "bundleEID".

  "ACME for Subdomains", Owen Friel, Richard Barnes, Tim Hollebeek, Michael
  Richardson, 2022-03-02, <draft-ietf-acme-subdomains-02.txt>

      This document outlines how ACME can be used by a client to obtain a
      certificate for a subdomain identifier from a certification
      authority.  The client has fulfilled a challenge against a parent
      domain but does not need to fulfill a challenge against the explicit
      subdomain as certification authority policy allows issuance of the
      subdomain certificate without explicit subdomain ownership proof.

Adaptive DNS Discovery (add)
----------------------------

  "Discovery of Designated Resolvers", Tommy Pauly, Eric Kinnear, Christopher
  Wood, Patrick McManus, Tommy Jensen, 2022-01-31, <draft-ietf-add-ddr-05.txt>

      This document defines Discovery of Designated Resolvers (DDR), a
      mechanism for DNS clients to use DNS records to discover a resolver's
      encrypted DNS configuration.  This mechanism can be used to move from
      unencrypted DNS to encrypted DNS when only the IP address of a
      resolver is known.  This mechanism is designed to be limited to cases
      where unencrypted resolvers and their designated resolvers are
      operated by the same entity or cooperating entities.  It can also be
      used to discover support for encrypted DNS protocols when the name of
      an encrypted resolver is known.

  "DHCP and Router Advertisement Options for the Discovery of
  Network-designated Resolvers (DNR)", Mohamed Boucadair, Tirumaleswar
  Reddy.K, Dan Wing, Neil Cook, Tommy Jensen, 2021-12-13,
  <draft-ietf-add-dnr-05.txt>

      The document specifies new DHCP and IPv6 Router Advertisement options
      to discover encrypted DNS servers (e.g., DNS-over-HTTPS, DNS-over-
      TLS, DNS-over-QUIC).  Particularly, it allows to learn an
      authentication domain name together with a list of IP addresses and a
      set of service parameters to reach such encrypted DNS servers.

  "Service Binding Mapping for DNS Servers", Benjamin Schwartz, 2022-02-01,
  <draft-ietf-add-svcb-dns-02.txt>

      The SVCB DNS record type expresses a bound collection of endpoint
      metadata, for use when establishing a connection to a named service.
      DNS itself can be such a service, when the server is identified by a
      domain name.  This document provides the SVCB mapping for named DNS
      servers, allowing them to indicate support for new transport
      protocols.

Application-Layer Traffic Optimization (alto)
---------------------------------------------

  "ALTO Performance Cost Metrics", Qin WU, Y. Yang, Young Lee, Dhruv Dhody,
  Sabine Randriamasy, Luis Contreras, 2022-03-02,
  <draft-ietf-alto-performance-metrics-26.txt>

      The cost metric is a basic concept in Application-Layer Traffic
      Optimization (ALTO), and different applications may use different
      types of cost metrics.  Since the ALTO base protocol (RFC 7285)
      defines only a single cost metric (namely, the generic "routingcost"
      metric), if an application wants to issue a cost map or an endpoint
      cost request in order to identify a resource provider that offers
      better performance metrics (e.g., lower delay or loss rate), the base
      protocol does not define the cost metric to be used.
      
      This document addresses this issue by extending the specification to
      provide a variety of network performance metrics, including network
      delay, delay variation (a.k.a, jitter), packet loss rate, hop count,
      and bandwidth.
      
      There are multiple sources (e.g., estimation based on measurements or
      service-level agreement) to derive a performance metric.  This
      document introduces an additional "cost-context" field to the ALTO
      "cost-type" field to convey the source of a performance metric.

  "An ALTO Extension: Path Vector", Kai Gao, Young Lee, Sabine Randriamasy,
  Y. Yang, Jingxuan Zhang, 2022-03-07, <draft-ietf-alto-path-vector-24.txt>

      This document is an extension to the base Application-Layer Traffic
      Optimization (ALTO) protocol.  It extends the ALTO Cost Map and ALTO
      Property Map services so that an application can decide which
      endpoint(s) to connect based on not only numerical/ordinal cost
      values but also fine-grained abstract information of the paths.  This
      is useful for applications whose performance is impacted by specified
      components of a network on the end-to-end paths, e.g., they may infer
      that several paths share common links and prevent traffic bottlenecks
      by avoiding such paths.  This extension introduces a new abstraction
      called Abstract Network Element (ANE) to represent these components
      and encodes a network path as a vector of ANEs.  Thus, it provides a
      more complete but still abstract graph representation of the
      underlying network(s) for informed traffic optimization among
      endpoints.

  "Content Delivery Network Interconnection (CDNI) Request Routing: CDNI
  Footprint and Capabilities Advertisement using ALTO", Jan Seedorf, Y. Yang,
  Kevin Ma, Jon Peterson, Jingxuan Zhang, 2022-02-16,
  <draft-ietf-alto-cdni-request-routing-alto-22.txt>

      The Content Delivery Networks Interconnection (CDNI) framework in RFC
      6707 defines a set of protocols to interconnect CDNs to achieve
      multiple goals, including extending the reach of a given CDN.  A CDNI
      Request Routing Footprint & Capabilities Advertisement interface
      (FCI) is needed to achieve the goals of a CDNI.  RFC 8008 defines the
      FCI semantics and provides guidelines on the FCI protocol, but the
      exact protocol is not specified.  This document defines a new
      Application-Layer Traffic Optimization (ALTO) service, called "CDNI
      Advertisement Service", that provides an implementation of the FCI,
      following the guidelines defined in RFC 8008.

  "An ALTO Extension: Entity Property Maps", Wendy Roome, Sabine Randriamasy,
  Y. Yang, Jingxuan Zhang, Kai Gao, 2022-02-28,
  <draft-ietf-alto-unified-props-new-24.txt>

      This document specifies an extension to the base Application-Layer
      Traffic Optimization (ALTO) protocol that generalizes the concept of
      "endpoint properties", which were so far tied to IP addresses, to
      entities defined by a wide set of objects.  Further, these properties
      are presented as maps, similar to the network and cost maps in the
      base ALTO protocol.  While supporting the endpoints and related
      endpoint property service defined in RFC7285, the ALTO protocol is
      extended in two major directions.  First, from endpoints restricted
      to IP addresses to entities covering a wider and extensible set of
      objects; second, from properties on specific endpoints to entire
      entity property maps.  These extensions introduce additional features
      allowing entities and property values to be specific to a given
      information resource.  This is made possible by a generic and
      flexible design of entity and property types.

Autonomic Networking Integrated Model and Approach (anima)
----------------------------------------------------------

  "Constrained Bootstrapping Remote Secure Key Infrastructure (BRSKI)",
  Michael Richardson, Peter van der Stok, Panos Kampanakis, Esko Dijk,
  2022-02-14, <draft-ietf-anima-constrained-voucher-16.txt>

      This document defines the Constrained Bootstrapping Remote Secure Key
      Infrastructure (Constrained BRSKI) protocol, which provides a
      solution for secure zero-touch bootstrapping of resource-constrained
      (IoT) devices into the network of a domain owner.  This protocol is
      designed for constrained networks, which may have limited data
      throughput or may experience frequent packet loss.  Constrained BRSKI
      is a variant of the BRSKI protocol, which uses an artifact signed by
      the device manufacturer called the "voucher" which enables a new
      device and the owner's network to mutually authenticate.  While the
      BRSKI voucher is typically encoded in JSON, Constrained BRSKI defines
      a compact CBOR-encoded voucher.  The BRSKI voucher is extended with
      new data types that allow for smaller voucher sizes.  The Enrollment
      over Secure Transport (EST) protocol, used in BRSKI, is replaced with
      EST-over-CoAPS; and HTTPS used in BRSKI is replaced with CoAPS.

  "Information Distribution over GRASP", Xun Xiao, Bing Liu, Artur Hecker,
  Sheng Jiang, 2022-01-07, <draft-ietf-anima-grasp-distribution-04.txt>

      Autonomic network infrastructure (ANI) is a generic platform for
      tenant applications (i.e.  AFs).  As we will see in some examplery
      use cases, AFs may not only require communication capability
      supported from the infrastructure side, but also the capability the
      infrastructure can hold and re-distribute information on-demand.
      This document proposes a set of solutions for information
      distribution in the ANI.  Information distribution is categorized
      into two different modes: 1) instantaneous distribution and 2)
      publishing for retrieval.  In the former case, the information is
      sent, propagated and disposed of after reception.  In the latter
      case, information needs to be stored in the network; additionally,
      conflict resolution is also needed when information stored in the
      network is updated with proposals from two different AFs.
      
      The capability of information distribution is a fundamental need for
      an autonomous network ([RFC7575]).  This document describes typical
      use cases of information distribution in ANI and requirements to ANI,
      such that abundant ways of information distribution can be natively
      supported.  This draft proposes a series of extensions to the
      autonomic nodes and suggests an implementation based on GRASP
      ([RFC8990]) extensions as a protocol on the wire.

  "BRSKI-AE: Alternative Enrollment Protocols in BRSKI", David von Oheimb,
  Steffen Fries, Hendrik Brockhaus, Eliot Lear, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-ietf-anima-brski-async-enroll-05.txt>

      This document enhances Bootstrapping Remote Secure Key Infrastructure
      (BRSKI, [RFC8995]) to allow employing alternative enrollment
      protocols, such as CMP.
      
      Using self-contained signed objects, the origin of enrollment
      requests and responses can be authenticated independently of message
      transfer.  This supports end-to-end security and asynchronous
      operation of certificate enrollment and provides flexibility where to
      authenticate and authorize certification requests.

  "Guidelines for Autonomic Service Agents", Brian Carpenter, Laurent
  Ciavaglia, Sheng Jiang, Peloso Pierre, 2022-02-01,
  <draft-ietf-anima-asa-guidelines-07.txt>

      This document proposes guidelines for the design of Autonomic Service
      Agents for autonomic networks.  Autonomic Service Agents, together
      with the Autonomic Network Infrastructure, the Autonomic Control
      Plane and the Generic Autonomic Signaling Protocol constitute base
      elements of an autonomic networking ecosystem.

  "Constrained Join Proxy for Bootstrapping Protocols", Michael Richardson,
  Peter van der Stok, Panos Kampanakis, 2021-12-03,
  <draft-ietf-anima-constrained-join-proxy-06.txt>

      This document defines a protocol to securely assign a Pledge to a
      domain, represented by a Registrar, using an intermediary node
      between Pledge and Registrar.  This intermediary node is known as a
      "constrained Join Proxy".  An enrolled Pledge can act as a Join
      Proxy.
      
      This document extends the work of Bootstrapping Remote Secure Key
      Infrastructures (BRSKI) by replacing the Circuit-proxy between Pledge
      and Registrar by a stateless/stateful constrained Join Proxy.  It
      relays join traffic from the Pledge to the Registrar.

  "BRSKI Cloud Registrar", Owen Friel, Rifaat Shekh-Yusef, Michael
  Richardson, 2022-03-06, <draft-ietf-anima-brski-cloud-03.txt>

      This document specifies the behaviour of a BRSKI Cloud Registrar, and
      how a pledge can interact with a BRSKI Cloud Registrar when
      bootstrapping.
      
      RFCED REMOVE: It is being actively worked on at https://github.com/
      anima-wg/brski-cloud

  "JWS signed Voucher Artifacts for Bootstrapping Protocols", Michael
  Richardson, Thomas Werner, 2022-03-07, <draft-ietf-anima-jws-voucher-03.txt>

      RFC8366 defines a digital artifact called voucher as a YANG-defined
      JSON document that has been signed using a Cryptographic Message
      Syntax (CMS) structure.  This memo introduces a variant of the
      voucher structure in which CMS is replaced by the JSON Object Signing
      and Encryption (JOSE) mechanism described in RFC7515 to better
      support use-cases in which JOSE is preferred over CMS.
      
      In addition to explaining how the format is created, MIME types are
      registered and examples are provided.

  "BRSKI with Pledge in Responder Mode (BRSKI-PRM)", Steffen Fries, Thomas
  Werner, Eliot Lear, Michael Richardson, 2022-03-04,
  <draft-ietf-anima-brski-prm-02.txt>

      This document defines enhancements to bootstrapping a remote secure
      key infrastructure (BRSKI, [RFC8995]) to facilitate bootstrapping in
      domains featuring no or only timely limited connectivity between a
      pledge and the domain registrar.  It specifically targets situations,
      in which the interaction model changes from a pledge-initiator-mode,
      as used in BRSKI, to a pledge-responder-mode as described in this
      document.  To support both, BRSKI-PRM introduces a new registrar-
      agent component, which facilitates the communication between pledge
      and registrar during the bootstrapping phase.  For the establishment
      of a trust relation between pledge and domain registrar, BRSKI-PRM
      relies on the exchange of authenticated self-contained objects
      (signature-wrapped objects).  The defined approach is agnostic
      regarding the utilized enrollment protocol, deployed by the domain
      registrar to communicate with the Domain CA.

  "An Autonomic Mechanism for Resource-based Network Services
  Auto-deployment", Joanna Dang, Sheng Jiang, Zongpeng Du, Yujing Zhou,
  2022-03-03, <draft-ietf-anima-network-service-auto-deployment-01.txt>

      This document specifies an autonomic mechanism for resource-based
      network services deployment through the Autonomic Control Plane (ACP)
      in a network.  This mechanism uses the GeneRic Autonomic Signaling
      Protocol (GRASP) in [RFC8990] to exchange the information among the
      autonomic nodes so that the resource along the service path can be
      coordinated.

  "A Voucher Artifact for Bootstrapping Protocols", Kent Watsen, Michael
  Richardson, Max Pritikin, Toerless Eckert, Qiufang Ma, 2022-01-31,
  <draft-ietf-anima-rfc8366bis-00.txt>

      This document defines a strategy to securely assign a pledge to an
      owner using an artifact signed, directly or indirectly, by the
      pledge's manufacturer.  This artifact is known as a "voucher".
      
      This document defines an artifact format as a YANG-defined JSON
      document that has been signed using a Cryptographic Message Syntax
      (CMS) structure.  Other YANG-derived formats are possible.  The
      voucher artifact is normally generated by the pledge's manufacturer
      (i.e., the Manufacturer Authorized Signing Authority (MASA)).
      
      This document only defines the voucher artifact, leaving it to other
      documents to describe specialized protocols for accessing it.

Applications and Real-Time Area (art)
-------------------------------------

  "Internationalized Domain Names in Applications (IDNA): Registry
  Restrictions and Recommendations", John Klensin, Asmus Freytag, 2020-07-13,
  <draft-klensin-idna-rfc5891bis-06.txt>

      The IDNA specifications for internationalized domain names combine
      rules that determine the labels that are allowed in the DNS without
      violating the protocol itself and an assignment of responsibility,
      consistent with earlier specifications, for determining the labels
      that are allowed in particular zones.  Conformance to IDNA by
      registries and other implementations requires both parts.  Experience
      strongly suggests that the language describing those responsibilities
      was insufficiently clear to promote safe and interoperable use of the
      specifications and that more details and discussion of circumstances
      would have been helpful.  Without making any substantive changes to
      IDNA, this specification updates two of the core IDNA documents (RFCs
      5890 and 5891) and the IDNA explanatory document (RFC 5894) to
      provide that guidance and to correct some technical errors in the
      descriptions.

  "IDNA2008 and Unicode 12.0.0", Patrik Faltstrom, 2022-02-13,
  <draft-faltstrom-unicode12-07.txt>

      This document describes the changes between Unicode 6.0.0 and Unicode
      12.0.0 in the context of IDNA2008.  Some additions and changes have
      been made in the Unicode Standard that affect the values produced by
      the algorithm IDNA2008 specifies.  IDNA2008 allows adding exceptions
      to the algorithm for backward compatibility; however, this document
      does not add any such exceptions.  This document provides the
      necessary tables to IANA to make its database consistent with Unicode
      12.0.0.
      
      To improve understanding, this document describes systems that are
      being used as alternatives to those that conform to IDNA2008.
      
      TO BE REMOVED AT TIME OF PUBLICATION AS AN RFC:
      
      This document is discussed on the i18n-discuss@ietf.org mailing list
      of the IETF.

  "Robots Exclusion Protocol", Martijn Koster, Gary Illyes, Henner Zeller,
  Lizzi Harvey, 2021-11-07, <draft-koster-rep-06.txt>

      This document specifies and extends the "Robots Exclusion Protocol"
      method originally defined by Martijn Koster in 1996 for service
      owners to control how content served by their services may be
      accessed, if at all, by automatic clients known as crawlers.

  "WebP Image Format Media Type Registration", James Zern, 2022-01-12,
  <draft-zern-webp-06.txt>

      This document provides the Media Type Registration for the subtype
      image/webp.

Automatic SIP trunking And Peering (asap)
-----------------------------------------

  "Automatic Peering for SIP Trunks", Kaustubh Inamdar, Sreekanth Narayanan,
  Cullen Jennings, 2021-10-24, <draft-ietf-asap-sip-auto-peer-04.txt>

      This draft specifies a configuration workflow to enable enterprise
      Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) networks to solicit the capability
      set of a SIP service provider network.  The capability set can
      subsequently be used to configure features and services on the
      enterprise edge element, such as a Session Border Controller (SBC),
      to ensure smooth peering between enterprise and service provider
      networks.

A Semantic Definition Format for Data and Interactions of Things (asdf)
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

  "Semantic Definition Format (SDF) for Data and Interactions of Things",
  Michael Koster, Carsten Bormann, 2022-02-28, <draft-ietf-asdf-sdf-11.txt>

      The Semantic Definition Format (SDF) is a format for domain experts
      to use in the creation and maintenance of data and interaction models
      in the Internet of Things.  It was created as a common language for
      use in the development of the One Data Model liaison organization
      (OneDM) definitions.  Tools convert this format to database formats
      and other serializations as needed.
      
      An SDF specification describes definitions of SDF Objects and their
      associated interactions (Events, Actions, Properties), as well as the
      Data types for the information exchanged in those interactions.
      
      
      // A JSON format representation of SDF 1.0 was defined in version
      // (-00) of this document; version (-05) was designated as an
      // _implementation draft_, labeled SDF 1.1, at the IETF110 meeting of
      // the ASDF WG (2021-03-11).  The present version (-11) collects a
      // few smaller changes as input to the 2022-02-28 ASDF WG interim.
      // It also removes deprecated elements from SDF 1.0.

Audio/Video Transport Core Maintenance (avtcore)
------------------------------------------------

  "RTP Payload Format for VP9 Video", Justin Uberti, Stefan Holmer, Magnus
  Flodman, Danny Hong, Jonathan Lennox, 2021-06-10,
  <draft-ietf-payload-vp9-16.txt>

      This specification describes an RTP payload format for the VP9 video
      codec.  The payload format has wide applicability, as it supports
      applications from low bit-rate peer-to-peer usage, to high bit-rate
      video conferences.  It includes provisions for temporal and spatial
      scalability.

  "Frame Marking RTP Header Extension", Mo Zanaty, Espen Berger, Suhas
  Nandakumar, 2021-11-11, <draft-ietf-avtext-framemarking-13.txt>

      This document describes a Frame Marking RTP header extension used to
      convey information about video frames that is critical for error
      recovery and packet forwarding in RTP middleboxes or network nodes.
      It is most useful when media is encrypted, and essential when the
      middlebox or node has no access to the media decryption keys.  It is
      also useful for codec-agnostic processing of encrypted or unencrypted
      media, while it also supports extensions for codec-specific
      information.

  "RTP Payload Format for Versatile Video Coding (VVC)", Shuai Zhao, Stephan
  Wenger, Yago Sanchez, Ye-Kui Wang, Miska Hannuksela, 2022-02-25,
  <draft-ietf-avtcore-rtp-vvc-14.txt>

      This memo describes an RTP payload format for the video coding
      standard ITU-T Recommendation H.266 and ISO/IEC International
      Standard 23090-3, both also known as Versatile Video Coding (VVC) and
      developed by the Joint Video Experts Team (JVET).  The RTP payload
      format allows for packetization of one or more Network Abstraction
      Layer (NAL) units in each RTP packet payload as well as fragmentation
      of a NAL unit into multiple RTP packets.  The payload format has wide
      applicability in videoconferencing, Internet video streaming, and
      high-bitrate entertainment-quality video, among other applications.

  "Multiplexing Scheme Updates for QUIC", Bernard Aboba, Gonzalo Salgueiro,
  Colin Perkins, 2022-01-28, <draft-ietf-avtcore-rfc7983bis-02.txt>

      This document defines how QUIC, Datagram Transport Layer Security
      (DTLS), Real-time Transport Protocol (RTP), RTP Control Protocol
      (RTCP), Session Traversal Utilities for NAT (STUN), Traversal Using
      Relays around NAT (TURN), and ZRTP packets are multiplexed on a
      single receiving socket.
      
      This document updates RFC 7983 and RFC 5764.

  "Completely Encrypting RTP Header Extensions and Contributing Sources",
  Justin Uberti, Cullen Jennings, Sergio Murillo, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-ietf-avtcore-cryptex-05.txt>

      While the Secure Real-time Transport Protocol (SRTP) provides
      confidentiality for the contents of a media packet, a significant
      amount of metadata is left unprotected, including RTP header
      extensions and contributing sources (CSRCs).  However, this data can
      be moderately sensitive in many applications.  While there have been
      previous attempts to protect this data, they have had limited
      deployment, due to complexity as well as technical limitations.
      
      This document defines Cryptex as a new mechanism that completely
      encrypts header extensions and CSRCs and uses simpler signaling with
      the goal of facilitating deployment.

  "RTP Payload Format for the SCIP Codec", Daniel Hanson, MikeFaller, Keith
  Maver, 2022-02-18, <draft-ietf-avtcore-rtp-scip-00.txt>

      This document describes the RTP payload format of the Secure
      Communication Interoperability Protocol (SCIP) as audio and
      video media subtypes.  It provides RFC 6838 compliant media
      subtype definitions.  SCIP-214.2 and SCIP-210 describe the
      protocols that comprise the SCIP RTP packet payload.  This
      document follows the registration for related media types
      called "audio/scip" and "video/scip" with IANA and formatted
      according to RFC 4855.

Audio/Video Transport Extensions (avtext)
-----------------------------------------

  "The Layer Refresh Request (LRR) RTCP Feedback Message", Jonathan Lennox,
  Danny Hong, Justin Uberti, Stefan Holmer, Magnus Flodman, 2017-07-02,
  <draft-ietf-avtext-lrr-07.txt>

      This memo describes the RTCP Payload-Specific Feedback Message "Layer
      Refresh Request" (LRR), which can be used to request a state refresh
      of one or more substreams of a layered media stream.  It also defines
      its use with several RTP payloads for scalable media formats.

Babel routing protocol (babel)
------------------------------

  "YANG Data Model for Babel", Mahesh Jethanandani, Barbara Stark,
  2021-09-20, <draft-ietf-babel-yang-model-13.txt>

      This document defines a data model for the Babel routing protocol.
      The data model is defined using the YANG data modeling language.

  "IPv4 routes with an IPv6 next hop in the Babel routing protocol", Juliusz
  Chroboczek, 2022-02-24, <draft-ietf-babel-v4viav6-08.txt>

      This document defines an extension to the Babel routing protocol that
      allows announcing routes to an IPv4 prefix with an IPv6 next-hop,
      which makes it possible for IPv4 traffic to flow through interfaces
      that have not been assigned an IPv4 address.

BGP Enabled ServiceS (bess)
---------------------------

  "Optimized Ingress Replication Solution for Ethernet VPN (EVPN)", Jorge
  Rabadan, Senthil Sathappan, Wen Lin, Mukul Katiyar, Ali Sajassi,
  2022-01-25, <draft-ietf-bess-evpn-optimized-ir-12.txt>

      Network Virtualization Overlay networks using Ethernet VPN (EVPN) as
      their control plane may use Ingress Replication or PIM (Protocol
      Independent Multicast)-based trees to convey the overlay Broadcast,
      Unknown unicast and Multicast (BUM) traffic.  PIM provides an
      efficient solution to avoid sending multiple copies of the same
      packet over the same physical link, however it may not always be
      deployed in the Network Virtualization Overlay core network.  Ingress
      Replication avoids the dependency on PIM in the Network
      Virtualization Overlay network core.  While Ingress Replication
      provides a simple multicast transport, some Network Virtualization
      Overlay networks with demanding multicast applications require a more
      efficient solution without PIM in the core.  This document describes
      a solution to optimize the efficiency of Ingress Replication trees.

  "Updates on EVPN BUM Procedures", Zhaohui Zhang, Wen Lin, Jorge Rabadan,
  Keyur Patel, Ali Sajassi, 2021-11-18,
  <draft-ietf-bess-evpn-bum-procedure-updates-14.txt>

      This document specifies updated procedures for handling broadcast,
      unknown unicast, and multicast (BUM) traffic in Ethernet VPNs (EVPN),
      including selective multicast, and provider tunnel segmentation.
      This document updates RFC 7432.

  "IGMP and MLD Proxy for EVPN", Ali Sajassi, Samir Thoria, Mankamana Mishra,
  John Drake, Wen Lin, 2022-03-04,
  <draft-ietf-bess-evpn-igmp-mld-proxy-19.txt>

      This document describes how to support efficiently endpoints running
      IGMP(Internet Group Management Protocol) or MLD (Multicast Listener
      Discovery) for the multicast services over an EVPN network by
      incorporating IGMP/MLD proxy procedures on EVPN (Ethernet VPN) PEs.

  "Preference-based EVPN DF Election", Jorge Rabadan, Senthil Sathappan, Tony
  Przygienda, Wen Lin, John Drake, Ali Sajassi, satyamoh@cisco.com,
  2021-09-23, <draft-ietf-bess-evpn-pref-df-08.txt>

      The Designated Forwarder (DF) in Ethernet Virtual Private Networks
      (EVPN) is defined as the PE responsible for sending Broadcast,
      Unknown unicast and Broadcast traffic (BUM) to a multi-homed device/
      network in the case of an all-active multi-homing Ethernet Segment
      (ES), or BUM and unicast in the case of single-active multi-homing.
      The DF is selected out of a candidate list of PEs that advertise the
      same Ethernet Segment Identifier (ESI) to the EVPN network, according
      to the Default DF Election algorithm.  While the Default Algorithm
      provides an efficient and automated way of selecting the DF across
      different Ethernet Tags in the ES, there are some use cases where a
      more 'deterministic' and user-controlled method is required.  At the
      same time, Service Providers require an easy way to force an on-
      demand DF switchover in order to carry out some maintenance tasks on
      the existing DF or control whether a new active PE can preempt the
      existing DF PE.
      
      This document proposes a DF Election algorithm that meets the
      requirements of determinism and operation control.

  "EVPN Optimized Inter-Subnet Multicast (OISM) Forwarding", Wen Lin, Zhaohui
  Zhang, John Drake, Eric Rosen, Jorge Rabadan, Ali Sajassi, 2021-05-24,
  <draft-ietf-bess-evpn-irb-mcast-06.txt>

      Ethernet VPN (EVPN) provides a service that allows a single Local
      Area Network (LAN), comprising a single IP subnet, to be divided into
      multiple "segments".  Each segment may be located at a different
      site, and the segments are interconnected by an IP or MPLS backbone.
      Intra-subnet traffic (either unicast or multicast) always appears to
      the endusers to be bridged, even when it is actually carried over the
      IP or MPLS backbone.  When a single "tenant" owns multiple such LANs,
      EVPN also allows IP unicast traffic to be routed between those LANs.
      This document specifies new procedures that allow inter-subnet IP
      multicast traffic to be routed among the LANs of a given tenant,
      while still making intra-subnet IP multicast traffic appear to be
      bridged.  These procedures can provide optimal routing of the inter-
      subnet multicast traffic, and do not require any such traffic to
      leave a given router and then reenter that same router.  These
      procedures also accommodate IP multicast traffic that needs to travel
      to or from systems that are outside the EVPN domain.

  "EVPN VPWS Flexible Cross-Connect Service", Ali Sajassi, Patrice Brissette,
  Jim Uttaro, John Drake, Sami Boutros, Jorge Rabadan, 2022-02-08,
  <draft-ietf-bess-evpn-vpws-fxc-05.txt>

      This document describes a new EVPN VPWS service type specifically for
      multiplexing multiple attachment circuits across different Ethernet
      Segments and physical interfaces into a single EVPN VPWS service
      tunnel and still providing Single-Active and All-Active multi-homing.
      This new service is referred to as flexible cross-connect service.
      After a description of the rationale for this new service type, the
      solution to deliver such service is detailed.

  "Fast Recovery for EVPN Designated Forwarder Election", Patrice Brissette,
  Ali Sajassi, Luc Burdet, John Drake, Jorge Rabadan, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-ietf-bess-evpn-fast-df-recovery-05.txt>

      Ethernet Virtual Private Network (EVPN) solution provides Designated
      Forwarder election procedures for multihomed Ethernet Segments.
      These procedures have been enhanced further by applying Highest
      Random Weight (HRW) Algorithm for Designated Forwarded election in
      order to avoid unnecessary DF status changes upon a failure.  This
      draft improves these procedures by providing a fast Designated
      Forwarder (DF) election upon recovery of the failed link or node
      associated with the multihomed Ethernet Segment.  The solution is
      independent of number of EVIs associated with that Ethernet Segment
      and it is performed via a simple signaling between the recovered PE
      and each of the other PEs in the multihoming group.

  "EVPN Virtual Ethernet Segment", Ali Sajassi, Patrice Brissette, Rick
  Schell, John Drake, Jorge Rabadan, 2021-07-06,
  <draft-ietf-bess-evpn-virtual-eth-segment-07.txt>

      EVPN and PBB-EVPN introduce a family of solutions for multipoint
      Ethernet services over MPLS/IP network with many advanced features
      among which their multi-homing capabilities.  These solutions
      introduce Single-Active and All-Active for an Ethernet Segment (ES),
      itself defined as a set of physical links between the multi-homed
      device/network and a set of PE devices that they are connected to.
      This document extends the Ethernet Segment concept so that an ES can
      be associated to a set of EVCs (e.g., VLANs) or other objects such as
      MPLS Label Switch Paths (LSPs) or Pseudowires (PWs), referred to as
      Virtual Ethernet Segments (vES).  This draft describes the
      requirements and the extensions needed to support vES in EVPN and
      PBB-EVPN.

  "Per multicast flow Designated Forwarder Election for EVPN", Ali Sajassi,
  Mankamana Mishra, Samir Thoria, Jorge Rabadan, John Drake, 2022-01-26,
  <draft-ietf-bess-evpn-per-mcast-flow-df-election-06.txt>

      [RFC7432] describes mechanism to elect designated forwarder (DF) at
      the granularity of (ESI, EVI) which is per VLAN (or per group of
      VLANs in case of VLAN bundle or VLAN-aware bundle service).  However,
      the current level of granularity of per-VLAN is not adequate for some
      applications.[I-D.ietf-bess-evpn-df-election-framework] improves base
      line DF election by introducing HRW DF election.
      [I-D.ietf-bess-evpn-igmp-mld-proxy] introduces applicability of EVPN
      to Multicast flows, routes to sync them and a default DF election.
      This document is an extension to HRW base draft
      [I-D.ietf-bess-evpn-df-election-framework] and further enhances HRW
      algorithm for the Multicast flows to do DF election at the
      granularity of (ESI, VLAN, Mcast flow).

  "Weighted Multi-Path Procedures for EVPN Multi-Homing", Neeraj Malhotra,
  Ali Sajassi, Jorge Rabadan, John Drake, Avinash Lingala, Samir Thoria,
  2021-11-17, <draft-ietf-bess-evpn-unequal-lb-15.txt>

      EVPN enables all-active multi-homing for a CE device connected to two
      or more PEs via a LAG, such that bridged and routed traffic from
      remote PEs to hosts attached to the Ethernet Segment can be equally
      load balanced (it uses Equal Cost Multi Path) across the multi-homing
      PEs.  EVPN also enables multi-homing for IP subnets advertised in IP
      Prefix routes, so that routed traffic from remote PEs to those IP
      subnets can be load balanced.  This document defines extensions to
      EVPN procedures to optimally handle unequal access bandwidth
      distribution across a set of multi-homing PEs in order to:
      
      *  provide greater flexibility, with respect to adding or removing
      individual multi-homed PE-CE links.
      
      *  handle multi-homed PE-CE link failures that can result in unequal
      PE-CE access bandwidth across a set of multi-homing PEs.

  "MVPN/EVPN Tunnel Aggregation with Common Labels", Zhaohui Zhang, Eric
  Rosen, Wen Lin, Zhenbin Li, IJsbrand Wijnands, 2022-01-20,
  <draft-ietf-bess-mvpn-evpn-aggregation-label-08.txt>

      The MVPN specifications allow a single Point-to-Multipoint (P2MP)
      tunnel to carry traffic of multiple VPNs.  The EVPN specifications
      allow a single P2MP tunnel to carry traffic of multiple Broadcast
      Domains (BDs).  These features require the ingress router of the P2MP
      tunnel to allocate an upstream-assigned MPLS label for each VPN or
      for each BD.  A packet sent on a P2MP tunnel then carries the label
      that is mapped to its VPN or BD (in some cases, a distinct upstream-
      assigned label is needed for each flow.)  Since each ingress router
      allocates labels independently, with no coordination among the
      ingress routers, the egress routers may need to keep track of a large
      number of labels.  The number of labels may need to be as large (or
      larger) than the product of the number of ingress routers times the
      number of VPNs or BDs.  However, the number of labels can be greatly
      reduced if the association between a label and a VPN or BD is made by
      provisioning, so that all ingress routers assign the same label to a
      particular VPN or BD.  New procedures are needed in order to take
      advantage of such provisioned labels.  These new procedures also
      apply to Multipoint-to-Multipoint (MP2MP) tunnels.  This document
      updates RFCs 6514, 7432 and 7582 by specifying the necessary
      procedures.

  "EVPN Interworking with IPVPN", Jorge Rabadan, Ali Sajassi, Eric Rosen,
  John Drake, Wen Lin, Jim Uttaro, Adam Simpson, 2021-09-22,
  <draft-ietf-bess-evpn-ipvpn-interworking-06.txt>

      EVPN is used as a unified control plane for tenant network intra and
      inter-subnet forwarding.  When a tenant network spans not only EVPN
      domains but also domains where BGP VPN-IP or IP families provide
      inter-subnet forwarding, there is a need to specify the interworking
      aspects between BGP domains of type EVPN, VPN-IP and IP, so that the
      end to end tenant connectivity can be accomplished.  This document
      specifies how EVPN interworks with VPN-IPv4/VPN-IPv6 and IPv4/IPv6
      BGP families for inter-subnet forwarding.

  "Extended Mobility Procedures for EVPN-IRB", Neeraj Malhotra, Ali Sajassi,
  Aparna Pattekar, Jorge Rabadan, Avinash Lingala, John Drake, 2021-10-02,
  <draft-ietf-bess-evpn-irb-extended-mobility-07.txt>

      Procedure to handle host mobility in a layer 2 Network with EVPN
      control plane is defined as part of RFC 7432.  EVPN has since evolved
      to find wider applicability across various IRB use cases that include
      distributing both MAC and IP reachability via a common EVPN control
      plane.  MAC Mobility procedures defined in RFC 7432 are extensible to
      IRB use cases if a fixed 1:1 mapping between VM IP and MAC is assumed
      across VM moves.  Generic mobility support for IP and MAC that allows
      these bindings to change across moves is required to support a
      broader set of EVPN IRB use cases, and requires further
      consideration.  EVPN all-active multi-homing further introduces
      scenarios that require additional consideration from mobility
      perspective.  This document enumerates a set of design considerations
      applicable to mobility across these EVPN IRB use cases and defines
      generic sequence number assignment procedures to address these IRB
      use cases.

  "LSP-Ping Mechanisms for EVPN and PBB-EVPN", Parag Jain, Samer Salam, Ali
  Sajassi, Sami Boutros, Greg Mirsky, 2022-02-10,
  <draft-ietf-bess-evpn-lsp-ping-07.txt>

      LSP Ping is a widely deployed Operation, Administration, and
      Maintenance mechanism in MPLS networks.  This document describes
      mechanisms for detecting data-plane failures using LSP Ping in MPLS
      based EVPN and PBB-EVPN networks.

  "EVPN control plane for Geneve", Sami Boutros, Ali Sajassi, John Drake,
  Jorge Rabadan, Sam Aldrin, 2021-09-18, <draft-ietf-bess-evpn-geneve-03.txt>

      This document describes how Ethernet VPN (EVPN) control plane can be
      used with Network Virtualization Overlay over Layer 3 (NVO3) Generic
      Network Virtualization Encapsulation (Geneve) encapsulation for NVO3
      solutions.
      
      EVPN control plane can also be used by Network Virtualization Edges
      (NVEs) to express Geneve tunnel option TLV(s) supported in the
      transmission and/or reception of Geneve encapsulated data packets.

  "PBB-EVPN ISID-based CMAC-Flush", Jorge Rabadan, Senthil Sathappan, Kiran
  Nagaraj, Masahiro Miyake, Taku Matsuda, 2021-11-18,
  <draft-ietf-bess-pbb-evpn-isid-cmacflush-04.txt>

      Provider Backbone Bridging (PBB) can be combined with Ethernet VPN
      (EVPN) to deploy Ethernet Local Area Network (ELAN) services in large
      Multi-Protocol Label Switching (MPLS) networks (PBB-EVPN).  Single-
      Active Multi-homing and per-I-SID (per Service Instance Identifier)
      Load-Balancing can be provided to access devices and aggregation
      networks.  In order to speed up the network convergence in case of
      failures on Single-Active Multi-Homed Ethernet Segments, PBB-EVPN
      defines a flush mechanism for Customer MACs (CMAC-flush) that works
      for different Ethernet Segment Backbone MAC (BMAC) address allocation
      models.  This document complements those CMAC-flush procedures for
      cases in which no PBB-EVPN Ethernet Segments are defined (the
      attachment circuit is associated to a zero Ethernet Segment
      Identifier) and a Service Instance Identifier based (I-SID-based)
      CMAC-flush granularity is required.

  "SRv6 BGP based Overlay Services", Gaurav Dawra, Clarence Filsfils, Ketan
  Talaulikar, Robert Raszuk, Bruno Decraene, Shunwan Zhuang, Jorge Rabadan,
  2022-03-05, <draft-ietf-bess-srv6-services-12.txt>

      This document defines procedures and messages for SRv6-based BGP
      services including L3VPN, EVPN, and Internet services.  It builds on
      RFC4364 "BGP/MPLS IP Virtual Private Networks (VPNs)" and RFC7432
      "BGP MPLS-Based Ethernet VPN".

  "Seamless Multicast Interoperability between EVPN and MVPN PEs", Ali
  Sajassi, Kesavan Thiruvenkatasamy, Samir Thoria, Ashutosh Gupta, Luay
  Jalil, 2021-10-25, <draft-ietf-bess-evpn-mvpn-seamless-interop-03.txt>

      Ethernet Virtual Private Network (EVPN) solution is becoming
      pervasive for Network Virtualization Overlay (NVO) services in data
      center (DC) networks and as the next generation VPN services in
      service provider (SP) networks.
      
      As service providers transform their networks in their Central
      Offices (COs) towards the next generation data center with Software
      Defined Networking (SDN) based fabric and Network Function
      Virtualization (NFV), they want to be able to maintain their offered
      services including Multicast VPN (MVPN) service between their
      existing network and their new Service Provider Data Center (SPDC)
      network seamlessly without the use of gateway devices.  They want to
      have such seamless interoperability between their new SPDCs and their
      existing networks for a) reducing cost, b) having optimum forwarding,
      and c) reducing provisioning.  This document describes a unified
      solution based on RFCs 6513 & 6514 for seamless interoperability of
      Multicast VPN between EVPN and MVPN PEs.  Furthermore, it describes
      how the proposed solution can be used as a routed multicast solution
      in data centers with only EVPN PEs.

  "BGP Based Multicast", Zhaohui Zhang, Lenny Giuliano, Keyur Patel, IJsbrand
  Wijnands, Mankamana Mishra, Arkadiy Gulko, 2022-01-07,
  <draft-ietf-bess-bgp-multicast-04.txt>

      This document specifies a BGP address family and related procedures
      that allow BGP to be used for setting up multicast distribution
      trees.  This document also specifies procedures that enable BGP to be
      used for multicast source discovery, and for showing interest in
      receiving particular multicast flows.  Taken together, these
      procedures allow BGP to be used as a replacement for other multicast
      routing protocols, such as PIM or mLDP.  The BGP procedures specified
      here are based on the BGP multicast procedures that were originally
      designed for use by providers of Multicast Virtual Private Network
      service.
      
      This document also describes how various signaling mechanisms can be
      used to set up end-to-end inter-region multiast trees.

  "EVPN multi-homing port-active load-balancing", Patrice Brissette, Ali
  Sajassi, Luc Burdet, Samir Thoria, Bin Wen, Eddie Leyton, Jorge Rabadan,
  2022-03-07, <draft-ietf-bess-evpn-mh-pa-05.txt>

      The Multi-Chassis Link Aggregation Group (MC-LAG) technology enables
      establishing a logical link-aggregation connection with a redundant
      group of independent nodes.  The purpose of multi-chassis LAG is to
      provide a solution to achieve higher network availability, while
      providing different modes of sharing/balancing of traffic.  RFC7432
      defines EVPN based MC-LAG with single-active and all-active
      multi-homing load-balancing mode.  The current draft expands on
      existing redundancy mechanisms supported by EVPN and introduces
      support for port-active load-balancing mode.

  "BGP Usage for SDWAN Overlay Networks", Linda Dunbar, Jim Guichard, Ali
  Sajassi, John Drake, Basil Najem, David Carrel, 2021-10-18,
  <draft-ietf-bess-bgp-sdwan-usage-04.txt>

      The document discusses the usage and applicability of BGP as the
      control plane for multiple SDWAN scenarios. The document aims to
      demonstrate how the BGP-based control plane is used for large-scale
      SDWAN overlay networks with little manual intervention.
      
      SDWAN edge nodes are commonly interconnected by multiple types of
      underlay networks owned and managed by different network providers.

  "EVPN Multi-Homing Extensions for Split Horizon Filtering", Jorge Rabadan,
  Kiran Nagaraj, Wen Lin, Ali Sajassi, 2021-10-15,
  <draft-ietf-bess-evpn-mh-split-horizon-02.txt>

      Ethernet Virtual Private Network (EVPN) is commonly used along with
      Network Virtualization Overlay (NVO) tunnels.  The EVPN multi-homing
      procedures may be different depending on the NVO tunnel type used in
      the EVPN Broadcast Domain.  In particular, there are two multi-homing
      Split Horizon procedures to avoid looped frames on the multi-homed
      CE: ESI Label based and Local Bias.  ESI Label based Split Horizon is
      used for MPLSoX tunnels, E.g., MPLSoUDP, whereas Local Bias is used
      for others, E.g., VXLAN tunnels.  The current specifications do not
      allow the operator to decide which Split Horizon procedure to use for
      tunnel encapsulations that could support both.  Examples of tunnels
      that may support both procedures are MPLSoGRE, MPLSoUDP, GENEVE or
      SRv6.  This document extends the EVPN Multi-Homing procedures so that
      an operator can decide the Split Horizon procedure for a given NVO
      tunnel depending on their own requirements.

  "Multicast and Ethernet VPN with Segment Routing P2MP", Rishabh Parekh,
  Clarence Filsfils, Arvind Venkateswaran, Hooman Bidgoli, Dan Voyer, Zhaohui
  Zhang, 2021-10-19, <draft-ietf-bess-mvpn-evpn-sr-p2mp-04.txt>

      A Point-to-Multipoint (P2MP) Tree in a Segment Routing domain carries
      traffic from a Root to a set of Leaves.  This document describes
      extensions to BGP encodings and procedures for P2MP trees and Ingress
      Replication used in BGP/MPLS IP VPNs and Ethernet VPNs in a Segment
      Routing domain.

  "BGP MPLS-Based Ethernet VPN", Ali Sajassi, Luc Burdet, John Drake, Jorge
  Rabadan, 2022-03-07, <draft-ietf-bess-rfc7432bis-04.txt>

      This document describes procedures for BGP MPLS-based Ethernet VPNs
      (EVPN).  The procedures described here meet the requirements
      specified in RFC 7209 -- "Requirements for Ethernet VPN (EVPN)".
      
      Note to Readers
      
      _RFC EDITOR: please remove this section before publication_
      
      The complete and detailed set of all changes between this version and
      RFC7432 may be found as an Annotated Diff (rfcdiff) here
      (https://tools.ietf.org/rfcdiff?url1=https://www.rfc-
      editor.org/rfc/rfc7432.txt&url2=https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/
      draft-ietf-bess-rfc7432bis-04.txt).

  "Multicast Source Redundancy in EVPN Networks", Jorge Rabadan, Jayant
  Kotalwar, Senthil Sathappan, Zhaohui Zhang, Wen Lin, Eric Rosen,
  2022-02-06, <draft-ietf-bess-evpn-redundant-mcast-source-03.txt>

      EVPN supports intra and inter-subnet IP multicast forwarding.
      However, EVPN (or conventional IP multicast techniques for that
      matter) do not have a solution for the case where: a) a given
      multicast group carries more than one flow (i.e., more than one
      source), and b) it is desired that each receiver gets only one of the
      several flows.  Existing multicast techniques assume there are no
      redundant sources sending the same flow to the same IP multicast
      group, and, in case there were redundant sources, the receiver's
      application would deal with the received duplicated packets.  This
      document extends the existing EVPN specifications and assumes that IP
      Multicast source redundancy may exist.  It also assumes that, in case
      two or more sources send the same IP Multicast flows into the tenant
      domain, the EVPN PEs need to avoid that the receivers get packet
      duplication by following the described procedures.

  "EVPN Multi-Homing Mechanism for Layer-2 Gateway Protocols", Patrice
  Brissette, Ali Sajassi, Luc Burdet, Dan Voyer, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-ietf-bess-evpn-l2gw-proto-01.txt>

      The existing EVPN multi-homing load-balancing modes defined are
      Single-Active and All-Active.  Neither of these multi-homing
      mechanisms adequately represent ethernet-segments facing access
      networks with Layer-2 Gateway protocols such as G.8032, (M)STP, REP,
      MPLS-TP, etc.  These loop-preventing Layer-2 protocols require a new
      multi-homing mechanism defined in this draft.

  "EVPN Interoperability Modes", Lukas Krattiger, Ali Sajassi, Samir Thoria,
  Jorge Rabadan, John Drake, 2021-11-30,
  <draft-ietf-bess-evpn-modes-interop-01.txt>

      Ethernet VPN (EVPN) provides different functional modes in the area
      of Service Interface, Integrated Route and Bridge (IRB) and IRB Core
      connectivity. This document specifies how the different EVPN
      functional modes and types can interoperate with each other. This
      document doesn't aim to redefine the existing functional modes but
      describe how there is interoperability.

  "IPv6-Only PE Design for IPv4-NLRI with IPv6-NH", Gyan Mishra, Mankamana
  Mishra, Jeff Tantsura, Sudha Madhavi, Qing Yang, Adam Simpson, Shuanglong
  Chen, 2022-03-07, <draft-ietf-bess-ipv6-only-pe-design-01.txt>

      As Enterprises and Service Providers upgrade their brown field or
      green field MPLS/SR core to an IPv6 transport, Multiprotocol BGP (MP-
      BGP)now plays an important role in the transition of their Provider
      (P) core network as well as Provider Edge (PE) Edge network from IPv4
      to IPv6.  Operators must be able to continue to support IPv4
      customers when both the Core and Edge networks are IPv6-Only.
      
      This document details an important External BGP (eBGP) PE-CE Edge and
      Inter-AS IPv6-Only peering design that leverages the MP-BGP
      capability exchange by using IPv6 peering as pure transport, allowing
      both IPv4 Network Layer Reachability Information (NLRI) and IPv6
      Network Layer Reachability Information (NLRI)to be carried over the
      same (Border Gateway Protocol) BGP TCP session.  The design change
      provides the same Dual Stacking functionality that exists today with
      separate IPv4 and IPv6 BGP sessions as we have today.  With this
      design change from a control plane perspective a single IPv6 is
      required for both IPv4 and IPv6 routing updates and from a data plane
      forwarindg perspective an IPv6 address need only be configured on the
      PE and CE interface for both IPv4 and IPv6 packet forwarding.
      
      This document provides a much needed solution for Internet Exchange
      Point (IXP) that are facing IPv4 address depletion at large peering
      points.  With this design, IXP can now deploy PE-CE IPv6-Only eBGP
      Edge or Inter-AS peering design to eliminate IPv4 provisioning at the
      Edge.  This core and edge IPv6-Only peering design paradigm change
      can apply to any eBGP peering, public internet or private, which can
      be either Core networks, Data Center networks, Access networks or can
      be any eBGP peering scenario.  This document provides vendor specific
      test cases for the IPv6-Only peering design as well as test results
      for the five major vendors stakeholders in the routing and switching
      indusrty, Cisco, Juniper, Arista, Nokia and Huawei.  With the test
      results provided for the IPv6-Only Edge peering design, the goal is
      that all other vendors around the world that have not been tested
      will begin to adopt and implement this new Best Current Practice for
      eBGP IPv6-Only Edge peering.
      
      As this issue with IXP IPv4 address depletion is a critical issue
      around the world, it is imperative for an immediate solution that can
      be implemented quickly.  This Best Current Practice IPv6-only eBGP
      peering design specification will help proliferate IPv6-Only
      deployments at the eBGP Edge network peering points to starting
      immediately at a minimum with operators around the world using Cisco,
      Juniper, Arista, Nokia and Huawei.  As other vendors start to
      implement this Best Current Practice, the IXP IPv4 address depletion
      gap will eventually be eliminated.

Bidirectional Forwarding Detection (bfd)
----------------------------------------

  "Unsolicited BFD for Sessionless Applications", Enke Chen, Naiming Shen,
  Robert Raszuk, Reshad Rahman, 2021-12-03,
  <draft-ietf-bfd-unsolicited-09.txt>

      For operational simplification of "sessionless" applications using
      BFD, in this document we present procedures for "unsolicited BFD"
      that allow a BFD session to be initiated by only one side, and be
      established without explicit per-session configuration or
      registration by the other side (subject to certain per-interface or
      per-router policies).
      
      We also introduce a new YANG module to configure and manage
      "unsolicited BFD".  The YANG module in this document conforms to the
      Network Management Datastore Architecture (NMDA) [RFC8342].

  "Unaffiliated BFD Echo", Weiqiang Cheng, Ruixue Wang, Xiao Min, Reshad
  Rahman, Raj Boddireddy, 2022-02-08,
  <draft-ietf-bfd-unaffiliated-echo-04.txt>

      Bidirectional Forwarding Detection (BFD) is a fault detection
      protocol that can quickly determine a communication failure between
      two forwarding engines.  This document proposes a use of the BFD Echo
      where the local system supports BFD but the neighboring system does
      not support BFD.
      
      This document updates RFC 5880.

  "YANG Data Model for Bidirectional Forwarding Detection (BFD)", Mahesh
  Jethanandani, Reshad Rahman, Lianshu Zheng, Santosh Pallagatti, Greg
  Mirsky, 2022-02-11, <draft-ietf-bfd-rfc9127-bis-02.txt>

      This document defines a YANG data model that can be used to configure
      and manage Bidirectional Forwarding Detection (BFD).
      
      The YANG modules in this document conform to the Network Management
      Datastore Architecture (NMDA) (RFC 8342).  This document updates YANG
      Data Model for Bidirectional Forwarding Detection (BFD) (RFC 9127).

Bit Indexed Explicit Replication (bier)
---------------------------------------

  "Path Maximum Transmission Unit Discovery (PMTUD) for Bit Index Explicit
  Replication (BIER) Layer", Greg Mirsky, Tony Przygienda, Andrew Dolganow,
  2021-10-04, <draft-ietf-bier-path-mtu-discovery-11.txt>

      This document describes Path Maximum Transmission Unit Discovery
      (PMTUD) in Bit Indexed Explicit Replication (BIER) layer.

  "Performance Measurement (PM) with Marking Method in Bit Index Explicit
  Replication (BIER) Layer", Greg Mirsky, Lianshu Zheng, Mach Chen, Giuseppe
  Fioccola, 2021-10-04, <draft-ietf-bier-pmmm-oam-11.txt>

      This document describes the applicability of a hybrid performance
      measurement method for packet loss and packet delay measurements of a
      multicast service through a Bit Index Explicit Replication domain.

  "BIER Ingress Multicast Flow Overlay using Multicast Listener Discovery
  Protocols", Pierre Pfister, IJsbrand Wijnands, Stig Venaas, Cui(Linda)
  Wang, Zheng Zhang, Markus Stenberg, 2022-01-05, <draft-ietf-bier-mld-06.txt>

      This document specifies the ingress part of a multicast flow overlay
      for BIER networks.  Using existing multicast listener discovery
      protocols, it enables multicast membership information sharing from
      egress routers, acting as listeners, toward ingress routers, acting
      as queriers.  Ingress routers keep per-egress-router state, used to
      construct the BIER bit mask associated with IP multicast packets
      entering the BIER domain.

  "EVPN BUM Using BIER", Zhaohui Zhang, Tony Przygienda, Ali Sajassi, Jorge
  Rabadan, 2021-12-07, <draft-ietf-bier-evpn-05.txt>

      This document specifies protocols and procedures for forwarding
      broadcast, unknown unicast and multicast (BUM) traffic of Ethernet
      VPNs (EVPN) using Bit Index Explicit Replication (BIER).

  "Tree Engineering for Bit Index Explicit Replication (BIER-TE)", Toerless
  Eckert, Michael Menth, Gregory Cauchie, 2022-01-28,
  <draft-ietf-bier-te-arch-12.txt>

      This memo describes per-packet stateless strict and loose path
      steered replication and forwarding for "Bit Index Explicit
      Replication" (BIER, RFC8279) packets.  It is called BIER Tree
      Engineering (BIER-TE) and is intended to be used as the path steering
      mechanism for Traffic Engineering with BIER.
      
      BIER-TE introduces a new semantic for "bit positions" (BP).  They
      indicate adjacencies of the network topology, as opposed to (non-TE)
      BIER in which BPs indicate "Bit-Forwarding Egress Routers" (BFER).  A
      BIER-TE packets BitString therefore indicates the edges of the (loop-
      free) tree that the packet is forwarded across by BIER-TE.  BIER-TE
      can leverage BIER forwarding engines with little changes.  Co-
      existence of BIER and BIER-TE forwarding in the same domain is
      possible, for example by using separate BIER "sub-domains" (SDs).
      Except for the optional routed adjacencies, BIER-TE does not require
      a BIER routing underlay, and can therefore operate without depending
      on an "Interior Gateway Routing protocol" (IGP).
      
      As it operates on the same per-packet stateless forwarding
      principles, BIER-TE can also be a good fit to support multicast path
      steering in "Segment Routing" (SR) networks.

  "BIER Underlay Path Calculation Algorithm and Constraints", Zhaohui Zhang,
  Tony Przygienda, Andrew Dolganow, Hooman Bidgoli, IJsbrand Wijnands,
  Arkadiy Gulko, 2022-02-01, <draft-ietf-bier-bar-ipa-10.txt>

      This document specifies general rules for the interaction between the
      BIER Algorithm (BAR) and the IGP Algorithm (IPA) used for underlay
      path calculation.  The semantics defined in this document update
      RFC8401 and RFC8444.

  "BIER Penultimate Hop Popping", Zhaohui Zhang, 2021-12-07,
  <draft-ietf-bier-php-07.txt>

      Bit Index Explicit Replication (BIER) can be used as provider tunnel
      for Multicast Virtual Private Network (MVPN).  Global Table Multicast
      [RFC7716] or Ethernet Virtual Private Network (EVPN).  It is possible
      that not all routers in the provider network support BIER and there
      are various methods to handle BIER-incapable transit routers.
      However those methods assume the MVPN/EVPN Provider Edges (PEs) are
      BIER-capable.  This document specifies a method to allow BIER-
      incapable routers to act as MVPN/EVPN PEs with BIER as the transport,
      by having the upstream BIER Forwarding Router (BFR) that is connected
      directly or indirectly via a tunnel to a BIER-incapable PE remove the
      BIER header and send the payload to the PE.

  "A YANG data model for Tree Engineering for Bit Index Explicit Replication
  (BIER-TE)", Zheng Zhang, Cui(Linda) Wang, Ran Chen, fangwei hu, Mahesh
  Sivakumar, chenhuanan, 2021-11-07, <draft-ietf-bier-te-yang-04.txt>

      This document defines a YANG data model for Tree Engineering for Bit
      Index Explicit Replication (BIER-TE) configuration and operation.

  "OSPFv3 Extensions for BIER", Peter Psenak, Nagendra Nainar, IJsbrand
  Wijnands, 2021-11-19, <draft-ietf-bier-ospfv3-extensions-05.txt>

      Bit Index Explicit Replication (BIER) is an architecture that
      provides multicast forwarding through a "BIER domain" without
      requiring intermediate routers to maintain multicast related per-flow
      state.  Neither does BIER require an explicit tree-building protocol
      for its operation.  A multicast data packet enters a BIER domain at a
      "Bit-Forwarding Ingress Router" (BFIR), and leaves the BIER domain at
      one or more "Bit-Forwarding Egress Routers" (BFERs).  The BFIR router
      adds a BIER header to the packet.  Such header contains a bit-string
      in which each bit represents exactly one BFER to forward the packet
      to.  The set of BFERs to which the multicast packet needs to be
      forwarded is expressed by the according set of bits set in BIER
      packet header.
      
      This document describes the OSPFv3 [RFC8362] protocol extensions
      required for BIER with MPLS encapsulation [RFC8296].  Support for
      other encapsulation types is outside the scope of this document.  The
      use of multiple encapsulation types is outside the scope of this
      document.

  "BIER Prefix Redistribute", Zheng Zhang, Bo Wu, Zhaohui Zhang, IJsbrand
  Wijnands, Yisong Liu, Hooman Bidgoli, 2021-12-23,
  <draft-ietf-bier-prefix-redistribute-01.txt>

      This document defines a BIER proxy function to support a single BIER
      sub-domain over multiple underlay routing protocol regions
      (Autonomous Systems or IGP areas).  A new BIER proxy range sub-TLV is
      defined to redistribute BIER BFR-id information across the routing
      regions.

  "M-LDP Signaling Through BIER Core", Hooman Bidgoli, Jayant Kotalwar,
  IJsbrand Wijnands, Mankamana Mishra, Zhaohui Zhang, Eddie Leyton,
  2021-11-12, <draft-ietf-bier-mldp-signaling-over-bier-01.txt>

      Consider an end to end Multipoint LDP (mLDP) network, where it is
      desirable to deploy BIER in portion of this network.  It might be
      desirable to deploy BIER with minimum disruption to the mLDP network
      or redesign of the network.
      
      This document describes the procedure needed for mLDP tunnels to be
      signaled over and stitched through a BIER core, allowing LDP routers
      to run traditional mLDP services through a BIER core.

  "BIER (Bit Index Explicit Replication) Redundant Ingress Router Failover",
  Zheng Zhang, Greg Mirsky, Quan Xiong, Yisong Liu, Huanan Li, 2021-10-24,
  <draft-ietf-bier-source-protection-01.txt>

      This document describes a failover in the Bit Index Explicit
      Replication domain with a redundant ingress router.

  "Supporting BIER in IPv6 Networks (BIERin6)", Zheng Zhang, Zhaohui Zhang,
  IJsbrand Wijnands, Mankamana Mishra, Hooman Bidgoli, Gyan Mishra,
  2022-03-02, <draft-ietf-bier-bierin6-04.txt>

      BIER is a multicast forwarding architecture that does not require
      per-flow state inside the network yet still provides optimal
      replication.  This document describes how the existing BIER
      encapsulation specified in RFC 8296 works in a non-MPLS IPv6 network,
      which is referred to as BIERin6.  Specifically, like in an IPv4
      network, BIER can work over L2 links directly or over tunnels.  In
      case of IPv6 tunneling, a new IP "Next Header" type is to be assigned
      for BIER.

  "OSPF Extensions for BIER-TE", Huaimo Chen, Mike McBride, Aijun Wang, Gyan
  Mishra, Yanhe Fan, Lei Liu, Xufeng Liu, 2022-01-20,
  <draft-ietf-bier-te-ospf-00.txt>

      This document describes OSPF extensions for distributing BitPositions
      configured on the links in "Bit Index Explicit Replication Traffic
      Engineering" (BIER-TE) domain.

  "IS-IS Extensions for BIER-TE", Huaimo Chen, Mike McBride, Aijun Wang, Gyan
  Mishra, Yanhe Fan, Lei Liu, Xufeng Liu, 2022-01-25,
  <draft-ietf-bier-te-isis-00.txt>

      This document describes IS-IS extensions for distributing
      BitPositions configured on the links in "Bit Index Explicit
      Replication Traffic Engineering" (BIER-TE) domain.

  "OSPFv3 Extensions for BIER-TE", Huaimo Chen, Mike McBride, Aijun Wang,
  Gyan Mishra, Yanhe Fan, Lei Liu, Xufeng Liu, 2022-01-25,
  <draft-ietf-bier-te-ospfv3-00.txt>

      This document describes OSPFv3 extensions for distributing
      BitPositions configured on the links in "Bit Index Explicit
      Replication Traffic Engineering" (BIER-TE) domain.

  "LSR Extensions for BIER non-MPLS Encapsulation", Senthil Dhanaraj, Gang
  Yan, IJsbrand Wijnands, Peter Psenak, Zhaohui Zhang, Jingrong Xie,
  2022-03-01, <draft-ietf-bier-lsr-non-mpls-extensions-00.txt>

      Bit Index Explicit Replication (BIER) is an architecture that
      provides multicast forwarding through a "BIER domain" without
      requiring intermediate routers to maintain multicast related per-flow
      state.  BIER can be supported in MPLS and non-MPLS networks.
      
      This document specifies the required extensions to the IS-IS, OSPFv2
      and OSPFv3 protocols for supporting BIER in non-MPLS networks using
      BIER non-MPLS encapsulation.

Benchmarking Methodology (bmwg)
-------------------------------

  "Benchmarking Methodology for Network Security Device Performance",
  Balamuhunthan Balarajah, Carsten Rossenhoevel, bmonkman, 2022-01-12,
  <draft-ietf-bmwg-ngfw-performance-13.txt>

      This document provides benchmarking terminology and methodology for
      next-generation network security devices including next-generation
      firewalls (NGFW), next-generation intrusion prevention systems
      (NGIPS), and unified threat management (UTM) implementations.  The
      main areas covered in this document are test terminology, test
      configuration parameters, and benchmarking methodology for NGFW and
      NGIPS.  This document aims to improve the applicability,
      reproducibility, and transparency of benchmarks and to align the test
      methodology with today's increasingly complex layer 7 security
      centric network application use cases.  As a result, this document
      makes [RFC3511] obsolete.

  "Multiple Loss Ratio Search for Packet Throughput (MLRsearch)", Maciek
  Konstantynowicz, Vratko Polak, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-ietf-bmwg-mlrsearch-02.txt>

      TODO: Update after all sections are ready.
      
      This document proposes changes to [RFC2544], specifically to packet
      throughput search methodology, by defining a new search algorithm
      referred to as Multiple Loss Ratio search (MLRsearch for short).
      Instead of relying on binary search with pre-set starting offered
      load, it proposes a novel approach discovering the starting point in
      the initial phase, and then searching for packet throughput based on
      defined packet loss ratio (PLR) input criteria and defined final
      trial duration time.  One of the key design principles behind
      MLRsearch is minimizing the total test duration and searching for
      multiple packet throughput rates (each with a corresponding PLR)
      concurrently, instead of doing it sequentially.
      
      The main motivation behind MLRsearch is the new set of challenges and
      requirements posed by NFV (Network Function Virtualization),
      specifically software based implementations of NFV data planes.
      Using [RFC2544] in the experience of the authors yields often not
      repetitive and not replicable end results due to a large number of
      factors that are out of scope for this draft.  MLRsearch aims to
      address this challenge in a simple way of getting the same result
      sooner, so more repetitions can be done to describe the
      replicability.

Calendaring Extensions (calext)
-------------------------------

  "Support for iCalendar Relationships", Michael Douglass, 2022-02-27,
  <draft-ietf-calext-ical-relations-10.txt>

      This specification updates the iCalendar RELATED-TO property defined
      in RFC5545 by adding new relation types and introduces new iCalendar
      properties LINK, CONCEPT and REFID to allow better linking and
      grouping of iCalendar components and related data.

  "JSCalendar: Converting from and to iCalendar", Neil Jenkins, Robert
  Stepanek, Michael Douglass, 2022-01-13,
  <draft-ietf-calext-jscalendar-icalendar-06.txt>

      This document provides the required methods for converting JSCalendar
      from and to iCalendar.

  "Calendar subscription upgrades", Michael Douglass, 2022-03-05,
  <draft-ietf-calext-subscription-upgrade-05.txt>

      This specification updates RFC5545 to add the value DELETED to the
      STATUS property.
      
      This specification also updates RFC7240 to add the subscribe-
      enhanced-get and limit preferences.

  "VPOLL: Consensus Scheduling Component for iCalendar", Eric York, Michael
  Douglass, 2022-03-05, <draft-ietf-calext-vpoll-03.txt>

      This specification introduces a new RFC5545 iCalendar component which
      allows for consensus scheduling, that is, voting on a number of
      alternative meeting or task alternatives.

  "JSContact: A JSON representation of contact data", Robert Stepanek, Mario
  Loffredo, 2022-03-07, <draft-ietf-calext-jscontact-01.txt>

      This specification defines a data model and JSON representation of
      contact card information that can be used for data storage and
      exchange in address book or directory applications.  It aims to be an
      alternative to the vCard data format and to be unambiguous,
      extendable and simple to process.  In contrast to the JSON-based
      jCard format, it is not a direct mapping from the vCard data model
      and expands semantics where appropriate.

  "Serverside Subscriptions", Michael Douglass, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-ietf-calext-serverside-subscriptions-02.txt>

      This specification provides a mechanism whereby subscriptions to
      external resources can be handled by the server.
      
      This specification updates RFC4791 to add new properties for the
      MKCOL request.

  "Task Extensions to iCalendar", Adrian Apthorp, Michael Douglass,
  2022-03-07, <draft-ietf-calext-ical-tasks-02.txt>

      This document defines extensions to the Internet Calendaring and
      Scheduling Core Object Specification (iCalendar) (RFC5545) to provide
      improved status tracking, scheduling and specification of tasks.
      
      It also defines how Calendaring Extensions to WebDAV (CalDAV) (RFC
      4791) servers can be extended to support certain automated task
      management behaviours.

  "JSContact: Converting from and to vCard", Mario Loffredo, Robert Stepanek,
  2022-03-07, <draft-ietf-calext-jscontact-vcard-00.txt>

      This document defines how to convert contact information as defined
      in the JSContact [draft-ietf-calext-jscontact] specification from and
      to vCard.

Concise Binary Object Representation Maintenance and Extensions (cbor)
----------------------------------------------------------------------

  "Packed CBOR", Carsten Bormann, 2022-02-13, <draft-ietf-cbor-packed-04.txt>

      The Concise Binary Object Representation (CBOR, RFC 8949) is a data
      format whose design goals include the possibility of extremely small
      code size, fairly small message size, and extensibility without the
      need for version negotiation.
      
      CBOR does not provide any forms of data compression.  CBOR data
      items, in particular when generated from legacy data models often
      allow considerable gains in compactness when applying data
      compression.  While traditional data compression techniques such as
      DEFLATE (RFC 1951) can work well for CBOR encoded data items, their
      disadvantage is that the receiver needs to unpack the compressed form
      to make use of data.
      
      This specification describes Packed CBOR, a simple transformation of
      a CBOR data item into another CBOR data item that is almost as easy
      to consume as the original CBOR data item.  A separate decompression
      step is therefore often not required at the receiver.

  "On storing CBOR encoded items on stable storage", Michael Richardson,
  Carsten Bormann, 2022-03-07, <draft-ietf-cbor-file-magic-10.txt>

      This document defines an on-disk format for CBOR objects that is
      friendly to common on-disk recognition systems such as the Unix
      file(1) command.

Common Control and Measurement Plane (ccamp)
--------------------------------------------

  "A YANG Data Model for Optical Transport Network Topology", Haomian Zheng,
  Italo Busi, Xufeng Liu, Sergio Belotti, Oscar de Dios, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-ietf-ccamp-otn-topo-yang-14.txt>

      This document describes a YANG data model to describe the topologies
      of an Optical Transport Network (OTN).  It is independent of control
      plane protocols and captures topological and resource related
      information pertaining to OTN.  This model enables clients, which
      interact with a transport domain controller, for OTN topology related
      operations such as obtaining the relevant topology resource
      information.

  "OTN Tunnel YANG Model", Haomian Zheng, Italo Busi, Sergio Belotti, Victor
  Lopez, Yunbin Xu, 2022-03-07, <draft-ietf-ccamp-otn-tunnel-model-15.txt>

      This document describes the YANG data model for tunnels in OTN TE
      networks.  The model can be used to do the configuration in order to
      establish the tunnel in OTN network.  This work is independent with
      the control plane protocols.  The YANG data model defined in this
      document conforms to the Network Management Datastore Architecture
      (NMDA).

  "A YANG Data Model for Flexi-Grid Optical Networks", Universidad de Madrid,
  Daniel Burrero, Daniel King, Young Lee, Haomian Zheng, 2021-11-11,
  <draft-ietf-ccamp-flexigrid-yang-11.txt>

      This document defines a YANG module for managing flexi-grid optical
      networks.  The model defined in this document specifies a flexi-grid
      traffic engineering database that is used to describe the topology of
      a flexi-grid network.  It is based on and augments existing YANG
      models that describe network and traffic engineering topologies.
      
      The YANG data model defined in this document conforms to the Network
      Management Datastore Architecture (NMDA).

  "A Yang Data Model for WSON Tunnel", Young Lee, Haomian Zheng, Aihua Guo,
  Victor Lopez, Daniel King, Bin-Yeong Yoon, Ricard Vilalta, 2021-10-22,
  <draft-ietf-ccamp-wson-tunnel-model-06.txt>

      This document provides a YANG data model for WSON TE tunnel.

  "Transport Northbound Interface Applicability Statement", Italo Busi,
  Daniel King, Haomian Zheng, Yunbin Xu, 2021-09-29,
  <draft-ietf-ccamp-transport-nbi-app-statement-13.txt>

      This document provides an analysis of the applicability of the YANG
      models defined by the IETF (Traffic Engineering Architecture and
      Signaling (TEAS) moreover, Common Control and Measurement Plane
      (CCAMP) WGs in particular) to support ODU transit services,
      Transparent client services and EPL/EVPL Ethernet services over OTN
      single and multi-domain network scenarios.
      
      This document also describes how existing YANG models can be used
      through a number of worked examples and JSON fragments.

  "A YANG Data Model for L1 Connectivity Service Model (L1CSM)", Young Lee,
  Kwang-koog Lee, Haomian Zheng, Oscar de Dios, Daniele Ceccarelli,
  2021-12-13, <draft-ietf-ccamp-l1csm-yang-16.txt>

      This document provides a YANG data model for Layer 1 Connectivity
      Service Model (L1CSM).  The intent of this document is to provide a
      Layer 1 service model exploiting YANG data model, which can be
      utilized by a customer network controller to initiate a service
      request connectivity as well as retrieving service states toward a
      Layer 1 network controller communicating with its customer network
      controller.  This YANG model is NMDA-compliant.

  "A YANG Data Model for Microwave Topology", Jonas Ahlberg, Scott Mansfield,
  Min Ye, Italo Busi, Xi Li, Daniela Spreafico, 2021-10-22,
  <draft-ietf-ccamp-mw-topo-yang-02.txt>

      This document defines three YANG data models to describe topologies
      of microwave/millimeter radio links and bandwidth availability for a
      link in general, as well as to reference interface management
      information from a termination point.
      
      RFC Ed.  Note
      
      // RFC Ed.: replace all XXXX throughout the document with actual RFC
      numbers and remove this note

  "Applicability of GMPLS for Beyond 100G Optical Transport Network", Qilei
  Wang, Radha Valiveti, Haomian Zheng, Huub van Helvoort, Sergio Belotti,
  2021-11-07, <draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-otn-b100g-applicability-08.txt>

      This document examines the applicability of using existing GMPLS
      routing and signalling mechanisms to set up Optical Data Unit-k
      (ODUk) LSPs over Optical Data Unit-Cn (ODUCn) links as defined in the
      2020 version of G.709.

  "Extension to the Link Management Protocol (LMP/DWDM -rfc4209) for Dense
  Wavelength Division Multiplexing (DWDM) Optical Line Systems to manage the
  application code of optical interface parameters in DWDM application",
  Dharini Hiremagalur, Gert Grammel, Gabriele Galimberti, Ruediger Kunze,
  Dieter Beller, 2021-12-28, <draft-ietf-ccamp-dwdm-if-lmp-05.txt>

      This memo defines extensions to LMP [RFC4209] for managing Optical
      parameters associated with Wavelength Division Multiplexing (WDM)
      systems in accordance with the Interface Application Identifier
      approach defined in ITU-T Recommendation G.694.1.[ITU-T.G694.1] and
      its extensions.

  "A YANG Data Model for Optical Impairment-aware Topology", Dieter Beller,
  Esther Le Rouzic, Sergio Belotti, Gabriele Galimberti, Italo Busi,
  2022-03-07, <draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang-09.txt>

      In order to provision an optical connection through optical networks,
      a combination of path continuity, resource availability, and
      impairment constraints must be met to determine viable and optimal
      paths through the network.  The determination of appropriate paths is
      known as Impairment-Aware Routing and Wavelength Assignment (IA-RWA)
      for WSON, while it is known as Impairment-Aware Routing and Spectrum
      Assigment (IA-RSA) for SSON.
      
      This document provides a YANG data model for the impairment-aware TE
      topology in optical networks.

  "A YANG Data Model for Transport Network Client Signals", Haomian Zheng,
  Aihua Guo, Italo Busi, Anton Snitser, Francesco Lazzeri, 2022-01-05,
  <draft-ietf-ccamp-client-signal-yang-06.txt>

      A transport network is a server-layer network to provide connectivity
      services to its client.  The topology and tunnel information in the
      transport layer has already been defined by generic Traffic-
      engineered models and technology-specific models (e.g., OTN, WSON).
      However, how the client signals are accessing to the network has not
      been described.  These information is necessary to both client and
      provider.
      
      This draft describes how the client signals are carried over
      transport network and defines YANG data models which are required
      during configuration procedure.  More specifically, several client
      signal (of transport network) models including ETH, STM-n, FC and so
      on, are defined in this draft.

  "A YANG Data Model for Layer 1 Types", Haomian Zheng, Italo Busi,
  2022-03-07, <draft-ietf-ccamp-layer1-types-12.txt>

      This document defines a collection of common data types and groupings
      in the YANG data modeling language for use with layer 1 networks.
      These derived common types and groupings are intended to be imported
      by modules that specify OTN networks, such as topology, tunnel,
      client signal adaptation and service.

  "A YANG Data Model for Ethernet TE Topology", Haomian Zheng, Aihua Guo,
  Italo Busi, Yunbin Xu, Yang Zhao, Xufeng Liu, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-ietf-ccamp-eth-client-te-topo-yang-02.txt>

      A transport network is a server-layer network to provide connectivity
      services to its client.  In this draft the topology of Ethernet with
      TE is described with YANG data model.

  "A YANG Data Model for Flexi-Grid Tunnels", Universidad de Madrid, Daniel
  Burrero, Daniel King, Victor Lopez, Italo Busi, Oscar de Dios, Young Lee,
  Gabriele Galimberti, 2021-11-09,
  <draft-ietf-ccamp-flexigrid-tunnel-yang-00.txt>

      This document defines a YANG model for managing flexi-grid optical
      tunnels (media-channels), complementing the information provided by
      the flexi-grid topology model.
      
      The YANG data model defined in this document conforms to the Network
      Management Datastore Architecture (NMDA).

  "Framework and Data Model for OTN Network Slicing", Aihua Guo, Luis
  Contreras, Sergio Belotti, Reza Rokui, Yunbin Xu, Yang Zhao, Xufeng Liu,
  2022-03-04, <draft-ietf-ccamp-yang-otn-slicing-01.txt>

      The requirement of slicing network resources with desired quality of
      service is emerging at every network technology, including the
      Optical Transport Networks (OTN).  As a part of the transport
      network, OTN can provide hard pipes with guaranteed data isolation
      and deterministic low latency, which are highly demanded in the
      Service Level Agreement (SLA).
      
      This document describes a framework for OTN network slicing and a
      YANG data model augmentation of the OTN topology model.  Additional
      YANG data model augmentations will be defined in a future version of
      this draft.

  "A YANG Data Model for Layer 0 Types", Haomian Zheng, Young Lee, Aihua Guo,
  Victor Lopez, Daniel King, Dieter Beller, Sergio Belotti, Italo Busi,
  Esther Le Rouzic, 2022-03-07, <draft-ietf-ccamp-rfc9093-bis-00.txt>

      This document defines a collection of common data types and groupings
      in the YANG data modeling language.  These derived common types and
      groupings are intended to be imported by modules that model Layer 0
      optical Traffic Engineering (TE) configuration and state capabilities
      such as Wavelength Switched Optical Networks (WSONs) and flexi-grid
      Dense Wavelength Division Multiplexing (DWDM) networks.
      
      This document obsoletes RFC 9093.

Content Delivery Networks Interconnection (cdni)
------------------------------------------------

  "URI Signing for Content Delivery Network Interconnection (CDNI)", Ray van
  Brandenburg, Kent Leung, Phil Sorber, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-ietf-cdni-uri-signing-25.txt>

      This document describes how the concept of URI Signing supports the
      content access control requirements of Content Delivery Network
      Interconnection (CDNI) and proposes a URI Signing method as a JSON
      Web Token (JWT) profile.
      
      The proposed URI Signing method specifies the information needed to
      be included in the URI to transmit the signed JWT, as well as the
      claims needed by the signed JWT to authorize a User Agent (UA).  The
      mechanism described can be used both in CDNI and single Content
      Delivery Network (CDN) scenarios.

  "CDNI extensions for HTTPS delegation", Frederic Fieau, Stephan Emile,
  Sanjay Mishra, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-ietf-cdni-interfaces-https-delegation-08.txt>

      The delivery of content over HTTPS involving one or more CDNs raises
      credential management issues.  This document defines new CDNI FCI and
      Metadata objects to support HTTPS delegation, especially the ACME-
      STAR [RFC9115] method.

  "Content Delivery Network Interconnection (CDNI) Footprint Types:
  Subdivision Code and Union", Nir Sopher, Sanjay Mishra, 2022-03-02,
  <draft-ietf-cdni-additional-footprint-types-01.txt>

      Open Caching architecture is a use case of Content Delivery Networks
      Interconnection (CDNI) in which the commercial Content Delivery
      Network (CDN) is the upstream CDN (uCDN) and the ISP caching layer
      serves as the downstream CDN (dCDN).  This document supplements the
      CDNI Metadata Footprint Types defined in RFC 8006.  The Footprint
      Types defined in this document can be used for Footprint objects as
      part of the Metadata interface (MI) defined in RFC 8006 or the
      Footprint & Capabilities Advertisement interface (FCI) defined in RFC
      8008.  The defined Footprint Types are derived from requirements
      raised by Open Caching but are also applicable to CDNI use cases in
      general.

  "Content Delivery Network Interconnection (CDNI) Control Interface /
  Triggers 2nd Edition", Ori Finkelman, Sanjay Mishra, Nir Sopher,
  2022-03-02, <draft-ietf-cdni-ci-triggers-rfc8007bis-01.txt>

      This document obsoletes RFC8007.  This document describes the part of
      the Content Delivery Network Interconnection (CDNI) Control interface
      that allows a CDN to trigger activity in an interconnected CDN that
      is configured to deliver content on its behalf.  The upstream CDN can
      use this mechanism to request that the downstream CDN pre-position
      metadata or content or to request that it invalidate or purge
      metadata or content.  The upstream CDN can monitor the status of
      activity that it has triggered in the downstream CDN.

Codec Encoding for LossLess Archiving and Realtime transmission (cellar)
------------------------------------------------------------------------

  "FFV1 Video Coding Format Version 4", Michael Niedermayer, Dave Rice,
  Jerome Martinez, 2021-11-27, <draft-ietf-cellar-ffv1-v4-18.txt>

      This document defines FFV1, a lossless, intra-frame video encoding
      format.  FFV1 is designed to efficiently compress video data in a
      variety of pixel formats.  Compared to uncompressed video, FFV1
      offers storage compression, frame fixity, and self-description, which
      makes FFV1 useful as a preservation or intermediate video format.

  "Matroska Media Container Format Specifications", Steve Lhomme, Moritz
  Bunkus, Dave Rice, 2021-10-09, <draft-ietf-cellar-matroska-08.txt>

      This document defines the Matroska audiovisual container, including
      definitions of its structural elements, as well as its terminology,
      vocabulary, and application.

  "Matroska Media Container Codec Specifications", Steve Lhomme, Moritz
  Bunkus, Dave Rice, 2021-10-09, <draft-ietf-cellar-codec-07.txt>

      This document defines the Matroska codec mappings, including the
      codec ID, layout of data in a Block Element and in an optional
      CodecPrivate Element.

  "Matroska Media Container Tag Specifications", Steve Lhomme, Moritz Bunkus,
  Dave Rice, 2021-10-09, <draft-ietf-cellar-tags-07.txt>

      This document defines the Matroska tags, namely the tag names and
      their respective semantic meaning.

  "Free Lossless Audio Codec", Michael Richardson, Andrew Weaver, 2021-11-01,
  <draft-ietf-cellar-flac-02.txt>

      This document defines FLAC, which stands for Free Lossless Audio
      Codec, a free, open source codec for lossless audio compression and
      decompression.

  "Matroska Media Container Control Track Specifications", Steve Lhomme,
  Moritz Bunkus, Dave Rice, 2021-10-09, <draft-ietf-cellar-control-00.txt>

      This document defines the Control Track usage found in the Matroska
      container.

  "Matroska Media Container Chapter Codecs Specifications", Steve Lhomme,
  Moritz Bunkus, Dave Rice, 2021-10-09,
  <draft-ietf-cellar-chapter-codecs-00.txt>

      This document defines common Matroska Chapter Codecs, the basic
      Matroska Script and the DVD inspired DVD menu.

Crypto Forum (cfrg)
-------------------

  "SPAKE2, a PAKE", Watson Ladd, Benjamin Kaduk, 2022-02-08,
  <draft-irtf-cfrg-spake2-26.txt>

      This document describes SPAKE2 which is a protocol for two parties
      that share a password to derive a strong shared key without
      disclosing the password.  This method is compatible with any group,
      is computationally efficient, and SPAKE2 has a security proof.  This
      document predated the CFRG PAKE competition and it was not selected,
      however, given existing use of variants in Kerberos and other
      applications it was felt publication was beneficial.  Applications
      that need a symmetric PAKE (password authenticated key exchange) and
      where hashing onto an elliptic curve at execution time is not
      possible can use SPAKE2.  This document is a product of the Crypto
      Forum Research Group (CFRG) in the IRTF.

  "Verifiable Random Functions (VRFs)", Sharon Goldberg, Leonid Reyzin,
  Dimitrios Papadopoulos, Jan Vcelak, 2022-02-06, <draft-irtf-cfrg-vrf-11.txt>

      A Verifiable Random Function (VRF) is the public-key version of a
      keyed cryptographic hash.  Only the holder of the private key can
      compute the hash, but anyone with the public key can verify the
      correctness of the hash.  VRFs are useful for preventing enumeration
      of hash-based data structures.  This document specifies several VRF
      constructions based on RSA and Elliptic Curves that are secure in the
      cryptographic random oracle model.

  "Hashing to Elliptic Curves", Armando Faz-Hernandez, Sam Scott, Nick
  Sullivan, Riad Wahby, Christopher Wood, 2022-02-18,
  <draft-irtf-cfrg-hash-to-curve-14.txt>

      This document specifies a number of algorithms for encoding or
      hashing an arbitrary string to a point on an elliptic curve.  This
      document is a product of the Crypto Forum Research Group (CFRG) in
      the IRTF.

  "Oblivious Pseudorandom Functions (OPRFs) using Prime-Order Groups", Alex
  Davidson, Armando Faz-Hernandez, Nick Sullivan, Christopher Wood,
  2022-02-08, <draft-irtf-cfrg-voprf-09.txt>

      An Oblivious Pseudorandom Function (OPRF) is a two-party protocol
      between client and server for computing the output of a Pseudorandom
      Function (PRF).  The server provides the PRF secret key, and the
      client provides the PRF input.  At the end of the protocol, the
      client learns the PRF output without learning anything about the PRF
      secret key, and the server learns neither the PRF input nor output.
      An OPRF can also satisfy a notion of 'verifiability', called a VOPRF.
      A VOPRF ensures clients can verify that the server used a specific
      private key during the execution of the protocol.  A VOPRF can also
      be partially-oblivious, called a POPRF.  A POPRF allows clients and
      servers to provide public input to the PRF computation.  This
      document specifies an OPRF, VOPRF, and POPRF instantiated within
      standard prime-order groups, including elliptic curves.

  "KangarooTwelve", =?utf-8?q?Beno=C3=AEt_Viguier?=, David Wong, Giles Van
  Assche, Quynh Dang, Joan Daemen, 2022-02-20,
  <draft-irtf-cfrg-kangarootwelve-07.txt>

      This document defines the KangarooTwelve eXtendable Output Function
      (XOF), a hash function with output of arbitrary length.  It provides
      an efficient and secure hashing primitive, which is able to exploit
      the parallelism of the implementation in a scalable way.  It uses
      tree hashing over a round-reduced version of SHAKE128 as underlying
      primitive.
      
      This document builds up on the definitions of the permutations and of
      the sponge construction in [FIPS 202], and is meant to serve as a
      stable reference and an implementation guide.

  "Additional Parameter sets for LMS Hash-Based Signatures", Scott Fluhrer,
  Quynh Dang, 2021-12-01, <draft-fluhrer-lms-more-parm-sets-06.txt>

      This note extends LMS (RFC 8554) by defining parameter sets by
      including additional hash functions.  Hese include hash functions
      that result in signatures with significantly smaller than the
      signatures using the current parameter sets, and should have
      sufficient security.
      
      This document is a product of the Crypto Forum Research Group (CFRG)
      in the IRTF.

  "Deterministic ECDSA and EdDSA Signatures with Additional Randomness", John
  Mattsson, Erik Thormarker, Sini Ruohomaa, 2022-02-15,
  <draft-mattsson-cfrg-det-sigs-with-noise-04.txt>

      Deterministic elliptic-curve signatures such as deterministic ECDSA
      and EdDSA have gained popularity over randomized ECDSA as their
      security do not depend on a source of high-quality randomness.
      Recent research has however found that implementations of these
      signature algorithms may be vulnerable to certain side-channel and
      fault injection attacks due to their determinism.  One countermeasure
      to such attacks is to re-add randomness to the otherwise
      deterministic calculation of the per-message secret number.  This
      document updates RFC 6979 and RFC 8032 to recommend constructions
      with additional randomness for deployments where side-channel attacks
      and fault injection attacks are a concern.  The updates are invisible
      to the validator of the signature and compatible with existing ECDSA
      and EdDSA validators.

  "CPace, a balanced composable PAKE", Michel Abdalla, Bjoern Haase, Julia
  Hesse, 2022-01-14, <draft-irtf-cfrg-cpace-05.txt>

      This document describes CPace which is a protocol for two parties
      that share a low-entropy secret (password) to derive a strong shared
      key without disclosing the secret to offline dictionary attacks.
      This method was tailored for constrained devices, is compatible with
      any group of both prime- and non-prime order, and comes with a
      security proof providing composability guarantees.

  "Usage Limits on AEAD Algorithms", Felix Guenther, Martin Thomson,
  Christopher Wood, 2022-03-07, <draft-irtf-cfrg-aead-limits-04.txt>

      An Authenticated Encryption with Associated Data (AEAD) algorithm
      provides confidentiality and integrity.  Excessive use of the same
      key can give an attacker advantages in breaking these properties.
      This document provides simple guidance for users of common AEAD
      functions about how to limit the use of keys in order to bound the
      advantage given to an attacker.  It considers limits in both single-
      and multi-key settings.

  "The OPAQUE Asymmetric PAKE Protocol", Daniel Bourdrez, Hugo Krawczyk,
  Kevin Lewi, Christopher Wood, 2022-03-07, <draft-irtf-cfrg-opaque-08.txt>

      This document describes the OPAQUE protocol, a secure asymmetric
      password-authenticated key exchange (aPAKE) that supports mutual
      authentication in a client-server setting without reliance on PKI and
      with security against pre-computation attacks upon server compromise.
      In addition, the protocol provides forward secrecy and the ability to
      hide the password from the server, even during password registration.
      This document specifies the core OPAQUE protocol and one
      instantiation based on 3DH.

  "The ristretto255 and decaf448 Groups", Henry de Valence, Jack Grigg, Mike
  Hamburg, Isis Lovecruft, George Tankersley, Filippo Valsorda, 2022-02-25,
  <draft-irtf-cfrg-ristretto255-decaf448-03.txt>

      This memo specifies two prime-order groups, ristretto255 and
      decaf448, suitable for safely implementing higher-level and complex
      cryptographic protocols.  The ristretto255 group can be implemented
      using Curve25519, allowing existing Curve25519 implementations to be
      reused and extended to provide a prime-order group.  Likewise, the
      decaf448 group can be implemented using edwards448.

  "Two-Round Threshold Schnorr Signatures with FROST", Deirdre Connolly,
  Chelsea Komlo, Ian Goldberg, Christopher Wood, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-irtf-cfrg-frost-03.txt>

      In this draft, we present a two-round signing variant of FROST, a
      Flexible Round-Optimized Schnorr Threshold signature scheme.  FROST
      signatures can be issued after a threshold number of entities
      cooperate to issue a signature, allowing for improved distribution of
      trust and redundancy with respect to a secret key.  Further, this
      draft specifies signatures that are compatible with [RFC8032].
      However, unlike [RFC8032], the protocol for producing signatures in
      this draft is not deterministic, so as to ensure protection against a
      key-recovery attack that is possible when even only one participant
      is malicious.

  "RSA Blind Signatures", Frank Denis, Frederic Jacobs, Christopher Wood,
  2022-02-02, <draft-irtf-cfrg-rsa-blind-signatures-03.txt>

      This document specifies the RSA-based blind signature protocol with
      appendix (RSA-BSSA).  RSA blind signatures were first introduced by
      Chaum for untraceable payments [Chaum83].  It extends RSA-PSS
      encoding specified in [RFC8017] to enable blind signature support.
      
      Discussion Venues
      
      This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.
      
      Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
      https://github.com/chris-wood/draft-wood-cfrg-blind-signatures.

Computing in the Network Research Group (coinrg)
------------------------------------------------

  "Use Cases for In-Network Computing", Ike Kunze, Klaus Wehrle, Dirk
  Trossen, Marie-Jose Montpetit, Xavier de Foy, David Griffin, Miguel Rio,
  2022-03-07, <draft-irtf-coinrg-use-cases-02.txt>

      Computing in the Network (COIN) comes with the prospect of deploying
      processing functionality on networking devices, such as switches and
      network interface cards.  While such functionality can be beneficial
      in several contexts, it has to be carefully placed into the context
      of the general Internet communication.
      
      This document discusses some use cases to demonstrate how real
      applications can benefit from COIN and to showcase essential
      requirements that have to be fulfilled by COIN applications.

Constrained RESTful Environments (core)
---------------------------------------

  "CoRE Resource Directory", Christian Amsuess, Zach Shelby, Michael Koster,
  Carsten Bormann, Peter van der Stok, 2021-03-07,
  <draft-ietf-core-resource-directory-28.txt>

      In many IoT applications, direct discovery of resources is not
      practical due to sleeping nodes, or networks where multicast traffic
      is inefficient.  These problems can be solved by employing an entity
      called a Resource Directory (RD), which contains information about
      resources held on other servers, allowing lookups to be performed for
      those resources.  The input to an RD is composed of links and the
      output is composed of links constructed from the information stored
      in the RD.  This document specifies the web interfaces that an RD
      supports for web servers to discover the RD and to register,
      maintain, lookup and remove information on resources.  Furthermore,
      new target attributes useful in conjunction with an RD are defined.

  "CBOR Encoding of Data Modeled with YANG", Michel Veillette, Ivaylo Petrov,
  Alexander Pelov, Carsten Bormann, Michael Richardson, 2021-12-19,
  <draft-ietf-core-yang-cbor-18.txt>

      Based on the Concise Binary Object Representation (CBOR, RFC 8949),
      this document defines encoding rules for representing configuration
      data, state data, parameters and results of Remote Procedure Call
      (RPC) operations or actions, and notifications, defined using YANG
      (RFC 7950).

  "YANG Schema Item iDentifier (YANG SID)", Michel Veillette, Alexander
  Pelov, Ivaylo Petrov, Carsten Bormann, Michael Richardson, 2021-11-18,
  <draft-ietf-core-sid-18.txt>

      YANG Schema Item iDentifiers (YANG SID) are globally unique 63-bit
      unsigned integers used to identify YANG items, as a more compact
      method to identify YANG items that can be used for efficiency and in
      constrained environments (RFC 7228).  This document defines the
      semantics, the registration, and assignment processes of YANG SIDs
      for IETF managed YANG modules.  To enable the implementation of these
      processes, this document also defines a file format used to persist
      and publish assigned YANG SIDs.

  "Group OSCORE - Secure Group Communication for CoAP", Marco Tiloca, Goeran
  Selander, Francesca Palombini, John Mattsson, Jiye Park, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-ietf-core-oscore-groupcomm-14.txt>

      This document defines Group Object Security for Constrained RESTful
      Environments (Group OSCORE), providing end-to-end security of CoAP
      messages exchanged between members of a group, e.g., sent over IP
      multicast.  In particular, the described approach defines how OSCORE
      is used in a group communication setting to provide source
      authentication for CoAP group requests, sent by a client to multiple
      servers, and for protection of the corresponding CoAP responses.
      Group OSCORE also defines a pairwise mode where each member of the
      group can efficiently derive a symmetric pairwise key with any other
      member of the group for pairwise OSCORE communication.

  "SenML Data Value Content-Format Indication", Ari Keranen, Carsten Bormann,
  2021-10-21, <draft-ietf-core-senml-data-ct-07.txt>

      The Sensor Measurement Lists (SenML) media type supports multiple
      types of values, from numbers to text strings and arbitrary binary
      data values.  In order to facilitate processing of binary data
      values, this document specifies a pair of new SenML fields for
      indicating the content format of those binary data values, i.e.,
      their Internet media type including parameters as well as any content
      codings applied.

  "The Constrained RESTful Application Language (CoRAL)", Christian Amsuess,
  Thomas Fossati, 2022-03-07, <draft-ietf-core-coral-05.txt>

      The Constrained RESTful Application Language (CoRAL) defines a data
      model and interaction model as well as a compact serialization
      formats for the description of typed connections between resources on
      the Web ("links"), possible operations on such resources ("forms"),
      and simple resource metadata.

  "Constrained Resource Identifiers", Carsten Bormann, Henk Birkholz,
  2022-03-07, <draft-ietf-core-href-10.txt>

      The Constrained Resource Identifier (CRI) is a complement to the
      Uniform Resource Identifier (URI) that serializes the URI components
      in Concise Binary Object Representation (CBOR) instead of a sequence
      of characters.  This simplifies parsing, comparison and reference
      resolution in environments with severe limitations on processing
      power, code size, and memory size.
      
      The present revision -10 of this draft contains an experimental
      addition that allows representing user information
      (https://alice@chains.example) in the URI authority component.  This
      feature lacks test vectors and implementation experience at the time
      of writing and requires discussion.

  "Group Communication for the Constrained Application Protocol (CoAP)", Esko
  Dijk, Chonggang Wang, Marco Tiloca, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-ietf-core-groupcomm-bis-06.txt>

      This document specifies the use of the Constrained Application
      Protocol (CoAP) for group communication, including the use of UDP/IP
      multicast as the default underlying data transport.  Both unsecured
      and secured CoAP group communication are specified.  Security is
      achieved by use of the Group Object Security for Constrained RESTful
      Environments (Group OSCORE) protocol.  The target application area of
      this specification is any group communication use cases that involve
      resource-constrained devices or networks that support CoAP.  This
      document replaces RFC 7390, while it updates RFC 7252 and RFC 7641.

  "Constrained Application Protocol (CoAP) Block-Wise Transfer Options
  Supporting Robust Transmission", Mohamed Boucadair, Jon Shallow,
  2021-05-26, <draft-ietf-core-new-block-14.txt>

      This document specifies alternative Constrained Application Protocol
      (CoAP) Block-Wise transfer options: Q-Block1 and Q-Block2 Options.
      
      These options are similar to, but distinct from, the CoAP Block1 and
      Block2 Options defined in RFC 7959.  Q-Block1 and Q-Block2 Options
      are not intended to replace Block1 and Block2 Options, but rather
      have the goal of supporting Non-confirmable messages for large
      amounts of data with fewer packet interchanges.  Also, the Q-Block1
      and Q-Block2 Options support faster recovery should any of the blocks
      get lost in transmission.

  "Profiling EDHOC for CoAP and OSCORE", Francesca Palombini, Marco Tiloca,
  Rikard Hoeglund, Stefan Hristozov, Goeran Selander, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-ietf-core-oscore-edhoc-03.txt>

      The lightweight authenticated key exchange protocol EDHOC can be run
      over CoAP and used by two peers to establish an OSCORE Security
      Context.  This document further profiles this use of the EDHOC
      protocol, by specifying a number of additional and optional
      mechanisms.  These especially include an optimization approach for
      combining the execution of EDHOC with the first subsequent OSCORE
      transaction.  This combination reduces the number of round trips
      required to set up an OSCORE Security Context and to complete an
      OSCORE transaction using that Security Context.

  "Observe Notifications as CoAP Multicast Responses", Marco Tiloca, Rikard
  Hoeglund, Christian Amsuess, Francesca Palombini, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-ietf-core-observe-multicast-notifications-03.txt>

      The Constrained Application Protocol (CoAP) allows clients to
      "observe" resources at a server, and receive notifications as unicast
      responses upon changes of the resource state.  In some use cases,
      such as based on publish-subscribe, it would be convenient for the
      server to send a single notification addressed to all the clients
      observing a same target resource.  This document updates RFC7252 and
      RFC7641, and defines how a server sends observe notifications as
      response messages over multicast, synchronizing all the observers of
      a same resource on a same shared Token value.  Besides, this document
      defines how Group OSCORE can be used to protect multicast
      notifications end-to-end between the server and the observer clients.

  "Attacks on the Constrained Application Protocol (CoAP)", John Mattsson,
  John Fornehed, Goeran Selander, Francesca Palombini, Christian Amsuess,
  2022-02-04, <draft-mattsson-core-coap-attacks-03.txt>

      Being able to securely read information from sensors, to securely
      control actuators, and to not enable distributed denial-of-service
      attacks are essential in a world of connected and networking things
      interacting with the physical world.  This document summarizes a
      number of known attacks on CoAP and show that just using CoAP with a
      security protocol like DTLS, TLS, or OSCORE is not enough for secure
      operation.  Several of the discussed attacks can be mitigated with
      the solutions in draft-ietf-core-echo-request-tag.

  "Conditional Attributes for Constrained RESTful Environments", Michael
  Koster, Alan Soloway, Bill Silverajan, 2022-02-24,
  <draft-ietf-core-conditional-attributes-02.txt>

      This specification defines Conditional Notification and Control
      Attributes that work with CoAP Observe (RFC7641).
      
      Editor note
      
      The git repository for the draft is found at https://github.com/core-
      wg/conditional-attributes/

  "Key Update for OSCORE (KUDOS)", Rikard Hoeglund, Marco Tiloca, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-ietf-core-oscore-key-update-01.txt>

      Object Security for Constrained RESTful Environments (OSCORE) uses
      AEAD algorithms to ensure confidentiality and integrity of exchanged
      messages.  Due to known issues allowing forgery attacks against AEAD
      algorithms, limits should be followed on the number of times a
      specific key is used for encryption or decryption.  This document
      defines how two OSCORE peers must follow these limits and what steps
      they must take to preserve the security of their communications.
      Therefore, this document updates RFC8613.  Furthermore, this document
      specifies Key Update for OSCORE (KUDOS), a lightweight procedure that
      two peers can use to update their keying material and establish a new
      OSCORE Security Context.

CBOR Object Signing and Encryption (cose)
-----------------------------------------

  "CBOR Object Signing and Encryption (COSE): Structures and Process", Jim
  Schaad, 2021-02-01, <draft-ietf-cose-rfc8152bis-struct-15.txt>

      Concise Binary Object Representation (CBOR) is a data format designed
      for small code size and small message size.  There is a need for the
      ability to have basic security services defined for this data format.
      This document defines the CBOR Object Signing and Encryption (COSE)
      protocol.  This specification describes how to create and process
      signatures, message authentication codes, and encryption using CBOR
      for serialization.  This specification additionally describes how to
      represent cryptographic keys using CBOR.
      
      This document along with [I-D.ietf-cose-rfc8152bis-algs] obsoletes
      RFC8152.

  "CBOR Object Signing and Encryption (COSE): Initial Algorithms", Jim
  Schaad, 2020-09-24, <draft-ietf-cose-rfc8152bis-algs-12.txt>

      Concise Binary Object Representation (CBOR) is a data format designed
      for small code size and small message size.  There is a need for the
      ability to have basic security services defined for this data format.
      THis document defines a set of algorithms that can be used with the
      CBOR Object Signing and Encryption (COSE) protocol RFC XXXX.

  "CBOR Object Signing and Encryption (COSE): Header parameters for carrying
  and referencing X.509 certificates", Jim Schaad, 2020-12-14,
  <draft-ietf-cose-x509-08.txt>

      The CBOR Signing And Encrypted Message (COSE) structure uses
      references to keys in general.  For some algorithms, additional
      properties are defined which carry parameters relating to keys as
      needed.  The COSE Key structure is used for transporting keys outside
      of COSE messages.  This document extends the way that keys can be
      identified and transported by providing attributes that refer to or
      contain X.509 certificates.

  "CBOR Object Signing and Encryption (COSE): Hash Algorithms", Jim Schaad,
  2020-09-14, <draft-ietf-cose-hash-algs-09.txt>

      The CBOR Object Signing and Encryption (COSE) syntax
      [I-D.ietf-cose-rfc8152bis-struct] does not define any direct methods
      for using hash algorithms.  There are, however, circumstances where
      hash algorithms are used, such as indirect signatures where the hash
      of one or more contents are signed, and X.509 certificate or other
      object identification by the use of a fingerprint.  This document
      defines a set of hash algorithms that are identified by COSE
      Algorithm Identifiers.

  "CBOR Object Signing and Encryption (COSE): Countersignatures", Jim Schaad,
  Russ Housley, 2021-06-23, <draft-ietf-cose-countersign-05.txt>

      Concise Binary Object Representation (CBOR) is a data format designed
      for small code size and small message size.  CBOR Object Signing and
      Encryption (COSE) defines a set of security services for CBOR.  This
      document defines a countersignature algorithm along with the needed
      header parameters and CBOR tags for COSE.

  "CBOR Encoded X.509 Certificates (C509 Certificates)", John Mattsson,
  Goeran Selander, Shahid Raza, Joel Hoglund, Martin Furuhed, 2022-01-10,
  <draft-ietf-cose-cbor-encoded-cert-03.txt>

      This document specifies a CBOR encoding of X.509 certificates.  The
      resulting certificates are called C509 Certificates.  The CBOR
      encoding supports a large subset of RFC 5280 and all certificates
      compatible with the RFC 7925, IEEE 802.1AR (DevID), CNSA, RPKI, GSMA
      eUICC, and CA/Browser Forum Baseline Requirements profiles.  When
      used to re-encode DER encoded X.509 certificates, the CBOR encoding
      can in many cases reduce the size of RFC 7925 profiled certificates
      with over 50%.  The CBOR encoded structure can alternatively be
      signed directly ("natively signed"), which does not require re-
      encoding for the signature to be verified.  The document also
      specifies C509 COSE headers, a C509 TLS certificate type, and a C509
      file format.

  "Use of Hybrid Public-Key Encryption (HPKE) with CBOR Object Signing and
  Encryption (COSE)", Hannes Tschofenig, Russ Housley, Brendan Moran,
  2022-03-07, <draft-ietf-cose-hpke-01.txt>

      This specification defines hybrid public-key encryption (HPKE) for
      use with CBOR Object Signing and Encryption (COSE).  HPKE offers a
      variant of public-key encryption of arbitrary-sized plaintexts for a
      recipient public key.
      
      HPKE works for any combination of an asymmetric key encapsulation
      mechanism (KEM), key derivation function (KDF), and authenticated
      encryption with additional data (AEAD) encryption function.
      Authentication for HPKE in COSE is provided by COSE-native security
      mechanisms.

DANE Authentication for Network Clients Everywhere (dance)
----------------------------------------------------------

  "TLS Client Authentication via DANE TLSA records", Shumon Huque, Viktor
  Dukhovni, Ash Wilson, 2022-02-14, <draft-huque-dane-client-cert-08.txt>

      The DANE TLSA protocol [RFC6698] [RFC7671] describes how to publish
      Transport Layer Security (TLS) server certificates or public keys in
      the DNS.  This document updates RFC 6698 and RFC 7671.  It describes
      how to additionally use the TLSA record to publish client
      certificates or public keys, and also the rules and considerations
      for using them with TLS.

  "TLS Extension for DANE Client Identity", Shumon Huque, Viktor Dukhovni,
  Ash Wilson, 2022-02-14, <draft-huque-tls-dane-clientid-06.txt>

      This document specifies a TLS and DTLS extension to convey a DNS-
      Based Authentication of Named Entities (DANE) Client Identity to a
      TLS or DTLS server.  This is useful for applications that perform TLS
      client authentication via DANE TLSA records.

Deterministic Networking (detnet)
---------------------------------

  "Deterministic Networking (DetNet) YANG Model", Xuesong Geng, Yeoncheol
  Ryoo, Don Fedyk, Reshad Rahman, Zhenqiang Li, 2022-02-05,
  <draft-ietf-detnet-yang-16.txt,.pdf>

      This document contains the specification for the Deterministic
      Networking YANG Model for configuration and operational data for
      DetNet Flows.  The model allows for provisioning of end-to-end DetNet
      service on devices along the path without dependency on any signaling
      protocol.  It also specifies operational status for flows.  An
      operator or network controller programs the configuration of the
      devices.
      
      The YANG module defined in this document conforms to the Network
      Management Datastore Architecture (NMDA).

  "DetNet Bounded Latency", Norman Finn, Jean-Yves Le Boudec, Ehsan
  Mohammadpour, Jiayi Zhang, Balazs Varga, Janos Farkas, 2022-02-16,
  <draft-ietf-detnet-bounded-latency-09.txt>

      This document presents a timing model for sources, destinations, and
      DetNet transit nodes.  Using the model, it provides a methodology to
      compute end-to-end latency and backlog bounds for various queuing
      methods.  The methodology can be used by the management and control
      planes and by resource reservation algorithms to provide bounded
      latency and zero congestion loss for the DetNet service.

  "Operations, Administration and Maintenance (OAM) for Deterministic
  Networks (DetNet) with MPLS Data Plane", Greg Mirsky, Mach Chen, Balazs
  Varga, Janos Farkas, 2022-03-07, <draft-ietf-detnet-mpls-oam-07.txt>

      This document defines format and use principals of the Deterministic
      Network (DetNet) service Associated Channel (ACH) over a DetNet
      network with the MPLS data plane.  The DetNet service ACH can be used
      to carry test packets of active Operations, Administration, and
      Maintenance protocols that are used to detect DetNet failures and
      measure performance metrics.

  "Operations, Administration and Maintenance (OAM) for Deterministic
  Networks (DetNet) with IP Data Plane", Greg Mirsky, Mach Chen, David Black,
  2022-02-07, <draft-ietf-detnet-ip-oam-04.txt>

      This document defines the principles for using Operations,
      Administration, and Maintenance protocols and mechanisms in the
      Deterministic Networking networks with the IP data plane.

  "Deterministic Networking (DetNet) Controller Plane Framework", Andrew
  Malis, Xuesong Geng, Mach Chen, Fengwei Qin, Balazs Varga, 2021-10-25,
  <draft-ietf-detnet-controller-plane-framework-01.txt>

      This document provides a framework overview for the Deterministic
      Networking (DetNet) controller plane.  It discusses concepts and
      requirements for DetNet controller plane which could be basis for
      future solution specification.

  "Framework of Operations, Administration and Maintenance (OAM) for
  Deterministic Networking (DetNet)", Greg Mirsky, Fabrice Theoleyre,
  Georgios Papadopoulos, Carlos Bernardos, Balazs Varga, Janos Farkas,
  2021-10-14, <draft-ietf-detnet-oam-framework-05.txt>

      Deterministic Networking (DetNet), as defined in RFC 8655, is aimed
      to provide a bounded end-to-end latency on top of the network
      infrastructure, comprising both Layer 2 bridged and Layer 3 routed
      segments.  This document's primary purpose is to detail the specific
      requirements of the Operation, Administration, and Maintenance (OAM)
      recommended to maintain a deterministic network.  With the
      implementation of the OAM framework in DetNet, an operator will have
      a real-time view of the network infrastructure regarding the
      network's ability to respect the Service Level Objective, such as
      packet delay, delay variation, and packet loss ratio, assigned to
      each DetNet flow.

Dynamic Host Configuration (dhc)
--------------------------------

  "YANG Data Model for DHCPv6 Configuration", Ian Farrer, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-ietf-dhc-dhcpv6-yang-25.txt>

      This document describes YANG data modules for the configuration and
      management of DHCPv6 (Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol for IPv6
      RFC8415) servers, relays, and clients.

Diameter Maintenance and Extensions (dime)
------------------------------------------

  "Diameter Group Signaling", Mark Jones, Marco Liebsch, Lionel Morand,
  2020-03-09, <draft-ietf-dime-group-signaling-13.txt>

      In large network deployments, a single Diameter node can support over
      a million concurrent Diameter sessions.  Recent use cases have
      revealed the need for Diameter nodes to apply the same operation to a
      large group of Diameter sessions concurrently.  The Diameter base
      protocol commands operate on a single session so these use cases
      could result in many thousands of command exchanges to enforce the
      same operation on each session in the group.  In order to reduce
      signaling, it would be desirable to enable bulk operations on all (or
      part of) the sessions managed by a Diameter node using a single or a
      few command exchanges.  This document specifies the Diameter protocol
      extensions to achieve this signaling optimization.

Dispatch (dispatch)
-------------------

  "ECMAScript Media Types Updates", Matthew Miller, Myles Borins, Mathias
  Bynens, Bradley Farias, 2022-03-01,
  <draft-ietf-dispatch-javascript-mjs-17.txt>

      This document describes the registration of media types for the
      ECMAScript and JavaScript programming languages and conformance
      requirements for implementations of these types.  This document
      obsoletes RFC4329, "Scripting Media Types", replacing the previous
      registrations for "text/javascript" and "application/javascript" with
      information and requirements aligned with common usage and
      implementation experiences.

Domain-based Message Authentication, Reporting & Conformance (dmarc)
--------------------------------------------------------------------

  "Domain-based Message Authentication, Reporting, and Conformance (DMARC)",
  Todd Herr, John Levine, 2022-01-31, <draft-ietf-dmarc-dmarcbis-05.txt>

      This document describes the Domain-based Message Authentication,
      Reporting, and Conformance (DMARC) protocol.
      
      DMARC permits the owner of an email author's domain name to enable
      verification of the domain's use, to indicate the Domain Owner's or
      Public Suffix Operator's message handling preference regarding failed
      verification, and to request reports about use of the domain name.
      Mail receiving organizations can use this information when evaluating
      handling choices for incoming mail.
      
      This document obsoletes RFC 7489.

  "Domain-based Message Authentication, Reporting, and Conformance (DMARC)
  Failure Reporting", Steven Jones, Alessandro Vesely, 2022-02-20,
  <draft-ietf-dmarc-failure-reporting-03.txt>

      Domain-based Message Authentication, Reporting, and Conformance
      (DMARC) is a scalable mechanism by which a domain owner can request
      feedback about email messages using their domain in the From: address
      field.  This document describes "failure reports," or "failed message
      reports," which provide details about individual messages that failed
      to authenticate according to the DMARC mechanism.

  "DMARC Aggregate Reporting", Alex Brotman, 2021-12-13,
  <draft-ietf-dmarc-aggregate-reporting-04.txt>

      DMARC allows for domain holders to request aggregate reports from
      receivers.  This report is an XML document, and contains extensible
      elements that allow for other types of data to be specified later.
      The aggregate reports can be submitted to the domain holder's
      specified destination as supported by the receiver.
      
      This document (along with others) obsoletes RFC7489.

Distributed Mobility Management (dmm)
-------------------------------------

  "Segment Routing IPv6 for Mobile User Plane", Satoru Matsushima, Clarence
  Filsfils, Miya Kohno, Pablo Camarillo, Dan Voyer, Charles Perkins,
  2022-02-18, <draft-ietf-dmm-srv6-mobile-uplane-18.txt>

      This document specifies the applicability of SRv6 (Segment Routing
      IPv6) to the user-plane of mobile networks.  The network programming
      nature of SRv6 accomplishes mobile user-plane functions in a simple
      manner.  The statelessness of SRv6 and its ability to control both
      service layer path and underlying transport can be beneficial to the
      mobile user-plane, providing flexibility, end-to-end network slicing,
      and SLA control for various applications.

  "Mobility aware Transport Network Slicing for 5G", Uma Chunduri, John
  Kaippallimalil, Sridhar Bhaskaran, Jeff Tantsura, Praveen Muley,
  2022-03-05, <draft-ietf-dmm-tn-aware-mobility-03.txt>

      This document specifies a framework and mapping of slices in 5G
      mobile systems to transport network slices in IP, Layer 2 or Layer 1
      transport networks.  Slices in 5G systems are characterized by
      latency bounds, reservation guarantees, jitter, data rates,
      availability, mobility speed, usage density, criticality and
      priority.  These characteristics are mapped to transport network
      slice include bandwidth, latency and criteria such as isolation,
      directionality and disjoint routes.  Mobile slice criteria are mapped
      to the appropriate transport slice and capabilities offered in
      backhaul, midhaul and fronthaul connectivity segments between radio
      side network functions and user plane function(gateway).
      
      This document describes how a mobile network slice is mapped to a
      slice in IP or Layer 2 transport network between 3GPP provisioning
      end points.  The same mapping mechanisms apply during initial UE
      session setup and following UE mobility.  Applicability of this
      framework and underlying transport networks, which can enable
      different slice properties are also discussed.  This is based on
      mapping between mobile and transport underlays (L2, Segment Routing,
      IPv6, MPLS and IPv4).

Domain Name System Operations (dnsop)
-------------------------------------

  "The ALT Special Use Top Level Domain", Warren Kumari, 2021-12-15,
  <draft-ietf-dnsop-alt-tld-14.txt>

      This document reserves a string (ALT) to be used as a TLD label in
      non-DNS contexts.  It also provides advice and guidance to developers
      developing alternative namespaces.
      
      [Ed note: Text inside square brackets ([]) is additional background
      information, answers to frequently asked questions, general musings,
      etc.  They will be removed before publication.  This document is
      being collaborated on in Github at: https://github.com/wkumari/draft-
      wkumari-dnsop-alt-tld.  The most recent version of the document, open
      issues, etc should all be available here.  The authors (gratefully)
      accept pull requests. ]

  "DNS Transport over TCP - Operational Requirements", John Kristoff, Duane
  Wessels, 2022-01-06, <draft-ietf-dnsop-dns-tcp-requirements-15.txt>

      This document updates RFC 1123 and RFC 1536.  This document requires
      the operational practice of permitting DNS messages to be carried
      over TCP on the Internet as a Best Current Practice.  This
      operational requirement is aligned with the implementation
      requirements in RFC 7766.  The use of TCP includes both DNS over
      unencrypted TCP, as well as over an encrypted TLS session.  The
      document also considers the consequences of this form of DNS
      communication and the potential operational issues that can arise
      when this Best Current Practice is not upheld.

  "DNS Catalog Zones", Peter van Dijk, Libor Peltan, Ondrej Sury, Willem
  Toorop, Kees Monshouwer, Peter Thomassen, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-ietf-dnsop-dns-catalog-zones-05.txt>

      This document describes a method for automatic DNS zone provisioning
      among DNS primary and secondary nameservers by storing and
      transferring the catalog of zones to be provisioned as one or more
      regular DNS zones.

  "DNS Referral Glue Requirements", Mark Andrews, Shumon Huque, Paul Wouters,
  Duane Wessels, 2022-02-08, <draft-ietf-dnsop-glue-is-not-optional-04.txt>

      The DNS uses referral glue records to allow iterative clients to find
      the addresses of nameservers that are contained within a delegated
      zone.  Authoritative Servers are expected to return all available
      referral glue records in a referral response.  If message size
      constraints prevent the inclusion of all in-domain referral glue
      records, the server MUST set the TC flag to inform the client that
      the response is incomplete, and that the client SHOULD use another
      transport to retrieve the full response.  This document updates RFC
      1034 to clarify correct server behavior.

  "Service binding and parameter specification via the DNS (DNS SVCB and
  HTTPS RRs)", Benjamin Schwartz, Mike Bishop, Erik Nygren, 2021-10-12,
  <draft-ietf-dnsop-svcb-https-08.txt>

      This document specifies the "SVCB" and "HTTPS" DNS resource record
      (RR) types to facilitate the lookup of information needed to make
      connections to network services, such as for HTTP origins.  SVCB
      records allow a service to be provided from multiple alternative
      endpoints, each with associated parameters (such as transport
      protocol configuration and keys for encrypting the TLS ClientHello).
      They also enable aliasing of apex domains, which is not possible with
      CNAME.  The HTTPS RR is a variation of SVCB for use with HTTP [HTTP].
      By providing more information to the client before it attempts to
      establish a connection, these records offer potential benefits to
      both performance and privacy.
      
      TO BE REMOVED: This document is being collaborated on in Github at:
      https://github.com/MikeBishop/dns-alt-svc
      (https://github.com/MikeBishop/dns-alt-svc).  The most recent working
      version of the document, open issues, etc. should all be available
      there.  The authors (gratefully) accept pull requests.

  "Fragmentation Avoidance in DNS", Kazunori Fujiwara, Paul Vixie,
  2021-12-23, <draft-ietf-dnsop-avoid-fragmentation-06.txt>

      EDNS0 enables a DNS server to send large responses using UDP and is
      widely deployed.  Path MTU discovery remains widely undeployed due to
      security issues, and IP fragmentation has exposed weaknesses in
      application protocols.  Currently, DNS is known to be the largest
      user of IP fragmentation.  It is possible to avoid IP fragmentation
      in DNS by limiting response size where possible, and signaling the
      need to upgrade from UDP to TCP transport where necessary.  This
      document proposes to avoid IP fragmentation in DNS.

  "Use of GOST 2012 Signature Algorithms in DNSKEY and RRSIG Resource Records
  for DNSSEC", Dmitry Belyavsky, Vasily Dolmatov, 2021-11-12,
  <draft-ietf-dnsop-rfc5933-bis-07.txt>

      This document describes how to produce digital signatures and hash
      functions using the GOST R 34.10-2012 and GOST R 34.11-2012
      algorithms for DNSKEY, RRSIG, and DS resource records, for use in the
      Domain Name System Security Extensions (DNSSEC).
      
      This document obsoletes RFC 5933 and updates RFC 8624.

  "Delegation Revalidation by DNS Resolvers", Shumon Huque, Paul Vixie, Ralph
  Dolmans, 2022-03-07, <draft-ietf-dnsop-ns-revalidation-02.txt>

      This document recommends improved DNS [RFC1034] [RFC1035] resolver
      behavior with respect to the processing of Name Server (NS) resource
      record sets (RRset) during iterative resolution.  When following a
      referral response from an authoritative server to a child zone, DNS
      resolvers should explicitly query the authoritative NS RRset at the
      apex of the child zone and cache this in preference to the NS RRset
      on the parent side of the zone cut.  Resolvers should also
      periodically revalidate the child delegation by re-quering the parent
      zone at the expiration of the TTL of the parent side NS RRset.

  "DNS Terminology", Paul Hoffman, Kazunori Fujiwara, 2021-09-28,
  <draft-ietf-dnsop-rfc8499bis-03.txt>

      The Domain Name System (DNS) is defined in literally dozens of
      different RFCs.  The terminology used by implementers and developers
      of DNS protocols, and by operators of DNS systems, has sometimes
      changed in the decades since the DNS was first defined.  This
      document gives current definitions for many of the terms used in the
      DNS in a single document.
      
      This document obsoletes RFC 8499 and updates RFC 2308.

  "DNS Error Reporting", Roy Arends, Matt Larson, 2021-11-09,
  <draft-ietf-dnsop-dns-error-reporting-01.txt>

      DNS Error Reporting is a lightweight error reporting mechanism that
      provides the operator of an authoritative server with reports on DNS
      resource records that fail to resolve or validate, that a Domain
      Owner or DNS Hosting organization can use to improve domain hosting.
      The reports are based on Extended DNS Errors [RFC8914].
      
      When a domain name fails to resolve or validate due to a
      misconfiguration or an attack, the operator of the authoritative
      server may be unaware of this.  To mitigate this lack of feedback,
      this document describes a method for a validating recursive resolver
      to automatically signal an error to an agent specified by the
      authoritative server.  DNS Error Reporting uses the DNS to report
      errors.

  "Guidance for NSEC3 parameter settings", Wes Hardaker, Viktor Dukhovni,
  2022-03-07, <draft-ietf-dnsop-nsec3-guidance-06.txt>

      NSEC3 is a DNSSEC mechanism providing proof of non-existence by
      promising there are no names that exist between two domainnames
      within a zone.  Unlike its counterpart NSEC, NSEC3 avoids directly
      disclosing the bounding domainname pairs.  This document provides
      guidance on setting NSEC3 parameters based on recent operational
      deployment experience.

Extensions for Scalable DNS Service Discovery (dnssd)
-----------------------------------------------------

  "Service Registration Protocol for DNS-Based Service Discovery", Ted Lemon,
  Stuart Cheshire, 2021-10-24, <draft-ietf-dnssd-srp-12.txt>

      The Service Registration Protocol for DNS-Based Service Discovery
      uses the standard DNS Update mechanism to enable DNS-Based Service
      Discovery using only unicast packets.  This makes it possible to
      deploy DNS Service Discovery without multicast, which greatly
      improves scalability and improves performance on networks where
      multicast service is not an optimal choice, particularly 802.11
      (Wi-Fi) and 802.15.4 (IoT) networks.  DNS-SD Service registration
      uses public keys and SIG(0) to allow services to defend their
      registrations against attack.

  "An EDNS0 option to negotiate Leases on DNS Updates", Stuart Cheshire, Ted
  Lemon, 2021-10-25, <draft-ietf-dnssd-update-lease-00.txt>

      This document proposes a new EDNS0 option that can be used by DNS
      Update clients and DNS servers to include a lease lifetime in a DNS
      Update or response, allowing a server to garbage collect stale
      resource records that have been added by DNS Updates

  "Advertising Proxy for DNS-SD Service Registration Protocol", Stuart
  Cheshire, Ted Lemon, 2022-01-12, <draft-ietf-dnssd-advertising-proxy-00.txt>

      An Advertising Proxy allows a device that accepts service
      registrations using Service Registration Protocol (SRP) to make those
      registrations visible to legacy clients that only implement Multicast
      DNS.

DDoS Open Threat Signaling (dots)
---------------------------------

  "Multi-homing Deployment Considerations for Distributed-Denial-of-Service
  Open Threat Signaling (DOTS)", Mohamed Boucadair, Tirumaleswar Reddy.K, Wei
  Pan, 2022-02-10, <draft-ietf-dots-multihoming-11.txt>

      This document discusses multi-homing considerations for Distributed-
      Denial-of-Service Open Threat Signaling (DOTS).  The goal is to
      provide some guidance for DOTS clients and client-domain DOTS
      gateways when multihomed.

  "Distributed Denial-of-Service Open Threat Signaling (DOTS) Telemetry",
  Mohamed Boucadair, Tirumaleswar Reddy.K, Ehud Doron, chenmeiling, Jon
  Shallow, 2022-02-23, <draft-ietf-dots-telemetry-24.txt>

      This document aims to enrich the DOTS signal channel protocol with
      various telemetry attributes, allowing for optimal Distributed
      Denial-of-Service (DDoS) attack mitigation.  It specifies the normal
      traffic baseline and attack traffic telemetry attributes a DOTS
      client can convey to its DOTS server in the mitigation request, the
      mitigation status telemetry attributes a DOTS server can communicate
      to a DOTS client, and the mitigation efficacy telemetry attributes a
      DOTS client can communicate to a DOTS server.  The telemetry
      attributes can assist the mitigator to choose the DDoS mitigation
      techniques and perform optimal DDoS attack mitigation.
      
      This document specifies a YANG module for representing DOTS telemetry
      message types.  It also specifies a second YANG module to share the
      attack mapping details over the DOTS data channel.

  "Use Cases for DDoS Open Threat Signaling (DOTS) Telemetry", Yuhei Hayashi,
  chenmeiling, Li Su, 2022-02-22, <draft-ietf-dots-telemetry-use-cases-09.txt>

      Denial-of-service Open Threat Signaling (DOTS) Telemetry enriches the
      base DOTS protocols to assist the mitigator in using efficient DDoS
      attack mitigation techniques in a network.  This document presents
      sample use cases for DOTS Telemetry.  It discusses in particular what
      components are deployed in the network, how they cooperate, and what
      information is exchanged to effectively use these techniques.

  "Distributed Denial-of-Service Open Threat Signaling (DOTS) Signal Channel
  Configuration Attributes for Robust Block Transmission", Mohamed Boucadair,
  Jon Shallow, 2022-02-11, <draft-ietf-dots-robust-blocks-03.txt>

      This document specifies new DOTS signal channel configuration
      parameters that are negotiated between DOTS peers to enable the use
      of Q-Block1 and Q-Block2 CoAP Options.  These options enable robust
      and faster transmission rates for large amounts of data with less
      packet interchanges as well as supporting faster recovery should any
      of the blocks get lost in transmission.
      
      This document defines a YANG data model for representing these new
      DOTS signal channel configuration parameters.

DNS PRIVate Exchange (dprive)
-----------------------------

  "DNS over Dedicated QUIC Connections", Christian Huitema, Sara Dickinson,
  Allison Mankin, 2022-02-28, <draft-ietf-dprive-dnsoquic-10.txt>

      This document describes the use of QUIC to provide transport privacy
      for DNS.  The encryption provided by QUIC has similar properties to
      that provided by TLS, while QUIC transport eliminates the head-of-
      line blocking issues inherent with TCP and provides more efficient
      packet loss recovery than UDP.  DNS over QUIC (DoQ) has privacy
      properties similar to DNS over TLS (DoT) specified in RFC7858, and
      latency characteristics similar to classic DNS over UDP.  This
      specification describes the use of DNS over QUIC as a general-purpose
      transport for DNS and includes the use of DNS over QUIC for stub to
      recursive, recursive to authoritative, and zone transfer scenarios.

  "Unilateral Opportunistic Deployment of Encrypted
  Recursive-to-Authoritative DNS", Daniel Gillmor, Joey Salazar, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-ietf-dprive-unilateral-probing-00.txt>

      This draft sets out steps that DNS servers (recursive resolvers and
      authoritative servers) can take unilaterally (without any
      coordination with other peers) to defend DNS query privacy against a
      passive network monitor.  The steps in this draft can be defeated by
      an active attacker, but should be simpler and less risky to deploy
      than more powerful defenses.  The draft also introduces (but does not
      try to specify) the semantics of signalling that would permit defense
      against an active attacker.
      
      The goal of this draft is to simplify and speed deployment of
      opportunistic encrypted transport in the recursive-to-authoritative
      hop of the DNS ecosystem.  With wider easy deployment of the
      underlying transport on an opportunistic basis, we hope to facilitate
      the future specification of stronger cryptographic protections
      against more powerful attacks.

Drone Remote ID Protocol (drip)
-------------------------------

  "Drone Remote Identification Protocol (DRIP) Architecture", Stuart Card,
  Adam Wiethuechter, Robert Moskowitz, Shuai Zhao, Andrei Gurtov, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-ietf-drip-arch-21.txt>

      This document describes an architecture for protocols and services to
      support Unmanned Aircraft System (UAS) Remote Identification (RID)
      and tracking, plus UAS RID-related communications.  This architecture
      adheres to the requirements listed in the DRIP Requirements document
      (RFC9153).

  "DRIP Entity Tag (DET) for Unmanned Aircraft System Remote Identification
  (UAS RID)", Robert Moskowitz, Stuart Card, Adam Wiethuechter, Andrei
  Gurtov, 2021-12-08, <draft-ietf-drip-rid-15.txt>

      This document describes the use of Hierarchical Host Identity Tags
      (HHITs), updating both [RFC7401] and [RFC7343], as self-asserting
      IPv6 addresses and thereby a trustable identifier for use as the
      Unmanned Aircraft System Remote Identification and tracking (UAS
      RID).  Within the context of RID, HHITs will be called DRIP Entity
      Tags (DET).  HHITs self-attest to the included explicit hierarchy
      that provides Registrar discovery for 3rd-party identifier
      attestation.

  "DRIP Authentication Formats & Protocols for Broadcast Remote ID", Adam
  Wiethuechter, Stuart Card, Robert Moskowitz, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-ietf-drip-auth-05.txt>

      This document describes how to include trust into the ASTM Remote ID
      specification defined in ASTM F3411 under Broadcast Remote ID (RID).
      It defines a few message schemes (sent within the Authentication
      Message) that can be used to authenticate past messages sent by a
      unmanned aircraft (UA) and provide proof of UA trustworthiness even
      in the absence of Internet connectivity at the receiving node.

  "DRIP Registries", Adam Wiethuechter, Stuart Card, Robert Moskowitz, Jim
  Reid, 2022-03-07, <draft-ietf-drip-registries-01.txt>

      This document creates the DRIP DET registration and discovery
      ecosystem.  This includes all components in the ecosystem (e.g., RAA,
      HDA, UA, GCS, USS).  The registration process will use the Extensible
      Provisioning Protocol (EPP) and other protocols.  The discovery
      process will leverage DNS and DNSSEC and related technology.  The
      DETs can be registered with as their "raw public keys" or in X.509
      certificates.

Delay/Disruption Tolerant Networking (dtn)
------------------------------------------

  "DTN Management Architecture", Edward Birrane, Emery Annis, Sarah Heiner,
  2022-03-06, <draft-ietf-dtn-dtnma-00.txt>

      This document describes a management architecture suitable for
      deployment in the Delay-Tolerant Networking (DTN) architecture.  The
      DTN environment is characterized by a lack of end-to-end connectivity
      and communications delays that are both long-lives and unpredictable.
      A DTN Management Architecture (DTNMA) is needed that can operate
      without human- or system-in-the-loop synchronous interactivity and
      without reliance on transport-layer sessions.
      
      Within a DTNMA, nodes must provide both eventual data exchange and
      in-time local protection.  This can be accomplished with the use of
      autonomous and asynchronous configuration and reporting.  Despite the
      significant challenges to data transport, nodes must exhibit behavior
      that is both determinable and autonomous while maintaining as much
      compatibility with non-challenged-network operations concepts as
      possible.
      
      The DTNMA is supported by two types of asynchronous behavior.  First,
      the DTNMA does not presuppose any synchronized transport behavior
      between managed and managing devices.  Second, the DTNMA does not
      support any query-response semantics.  In this way, the DTNMA allows
      for operation in extremely challenging conditions, to include over
      uni-directional links and cases where delays/disruptions prevent
      operation over traditional transport layers.

Emergency Context Resolution with Internet Technologies (ecrit)
---------------------------------------------------------------

  "A LoST extension to return complete and similar location info", Brian
  Rosen, Roger Marshall, Jeff Martin, 2022-03-04,
  <draft-ietf-ecrit-similar-location-19.txt>

      This document describes an extension to the LoST protocol of RFC 5222
      that allows additional civic location information to be returned in a
      <findServiceResponse>.  This extension supports two use cases: First,
      when the input location is valid but lacks some Civic Address
      elements, the LoST server can provide a completed form.  Second, when
      the input location is invalid, the LoST server can identify one or
      more feasible ("similar") locations.  This extension is applicable
      when the location information in the <findService> request uses the
      Basic Civic profile as described in RFC 5222 or another profile whose
      definition provides instructions concerning its use with this
      extension.

  "Validation of Locations Around a Planned Change", Brian Rosen, 2021-10-11,
  <draft-ietf-ecrit-lost-planned-changes-05.txt>

      This document defines an extension to the Location to Service
      Translation (LoST) protocol (RFC5222) that allows planned changes to
      the data to be handled smoothly.  This extension is only useful with
      the validation function of LoST.  It is beneficial for LoST
      validation clients to be aware of planned changes, as records that
      previously were valid may become invalid at a known future date, and
      new locations may become valid after the date.  This extension adds
      an element to the <findService> request: a date that allows the LoST
      client to request that the server perform validation as of the date
      specified.  It adds an optional Time-To-Live element to the response,
      which informs clients of the current expected lifetime of a
      validation.  It also adds a separate interface to the LoST server
      that allows a client to poll for planned changes.  Additionally, this
      document provides a conventional XML schema for LoST, as a backwards
      compatible alternative to the RelaxNG schema in RFC5222.

Revision of core Email specifications (emailcore)
-------------------------------------------------

  "Simple Mail Transfer Protocol", John Klensin, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-ietf-emailcore-rfc5321bis-10.txt>

      This document is a specification of the basic protocol for Internet
      electronic mail transport.  It (including text carried forward from
      RFC 5321) consolidates, updates, and clarifies several previous
      documents, making all or parts of most of them obsolete.  It covers
      the SMTP extension mechanisms and best practices for the contemporary
      Internet, but does not provide details about particular extensions.
      The document also provides information about use of SMTP for other
      than strict mail transport and delivery.  This document replaces RFC
      5321, the earlier version with the same title.

  "Applicability Statement for IETF Core Email Protocols", John Klensin,
  Kenneth Murchison, Ekow Sam, 2022-01-31, <draft-ietf-emailcore-as-04.txt>

      Electronic mail is one of the oldest Internet applications that is
      still in very active use.  While the basic protocols and formats for
      mail transport and message formats have evolved slowly over the
      years, events and thinking in more recent years have supplemented
      those core protocols with additional features and suggestions for
      their use.  This Applicability Statement describes the relationship
      among many of those protocols and provides guidance and makes
      recommendations for the use of features of the core protocols.

  "Internet Message Format", Pete Resnick, 2021-09-29,
  <draft-ietf-emailcore-rfc5322bis-02.txt>

      This document specifies the Internet Message Format (IMF), a syntax
      for text messages that are sent between computer users, within the
      framework of "electronic mail" messages.  This specification is a
      revision of Request For Comments (RFC) 5322, itself a revision of
      Request For Comments (RFC) 2822, all of which supersede Request For
      Comments (RFC) 822, "Standard for the Format of ARPA Internet Text
      Messages", updating it to reflect current practice and incorporating
      incremental changes that were specified in other RFCs.

EAP Method Update (emu)
-----------------------

  "Forward Secrecy for the Extensible Authentication Protocol Method for
  Authentication and Key Agreement (EAP-AKA' FS)", Jari Arkko, Karl Norrman,
  Vesa Torvinen, 2022-03-07, <draft-ietf-emu-aka-pfs-06.txt>

      Many different attacks have been reported as part of revelations
      associated with pervasive surveillance.  Some of the reported attacks
      involved compromising smart cards, such as attacking SIM card
      manufacturers and operators in an effort to compromise shared secrets
      stored on these cards.  Since the publication of those reports,
      manufacturing and provisioning processes have gained much scrutiny
      and have improved.  However, the danger of resourceful attackers for
      these systems is still a concern.
      
      This specification is an optional extension to the EAP-AKA'
      authentication method which was defined in [RFC9048].  The extension,
      when negotiated, provides Forward Secrecy for the session key
      generated as a part of the authentication run in EAP-AKA'.  This
      prevents an attacker who has gained access to the long-term pre-
      shared secret in a SIM card from being able to decrypt any past
      communications.  In addition, if the attacker stays merely a passive
      eavesdropper, the extension prevents attacks against future sessions.
      This forces attackers to use active attacks instead.

  "TLS-based EAP types and TLS 1.3", Alan DeKok, 2022-03-05,
  <draft-ietf-emu-tls-eap-types-05.txt>

      EAP-TLS (RFC 5216) has been updated for TLS 1.3 in RFC 9190.  Many
      other EAP types also depend on TLS, such as FAST (RFC 4851), TTLS
      (RFC 5281), TEAP (RFC 7170), and possibly many vendor specific EAP
      methods.  This document updates those methods in order to use the new
      key derivation methods available in TLS 1.3.  Additional changes
      necessitated by TLS 1.3 are also discussed.

Email mailstore and eXtensions To Revise or Amend (extra)
---------------------------------------------------------

  "IMAP QUOTA Extension", Alexey Melnikov, 2021-11-18,
  <draft-ietf-extra-quota-10.txt>

      This document defines a QUOTA extension of the Internet Message
      Access Protocol (RFC 3501/RFC 9051) that permits administrative
      limits on resource usage (quotas) to be manipulated through the IMAP
      protocol.
      
      This document obsoletes RFC 2087, but attempts to remain backwards
      compatible whenever possible.

  "Sieve Email Filtering: Snooze Extension", Kenneth Murchison, Ricardo
  Signes, Neil Jenkins, 2022-03-07, <draft-ietf-extra-sieve-snooze-04.txt>

      This document describes the "snooze" extension to the Sieve email
      filtering language.  The "snooze" extension gives Sieve the ability
      to postpone the delivery of an incoming email message into a target
      mailbox until a later point in time.

  "IANA registry for Sieve actions", Alexey Melnikov, Kenneth Murchison,
  2022-03-07, <draft-ietf-extra-sieve-action-registry-02.txt>

      This document creates a registry of Sieve (RFC 5228) actions in order
      to help developers and Sieve extension writers track interactions
      between different extensions.

Grant Negotiation and Authorization Protocol (gnap)
---------------------------------------------------

  "Grant Negotiation and Authorization Protocol", Justin Richer, Aaron
  Parecki, Fabien Imbault, 2022-03-06, <draft-ietf-gnap-core-protocol-09.txt>

      GNAP defines a mechanism for delegating authorization to a piece of
      software, and conveying that delegation to the software.  This
      delegation can include access to a set of APIs as well as information
      passed directly to the software.

Global Routing Operations (grow)
--------------------------------

  "Methods for Detection and Mitigation of BGP Route Leaks", Kotikalapudi
  Sriram, Alexander Azimov, 2021-10-24,
  <draft-ietf-grow-route-leak-detection-mitigation-06.txt>

      Problem definition for route leaks and enumeration of types of route
      leaks are provided in RFC 7908.  This document describes a new well-
      known Large Community that provides a way for route-leak prevention,
      detection, and mitigation.  The configuration process for this
      Community can be automated with the methodology for setting BGP roles
      that is described in ietf-idr-bgp-open-policy draft.

  "TLV support for BMP Route Monitoring and Peer Down Messages", Paolo
  Lucente, Yunan Gu, 2022-03-07, <draft-ietf-grow-bmp-tlv-07.txt>

      Most of the message types defined by the BGP Monitoring Protocol
      (BMP) make provision for optional trailing data.  However, Route
      Monitoring messages (which provide a snapshot of the monitored
      Routing Information Base) and Peer Down messages (which indicate that
      a peering session was terminated) do not.  Supporting optional data
      in TLV format across all BMP message types allows for a homogeneous
      and extensible surface that would be useful for the most different
      use-cases that need to convey additional data to a BMP station.
      While it is not intended for this document to cover any specific
      utilization scenario, it defines a simple way to support optional TLV
      data in all message types.

  "AS Path Prepending", Mike McBride, Doug Madory, Jeff Tantsura, Robert
  Raszuk, Hongwei Li, Jakob Heitz, Gyan Mishra, 2022-02-17,
  <draft-ietf-grow-as-path-prepending-06.txt>

      AS Path Prepending provides a tool to manipulate the BGP AS_Path
      attribute through prepending multiple entries of an AS.  AS Path
      Prepending is used to deprioritize a route or alternate path.  By
      prepending the local ASN multiple times, ASs can make advertised AS
      paths appear artificially longer.  Excessive AS Path Prepending has
      caused routing issues in the Internet.  This document provides
      guidance with the use of AS Path Prepending, including alternative
      solutions, in order to avoid negatively affecting the Internet.

Human Rights Protocol Considerations (hrpc)
-------------------------------------------

  "Guidelines for Human Rights Protocol and Architecture Considerations",
  Gurshabad Grover, Niels ten Oever, 2022-01-25,
  <draft-irtf-hrpc-guidelines-12.txt>

      This document sets guidelines for human rights considerations for
      developers working on network protocols and architectures, similar to
      the work done on the guidelines for privacy considerations [RFC6973].
      This is an updated version of the guidelines for human rights
      considerations in [RFC8280].
      
      This document is not an Internet Standards Track specification; it is
      published for informational purposes.
      
      This informational document has consensus for publication from the
      Internet Research Task Force (IRTF) Human Right Protocol
      Considerations Research Group.  It has been reviewed, tried, and
      tested by both by the research group as well as by researchers and
      practitioners from outside the research group.  The research group
      acknowledges that the understanding of the impact of internet
      protocols and architecture on society is a developing practice and is
      a body of research that is still in development.

  "Freedom of Association on the Internet", Niels ten Oever, Gisela de Acha,
  Stephane Couture, Mallory Knodel, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-irtf-hrpc-association-09.txt>

      This document explores whether is a relation between the Internet
      architecture and the ability of people to exercise their right to
      peaceful assembly and the right to association online.  It does so by
      asking the question: what are the protocol development considerations
      for freedom of assembly and association?  The Internet increasingly
      mediates our lives, our relationships, and our ability to exercise
      our human rights.  As a global assemblage, the Internet provides a
      public space, yet it is predominantly built on private
      infrastructure.  Since Internet protocols and architecture play a
      central role in the management, development, and use of the Internet,
      we analyze the relation between protocols, architecture, and the
      rights to assemble and associate to mitigate infringements on those
      rights.  This document concludes that the way in which infrastructure
      is designed and implemented impacts people's ability to exercise
      their freedom of assembly and association.  It is therefore
      recommended that the the potential impacts of Internet technologies
      should be assessed, reflecting recommendations of various UN bodies
      and norms.  Finally, the document remarks that non-interoperable
      platforms that do not allow for interoperability or data-portability,
      render users unable to change platforms, therefore leading to a sort
      of "forced association" that inhibits people to fully exercise their
      freedom of assembly and association.

Building Blocks for HTTP APIs (httpapi)
---------------------------------------

  "RateLimit Fields for HTTP", Roberto Polli, Alex Ruiz, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-ietf-httpapi-ratelimit-headers-03.txt>

      This document defines the RateLimit-Limit, RateLimit-Remaining,
      RateLimit-Reset fields for HTTP, thus allowing servers to publish
      current service limits and clients to shape their request policy and
      avoid being throttled out.

  "Linkset: Media Types and a Link Relation Type for Link Sets", Erik Wilde,
  Herbert Van de Sompel, 2022-02-08, <draft-ietf-httpapi-linkset-08.txt>

      This specification defines two formats and respective media types for
      representing sets of links as stand-alone documents.  One format is
      JSON-based, the other aligned with the format for representing links
      in the HTTP "Link" header field.  This specification also introduces
      a link relation type to support discovery of sets of links.
      
      Note to Readers
      
      Please discuss this draft on the "Building Blocks for HTTP APIs"
      mailing list (https://www.ietf.org/mailman/listinfo/httpapi).
      
      Online access to all versions and files is available on GitHub
      (https://github.com/ietf-wg-httpapi/linkset).

  "Problem Details for HTTP APIs", Mark Nottingham, Erik Wilde, Sanjay Dalal,
  2021-10-13, <draft-ietf-httpapi-rfc7807bis-01.txt>

      This document defines a "problem detail" as a way to carry machine-
      readable details of errors in a HTTP response to avoid the need to
      define new error response formats for HTTP APIs.
      
      Discussion Venues
      
      This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.
      
      Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
      https://github.com/ietf-wg-httpapi/rfc7807bis.

  "REST API Media Types", Roberto Polli, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-ietf-httpapi-rest-api-mediatypes-01.txt>

      This document registers the following media types used in APIs on the
      IANA Media Types registry: application/yaml, application/schema+json,
      application/schema-instance+json, application/openapi+json, and
      application/openapi+yaml.

HTTP (httpbis)
--------------

  "Cookies: HTTP State Management Mechanism", Lily Chen, Steven Englehardt,
  Mike West, John Wilander, 2021-10-19, <draft-ietf-httpbis-rfc6265bis-09.txt>

      This document defines the HTTP Cookie and Set-Cookie header fields.
      These header fields can be used by HTTP servers to store state
      (called cookies) at HTTP user agents, letting the servers maintain a
      stateful session over the mostly stateless HTTP protocol.  Although
      cookies have many historical infelicities that degrade their security
      and privacy, the Cookie and Set-Cookie header fields are widely used
      on the Internet.  This document obsoletes RFC 6265.

  "Expect-CT Extension for HTTP", estark@google.com, 2018-12-09,
  <draft-ietf-httpbis-expect-ct-08.txt>

      This document defines a new HTTP header field named Expect-CT, which
      allows web host operators to instruct user agents to expect valid
      Signed Certificate Timestamps (SCTs) to be served on connections to
      these hosts.  Expect-CT allows web host operators to discover
      misconfigurations in their Certificate Transparency deployments.
      Further, web host operaters can use Expect-CT to ensure that, if a UA
      which supports Expect-CT accepts a misissued certificate, that
      certificate will be discoverable in Certificate Transparency logs.

  "Building Protocols with HTTP", Mark Nottingham, 2021-08-27,
  <draft-ietf-httpbis-bcp56bis-15.txt>

      Applications often use HTTP as a substrate to create HTTP-based APIs.
      This document specifies best practices for writing specifications
      that use HTTP to define new application protocols.  It is written
      primarily to guide IETF efforts to define application protocols using
      HTTP for deployment on the Internet, but might be applicable in other
      situations.
      
      This document obsoletes [RFC3205].

  "HTTP Caching", Roy Fielding, Mark Nottingham, Julian Reschke, 2021-09-12,
  <draft-ietf-httpbis-cache-19.txt>

      The Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) is a stateless application-
      level protocol for distributed, collaborative, hypertext information
      systems.  This document defines HTTP caches and the associated header
      fields that control cache behavior or indicate cacheable response
      messages.
      
      This document obsoletes RFC 7234.

  "HTTP/1.1", Roy Fielding, Mark Nottingham, Julian Reschke, 2021-09-12,
  <draft-ietf-httpbis-messaging-19.txt>

      The Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) is a stateless application-
      level protocol for distributed, collaborative, hypertext information
      systems.  This document specifies the HTTP/1.1 message syntax,
      message parsing, connection management, and related security
      concerns.
      
      This document obsoletes portions of RFC 7230.

  "HTTP Semantics", Roy Fielding, Mark Nottingham, Julian Reschke,
  2021-09-12, <draft-ietf-httpbis-semantics-19.txt>

      The Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) is a stateless application-
      level protocol for distributed, collaborative, hypertext information
      systems.  This document describes the overall architecture of HTTP,
      establishes common terminology, and defines aspects of the protocol
      that are shared by all versions.  In this definition are core
      protocol elements, extensibility mechanisms, and the "http" and
      "https" Uniform Resource Identifier (URI) schemes.
      
      This document updates RFC 3864 and obsoletes RFC 2818, RFC 7231, RFC
      7232, RFC 7233, RFC 7235, RFC 7538, RFC 7615, RFC 7694, and portions
      of RFC 7230.

  "The Cache-Status HTTP Response Header Field", Mark Nottingham, 2021-08-17,
  <draft-ietf-httpbis-cache-header-10.txt>

      To aid debugging, HTTP caches often append header fields to a
      response explaining how they handled the request in an ad hoc manner.
      This specification defines a standard mechanism to do so that is
      aligned with HTTP's caching model.

  "The Proxy-Status HTTP Response Header Field", Mark Nottingham, Piotr
  Sikora, 2021-10-13, <draft-ietf-httpbis-proxy-status-08.txt>

      This document defines the Proxy-Status HTTP field to convey the
      details of intermediary response handling, including generated
      errors.

  "Digest Fields", Roberto Polli, Lucas Pardue, 2021-11-16,
  <draft-ietf-httpbis-digest-headers-07.txt>

      This document defines HTTP fields that support integrity checksums.
      The Digest field can be used for the integrity of HTTP
      representations.  The Content-Digest field can be used for the
      integrity of HTTP message content.  Want-Digest and Want-Content-
      Digest can be used to indicate a sender's desire to receive integrity
      fields respectively.
      
      This document obsoletes RFC 3230.

  "Extensible Prioritization Scheme for HTTP", Kazuho Oku, Lucas Pardue,
  2022-01-17, <draft-ietf-httpbis-priority-12.txt>

      This document describes a scheme that allows an HTTP client to
      communicate its preferences for how the upstream server prioritizes
      responses to its requests, and also allows a server to hint to a
      downstream intermediary how its responses should be prioritized when
      they are forwarded.  This document defines the Priority header field
      for communicating the initial priority in an HTTP version-independent
      manner, as well as HTTP/2 and HTTP/3 frames for reprioritizing
      responses.  These share a common format structure that is designed to
      provide future extensibility.

  "HTTP Message Signatures", Annabelle Backman, Justin Richer, Manu Sporny,
  2022-03-06, <draft-ietf-httpbis-message-signatures-09.txt>

      This document describes a mechanism for creating, encoding, and
      verifying digital signatures or message authentication codes over
      components of an HTTP message.  This mechanism supports use cases
      where the full HTTP message may not be known to the signer, and where
      the message may be transformed (e.g., by intermediaries) before
      reaching the verifier.  This document also describes a means for
      requesting that a signature be applied to a subsequent HTTP message
      in an ongoing HTTP exchange.

  "HTTP/2", Martin Thomson, Cory Benfield, 2022-01-24,
  <draft-ietf-httpbis-http2bis-07.txt>

      This specification describes an optimized expression of the semantics
      of the Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP), referred to as HTTP
      version 2 (HTTP/2).  HTTP/2 enables a more efficient use of network
      resources and a reduced latency by introducing field compression and
      allowing multiple concurrent exchanges on the same connection.
      
      This document obsoletes RFC 7540 and RFC 8740.

  "The HTTP QUERY Method", Julian Reschke, Ashok Malhotra, James Snell,
  2021-11-09, <draft-ietf-httpbis-safe-method-w-body-02.txt>

      This specification defines a new HTTP method, QUERY, as a safe,
      idempotent request method that can carry request content.

  "Client-Cert HTTP Header Field", Brian Campbell, Mike Bishop, 2022-01-25,
  <draft-ietf-httpbis-client-cert-field-01.txt>

      This document defines HTTP extension header fields that allow a TLS
      terminating reverse proxy to convey the client certificate
      information of a mutually-authenticated TLS connection to the origin
      server in a common and predictable manner.

  "Targeted HTTP Cache Control", Stephen Ludin, Mark Nottingham, Yuchen Wu,
  2022-01-23, <draft-ietf-httpbis-targeted-cache-control-04.txt>

      This specification defines a convention for HTTP response header
      fields that allow cache directives to be targeted at specific caches
      or classes of caches.  It also defines one such header field,
      targeted at Content Delivery Network (CDN) caches.

  "Bootstrapping WebSockets with HTTP/3", Ryan Hamilton, 2022-02-08,
  <draft-ietf-httpbis-h3-websockets-04.txt>

      The mechanism for running the WebSocket Protocol over a single stream
      of an HTTP/2 connection is equally applicable to HTTP/3, but the HTTP
      version-specific details need to be specified.  This document
      describes how the mechanism is adapted for HTTP/3.

  "Binary Representation of HTTP Messages", Martin Thomson, Christopher Wood,
  2022-02-03, <draft-ietf-httpbis-binary-message-01.txt>

      This document defines a binary format for representing HTTP messages.

  "Retrofit Structured Fields for HTTP", Mark Nottingham, 2022-02-26,
  <draft-ietf-httpbis-retrofit-00.txt>

      This specification defines how a selection of existing HTTP fields
      can be handled as Structured Fields.

Interface to Network Security Functions (i2nsf)
-----------------------------------------------

  "Applicability of Interfaces to Network Security Functions to Network-Based
  Security Services", Jaehoon Jeong, Sangwon Hyun, Tae-Jin Ahn, Susan Hares,
  Diego Lopez, 2019-09-16, <draft-ietf-i2nsf-applicability-18.txt>

      This document describes the applicability of Interface to Network
      Security Functions (I2NSF) to network-based security services in
      Network Functions Virtualization (NFV) environments, such as
      firewall, deep packet inspection, or attack mitigation engines.

  "I2NSF Consumer-Facing Interface YANG Data Model", Jaehoon Jeong, Chaehong
  Chung, Tae-Jin Ahn, Rakesh Kumar, Susan Hares, 2022-01-28,
  <draft-ietf-i2nsf-consumer-facing-interface-dm-16.txt>

      This document describes an information model and a YANG data model
      for the Consumer-Facing Interface between an Interface to Network
      Security Functions (I2NSF) User and Security Controller in an I2NSF
      system in a Network Functions Virtualization (NFV) environment.  The
      information model defines various types of managed objects and the
      relationship among them needed to build the interface.  The
      information model is based on the "Event-Condition-Action" (ECA)
      policy model defined by a capability information model for I2NSF, and
      the data model is defined for enabling different users of a given
      I2NSF system to define, manage, and monitor security policies for
      specific flows within an administrative domain.

  "I2NSF Network Security Function-Facing Interface YANG Data Model", Jinyong
  Kim, Jaehoon Jeong, J., PARK, Susan Hares, Qiushi Lin, 2022-02-11,
  <draft-ietf-i2nsf-nsf-facing-interface-dm-21.txt>

      This document defines a YANG data model for configuring security
      policy rules on Network Security Functions (NSF) in the Interface to
      Network Security Functions (I2NSF) framework.  The YANG data model in
      this document corresponds to the information model for NSF-Facing
      Interface in the I2NSF framework.

  "I2NSF Capability YANG Data Model", Susan Hares, Jaehoon Jeong, Jinyong
  Kim, Robert Moskowitz, Qiushi Lin, 2022-02-10,
  <draft-ietf-i2nsf-capability-data-model-26.txt>

      This document defines an information model and the corresponding YANG
      data model for the capabilities of various Network Security Functions
      (NSFs) in the Interface to Network Security Functions (I2NSF)
      framework to centrally manage the capabilities of the various NSFs.

  "I2NSF Registration Interface YANG Data Model", Sangwon Hyun, Jaehoon
  Jeong, TaeKyun Roh, Sarang Wi, J., PARK, 2022-01-28,
  <draft-ietf-i2nsf-registration-interface-dm-14.txt>

      This document defines an information model and a YANG data model for
      Registration Interface between Security Controller and Developer's
      Management System (DMS) in the Interface to Network Security
      Functions (I2NSF) framework to register Network Security Functions
      (NSF) of the DMS with the Security Controller.  The objective of
      these information and data models is to support NSF capability
      registration and query via I2NSF Registration Interface.

  "I2NSF NSF Monitoring Interface YANG Data Model", Jaehoon Jeong, Patrick
  Lingga, Susan Hares, Liang Xia, Henk Birkholz, 2022-02-15,
  <draft-ietf-i2nsf-nsf-monitoring-data-model-15.txt>

      This document proposes an information model and the corresponding
      YANG data model of an interface for monitoring Network Security
      Functions (NSFs) in the Interface to Network Security Functions
      (I2NSF) framework.  If the monitoring of NSFs is performed with the
      NSF monitoring interface in a standard way, it is possible to detect
      the indication of malicious activity, anomalous behavior, the
      potential sign of denial-of-service attacks, or system overload in a
      timely manner.  This monitoring functionality is based on the
      monitoring information that is generated by NSFs.  Thus, this
      document describes not only an information model for the NSF
      monitoring interface along with a YANG tree diagram, but also the
      corresponding YANG data model.

Internet Architecture Board (iab)
---------------------------------

  "RFC Editor Model (Version 3)", Peter Saint-Andre, 2022-03-17,
  <draft-iab-rfcefdp-rfced-model-13.txt>

      This document specifies version 3 of the RFC Editor Model.  The Model
      defines two high-level tasks related to the RFC Series.  First,
      policy definition is the joint responsibility of the RFC Series
      Working Group (RSWG), which produces policy proposals, and the RFC
      Series Approval Board (RSAB), which approves such proposals.  Second,
      policy implementation is primarily the responsibility of the RFC
      Production Center (RPC) as contractually overseen by the IETF
      Administration Limited Liability Company (IETF LLC).  In addition,
      various responsibilities of the "RFC Editor Function" are now
      performed alone or in combination by the RSWG, RSAB, RPC, RFC Series
      Consulting Editor (RSCE), and IETF LLC.  Finally, this document
      establishes the Editorial Stream for publication of future policy
      definition documents produced through the processes defined herein.
      
      This document obsoletes RFC 8728.  This document updates RFC 7841,
      RFC 8729, and RFC 8730.

  "IAB workshop report: Measuring Network Quality for End-Users", Wes
  Hardaker, Omer Shapira, 2022-03-07, <draft-iab-mnqeu-report-01.txt>

      The Measuring Network Quality for End-Users workshop was held
      virtually by the Internet Architecture Board (IAB) from September
      14-16, 2021.  This report summarizes the workshop, the topics
      discussed, and some preliminary conclusions drawn at the end of the
      workshop.

  "Report from the IAB Workshop on Analyzing IETF Data (AID), 2021", Niels
  ten Oever, Corinne Cath, Mirja Kuehlewind, Colin Perkins, 2022-02-22,
  <draft-iab-aid-workshop-00.txt>

      The 'Show me the numbers: Workshop on Analyzing IETF Data (AID)' was
      convened by the Internet Architecture Board (IAB) from November 29 to
      December 2 and hosted by the IN-SIGHT.it project at the University of
      Amsterdam, however, converted to an online only event.  The workshop
      was conducted based on two discussion parts and a hackathon activity
      in between.  This report summarizes the workshop's discussion and
      identifies topics that warrant future work and consideration.
      
      Note that this document is a report on the proceedings of the
      workshop.  The views and positions documented in this report are
      those of the workshop participants and do not necessarily reflect IAB
      views and positions.

  "Considerations on Application - Network Collaboration Using Path Signals",
  Jari Arkko, Ted Hardie, Tommy Pauly, Mirja Kuehlewind, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-iab-path-signals-collaboration-00.txt>

      This document discusses principles for designing mechanisms that use
      or provide path signals, and calls for standards action in specific
      valuable cases.  RFC 8558 describes path signals as messages to or
      from on-path elements, and points out that visible information will
      be used whether it is intended as a signal or not.  The principles in
      this document are intended as guidance for the design of explicit
      path signals, which are encouraged to be authenticated and include a
      minimal set of parties and minimize information sharing.  These
      principles can be achieved through mechanisms like encryption of
      information and establishing trust relationships between entities on
      a path.

Information-Centric Networking (icnrg)
--------------------------------------

  "File-Like ICN Collections (FLIC)", Christian Tschudin, Christopher Wood,
  Marc Mosko, David Oran, 2021-11-07, <draft-irtf-icnrg-flic-03.txt>

      This document describes a simple "index table" data structure and its
      associated ICN data objects for organizing a set of primitive ICN
      data objects into a large, File-Like ICN Collection (FLIC).  At the
      core of this collection is a _manifest_ which acts as the
      collection's root node.  The manifest contains an index table with
      pointers, each pointer being a hash value pointing to either a final
      data block or another index table node.

  "Experimental Scenarios of ICN Integration in 4G Mobile Networks", Prakash
  suthar, Milan Stolic, Anil Jangam, Dirk Trossen, 2022-01-28,
  <draft-irtf-icnrg-icn-lte-4g-11.txt>

      4G mobile network uses IP-based transport for the control plane to
      establish the data session at the user plane for the actual data
      delivery.  In the existing architecture, IP-based unicast is used for
      the delivery of multimedia content to a mobile terminal, where each
      user is receiving a separate stream from the server.  From a
      bandwidth and routing perspective, this approach is inefficient.
      Evolved multimedia broadcast and multicast service (eMBMS) provides
      capabilities for delivering contents to multiple users
      simultaneously, but its deployment is very limited or at an
      experimental stage due to numerous challenges.  The focus of this
      draft is to list the options for use of Information centric
      technology (ICN) in 4G mobile networks and elaborate the experimental
      setups for its further evaluation.  The experimental setups discussed
      provide for using ICN either natively or with existing mobility
      protocol stack.  With further investigations based on the listed
      experiments, ICN with its inherent capabilities such as, network-
      layer multicast, anchorless mobility, security, and optimized data
      delivery using local caching at the edge may provide a viable
      alternative to IP transport in 4G mobile networks.

  "CCNinfo: Discovering Content and Network Information in Content-Centric
  Networks", Hitoshi Asaeda, Atsushi Ooka, Xun Shao, 2022-02-10,
  <draft-irtf-icnrg-ccninfo-09.txt>

      This document describes a mechanism named "CCNinfo" that discovers
      information about the network topology and in-network cache in
      Content-Centric Networks (CCN).  CCNinfo investigates: 1) the CCN
      routing path information per name prefix, 2) the Round-Trip Time
      (RTT) between the content forwarder and consumer, and 3) the states
      of in-network cache per name prefix.  CCNinfo is useful to understand
      and debug the behavior of testbed networks and other experimental
      deployments of CCN systems.
      
      This document is a product of the IRTF Information-Centric Networking
      Research Group (ICNRG).  This document represents the consensus view
      of ICNRG and has been reviewed extensively by several members of the
      ICN community and the RG.  The authors and RG chairs approve of the
      contents.  The document is sponsored under the IRTF and is not issued
      by the IETF and is not an IETF standard.  This is an experimental
      protocol and the specification may change in the future.

  "Architectural Considerations of ICN using Name Resolution Service", Jungha
  Hong, Taewan You, Ved Kafle, 2021-12-15,
  <draft-irtf-icnrg-nrsarch-considerations-07.txt>

      This document describes architectural considerations and implications
      related to the use of a Name Resolution Service (NRS) in Information-
      Centric Networking (ICN).  It explains how the ICN architecture can
      change when an NRS is utilized and how its use influences the ICN
      routing system.  This document is a product of the Information-
      Centric Networking Research Group (ICNRG).

  "ICN Ping Protocol Specification", Spyridon Mastorakis, Jim Gibson, Ilya
  Moiseenko, Ralph Droms, David Oran, 2022-03-06,
  <draft-irtf-icnrg-icnping-04.txt>

      This document presents the design of an ICN Ping protocol.  It
      includes the operations of both the client and the forwarder.

  "ICN Traceroute Protocol Specification", Spyridon Mastorakis, Jim Gibson,
  Ilya Moiseenko, Ralph Droms, David Oran, 2022-03-06,
  <draft-irtf-icnrg-icntraceroute-04.txt>

      This document presents the design of an ICN Traceroute protocol.
      This includes the operation of both the client and the forwarder.

Inter-Domain Routing (idr)
--------------------------

  "Dynamic Capability for BGP-4", Enke Chen, Srihari Sangli, 2021-10-21,
  <draft-ietf-idr-dynamic-cap-16.txt>

      This document defines a new BGP capability termed "Dynamic
      Capability", which would allow the dynamic update of capabilities
      over an established BGP session. This capability would facilitate
      non-disruptive capability changes by BGP speakers.

  "Carrying next-hop cost information in BGP", Ilya Varlashkin, Robert
  Raszuk, Keyur Patel, Manish Bhardwaj, Serpil Bayraktar, 2021-11-30,
  <draft-ietf-idr-bgp-nh-cost-03.txt>

      BGPLS provides a mechanism by which Link state and traffic
      engineering information can be collected from internal networks and
      shared with external network routers using BGP.  BGPLS defines a new
      Address Family to exchange this information using BGP.
      
      BGP Optimal Route Reflection [BGP-ORR] [RFC9107] provides a mechanism
      for a centralized BGP Route Reflector to acheive requirements of a
      Hot Potato Routing as described in Section 11 of [RFC4456].  Optimal
      Route Reflection requires BGP ORR to overwrite the default IGP
      location placement of the route reflector; which is used for
      determining cost to the nexthop contained in the path.
      
      This draft augments BGPLS and defines a new extensions to exchange
      cost information to next-hops for the purpose of calculating best
      path from a peer perspective rather than local BGP speaker own
      perspective.

  "Distribution of Traffic Engineering (TE) Policies and State using BGP-LS",
  Stefano Previdi, Ketan Talaulikar, Jie Dong, Mach Chen, Hannes Gredler,
  Jeff Tantsura, 2021-10-22, <draft-ietf-idr-te-lsp-distribution-16.txt>

      This document describes a mechanism to collect the Traffic
      Engineering and Policy information that is locally available in a
      node and advertise it into BGP Link State (BGP-LS) updates.  Such
      information can be used by external components for path computation,
      re-optimization, service placement, network visualization, etc.

  "BGP Dissemination of L2 Flow Specification Rules", Hao Weiguo, Donald
  Eastlake, Stephane Litkowski, Shunwan Zhuang, 2021-10-24,
  <draft-ietf-idr-flowspec-l2vpn-18.txt>

      This document defines a Border Gateway Protocol (BGP) Flow
      Specification (flowspec) extension to disseminate Ethernet Layer 2
      (L2) and Layer 2 Virtual Private Network (L2VPN) traffic filtering
      rules either by themselves or in conjunction with L3 flowspecs.
      AFI/SAFI 6/133 and 25/134 are used for these purposes.  New component
      types and two extended communities are also defined.

  "BGP Community Container Attribute", Robert Raszuk, Jeffrey Haas, Andrew
  Lange, Bruno Decraene, Shane Amante, Paul Jakma, 2022-01-10,
  <draft-ietf-idr-wide-bgp-communities-06.txt>

      Route tagging plays an important role in external BGP [RFC4271]
      relations, in communicating various routing policies between peers.
      It is also a very common best practice among operators to propagate
      various additional information about routes intra-domain.  The most
      common tool used today to attach various information about routes is
      through the use of BGP communities [RFC1997].
      
      This document defines a new encoding which will enhance and simplify
      what can be accomplished today with the use of BGP communities.  The
      most important addition this specification makes over currently
      defined BGP communities is the ability to specify, carry as well as
      use for execution an operator's defined set of parameters.  It also
      provides an extensible platform for any new community encoding needs
      in the future.

  "BGP YANG Model for Service Provider Networks", Mahesh Jethanandani, Keyur
  Patel, Susan Hares, Jeffrey Haas, 2022-03-06,
  <draft-ietf-idr-bgp-model-13.txt>

      This document defines a YANG data model for configuring and managing
      BGP, including protocol, policy, and operational aspects, such as
      RIB, based on data center, carrier, and content provider operational
      requirements.

  "BGP Dissemination of Flow Specification Rules for Tunneled Traffic",
  Donald Eastlake, Hao Weiguo, Shunwan Zhuang, Zhenbin Li, Rong Gu,
  2022-02-06, <draft-ietf-idr-flowspec-nvo3-15.txt>

      This draft specifies a Border Gateway Protocol (BGP) Network Layer
      Reachability Information (NLRI) encoding format for flow
      specifications (RFC 8955) that can match on a variety of tunneled
      traffic. In addition, flow specification components are specified for
      certain tunneling header fields.

  "BGP Next-Hop dependent capabilities", Bruno Decraene, Kireeti Kompella,
  Wim Henderickx, 2021-12-08, <draft-ietf-idr-next-hop-capability-07.txt>

      RFC 5492 advertises the capabilities of the BGP peer.  When the BGP
      peer is not the same as the BGP Next-Hop, it is useful to also be
      able to advertise the capability of the BGP Next-Hop, in particular
      to advertise forwarding plane features.  This document defines a
      mechanism to advertise such BGP Next Hop dependent Capabilities.
      
      This document defines a new BGP non-transitive attribute to carry
      Next-Hop Capabilities.  This attribute is guaranteed to be deleted or
      updated when the BGP Next Hop is changed, in order to reflect the
      capabilities of the new BGP Next-Hop.
      
      This document also defines a Next-Hop capability to advertise the
      ability to process the MPLS Entropy Label as an egress LSR for all
      NLRI advertised in the BGP UPDATE.  It updates RFC 6790 with regard
      to this BGP signaling.

  "Route Leak Prevention and Detection using Roles in UPDATE and OPEN
  Messages", Alexander Azimov, Eugene Bogomazov, Randy Bush, Keyur Patel,
  Kotikalapudi Sriram, 2022-03-03, <draft-ietf-idr-bgp-open-policy-23.txt>

      Route leaks are the propagation of BGP prefixes that violate
      assumptions of BGP topology relationships, e.g., announcing a route
      learned from one transit provider to another transit provider or a
      lateral (i.e., non-transit) peer or announcing a route learned from
      one lateral peer to another lateral peer or a transit provider.
      These are usually the result of misconfigured or absent BGP route
      filtering or lack of coordination between autonomous systems (ASes).
      Existing approaches to leak prevention rely on marking routes by
      operator configuration, with no check that the configuration
      corresponds to that of the eBGP neighbor, or enforcement that the two
      eBGP speakers agree on the peering relationship.  This document
      enhances the BGP OPEN message to establish an agreement of the
      peering relationship on each eBGP session between autonomous systems
      in order to enforce appropriate configuration on both sides.
      Propagated routes are then marked according to the agreed
      relationship, allowing both prevention and detection of route leaks.

  "Advertising Segment Routing Policies in BGP", Stefano Previdi, Clarence
  Filsfils, Ketan Talaulikar, Paul Mattes, Dhanendra Jain, Steven Lin,
  2022-03-07, <draft-ietf-idr-segment-routing-te-policy-16.txt>

      This document defines a new BGP SAFI with a new NLRI to advertise a
      candidate path of a Segment Routing (SR) Policy.  An SR Policy is a
      set of candidate paths, each consisting of one or more segment lists.
      The headend of an SR Policy may learn multiple candidate paths for an
      SR Policy.  Candidate paths may be learned via several different
      mechanisms, e.g., CLI, NetConf, PCEP, or BGP.  This document
      specifies how BGP may be used to distribute SR Policy candidate
      paths.  New sub-TLVs for the Tunnel Encapsulation Attribute are
      defined for signaling information about these candidate paths.

  "BGP-LS Extension for Inter-AS Topology Retrieval", Aijun Wang, Huaimo
  Chen, Ketan Talaulikar, Shunwan Zhuang, 2021-10-12,
  <draft-ietf-idr-bgpls-inter-as-topology-ext-10.txt>

      This document describes the process to build Border Gateway Protocol-
      Link State (BGP-LS) key parameters in inter-domain scenario, defines
      one new BGP-LS Network Layer Reachability Information (NLRI) type
      (Stub Link NLRI) and some new inter Autonomous (inter-AS) Traffic
      Engineering (TE) related Type-Length-Values (TLVs) for BGP-LS to let
      Software Definition Network (SDN) controller retrieve the network
      topology automatically under various inter-AS environments.
      
      Such extension and process can enable the network operator to collect
      the interconnect information between different domains and then
      calculate the overall network topology automatically based on the
      information provided by BGP-LS protocol.

  "BGP Link State Extensions for SRv6", Gaurav Dawra, Clarence Filsfils,
  Ketan Talaulikar, Mach Chen, Daniel Bernier, Bruno Decraene, 2021-11-10,
  <draft-ietf-idr-bgpls-srv6-ext-09.txt>

      Segment Routing over IPv6 (SRv6) allows for a flexible definition of
      end-to-end paths within various topologies by encoding paths as
      sequences of topological or functional sub-paths, called "segments".
      These segments are advertised by various protocols such as BGP, IS-IS
      and OSPFv3.
      
      This document defines extensions to BGP Link-state (BGP-LS) to
      advertise SRv6 segments along with their behaviors and other
      attributes via BGP.  The BGP-LS address-family solution for SRv6
      described in this document is similar to BGP-LS for SR for the MPLS
      data-plane defined in a separate document.

  "Application-Specific Attributes Advertisement with BGP Link-State", Ketan
  Talaulikar, Peter Psenak, Jeff Tantsura, 2021-11-10,
  <draft-ietf-idr-bgp-ls-app-specific-attr-08.txt>

      Various link attributes have been defined in link-state routing
      protocols like OSPF and IS-IS in the context of the MPLS Traffic
      Engineering (TE) and GMPLS.  BGP Link-State (BGP-LS) extensions have
      been defined to distribute these attributes along with other topology
      information from these link-state routing protocols.  Many of these
      link attributes can be used for applications other than MPLS-TE or
      GMPLS.
      
      Extensions to link-state routing protocols have been defined for such
      link attributes that enable distribution of their application-
      specific values.  This document defines extensions to BGP-LS address-
      family to enable advertisement of these application-specific
      attributes as a part of the topology information from the network.

  "Flexible Algorithm Definition Advertisement with BGP Link-State", Ketan
  Talaulikar, Peter Psenak, Shawn Zandi, Gaurav Dawra, 2021-11-10,
  <draft-ietf-idr-bgp-ls-flex-algo-08.txt>

      Flexible Algorithm is a solution that allows routing protocols (viz.
      OSPF and IS-IS) to compute paths over a network based on user-defined
      (and hence, flexible) constraints and metrics.  The computation is
      performed by routers participating in the specific network in a
      distribute manner using a Flex Algorithm definition.  This definition
      provisioned on one or more routers and propagated (viz.  OSPF and IS-
      IS flooding) through the network.
      
      BGP Link-State (BGP-LS) enables the collection of various topology
      information from the network.  This draft defines extensions to BGP-
      LS address-family to advertise the Flexible Algorithm Definition as a
      part of the topology information from the network.

  "BGP Link-State Extensions for Seamless BFD", Zhenbin Li, Shunwan Zhuang,
  Ketan Talaulikar, Sam Aldrin, Jeff Tantsura, Greg Mirsky, 2021-10-22,
  <draft-ietf-idr-bgp-ls-sbfd-extensions-06.txt>

      Seamless Bidirectional Forwarding Detection (S-BFD) defines a
      simplified mechanism to use Bidirectional Forwarding Detection (BFD)
      with large portions of negotiation aspects eliminated, thus providing
      benefits such as quick provisioning as well as improved control and
      flexibility to network nodes initiating the path monitoring.  The
      link-state routing protocols (IS-IS and OSPF) have been extended to
      advertise the Seamless BFD (S-BFD) Discriminators.
      
      This draft defines extensions to the BGP Link-state address-family to
      carry the S-BFD Discriminators information via BGP.

  "Deprecation of AS_SET and AS_CONFED_SET in BGP", Warren Kumari,
  Kotikalapudi Sriram, Lilia Hannachi, Jeffrey Haas, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-ietf-idr-deprecate-as-set-confed-set-07.txt>

      BCP 172 (i.e., RFC 6472) recommends not using AS_SET and
      AS_CONFED_SET in the Border Gateway Protocol.  This document advances
      this recommendation to a standards requirement in BGP; it proscribes
      the use of the AS_SET and AS_CONFED_SET types of path segments in the
      AS_PATH.  This is done to simplify the design and implementation of
      BGP and to make the semantics of the originator of a route clearer.
      This will also simplify the design, implementation, and deployment of
      various BGP security mechanisms.  This document (if approved) updates
      RFC 4271 and RFC 5065 by eliminating AS_SET and AS_CONFED_SET types,
      and obsoletes RFC 6472.

  "Distribution of Link-State and Traffic Engineering Information Using BGP",
  Ketan Talaulikar, 2021-11-10, <draft-ietf-idr-rfc7752bis-10.txt>

      In a number of environments, a component external to a network is
      called upon to perform computations based on the network topology and
      the current state of the connections within the network, including
      Traffic Engineering (TE) information.  This is information typically
      distributed by IGP routing protocols within the network.
      
      This document describes a mechanism by which link-state and TE
      information can be collected from networks and shared with external
      components using the BGP routing protocol.  This is achieved using a
      new BGP Network Layer Reachability Information (NLRI) encoding
      format.  The mechanism is applicable to physical and virtual IGP
      links.  The mechanism described is subject to policy control.
      
      Applications of this technique include Application-Layer Traffic
      Optimization (ALTO) servers and Path Computation Elements (PCEs).
      
      This document obsoletes RFC 7752 by completely replacing that
      document.  It makes some small changes and clarifications to the
      previous specification.  This document also obsoletes RFC 9029 by
      incorporating the updates which it made to RFC 7752.

  "BGP BFD Strict-Mode", Mercia Zheng, Acee Lindem, Jeffrey Haas, Albert Fu,
  2021-11-08, <draft-ietf-idr-bgp-bfd-strict-mode-06.txt>

      This document specifies extensions to RFC4271 BGP-4 that enable a BGP
      speaker to negotiate additional Bidirectional Forwarding Detection
      (BFD) extensions using a BGP capability.  This BFD capability enables
      a BGP speaker to prevent a BGP session from being established until a
      BFD session is established.  It is referred to as BGP BFD "strict-
      mode".  BGP BFD strict-mode will be supported when both the local
      speaker and its remote peer are BFD strict-mode capable.

  "SR Policy Extensions for Path Segment and Bidirectional Path", Cheng Li,
  Zhenbin Li, Yuanyang Yin, Weiqiang Cheng, Ketan Talaulikar, 2022-01-23,
  <draft-ietf-idr-sr-policy-path-segment-05.txt>

      A Segment Routing (SR) policy is a set of candidate SR paths
      consisting of one or more segment lists with necessary path
      attributes.  For each SR path, it may also have its own path
      attributes, and Path Segment is one of them.  A Path Segment is
      defined to identify an SR path, which can be used for performance
      measurement, path correlation, and end-2-end path protection.  Path
      Segment can be also used to correlate two unidirectional SR paths
      into a bidirectional SR path which is required in some scenarios, for
      example, mobile backhaul transport network.
      
      This document defines extensions to BGP to distribute SR policies
      carrying Path Segment and bidirectional path information.

  "BGP Extensions for Routing Policy Distribution (RPD)", Zhenbin Li, Liang
  Ou, Yujia Luo, Sujian Lu, Gyan Mishra, Huaimo Chen, Shunwan Zhuang, Haibo
  Wang, 2022-01-25, <draft-ietf-idr-rpd-15.txt>

      It is hard to adjust traffic and optimize traffic paths in a
      traditional IP network from time to time through manual
      configurations.  It is desirable to have a mechanism for setting up
      routing policies, which adjusts traffic and optimizes traffic paths
      automatically.  This document describes BGP Extensions for Routing
      Policy Distribution (BGP RPD) to support this.

  "SR Policies Extensions for Path Segment and Bidirectional Path in BGP-LS",
  Cheng Li, Zhenbin Li, Yongqing Zhu, Weiqiang Cheng, Ketan Talaulikar,
  2022-01-25, <draft-ietf-idr-bgp-ls-sr-policy-path-segment-02.txt>

      This document specifies the way of collecting configuration and
      states of SR policies carrying Path Segment and bidirectional path
      information by using BPG-LS.  Such information can be used by
      external conponents for many use cases such as performance
      measurement, path re-optimization and end-to-end protection.

  "BGP-LS with Multi-topology for Segment Routing based Virtual Transport
  Networks", Chongfeng Xie, Cong Li, Jie Dong, Zhenbin Li, 2022-01-09,
  <draft-xie-idr-bgpls-sr-vtn-mt-04.txt>

      Enhanced VPN (VPN+) aims to provide enhanced VPN service to support
      some applications' needs of enhanced isolation and stringent
      performance requirements.  VPN+ requires integration between the
      overlay VPN and the underlay network.  A Virtual Transport Network
      (VTN) is a virtual underlay network which consists of a subset of the
      network topology and network resources allocated from the physical
      network.  A VTN could be used as the underlay for one or a group of
      VPN+ services.
      
      When Segment Routing is used as the data plane of VTNs, each VTN can
      be allocated with a group of Segment Identifiers (SIDs) to identify
      the topology and resource attributes of network segments in the VTN.
      The association between the network topology, the network resource
      attributes and the SR SIDs may need to be distributed to a
      centralized network controller.  For network scenarios where each VTN
      can be associated with a unique logical network topology, this
      document describes a mechanism to distribute the information of SR
      based VTNs using BGP-LS with Multi-Topology.

  "Segment Routing Path MTU in BGP", Cheng Li, Yongqing Zhu, Ahmed El Sawaf,
  Zhenbin Li, 2021-10-20, <draft-ietf-idr-sr-policy-path-mtu-04.txt>

      Segment Routing is a source routing paradigm that explicitly
      indicates the forwarding path for packets at the ingress node.  An SR
      policy is a set of candidate SR paths consisting of one or more
      segment lists with necessary path attributes.  However, the path
      maximum transmission unit (MTU) information for SR path is not
      available in the SR policy since the SR does not require signaling.
      This document defines extensions to BGP to distribute path MTU
      information within SR policies.

  "Signaling Maximum Transmission Unit (MTU) using BGP-LS", Yongqing Zhu,
  Zhibo Hu, Shuping Peng, Robbins Mwehair, 2021-11-26,
  <draft-ietf-idr-bgp-ls-link-mtu-02.txt>

      BGP Link State (BGP-LS) describes a mechanism by which link-state and
      TE information can be collected from networks and shared with
      external components using the BGP routing protocol.  The centralized
      controller (PCE/SDN) completes the service path calculation based on
      the information transmitted by the BGP-LS and delivers the result to
      the Path Computation Client (PCC) through the PCEP or BGP protocol.
      
      Segment Routing (SR) leverages the source routing paradigm, which can
      be directly applied to the MPLS architecture with no change on the
      forwarding plane and applied to the IPv6 architecture, with a new
      type of routing header, called SRH.  The SR uses the IGP protocol as
      the control protocol.  Compared to the MPLS tunneling technology, the
      SR does not require additional signaling.  Therefore, the SR does not
      support the negotiation of the Path MTU.  Since multiple labels or
      SRv6 SIDs are pushed in the packets, it is more likely that the
      packet size exceeds the path mtu of SR tunnel.
      
      This document specifies the extensions to BGP Link State (BGP-LS) to
      carry maximum transmission unit (MTU) messages of link.  The PCE/SDN
      calculates the Path MTU while completing the service path calculation
      based on the information transmitted by the BGP-LS.

  "BGP SR Policy Extensions to Enable IFIT", Fengwei Qin, Hang Yuan, Tianran
  Zhou, Giuseppe Fioccola, Yali Wang, 2022-01-10,
  <draft-ietf-idr-sr-policy-ifit-03.txt>

      Segment Routing (SR) policy is a set of candidate SR paths consisting
      of one or more segment lists and necessary path attributes.  It
      enables instantiation of an ordered list of segments with a specific
      intent for traffic steering.  In-situ Flow Information Telemetry
      (IFIT) refers to network OAM data plane on-path telemetry techniques,
      in particular the most popular are In-situ OAM (IOAM) and Alternate
      Marking.  This document defines extensions to BGP to distribute SR
      policies carrying IFIT information.  So that IFIT methods can be
      enabled automatically when the SR policy is applied.

  "Requirements and Considerations in BGP Peer Auto-Configuration", Randy
  Bush, Jie Dong, Jeffrey Haas, Warren Kumari, 2022-01-18,
  <draft-ietf-idr-bgp-autoconf-considerations-02.txt>

      This draft is an exploration of the requirements, the alternatives,
      and trade-offs in BGP peer auto-discovery at various layers in the
      stack.  It is based on discussions in the IDR Working Group BGP
      Autoconf Design Team.  The current target environment is the
      datacenter.
      
      This document is not intended to become an RFC.

  "BGP Link-State Extensions for BGP-only Fabric", Ketan Talaulikar, Clarence
  Filsfils, krishnaswamy ananthamurthy, Shawn Zandi, Gaurav Dawra, Muhammad
  Durrani, 2021-11-12, <draft-ietf-idr-bgp-ls-bgp-only-fabric-02.txt>

      BGP is used as the only routing protocol in some networks today.  In
      such networks, it is useful to get a detailed view of the nodes and
      underlying links in the topology along with their attributes similar
      to one available when using link state routing protocols.  Such a
      view of a BGP-only fabric enables use cases like traffic engineering
      and forwarding of services along paths other than the BGP best path
      selection.
      
      This document defines extensions to the BGP Link-state address-family
      (BGP-LS) and the procedures for advertisement of the topology in a
      BGP-only network.  It also describes a specific use-case for traffic
      engineering based on Segment Routing.

  "BGP UPDATE for SDWAN Edge Discovery", Linda Dunbar, Susan Hares, Robert
  Raszuk, Kausik Majumdar, Gyan Mishra, 2022-03-05,
  <draft-ietf-idr-sdwan-edge-discovery-01.txt>

      The document describes the encoding of BGP UPDATE messages for the
      SDWAN edge node discovery.
      
      In the context of this document, BGP Route Reflector (RR) is the
      component of the SDWAN Controller that receives the BGP UPDATE from
      SDWAN edges and in turns propagates the information to the intended
      peers that are authorized to communicate via the SDWAN overlay
      network.

  "BGP Flow Specification for SRv6", Zhenbin Li, Lei Li, Huaimo Chen,
  Christoph Loibl, Gyan Mishra, Yanhe Fan, Yongqing Zhu, Lei Liu, Xufeng Liu,
  2021-10-08, <draft-ietf-idr-flowspec-srv6-00.txt>

      This document proposes extensions to BGP Flow Specification for SRv6
      for filtering packets with a SRv6 SID that matches a sequence of
      conditions.

  "BGP-LS Advertisement of Segment Routing Service Segments", Gaurav Dawra,
  Clarence Filsfils, Ketan Talaulikar, Francois Clad, Daniel Bernier, Jim
  Uttaro, Bruno Decraene, Hani Elmalky, Xiaohu Xu, Jim Guichard, Cheng Li,
  2021-10-22, <draft-ietf-idr-bgp-ls-sr-service-segments-00.txt>

      Service functions are deployed as, physical or virtualized elements
      along with network nodes or on servers in data centers.  Segment
      Routing (SR) brings in the concept of segments which can be
      topological or service instructions.  Service segments are SR
      segments that are associated with service functions.  SR Policies are
      used for the setup of paths for steering of traffic through service
      functions using their service segments.
      
      BGP Link-State (BGP-LS) enables distribution of topology information
      from the network to a controller or an application in general so it
      can learn the network topology.  This document specifies the
      extensions to BGP-LS for the advertisement of service functions along
      their associated service segments.  The BGP-LS advertisement of
      service function information along with the network nodes that they
      are attached to, or associated with, enables controllers compute and
      setup service paths in the network.

  "BGP-LS with Multi-topology for Segment Routing based Virtual Transport
  Networks", Chongfeng Xie, Cong Li, Jie Dong, Zhenbin Li, 2022-02-04,
  <draft-ietf-idr-bgpls-sr-vtn-mt-00.txt>

      Enhanced VPN (VPN+) aims to provide enhanced VPN service to support
      some applications' needs of enhanced isolation and stringent
      performance requirements.  VPN+ requires integration between the
      overlay VPN and the underlay network.  A Virtual Transport Network
      (VTN) is a virtual underlay network which consists of a subset of the
      network topology and network resources allocated from the physical
      network.  A VTN could be used as the underlay for one or a group of
      VPN+ services.
      
      When Segment Routing is used as the data plane of VTNs, each VTN can
      be allocated with a group of Segment Identifiers (SIDs) to identify
      the topology and resource attributes of network segments in the VTN.
      The association between the network topology, the network resource
      attributes and the SR SIDs may need to be distributed to a
      centralized network controller.  For network scenarios where each VTN
      can be associated with a unique logical network topology, this
      document describes a mechanism to distribute the information of SR
      based VTNs using BGP-LS with Multi-Topology.

  "BGP Cease Notification Subcode For BFD", Jeffrey Haas, 2022-02-24,
  <draft-ietf-idr-bfd-subcode-02.txt>

      The Bidirectional Forwarding Detection protocol (BFD) is used to
      detect loss of connectivity between two forwarding engines, typically
      with low latency.  BFD is leveraged by routing protocols, including
      the Border Gateway Protocol (BGP), to use that detection of loss of
      connectivity to bring down the protocol connections faster than the
      native protocol timers.
      
      This document defines a Subcode for the BGP Cease NOTIFICATION
      message for when a BGP connection is being closed due to a BFD
      session going down.

IP Performance Measurement (ippm)
---------------------------------

  "Data Fields for In-situ OAM", Frank Brockners, Shwetha Bhandari, Tal
  Mizrahi, 2021-12-13, <draft-ietf-ippm-ioam-data-17.txt>

      In-situ Operations, Administration, and Maintenance (IOAM) records
      operational and telemetry information in the packet while the packet
      traverses a path in the network.  This document discusses the data
      fields and associated data types for in-situ OAM.  In-situ OAM data
      fields can be encapsulated into a variety of protocols such as NSH,
      Segment Routing, Geneve, or IPv6.  In-situ OAM can be used to
      complement OAM mechanisms based on, e.g., ICMP or other types of
      probe packets.

  "Advanced Unidirectional Route Assessment (AURA)", Jose Alvarez-Hamelin,
  Alfred Morton, Joachim Fabini, Carlos Pignataro, Ruediger Geib, 2020-08-13,
  <draft-ietf-ippm-route-10.txt>

      This memo introduces an advanced unidirectional route assessment
      (AURA) metric and associated measurement methodology, based on the IP
      Performance Metrics (IPPM) Framework RFC 2330.  This memo updates RFC
      2330 in the areas of path-related terminology and path description,
      primarily to include the possibility of parallel subpaths between a
      given Source and Destination pair, owing to the presence of multi-
      path technologies.

  "In-situ OAM IPv6 Options", Shwetha Bhandari, Frank Brockners, 2022-02-06,
  <draft-ietf-ippm-ioam-ipv6-options-07.txt>

      In-situ Operations, Administration, and Maintenance (IOAM) records
      operational and telemetry information in the packet while the packet
      traverses a path between two points in the network.  This document
      outlines how IOAM data fields are encapsulated in IPv6.

  "In-situ OAM Loopback and Active Flags", Tal Mizrahi, Frank Brockners,
  Shwetha Bhandari, Ramesh Sivakolundu, Carlos Pignataro, Aviv Kfir, Barak
  Gafni, Mickey Spiegel, Jennifer Lemon, 2021-10-13,
  <draft-ietf-ippm-ioam-flags-07.txt>

      In-situ Operations, Administration, and Maintenance (IOAM) collects
      operational and telemetry information in packets while they traverse
      a path between two points in the network.  This document defines two
      new flags in the IOAM Trace Option headers, specifically the Loopback
      and Active flags.

  "In-situ OAM Direct Exporting", Haoyu Song, Barak Gafni, Tianran Zhou,
  Zhenbin Li, Frank Brockners, Shwetha Bhandari, Ramesh Sivakolundu, Tal
  Mizrahi, 2021-10-13, <draft-ietf-ippm-ioam-direct-export-07.txt>

      In-situ Operations, Administration, and Maintenance (IOAM) is used
      for recording and collecting operational and telemetry information.
      Specifically, IOAM allows telemetry data to be pushed into data
      packets while they traverse the network.  This document introduces a
      new IOAM option type called the Direct Export (DEX) option, which is
      used as a trigger for IOAM data to be directly exported or locally
      aggregated without being pushed into in-flight data packets.  The
      exporting method and format are outside the scope of this document.

  "A Connectivity Monitoring Metric for IPPM", Ruediger Geib, 2021-11-07,
  <draft-ietf-ippm-connectivity-monitoring-03.txt>

      Within a Segment Routing domain, segment routed measurement packets
      can be sent along pre-determined paths.  This enables new kinds of
      measurements.  Connectivity monitoring allows to supervise the state
      and performance of a connection or a (sub)path from one or a few
      central monitoring systems.  This document specifies a suitable
      type-P connectivity monitoring metric.

  "A YANG Data Model for In-Situ OAM", Tianran Zhou, Jim Guichard, Frank
  Brockners, Srihari Raghavan, 2022-01-25, <draft-ietf-ippm-ioam-yang-03.txt>

      In-situ Operations, Administration, and Maintenance (IOAM) records
      operational and telemetry information in user packets while the
      packets traverse a path between two points in the network.  This
      document defines a YANG module for the IOAM function.

  "Simple TWAMP (STAMP) Extensions for Segment Routing Networks", Rakesh
  Gandhi, Clarence Filsfils, Dan Voyer, Mach Chen, Bart Janssens, Richard
  Foote, 2022-02-02, <draft-ietf-ippm-stamp-srpm-03.txt>

      Segment Routing (SR) leverages the source routing paradigm.  SR is
      applicable to both Multiprotocol Label Switching (SR-MPLS) and IPv6
      (SRv6) forwarding planes.  This document specifies RFC 8762 (Simple
      Two-Way Active Measurement Protocol (STAMP)) extensions for SR
      networks, for both SR-MPLS and SRv6 forwarding planes by augmenting
      the optional extensions defined in RFC 8972.

  "Echo Request/Reply for Enabled In-situ OAM Capabilities", Xiao Min, Greg
  Mirsky, Lei Bo, 2022-01-26, <draft-ietf-ippm-ioam-conf-state-03.txt>

      This document describes an extension to the echo request/reply
      mechanisms used in IPv6 (including SRv6), MPLS (including SR-MPLS),
      SFC and BIER environments, which can be used within the IOAM domain,
      allowing the IOAM encapsulating node to discover the enabled IOAM
      capabilities of each IOAM transit and IOAM decapsulating node.

  "Integrity of In-situ OAM Data Fields", Frank Brockners, Shwetha Bhandari,
  Tal Mizrahi, Justin Iurman, 2022-03-02,
  <draft-ietf-ippm-ioam-data-integrity-01.txt>

      In-situ Operations, Administration, and Maintenance (IOAM) records
      operational and telemetry information in the packet while the packet
      traverses a path in the network.  IETF protocols require features to
      ensure their security.  This document describes the integrity
      protection of IOAM-Data-Fields.

  "In-situ OAM Deployment", Frank Brockners, Shwetha Bhandari, Daniel
  Bernier, Tal Mizrahi, 2021-10-19, <draft-ietf-ippm-ioam-deployment-00.txt>

      In-situ Operations, Administration, and Maintenance (IOAM) collects
      operational and telemetry information in the packet while the packet
      traverses a path between two points in the network.  This document
      provides a framework for IOAM deployment and provides best current
      practices.

  "Explicit Flow Measurements Techniques", Mauro Cociglio, Alexandre
  Ferrieux, Giuseppe Fioccola, Igor Lubashev, Fabio Bulgarella, Isabelle
  Hamchaoui, Massimo Nilo, Riccardo Sisto, Dmitri Tikhonov, 2021-10-25,
  <draft-ietf-ippm-explicit-flow-measurements-00.txt>

      This document describes protocol independent methods called Explicit
      Flow Measurement Techniques that employ few marking bits, inside the
      header of each packet, for loss and delay measurement.  The
      endpoints, marking the traffic, signal these metrics to intermediate
      observers allowing them to measure connection performance, and to
      locate the network segment where impairments happen.  Different
      alternatives are considered within this document.  These signaling
      methods apply to all protocols but they are especially valuable when
      applied to protocols that encrypt transport header and do not allow
      traditional methods for delay and loss detection.

  "Test Protocol for One-way IP Capacity Measurement", Len Ciavattone, Alfred
  Morton, 2022-02-25, <draft-ietf-ippm-capacity-protocol-01.txt>

      This memo addresses the problem of protocol support for measuring
      Network Capacity metrics in RFC 9097, where the method deploys a
      feedback channel from the receiver to control the sender's
      transmission rate in near-real-time.  This memo defines a simple
      protocol to perform the RFC 9097 (and other) measurements.
      
      See Section 10: The authors seek feedback to determine what
      additional features will be necessary for an IETF Standards Track
      Protocol, beyond what is present in the running code available now.

  "Responsiveness under Working Conditions", Christoph Paasch, Randall Meyer,
  Stuart Cheshire, Omer Shapira, Matt Mathis, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-ietf-ippm-responsiveness-00.txt,.pdf>

      For many years, a lack of responsiveness, variously called lag,
      latency, or bufferbloat, has been recognized as an unfortunate, but
      common symptom in today's networks.  Even after a decade of work on
      standardizing technical solutions, it remains a common problem for
      the end users.
      
      Everyone "knows" that it is "normal" for a video conference to have
      problems when somebody else at home is watching a 4K movie or
      uploading photos from their phone.  However, there is no technical
      reason for this to be the case.  In fact, various queue management
      solutions (fq_codel, cake, PIE) have solved the problem.
      
      Our networks remain unresponsive, not from a lack of technical
      solutions, but rather a lack of awareness of the problem.  We believe
      that creating a tool whose measurement matches people's every day
      experience will create the necessary awareness, and result in a
      demand for products that solve the problem.
      
      This document specifies the "RPM Test" for measuring responsiveness.
      It uses common protocols and mechanisms to measure user experience
      especially when the network is under working conditions.  The
      measurement is expressed as "Round-trips Per Minute" (RPM) and should
      be included with throughput (up and down) and idle latency as
      critical indicators of network quality.

IP Security Maintenance and Extensions (ipsecme)
------------------------------------------------

  "Labeled IPsec Traffic Selector support for IKEv2", Paul Wouters, Sahana
  Prasad, 2021-10-25, <draft-ietf-ipsecme-labeled-ipsec-06.txt>

      This document defines a new Traffic Selector (TS) Type for Internet
      Key Exchange version 2 to add support for negotiating Mandatory
      Access Control (MAC) security labels as a traffic selector of the
      Security Policy Database (SPD).  Security Labels for IPsec are also
      known as "Labeled IPsec".  The new TS type is TS_SECLABEL, which
      consists of a variable length opaque field specifying the security
      label.  This document updates the IKEv2 TS negotiation specified in
      RFC 7296 Section 2.9.

  "Intermediate Exchange in the IKEv2 Protocol", Valery Smyslov, 2022-03-05,
  <draft-ietf-ipsecme-ikev2-intermediate-10.txt>

      This document defines a new exchange, called Intermediate Exchange,
      for the Internet Key Exchange protocol Version 2 (IKEv2).  This
      exchange can be used for transferring large amounts of data in the
      process of IKEv2 Security Association (SA) establishment.  An example
      of the need to do this is using Quantum Computer resistant key
      exchange methods for IKE SA establishment.  Introducing the
      Intermediate Exchange allows re-using the existing IKE fragmentation
      mechanism, that helps to avoid IP fragmentation of large IKE
      messages, but cannot be used in the initial IKEv2 exchange.

  "IP-TFS: Aggregation and Fragmentation Mode for ESP and its Use for IP
  Traffic Flow Security", Christian Hopps, 2021-11-08,
  <draft-ietf-ipsecme-iptfs-12.txt>

      This document describes a mechanism for aggregation and fragmentation
      of IP packets when they are being encapsulated in ESP payload.  This
      new payload type can be used for various purposes such as decreasing
      encapsulation overhead for small IP packets; however, the focus in
      this document is to enhance IPsec traffic flow security (IP-TFS) by
      adding Traffic Flow Confidentiality (TFC) to encrypted IP
      encapsulated traffic.  TFC is provided by obscuring the size and
      frequency of IP traffic using a fixed-sized, constant-send-rate IPsec
      tunnel.  The solution allows for congestion control as well as non-
      constant send-rate usage.

  "Group Key Management using IKEv2", Valery Smyslov, Brian Weis, 2022-03-18,
  <draft-ietf-ipsecme-g-ikev2-05.txt>

      This document presents an extension to the Internet Key Exchange
      version 2 (IKEv2) protocol for the purpose of a group key management.
      The protocol is in conformance with the Multicast Security (MSEC) key
      management architecture, which contains two components: member
      registration and group rekeying.  Both components require a Group
      Controller/Key Server to download IPsec group security associations
      to authorized members of a group.  The group members then exchange IP
      multicast or other group traffic as IPsec packets.  This document
      obsoletes RFC 6407.

  "Multiple Key Exchanges in IKEv2", C. Tjhai, M. Tomlinson, G. Bartlett,
  Scott Fluhrer, Daniel Van Geest, Oscar Garcia-Morchon, Valery Smyslov,
  2021-09-30, <draft-ietf-ipsecme-ikev2-multiple-ke-04.txt>

      This document describes how to extend the Internet Key Exchange
      Protocol Version 2 (IKEv2) to allow multiple key exchanges to take
      place while computing a shared secret during a Security Association
      (SA) setup.  The primary application of this feature in IKEv2 is the
      ability to perform one or more post-quantum key exchanges in
      conjunction with the classical (Elliptic Curve) Diffie-Hellman key
      exchange, so that the resulting shared key is resistant against
      quantum computer attacks.  Another possible application is the
      ability to combine several key exchanges in situations when no single
      key exchange algorithm is trusted by both initiator and responder.
      
      This document updates RFC7296 by renaming a transform type 4 from
      "Diffie-Hellman Group (D-H)" to "Key Exchange Method (KE)" and
      renaming a field in the Key Exchange Payload from "Diffie-Hellman
      Group Num" to "Key Exchange Method".  It also renames an IANA
      registry for this transform type from "Transform Type 4 - Diffie-
      Hellman Group Transform IDs" to "Transform Type 4 - Key Exchange
      Method Transform IDs".  These changes generalize key exchange
      algorithms that can be used in IKEv2.

  "A YANG Data Model for IP Traffic Flow Security", Don Fedyk, Christian
  Hopps, 2021-11-18, <draft-ietf-ipsecme-yang-iptfs-05.txt>

      This document describes a yang module for the management of IP
      Traffic Flow Security additions to IKEv2 and IPsec.

  "Deprecation of IKEv1 and obsoleted algorithms", Paul Wouters, 2021-10-25,
  <draft-ietf-ipsecme-ikev1-algo-to-historic-02.txt>

      Internet Key Exchange version 1 (IKEv1) is deprecated.  Accordingly,
      IKEv1 has been moved to Historic status.  A number of old algorithms
      that are associated with IKEv1, and not widely implemented for IKEv2
      are deprecated as well.  This document adds a Status column to the
      IANA IKEv2 Transform Type registries.

  "TCP Encapsulation of IKE and IPsec Packets", Valery Smyslov, Tommy Pauly,
  2022-01-19, <draft-ietf-ipsecme-rfc8229bis-02.txt>

      This document describes a method to transport Internet Key Exchange
      Protocol (IKE) and IPsec packets over a TCP connection for traversing
      network middleboxes that may block IKE negotiation over UDP.  This
      method, referred to as "TCP encapsulation", involves sending both IKE
      packets for Security Association establishment and Encapsulating
      Security Payload (ESP) packets over a TCP connection.  This method is
      intended to be used as a fallback option when IKE cannot be
      negotiated over UDP.
      
      TCP encapsulation for IKE and IPsec was defined in [RFC8229].  This
      document updates the specification for TCP encapsulation by including
      additional clarifications obtained during implementation and
      deployment of this method.  This documents makes RFC8229 obsolete.

  "Definitions of Managed Objects for IP Traffic Flow Security", Don Fedyk,
  Eric Kinzie, 2021-11-18, <draft-ietf-ipsecme-mib-iptfs-03.txt>

      This document describes managed objects for the the management of IP
      Traffic Flow Security additions to IKEv2 and IPsec.  This document
      provides a read only version of the objects defined in the YANG
      module for the same purpose.

  "Internet Key Exchange Protocol Version 2 (IKEv2) Configuration for
  Encrypted DNS", Mohamed Boucadair, Tirumaleswar Reddy.K, Dan Wing, Valery
  Smyslov, 2021-12-17, <draft-ietf-ipsecme-add-ike-00.txt>

      This document specifies a new Internet Key Exchange Protocol Version
      2 (IKEv2) Configuration Payload Attribute Types for encrypted DNS
      protocols such as DNS-over-HTTPS (DoH), DNS-over-TLS (DoT), and DNS-
      over-QUIC (DoQ).

  "Announcing Supported Authentication Methods in IKEv2", Valery Smyslov,
  2022-02-24, <draft-ietf-ipsecme-ikev2-auth-announce-00.txt>

      This specification defines a mechanism that allows the Internet Key
      Exchange version 2 (IKEv2) implementations to indicate the list of
      supported authentication methods to their peers while establishing
      IKEv2 Security Association (SA).  This mechanism improves
      interoperability when IKEv2 partners are configured with multiple
      different credentials to authenticate each other.

IP Wireless Access in Vehicular Environments (ipwave)
-----------------------------------------------------

  "IPv6 Wireless Access in Vehicular Environments (IPWAVE): Problem Statement
  and Use Cases", Jaehoon Jeong, 2022-02-22,
  <draft-ietf-ipwave-vehicular-networking-27.txt>

      This document discusses the problem statement and use cases of
      IPv6-based vehicular networking for Intelligent Transportation
      Systems (ITS).  The main scenarios of vehicular communications are
      vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V), vehicle-to-infrastructure (V2I), and
      vehicle-to-everything (V2X) communications.  First, this document
      explains use cases using V2V, V2I, and V2X networking.  Next, for
      IPv6-based vehicular networks, it makes a gap analysis of current
      IPv6 protocols (e.g., IPv6 Neighbor Discovery, Mobility Management,
      and Security & Privacy), and then enumerates requirements for the
      extensions of those IPv6 protocols for IPv6-based vehicular
      networking.

JSON Mail Access Protocol (jmap)
--------------------------------

  "JMAP for Calendars", Neil Jenkins, Michael Douglass, 2022-02-23,
  <draft-ietf-jmap-calendars-08.txt>

      This document specifies a data model for synchronizing calendar data
      with a server using JMAP.

  "S/MIME signature verification extension to JMAP", Alexey Melnikov,
  2022-01-06, <draft-ietf-jmap-smime-12.txt>

      This document specifies an extension to JMAP for Mail (RFC 8621) for
      returning S/MIME signature verification status.

  "JMAP for Quotas", Rene Cordier, 2022-02-07, <draft-ietf-jmap-quotas-03.txt>

      This document specifies a data model for handling quotas on accounts
      with a server using JMAP.

  "JMAP for Sieve Scripts", Kenneth Murchison, 2021-11-08,
  <draft-ietf-jmap-sieve-06.txt>

      This document specifies a data model for managing Sieve scripts on a
      server using the JSON Meta Application Protocol (JMAP).

  "JMAP for Tasks", Joris Baum, Hans-Jorg Happel, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-ietf-jmap-tasks-03.txt>

      This document specifies a data model for synchronizing task data with
      a server using JMAP.

  "JMAP Sharing", Neil Jenkins, 2022-02-06, <draft-ietf-jmap-sharing-01.txt>

      This document specifies a data model for sharing data between users
      using JMAP.

  "JMAP Blob management extension", Bron Gondwana, 2022-03-04,
  <draft-ietf-jmap-blob-09.txt>

      The JMAP base protocol (RFC8620) provides the ability to upload and
      download arbitrary binary data via HTTP POST and GET on defined
      endpoint.  This binary data is called a "blob".
      
      This extension adds additional ways to create and access blobs, by
      making inline method calls within a standard JMAP request.
      
      This extension also adds a reverse lookup mechanism to discover where
      blobs are referenced within other data types.

  "JMAP extension for S/MIME signing and encryption", Alexey Melnikov,
  2021-11-08, <draft-ietf-jmap-smime-sender-extensions-01.txt>

      This document specifies an extension to JMAP for sending S/MIME
      signed and S/MIME encrypted messages.

JSON Path (jsonpath)
--------------------

  "JSONPath: Query expressions for JSON", Stefan Gossner, Glyn Normington,
  Carsten Bormann, 2022-03-07, <draft-ietf-jsonpath-base-04.txt>

      JSONPath defines a string syntax for selecting and extracting values
      within a JavaScript Object Notation (JSON, RFC 8259) value.

Common Authentication Technology Next Generation (kitten)
---------------------------------------------------------

  "SAML Enhanced Client SASL and GSS-API Mechanisms", Scott Cantor, Margaret
  Cullen, Simon Josefsson, 2021-05-10, <draft-ietf-kitten-sasl-saml-ec-20.txt>

      Security Assertion Markup Language (SAML) 2.0 is a generalized
      framework for the exchange of security-related information between
      asserting and relying parties.  Simple Authentication and Security
      Layer (SASL) and the Generic Security Service Application Program
      Interface (GSS-API) are application frameworks that facilitate an
      extensible authentication model, among other things.  This document
      specifies a SASL and GSS-API mechanism for SAML 2.0 that leverages
      the capabilities of a SAML-aware "enhanced client" to address
      significant barriers to federated authentication in a manner that
      encourages reuse of existing SAML bindings and profiles designed for
      non-browser scenarios.

  "SPAKE Pre-Authentication", Nathaniel McCallum, Simo Sorce, Robbie Harwood,
  Greg Hudson, 2020-06-10, <draft-ietf-kitten-krb-spake-preauth-09.txt>

      This document defines a new pre-authentication mechanism for the
      Kerberos protocol that uses a password authenticated key exchange.
      This document has three goals.  First, increase the security of
      Kerberos pre-authentication exchanges by making offline brute-force
      attacks infeasible.  Second, enable the use of second factor
      authentication without the need for a separately-established secure
      channel.  This is achieved using the existing trust relationship
      established by the shared first factor.  Third, make Kerberos pre-
      authentication more resilient against time synchronization errors by
      removing the need to transfer an encrypted timestamp from the client.

  "Best practices for password hashing and storage", Sam Whited, 2021-09-27,
  <draft-ietf-kitten-password-storage-07.txt>

      This document outlines best practices for handling user passwords and
      other authenticator secrets in client-server systems making use of
      SASL.

  "Channel Bindings for TLS 1.3", Sam Whited, 2022-03-04,
  <draft-ietf-kitten-tls-channel-bindings-for-tls13-15.txt>

      This document defines a channel binding type, tls-exporter, that is
      compatible with TLS 1.3 in accordance with RFC 5056, On Channel
      Binding.  Furthermore, it updates the default channel binding to the
      new binding for versions of TLS greater than 1.2.  This document
      updates RFC5801, RFC5802, RFC5929, RFC7677, and RFC8446.

  "Extensions to Salted Challenge Response (SCRAM) for 2 factor
  authentication", Alexey Melnikov, 2022-01-25,
  <draft-ietf-kitten-scram-2fa-01.txt>

      This specification describes an extension to family of Simple
      Authentication and Security Layer (SASL; RFC 4422) authentication
      mechanisms called the Salted Challenge Response Authentication
      Mechanism (SCRAM), which provides support for 2 factor
      authentication.  It also includes a separate extension for quick
      reauthentication.
      
      This specification also gives an example of how TOTP (RFC 6238) can
      be used as the second factor.

Lightweight Authenticated Key Exchange (lake)
---------------------------------------------

  "Ephemeral Diffie-Hellman Over COSE (EDHOC)", Goeran Selander, John
  Mattsson, Francesca Palombini, 2021-10-20, <draft-ietf-lake-edhoc-12.txt>

      This document specifies Ephemeral Diffie-Hellman Over COSE (EDHOC), a
      very compact and lightweight authenticated Diffie-Hellman key
      exchange with ephemeral keys.  EDHOC provides mutual authentication,
      forward secrecy, and identity protection.  EDHOC is intended for
      usage in constrained scenarios and a main use case is to establish an
      OSCORE security context.  By reusing COSE for cryptography, CBOR for
      encoding, and CoAP for transport, the additional code size can be
      kept very low.

  "Traces of EDHOC", Goeran Selander, John Mattsson, 2021-11-25,
  <draft-ietf-lake-traces-00.txt>

      This document contains some example traces of Ephemeral Diffie-
      Hellman Over COSE (EDHOC).

Limited Additional Mechanisms for PKIX and SMIME (lamps)
--------------------------------------------------------

  "Certificate Management Protocol (CMP) Updates", Hendrik Brockhaus, David
  von Oheimb, John Gray, 2022-01-12, <draft-ietf-lamps-cmp-updates-17.txt>

      This document contains a set of updates to the syntax and transfer of
      Certificate Management Protocol (CMP) version 2.  This document
      updates RFC 4210, RFC 5912, and RFC 6712.
      
      The aspects of CMP updated in this document are using EnvelopedData
      instead of EncryptedValue, clarifying the handling of p10cr messages,
      improving the crypto agility, as well as adding new general message
      types, extended key usages to identify certificates for use with CMP,
      and '.well-known' HTTP path segments.
      
      To properly differentiate the support of EnvelopedData instead of
      EncryptedValue, the CMP version 3 is introduced in case a transaction
      is supposed to use EnvelopedData.
      
      CMP version 3 is introduced to enable signaling support of
      EnvelopedData instead of EncryptedValue and signaling the use of an
      explicit hash AlgorithmIdentifier in certConf messages, as far as
      needed.

  "Lightweight Certificate Management Protocol (CMP) Profile", Hendrik
  Brockhaus, David von Oheimb, Steffen Fries, 2022-02-01,
  <draft-ietf-lamps-lightweight-cmp-profile-10.txt>

      This document aims at simple, interoperable, and automated PKI
      management operations covering typical use cases of industrial and
      IoT scenarios.  This is achieved by profiling the Certificate
      Management Protocol (CMP), the related Certificate Request Message
      Format (CRMF), and HTTP-based or CoAP-based transfer in a succinct
      but sufficiently detailed and self-contained way.  To make secure
      certificate management for simple scenarios and constrained devices
      as lightweight as possible, only the most crucial types of operations
      and options are specified as mandatory.  More special and complex use
      cases are supported as well, by features specified as recommended or
      optional.

  "Header Protection for S/MIME", Daniel Gillmor, Bernie Hoeneisen, Alexey
  Melnikov, 2022-03-07, <draft-ietf-lamps-header-protection-08.txt>

      S/MIME version 3.1 introduced a mechanism to provide end-to-end
      cryptographic protection of e-mail message headers.  However, few
      implementations generate messages using this mechanism, and several
      legacy implementations have revealed rendering or security issues
      when handling such a message.
      
      This document updates the S/MIME specification to offer a different
      mechanism that provides the same cryptographic protections but with
      fewer downsides when handled by legacy clients.  Furthermore, it
      offers more explicit guidance for clients when generating or handling
      e-mail messages with cryptographic protection of message headers.

  "Certificate Management Protocol (CMP) Algorithms", Hendrik Brockhaus, Hans
  Aschauer, Mike Ounsworth, John Gray, 2022-02-15,
  <draft-ietf-lamps-cmp-algorithms-11.txt>

      This document updates RFC 4210 describing the conventions for using
      concrete cryptographic algorithms with the Certificate Management
      Protocol (CMP).  CMP is used to enroll and further manage the
      lifecycle of X.509 certificates.

  "S/MIME Example Keys and Certificates", Daniel Gillmor, 2022-02-02,
  <draft-ietf-lamps-samples-08.txt>

      The S/MIME development community benefits from sharing samples of
      signed or encrypted data.  This document facilitates such
      collaboration by defining a small set of X.509v3 certificates and
      keys for use when generating such samples.

  "Guidance on End-to-End E-mail Security", Daniel Gillmor, 2022-01-25,
  <draft-ietf-lamps-e2e-mail-guidance-02.txt>

      End-to-end cryptographic protections for e-mail messages can provide
      useful security.  However, the standards for providing cryptographic
      protection are extremely flexible.  That flexibility can trap users
      and cause surprising failures.  This document offers guidance for
      mail user agent implementers that need to compose or interpret e-mail
      messages with end-to-end cryptographic protection.  It provides a
      useful set of vocabulary as well as suggestions to avoid common
      failures.

  "General Purpose Extended Key Usage (EKU) for Document Signing X.509
  Certificates", Tadahiko Ito, Tomofumi Okubo, Sean Turner, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-ietf-lamps-documentsigning-eku-02.txt>

      RFC5280 specifies several extended key purpose identifiers
      (KeyPurposeIds) for X.509 certificates.  This document defines a
      general purpose document signing KeyPurposeId for inclusion in the
      Extended Key Usage (EKU) extension of X.509 public key certificates.
      Document Signing applications may require that the EKU extension be
      present and that a document signing KeyPurposeId be indicated in
      order for the certificate to be acceptable to that Document Signing
      application.

  "Internet X.509 Public Key Infrastructure: Logotypes in X.509
  Certificates", Stefan Santesson, Russ Housley, Trevor Freeman, Leonard
  Rosenthol, 2022-02-27, <draft-ietf-lamps-rfc3709bis-01.txt>

      This document specifies a certificate extension for including
      logotypes in public key certificates and attribute certificates.
      This document obsoletes RFC 3709 and RFC 6170.

Locator/ID Separation Protocol (lisp)
-------------------------------------

  "LISP-Security (LISP-SEC)", Fabio Maino, Vina Ermagan, Albert
  Cabellos-Aparicio, Damien Saucez, 2021-12-09, <draft-ietf-lisp-sec-25.txt>

      This memo specifies LISP-SEC, a set of security mechanisms that
      provides origin authentication, integrity and anti-replay protection
      to LISP's EID-to-RLOC mapping data conveyed via mapping lookup
      process.  LISP-SEC also enables verification of authorization on EID-
      prefix claims in Map-Reply messages.

  "An Architectural Introduction to the Locator/ID Separation Protocol
  (LISP)", Albert Cabellos-Aparicio, Damien Saucez, 2021-09-20,
  <draft-ietf-lisp-introduction-15.txt>

      This document describes the architecture of the Locator/ID Separation
      Protocol (LISP), making it easier to read the rest of the LISP
      specifications and providing a basis for discussion about the details
      of the LISP protocols.  This document is used for introductory
      purposes, more details can be found in [I-D.ietf-lisp-rfc6830bis] and
      [I-D.ietf-lisp-rfc6833bis], the protocol specifications.

  "LISP YANG Model", Vina Ermagan, AlbertoRodriguezNatal, Florin Coras, Carl
  Moberg, Reshad Rahman, Albert Cabellos-Aparicio, Fabio Maino, 2022-02-24,
  <draft-ietf-lisp-yang-17.txt>

      This document describes a YANG data model to use with the Locator/ID
      Separation Protocol (LISP).
      
      The YANG modules in this document conform to the Network Management
      Datastore Architecture (NMDA).

  "The Locator/ID Separation Protocol (LISP)", Dino Farinacci, Vince Fuller,
  David Meyer, Darrel Lewis, Albert Cabellos-Aparicio, 2020-11-18,
  <draft-ietf-lisp-rfc6830bis-36.txt>

      This document describes the Data-Plane protocol for the Locator/ID
      Separation Protocol (LISP).  LISP defines two namespaces, End-point
      Identifiers (EIDs) that identify end-hosts and Routing Locators
      (RLOCs) that identify network attachment points.  With this, LISP
      effectively separates control from data, and allows routers to create
      overlay networks.  LISP-capable routers exchange encapsulated packets
      according to EID-to-RLOC mappings stored in a local Map-Cache.
      
      LISP requires no change to either host protocol stacks or to underlay
      routers and offers Traffic Engineering, multihoming and mobility,
      among other features.
      
      This document obsoletes RFC 6830.

  "Locator/ID Separation Protocol (LISP) Control-Plane", Dino Farinacci,
  Fabio Maino, Vince Fuller, Albert Cabellos-Aparicio, 2020-11-18,
  <draft-ietf-lisp-rfc6833bis-30.txt>

      This document describes the Control-Plane and Mapping Service for the
      Locator/ID Separation Protocol (LISP), implemented by two types of
      LISP-speaking devices -- the LISP Map-Resolver and LISP Map-Server --
      that provides a simplified "front end" for one or more Endpoint ID to
      Routing Locator mapping databases.
      
      By using this Control-Plane service interface and communicating with
      Map-Resolvers and Map-Servers, LISP Ingress Tunnel Routers (ITRs) and
      Egress Tunnel Routers (ETRs) are not dependent on the details of
      mapping database systems, which facilitates modularity with different
      database designs.  Since these devices implement the "edge" of the
      LISP Control-Plane infrastructure, connecting EID addressable nodes
      of a LISP site, it the implementation and operational complexity of
      the overall cost and effort of deploying LISP.
      
      This document obsoletes RFC 6830 and RFC 6833.

  "LISP Traffic Engineering Use-Cases", Dino Farinacci, Michael Kowal,
  Parantap Lahiri, 2021-09-19, <draft-ietf-lisp-te-09.txt>

      This document describes how LISP reencapsulating tunnels can be used
      for Traffic Engineering purposes.  The mechanisms described in this
      document require no LISP protocol changes but do introduce a new
      locator (RLOC) encoding.  The Traffic Engineering features provided
      by these LISP mechanisms can span intra-domain, inter-domain, or
      combination of both.

  "LISP Mobile Node", Dino Farinacci, Darrel Lewis, David Meyer, Chris White,
  2022-01-30, <draft-ietf-lisp-mn-11.txt>

      This document describes how a lightweight version of LISP's ITR/ETR
      functionality can be used to provide seamless mobility to a mobile
      node.  The LISP Mobile Node design described in this document uses
      standard LISP functionality to provide scalable mobility for LISP
      mobile nodes.

  "LISP Virtual Private Networks (VPNs)", Victor Moreno, Dino Farinacci,
  2022-01-18, <draft-ietf-lisp-vpn-08.txt>

      This document describes the use of the Locator/ID Separation Protocol
      (LISP) to create Virtual Private Networks (VPNs).  LISP is used to
      provide segmentation in both the LISP data plane and control plane.
      These VPNs can be created over the top of the Internet or over
      private transport networks, and can be implemented by Enterprises or
      Service Providers.  The goal of these VPNs is to leverage the
      characteristics of LISP - routing scalability, simply expressed
      Ingress site TE Policy, IP Address Family traversal, and mobility, in
      ways that provide value to network operators.

  "LISP L2/L3 EID Mobility Using a Unified Control Plane", Marc
  Portoles-Comeras, Vrushali Ashtaputre, Fabio Maino, Victor Moreno, Dino
  Farinacci, 2022-01-18, <draft-ietf-lisp-eid-mobility-09.txt>

      The LISP control plane offers the flexibility to support multiple
      overlay flavors simultaneously.  This document specifies how LISP can
      be used to provide control-plane support to deploy a unified L2 and
      L3 overlay solution for End-point Identifier (EID) mobility, as well
      as analyzing possible deployment options and models.

  "LISP Predictive RLOCs", Dino Farinacci, Padma Pillay-Esnault, 2021-10-18,
  <draft-ietf-lisp-predictive-rlocs-09.txt>

      This specification describes a method to achieve near-zero packet
      loss when an EID is roaming quickly across RLOCs.

  "LISP EID Anonymity", Dino Farinacci, Padma Pillay-Esnault, Wassim Haddad,
  2021-09-19, <draft-ietf-lisp-eid-anonymity-11.txt>

      This specification will describe how ephemeral LISP EIDs can be used
      to create source anonymity.  The idea makes use of frequently
      changing EIDs much like how a credit-card system uses a different
      credit-card numbers for each transaction.

  "Vendor Specific LISP Canonical Address Format (LCAF)",
  AlbertoRodriguezNatal, Vina Ermagan, Anton Smirnov, Vrushali Ashtaputre,
  Dino Farinacci, 2021-03-30, <draft-ietf-lisp-vendor-lcaf-09.txt>

      This document describes a new LISP Canonical Address Format (LCAF),
      the Vendor Specific LCAF.  This LCAF enables organizations to have
      internal encodings for LCAF addresses.

  "LISP Generic Protocol Extension", Fabio Maino, Jennifer Lemon, Puneet
  Agarwal, Darrel Lewis, Michael Smith, 2020-07-26,
  <draft-ietf-lisp-gpe-19.txt>

      This document describes extensions to the Locator/ID Separation
      Protocol (LISP) Data-Plane, via changes to the LISP header, to
      support multi-protocol encapsulation and allow to introduce new
      protocol capabilities.

  "Publish/Subscribe Functionality for LISP", AlbertoRodriguezNatal, Vina
  Ermagan, Albert Cabellos-Aparicio, Sharon Barkai, Mohamed Boucadair,
  2021-06-28, <draft-ietf-lisp-pubsub-09.txt>

      This document specifies an extension to the Request/Reply based LISP
      Control Plane to enable Publish/Subscribe (PubSub) operation.

  "Locator/ID Separation Protocol (LISP) Map-Versioning", Luigi Iannone,
  Damien Saucez, Olivier Bonaventure, 2021-08-31,
  <draft-ietf-lisp-6834bis-09.txt>

      This document describes the LISP (Locator/ID Separation Protocol)
      Map-Versioning mechanism, which provides in-packet information about
      Endpoint ID to Routing Locator (EID-to-RLOC) mappings used to
      encapsulate LISP data packets.  The proposed approach is based on
      associating a version number to EID-to-RLOC mappings and the
      transport of such a version number in the LISP-specific header of
      LISP-encapsulated packets.  LISP Map-Versioning is particularly
      useful to inform communicating Ingress Tunnel Routers (ITRs) and
      Egress Tunnel Routers (ETRs) about modifications of the mappings used
      to encapsulate packets.  The mechanism is optional and transparent to
      implementations not supporting this feature, since in the LISP-
      specific header and in the Map Records, bits used for Map-Versioning
      can be safely ignored by ITRs and ETRs that do not support or do not
      want to use the mechanism.
      
      This document obsoletes RFC 6834 "Locator/ID Separation Protocol
      (LISP) Map-Versioning", which is the initial experimental
      specifications of the mechanisms updated by this document.

  "LISP Control-Plane ECDSA Authentication and Authorization", Dino
  Farinacci, Erik Nordmark, 2022-02-21, <draft-ietf-lisp-ecdsa-auth-07.txt>

      This draft describes how LISP control-plane messages can be
      individually authenticated and authorized without a a priori shared-
      key configuration.  Public-key cryptography is used with no new PKI
      infrastructure required.

  "Locator/ID Separation Protocol (LISP): Shared Extension Message & IANA
  Registry for Packet Type Allocations", Mohamed Boucadair, Christian
  Jacquenet, 2019-01-24, <draft-ietf-lisp-rfc8113bis-03.txt>

      This document specifies a Locator/ID Separation Protocol (LISP)
      shared message type for defining future extensions and conducting
      experiments without consuming a LISP packet type codepoint for each
      extension.
      
      This document obsoletes RFC 8113.

  "Network-Hexagons: H3-LISP GeoState & Mobility Network", sbarkai@gmail.com,
  Bruno Fernandez-Ruiz, Rotem Tamir, AlbertoRodriguezNatal, Fabio Maino,
  Albert Cabellos-Aparicio, Dino Farinacci, 2021-09-14,
  <draft-ietf-lisp-nexagon-19.txt>

      This document specifies the use of H3 and LISP for Geolocation
      Services. Geolocation Services utilize geospatial data for:
      Fresh HDMaps, Intelligent Driving, Cruise and Parking assists.
      Geospatial utilization is delivered using in-network compute for
      brokered verification, curation, and localization of data, using:
      
      - EID addressable geospatial-tiles abstraction of road-segments.
      - EID Interface for detections and uploads to the tile-contexts.
      - EID Routing-Sharing hazards, blockages, parking, road-inventory.
      - EID themed multicast channels per tile to subscribed clients.

IPv6 over Low Power Wide-Area Networks (lpwan)
----------------------------------------------

  "Data Model for Static Context Header Compression (SCHC)", Ana Minaburo,
  Laurent Toutain, 2022-02-28, <draft-ietf-lpwan-schc-yang-data-model-07.txt>

      This document describes a YANG data model for the SCHC (Static
      Context Header Compression) compression and fragmentation rules.

  "SCHC over Sigfox LPWAN", Juan Zuniga, Carles Gomez, Sergio Aguilar,
  Laurent Toutain, Sandra Cespedes, Diego Torre, Julien Boite, 2022-02-22,
  <draft-ietf-lpwan-schc-over-sigfox-09.txt>

      The Generic Framework for Static Context Header Compression and
      Fragmentation (SCHC) specification describes two mechanisms: i) an
      application header compression scheme, and ii) a frame fragmentation
      and loss recovery functionality.  SCHC offers a great level of
      flexibility that can be tailored for different Low Power Wide Area
      Network (LPWAN) technologies.
      
      The present document provides the optimal parameters and modes of
      operation when SCHC is implemented over a Sigfox LPWAN.  This set of
      parameters are also known as a "SCHC over Sigfox profile."

  "SCHC over NB-IoT", Edgar Ramos, Ana Minaburo, 2022-02-22,
  <draft-ietf-lpwan-schc-over-nbiot-07.txt>

      The Static Context Header Compression (SCHC) specification describes
      header compression and fragmentation functionalities for LPWAN (Low
      Power Wide Area Networks) technologies.  The Narrow Band Internet of
      Things (NB-IoT) architecture may adapt SCHC to improve its
      capacities.
      
      This document describes the use of SCHC over the NB-IoT wireless
      access and provides elements for efficient parameterization.

  "LPWAN Static Context Header Compression (SCHC) Architecture", Alexander
  Pelov, Pascal Thubert, Ana Minaburo, 2021-11-26,
  <draft-ietf-lpwan-architecture-01.txt>

      This document defines the LPWAN SCHC architecture.

  "SCHC Compound ACK", Juan Zuniga, Carles Gomez, Sergio Aguilar, Laurent
  Toutain, Sandra Cespedes, Diego Torre, 2022-02-09,
  <draft-ietf-lpwan-schc-compound-ack-03.txt>

      The present document describes an extension to the SCHC (Static
      Context Header Compression and fragmentation) protocol [RFC8724].  It
      defines a SCHC Compound ACK message format, which is intended to
      reduce the number of response transmissions (i.e., SCHC ACKs) by
      accumulating bitmaps of several windows in a single SCHC message
      (i.e., the SCHC Compound ACK).
      
      The message format is generic, and can be used, for instance, by any
      of the four LWPAN technologies defined in [RFC8376], being Sigfox,
      LoRaWAN, NB-IoT and IEEE 802.15.4w.

Link State Routing (lsr)
------------------------

  "YANG Data Model for IS-IS Protocol", Stephane Litkowski, Derek Yeung, Acee
  Lindem, Zhaohui Zhang, Ladislav Lhotka, 2019-10-15,
  <draft-ietf-isis-yang-isis-cfg-42.txt>

      This document defines a YANG data model that can be used to configure
      and manage the IS-IS protocol on network elements.

  "YANG Data Model for OSPF Protocol", Derek Yeung, Yingzhen Qu, Zhaohui
  Zhang, Ing-Wher Chen, Acee Lindem, 2019-10-17, <draft-ietf-ospf-yang-29.txt>

      This document defines a YANG data model that can be used to configure
      and manage OSPF.  The model is based on YANG 1.1 as defined in RFC
      7950 and conforms to the Network Management Datastore Architecture
      (NMDA) as described in RFC 8342.

  "YANG Data Model for OSPF Segment Routing", Derek Yeung, Yingzhen Qu,
  Zhaohui Zhang, Ing-Wher Chen, Acee Lindem, 2022-01-02,
  <draft-ietf-ospf-sr-yang-17.txt>

      This document defines a YANG data module that can be used to
      configure and manage OSPF Extensions for Segment Routing.  It also
      defines a module for management of Signaling Maximum SID Depth (MSD)
      Using OSPF.

  "YANG Data Model for IS-IS Segment Routing", Stephane Litkowski, Yingzhen
  Qu, Pushpasis Sarkar, Ing-Wher Chen, Jeff Tantsura, 2022-02-09,
  <draft-ietf-isis-sr-yang-12.txt>

      This document defines a YANG data module that can be used to
      configure and manage IS-IS Segment Routing, as well as a YANG data
      module for the management of Signaling Maximum SID Depth (MSD) using
      IS-IS.

  "IGP Flexible Algorithm", Peter Psenak, Shraddha Hegde, Clarence Filsfils,
  Ketan Talaulikar, Arkadiy Gulko, 2021-10-25,
  <draft-ietf-lsr-flex-algo-18.txt>

      IGP protocols traditionally compute best paths over the network based
      on the IGP metric assigned to the links.  Many network deployments
      use RSVP-TE based or Segment Routing based Traffic Engineering to
      steer traffic over a path that is computed using different metrics or
      constraints than the shortest IGP path.  This document proposes a
      solution that allows IGPs themselves to compute constraint-based
      paths over the network.  This document also specifies a way of using
      Segment Routing (SR) Prefix-SIDs and SRv6 locators to steer packets
      along the constraint-based paths.

  "IGP extension for PCEP security capability support in the PCE discovery",
  Diego Lopez, Qin WU, Dhruv Dhody, Qiufang Ma, Daniel King, 2021-08-21,
  <draft-ietf-lsr-pce-discovery-security-support-09.txt>

      When a Path Computation Element (PCE) is a Label Switching Router
      (LSR) participating in the Interior Gateway Protocol (IGP), or even a
      server participating in IGP, its presence and path computation
      capabilities can be advertised using IGP flooding.  The IGP
      extensions for PCE discovery (RFC 5088 and RFC 5089) define a method
      to advertise path computation capabilities using IGP flooding for
      OSPF and IS-IS respectively.  However these specifications lack a
      method to advertise PCEP security (e.g., Transport Layer Security
      (TLS), TCP Authentication Option (TCP-AO)) support capability.
      
      This document defines capability flag bits for PCE-CAP-FLAGS sub-TLV
      that can be announced as an attribute in the IGP advertisement to
      distribute PCEP security support information.  In addition, this
      document updates RFC 5088 and RFC 5089 to allow advertisement of Key
      ID or Key Chain Name Sub-TLV to support TCP-AO security capability.
      RFC 8231, RFC 8306, and RFC 8623 are also updated to reflect the
      movement of the IANA "PCE Capability Flags" registry.

  "Dynamic Flooding on Dense Graphs", Tony Li, Tony Przygienda, Peter Psenak,
  Les Ginsberg, Huaimo Chen, David Cooper, Luay Jalil, Srinath Dontula, Gyan
  Mishra, 2021-12-07, <draft-ietf-lsr-dynamic-flooding-10.txt>

      Routing with link state protocols in dense network topologies can
      result in sub-optimal convergence times due to the overhead
      associated with flooding.  This can be addressed by decreasing the
      flooding topology so that it is less dense.
      
      This document discusses the problem in some depth and an
      architectural solution.  Specific protocol changes for IS-IS, OSPFv2,
      and OSPFv3 are described in this document.

  "IS-IS Extensions to Support Segment Routing over IPv6 Dataplane", Peter
  Psenak, Clarence Filsfils, Ahmed Bashandy, Bruno Decraene, Zhibo Hu,
  2021-10-20, <draft-ietf-lsr-isis-srv6-extensions-18.txt>

      The Segment Routing (SR) architecture allows flexible definition of
      the end-to-end path by encoding it as a sequence of topological
      elements called "segments".  It can be implemented over the MPLS or
      the IPv6 data plane.  This document describes the IS-IS extensions
      required to support Segment Routing over the IPv6 data plane.
      
      This document updates RFC 7370 by modifying an existing registry.

  "OSPF YANG Model Augmentations for Additional Features - Version 1", Acee
  Lindem, Yingzhen Qu, 2022-01-09,
  <draft-ietf-lsr-ospf-yang-augmentation-v1-07.txt>

      This document defines YANG data modules augmenting the IETF OSPF YANG
      model to provide support for Traffic Engineering Extensions to OSPF
      Version 3 as defined in RF 5329, OSPF Two-Part Metric as defined in
      RFC 8042, OSPF Graceful Link Shutdown as defined in RFC 8379, OSPF
      Link-Local Signaling (LLS) Extensions for Local Interface ID
      Advertisement as defined in RFC 8510, OSPF Application-Specific Link
      Attributes as defined in RFC 8920, and OSPF Flexible Algorithm.

  "YANG Model for OSPFv3 Extended LSAs", Acee Lindem, Sharmila Palani,
  Yingzhen Qu, 2022-03-06, <draft-ietf-lsr-ospfv3-extended-lsa-yang-10.txt>

      This document defines a YANG data model augmenting the IETF OSPF YANG
      model to provide support for OSPFv3 Link State Advertisement (LSA)
      Extensibility as defined in RFC 8362.  OSPFv3 Extended LSAs provide
      extensible TLV-based LSAs for the base LSA types defined in RFC 5340.

  "IS-IS Extended Hierarchy", Tony Li, Les Ginsberg, Paul Wells, 2021-12-26,
  <draft-ietf-lsr-isis-extended-hierarchy-05.txt>

      The IS-IS routing protocol was originally defined with a two level
      hierarchical structure.  This was adequate for the networks at the
      time.  As we continue to expand the scale of our networks, it is
      apparent that additional hierarchy would be a welcome degree of
      flexibility in network design.
      
      This document defines IS-IS Levels 3 through 8.

  "OSPF BFD Strict-Mode", Ketan Talaulikar, Peter Psenak, Albert Fu, Rejesh
  Shetty, 2022-02-10, <draft-ietf-lsr-ospf-bfd-strict-mode-05.txt>

      This document specifies the extensions to OSPF that enable an OSPF
      router to signal the requirement for a Bidirectional Forwarding
      Detection (BFD) session prior to adjacency formation.  Link-Local
      Signaling (LLS) is used to advertise the requirement for strict-mode
      BFD session establishment for an OSPF adjacency.  If both OSPF
      neighbors advertise the BFD strict-mode, adjacency formation will be
      blocked until a BFD session has been successfully established.

  "OSPF Reverse Metric", Ketan Talaulikar, Peter Psenak, Hugh Johnston,
  2021-10-22, <draft-ietf-lsr-ospf-reverse-metric-04.txt>

      This document specifies the extensions to OSPF that enables a router
      to signal to its neighbor the metric that the neighbor should use
      towards itself using link-local advertisement between them.  The
      signaling of this reverse metric, to be used on the links towards
      itself, allows a router to influence the amount of traffic flowing
      towards itself and in certain use-cases enables routers to maintain
      symmetric metric on both sides of a link between them.

  "YANG Module for IS-IS Reverse Metric", Christian Hopps, 2022-01-01,
  <draft-ietf-lsr-yang-isis-reverse-metric-06.txt>

      This document defines a YANG module for managing the reverse metric
      extension to the Intermediate System to Intermediate System intra-
      domain routeing information exchange protocol (IS-IS).

  "OSPFv3 Extensions for SRv6", Zhenbin Li, Zhibo Hu, Dean Cheng, Ketan
  Talaulikar, Peter Psenak, 2021-11-19,
  <draft-ietf-lsr-ospfv3-srv6-extensions-03.txt>

      The Segment Routing (SR) architecture allows flexible definition of
      the end-to-end path by encoding it as a sequence of topological
      elements called "segments".  It can be implemented over the MPLS or
      the IPv6 data plane.  This document describes the OSPFv3 extensions
      required to support Segment Routing over the IPv6 data plane (SRv6).

  "Flooding Topology Minimum Degree Algorithm", Huaimo Chen, Mehmet Toy, Yi
  Yang, Aijun Wang, Xufeng Liu, Yanhe Fan, Lei Liu, 2021-12-31,
  <draft-ietf-lsr-flooding-topo-min-degree-04.txt>

      This document proposes an algorithm for a node to compute a flooding
      topology, which is a subgraph of the complete topology per underline
      physical network.  When every node in an area automatically
      calculates a flooding topology by using a same algorithm and floods
      the link states using the flooding topology, the amount of flooding
      traffic in the network is greatly reduced.  This would reduce
      convergence time with a more stable and optimized routing
      environment.

  "Area Proxy for IS-IS", Tony Li, Sarah Chen, Vivek Ilangovan, Gyan Mishra,
  2021-11-19, <draft-ietf-lsr-isis-area-proxy-07.txt>

      Link state routing protocols have hierarchical abstraction already
      built into them.  However, when lower levels are used for transit,
      they must expose their internal topologies to each other, leading to
      scale issues.
      
      To avoid this, this document discusses extensions to the IS-IS
      routing protocol that would allow level 1 areas to provide transit,
      yet only inject an abstraction of the level 1 topology into level 2.
      Each level 1 area is represented as a single level 2 node, thereby
      enabling greater scale.

  "IS-IS Flood Reflection", Tony Przygienda, Chris Bowers, Yiu Lee, Alankar
  Sharma, Russ White, 2021-12-09,
  <draft-ietf-lsr-isis-flood-reflection-07.txt>

      This document describes a backwards compatible, optional IS-IS
      extension that allows the creation of IS-IS flood reflection
      topologies.  Flood reflection allows topologies in which L1 areas
      provide transit forwarding for L2 using all available L1 nodes
      internally.  It accomplishes this by creating L2 flood reflection
      adjacencies within each L1 area.  Those adjacencies are used to flood
      L2 LSPDUs, and they are used in the L2 SPF computation.  However,
      they are not used for forwarding within the flood reflection cluster.
      This arrangement gives the L2 topology significantly better scaling
      properties.  As additional benefit, only those routers directly
      participating in flood reflection have to support the feature.  This
      allows for the incremental deployment of scalable L1 transit areas in
      an existing network, without the necessity of upgrading other routers
      in the network.

  "IS-IS Topology-Transparent Zone", Huaimo Chen, Richard Li, Yi Yang, Yanhe
  Fan, Ning So, Vic liu, Mehmet Toy, Lei Liu, Kiran Makhijani, 2021-09-29,
  <draft-ietf-lsr-isis-ttz-04.txt>

      This document specifies a topology-transparent zone in an IS-IS area.
      A zone is a subset (block/piece) of an area, which comprises a group
      of routers and a number of circuits connecting them.  It is
      abstracted as a virtual entity such as a single virtual node or zone
      edges mesh.  Any router outside of the zone is not aware of the zone.
      The information about the circuits and routers inside the zone is not
      distributed to any router outside of the zone.

  "Advertising L2 Bundle Member Link Attributes in OSPF", Ketan Talaulikar,
  Peter Psenak, 2021-10-22, <draft-ietf-lsr-ospf-l2bundles-02.txt>

      There are deployments where the Layer 3 interface on which OSPF
      operates is a Layer 2 interface bundle.  Existing OSPF advertisements
      only support advertising link attributes of the Layer 3 interface.
      If entities external to OSPF wish to control traffic flows on the
      individual physical links which comprise the Layer 2 interface bundle
      link attribute information about the bundle members is required.
      
      This document introduces the ability for OSPF to advertise the link
      attributes of layer 2 (L2) Bundle members.

  "IS-IS Extensions in Support of Inter-Autonomous System (AS) MPLS and GMPLS
  Traffic Engineering", Mach Chen, Les Ginsberg, Stefano Previdi, Xiaodong
  Duan, 2021-03-10, <draft-ietf-lsr-isis-rfc5316bis-02.txt>

      This document describes extensions to the Intermediate System to
      Intermediate System (IS-IS) protocol to support Multiprotocol Label
      Switching (MPLS) and Generalized MPLS (GMPLS) Traffic Engineering
      (TE) for multiple Autonomous Systems (ASs).  It defines IS-IS
      extensions for the flooding of TE information about inter-AS links,
      which can be used to perform inter-AS TE path computation.
      
      No support for flooding information from within one AS to another AS
      is proposed or defined in this document.
      
      This document obsoletes RFC 5316.

  "IGP Flexible Algorithms (Flex-Algorithm) In IP Networks", William Britto,
  Shraddha Hegde, Parag Kaneriya, Rejesh Shetty, Ron Bonica, Peter Psenak,
  2021-12-19, <draft-ietf-lsr-ip-flexalgo-04.txt>

      An IGP Flexible Algorithm (Flex-Algorithm) allows IGP to compute
      constraint-based paths.  As currently defined, IGP Flex-Algorithm is
      used with Segment Routing (SR) data planes - SR MPLS and SRv6.
      Therefore, Flex-Algorithm cannot be deployed in the absence of SR.
      
      This document extends IGP Flex-Algorithm, so that it can be used for
      regular IPv4 and IPv6 prefixes.  This allows Flex-Algorithm to be
      deployed in any IP network, even in the absence of SR.

  "Extensions to OSPF for Advertising Prefix Administrative Tags", Acee
  Lindem, Peter Psenak, 2022-03-06, <draft-ietf-lsr-ospf-admin-tags-03.txt>

      It is useful for routers in an OSPFv2 or OSPFv3 routing domain to be
      able to associate tags with prefixes.  Previously, OSPFv2 and OSPFv3
      were relegated to a single tag for AS External and Not-So-Stubby-Area
      (NSSA) prefixes.  With the flexible encodings provided by OSPFv2
      Prefix/Link Attribute Advertisement and OSPFv3 Extended LSAs,
      multiple administrative tags may advertised for all types of
      prefixes.  These administrative tags can be used for many
      applications including route redistribution policy, selective prefix
      prioritization, selective IP Fast-ReRoute (IPFRR) prefix protection,
      and many others.
      
      The ISIS protocol supports a similar mechanism that is described in
      RFC 5130.

  "IS-IS YANG Model Augmentations for Additional Features - Version 1", Acee
  Lindem, Stephane Litkowski, Yingzhen Qu, 2022-03-06,
  <draft-ietf-lsr-isis-yang-augmentation-v1-03.txt>

      This document defines YANG data modules augmenting the IETF IS-IS
      YANG model to provide support for IS-IS Minimum Remaining Lifetime as
      defined in RFC 7987, IS-IS Application-Specific Link Attributes as
      defined in RFC 8919, and IS-IS Flexible Algorithm.

  "Using IS-IS Multi-Topology (MT) for Segment Routing based Virtual
  Transport Network", Chongfeng Xie, Chenhao Ma, Jie Dong, Zhenbin Li,
  2022-01-13, <draft-ietf-lsr-isis-sr-vtn-mt-02.txt>

      Enhanced VPN (VPN+) aims to provide enhanced VPN service to support
      some application's needs of enhanced isolation and stringent
      performance requirements.  VPN+ requires integration between the
      overlay VPN connectivity and the characteristics provided by the
      underlay network.  A Virtual Transport Network (VTN) is a virtual
      underlay network which consists of a subset of network resources
      allocated on network nodes and links in a customized topology of the
      physical network.  A VTN could be used as the underlay to support one
      or a group of VPN+ services.
      
      In some network scenarios, each VTN can be associated with a unique
      logical network topology.  This document describes a mechanism to
      build the SR based VTNs using IS-IS Multi-Topology together with
      other well-defined IS-IS extensions.

  "OSPF Transport Instance Extensions", Acee Lindem, Yingzhen Qu, Abhay Roy,
  Sina Mirtorabi, 2021-11-18, <draft-ietf-lsr-ospf-transport-instance-01.txt>

      OSPFv2 and OSPFv3 include a reliable flooding mechanism to
      disseminate routing topology and Traffic Engineering (TE) information
      within a routing domain.  Given the effectiveness of these
      mechanisms, it is convenient to envision using the same mechanism for
      dissemination of other types of information within the domain.
      However, burdening OSPF with this additional information will impact
      intra-domain routing convergence and possibly jeopardize the
      stability of the OSPF routing domain.  This document presents
      mechanism to relegate this ancillary information to a separate OSPF
      instance and minimize the impact.

  "Algorithm Related IGP-Adjacency SID Advertisement", Shaofu Peng, Ran Chen,
  Ketan Talaulikar, Peter Psenak, 2022-01-18,
  <draft-ietf-lsr-algorithm-related-adjacency-sid-02.txt>

      Segment Routing architecture supports the use of multiple routing
      algorithms, i.e., different constraint-based shortest-path
      calculations can be supported.  There are two standard algorithms:
      SPF and Strict-SPF, defined in Segment Routing architecture.  There
      are also other user defined algorithms according to Flex-algo
      applicaiton.  However, an algorithm identifier is often included as
      part of a Prefix-SID advertisement, that maybe not satisfy some
      scenarios where multiple algorithm share the same link resource.
      This document complement that the algorithm identifier can be also
      included as part of a Adjacency-SID advertisement

  "IS-IS Fast Flooding", Bruno Decraene, Les Ginsberg, Tony Li, Guillaume
  Solignac, Marek Karasek, Chris Bowers, Gunter Van de Velde, Peter Psenak,
  Tony Przygienda, 2021-12-09, <draft-ietf-lsr-isis-fast-flooding-00.txt>

      Current Link State Protocol Data Unit (PDU) flooding rates are much
      slower than what modern networks can support.  The use of IS-IS at
      larger scale requires faster flooding rates to achieve desired
      convergence goals.  This document discusses the need for faster
      flooding, the issues around faster flooding, and some example
      approaches to achieve faster flooding.  It also defines protocol
      extensions relevant to faster flooding.

Link State Vector Routing (lsvr)
--------------------------------

  "BGP Link-State Shortest Path First (SPF) Routing", Keyur Patel, Acee
  Lindem, Shawn Zandi, Wim Henderickx, 2022-02-15,
  <draft-ietf-lsvr-bgp-spf-16.txt>

      Many Massively Scaled Data Centers (MSDCs) have converged on
      simplified layer 3 routing.  Furthermore, requirements for
      operational simplicity have led many of these MSDCs to converge on
      BGP as their single routing protocol for both their fabric routing
      and their Data Center Interconnect (DCI) routing.  This document
      describes extensions to BGP to use BGP Link-State distribution and
      the Shortest Path First (SPF) algorithm used by Internal Gateway
      Protocols (IGPs) such as OSPF.  In doing this, it allows BGP to be
      efficiently used as both the underlay protocol and the overlay
      protocol in MSDCs.

  "Layer-3 Discovery and Liveness", Randy Bush, Rob Austein, Keyur Patel,
  2021-10-14, <draft-ietf-lsvr-l3dl-08.txt>

      In Massive Data Centers, BGP-SPF and similar routing protocols are
      used to build topology and reachability databases.  These protocols
      need to discover IP Layer-3 attributes of links, such as neighbor IP
      addressing, logical link IP encapsulation abilities, and link
      liveness.  This Layer-3 Discovery and Liveness protocol collects
      these data, which may then be disseminated using BGP-SPF and similar
      protocols.

  "Layer-3 Discovery and Liveness Signing", Randy Bush, Russ Housley, Rob
  Austein, 2021-10-14, <draft-ietf-lsvr-l3dl-signing-03.txt>

      The Layer-3 Discovery and Liveness protocol OPEN PDU may contain a
      public key and a certificate, which can be used to verify signatures
      on subsequent PDUs.  This document describes two mechanisms based on
      digital signatures, one that is Trust On First Use (TOFU), and one
      that uses a trust anchor signture over the public key to provide
      authentication as well as session integrity.

  "L3DL Upper-Layer Protocol Configuration", Randy Bush, Keyur Patel,
  2021-10-14, <draft-ietf-lsvr-l3dl-ulpc-02.txt>

      This document uses the Layer-3 Liveness and Discovery protocol to
      communicate the parameters needed to exchange inter-device Upper
      Layer Protocol Configuration for upper-layer protocols such as the
      BGP family.

Light-Weight Implementation Guidance (lwig)
-------------------------------------------

  "Building Power-Efficient CoAP Devices for Cellular Networks", Jari Arkko,
  Anders Eriksson, Ari Keranen, 2016-01-04, <draft-ietf-lwig-cellular-06.txt>

      This memo discusses the use of the Constrained Application Protocol
      (CoAP) protocol in building sensors and other devices that employ
      cellular networks as a communications medium.  Building communicating
      devices that employ these networks is obviously well known, but this
      memo focuses specifically on techniques necessary to minimize power
      consumption.

  "Alternative Elliptic Curve Representations", Rene Struik, 2022-01-21,
  <draft-ietf-lwig-curve-representations-23.txt,.pdf>

      This document specifies how to represent Montgomery curves and
      (twisted) Edwards curves as curves in short-Weierstrass form and
      illustrates how this can be used to carry out elliptic curve
      computations leveraging existing implementations and specifications
      of, e.g., ECDSA and ECDH using NIST prime curves.  We also provide
      extensive background material that may be useful for implementers of
      elliptic curve cryptography.

  "Minimal IP Encapsulating Security Payload (ESP)", Daniel Migault, Tobias
  Guggemos, 2021-11-08, <draft-ietf-lwig-minimal-esp-08.txt>

      This document describes the minimal properties IP Encapsulating
      Security Payload (ESP) implementation needs to meet to remain
      interoperable with the standard RFC4303 ESP.  Such a minimal version
      of ESP is not intended to become a replacement of the RFC 4303 ESP.
      Instead, a minimal implementation is expected to be optimized for
      constrained environment while remaining interoperable with
      implementations of RFC 4303 ESP.  In addition, this document also
      provides some considerations to implement minimal ESP in a
      constrained environment which includes limiting the number of flash
      writes, handling frequent wakeup / sleep states, limiting wakeup
      time, or reducing the use of random generation.
      
      This document does not update or modify RFC 4303, but provides a
      compact description of how to implement the minimal version of the
      protocol.  RFC 4303 remains the authoritative description.

MAC Address Device Identification for Network and Application Services (madinas)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  "Randomized and Changing MAC Address Use Cases", Jerome Henry, Yiu Lee,
  2022-02-22, <draft-ietf-madinas-use-cases-01.txt>

      To limit the association between a device traffic and its user,
      client vendors have started implementing MAC address rotation.  When
      such rotation happens, some in-network states may break, which may
      affect network efficiency and the user experience.  At the same time,
      devices may continue sending other stable identifiers, defeating the
      MAC rotation purposes.  This document lists various network
      environements and a set of network services that may be affected by
      such rotation.  This document then examines settings and use cases
      where the user experience may be affected by in-network state
      disruption, and settings where other machine identifiers may expose
      the user privacy.  Last, this document examines solutions to maintain
      user privacy while preserving user quality of experience and network
      operation efficiency.

  "MAC address randomization", Juan Zuniga, Carlos Bernardos, Amelia
  Andersdotter, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-ietf-madinas-mac-address-randomization-01.txt>

      Internet privacy has become a major concern over the past few years.
      Users are becoming more aware that their online activity leaves a
      vast digital footprint, that communications are not always properly
      secured, and that their location and actions can be easily tracked.
      One of the main factors for the location tracking issue is the wide
      use of long-lasting identifiers, such as MAC addresses.
      
      There have been several initiatives at the IETF and the IEEE 802
      standards committees to overcome some of these privacy issues.  This
      document provides an overview of these activities, with the intention
      to inform the technical community about them, and help coordinate
      between present and future standardization activities.

Mobile Ad-hoc Networks (manet)
------------------------------

  "DLEP DiffServ Aware Credit Window Extension", Bow-Nan Cheng, David
  Wiggins, Lou Berger, 2022-02-24,
  <draft-ietf-manet-dlep-da-credit-extension-13.txt>

      This document defines an extension to the Dynamic Link Exchange
      Protocol (DLEP) that enables a DiffServ aware credit-window scheme
      for destination-specific and shared flow control.

  "DLEP Credit-Based Flow Control Messages and Data Items", Bow-Nan Cheng,
  David Wiggins, Lou Berger, Stan Ratliff, 2022-02-24,
  <draft-ietf-manet-dlep-credit-flow-control-10.txt>

      This document defines new Dynamic Link Exchange Protocol (DLEP) Data
      Items that are used to support credit-based flow control.  Credit
      window control is used to regulate when data may be sent to an
      associated virtual or physical queue.  The Data Items are defined in
      an extensible and reusable fashion.  Their use will be mandated in
      other documents defining specific DLEP extensions.

  "DLEP Traffic Classification Data Item", Bow-Nan Cheng, David Wiggins, Lou
  Berger, 2022-02-24, <draft-ietf-manet-dlep-traffic-classification-07.txt>

      This document defines a new Dynamic Link Exchange Protocol (DLEP)
      Data Item that is used to support traffic classification.  Traffic
      classification information is used to identify traffic flows based on
      frame/packet content such as destination address.  The Data Item is
      defined in an extensible and reusable fashion.  Its use will be
      mandated in other documents defining specific DLEP extensions.  This
      document also introduces DLEP Sub-Data Items, and Sub-Data Items are
      defined to support DiffServ and Ethernet traffic classification.

  "DLEP IEEE 802.1Q Aware Credit Window Extension", David Wiggins, Lou
  Berger, 2022-02-24, <draft-ietf-manet-dlep-ether-credit-extension-01.txt>

      This document defines an extension to the Dynamic Link Exchange
      Protocol (DLEP) that enables a Ethernet IEEE 802.1Q aware credit-
      window scheme for destination-specific and shared flow control.

Multiplexed Application Substrate over QUIC Encryption (masque)
---------------------------------------------------------------

  "UDP Proxying Support for HTTP", David Schinazi, 2022-03-04,
  <draft-ietf-masque-connect-udp-07.txt>

      This document describes how to proxy UDP over HTTP.  Similar to how
      the CONNECT method allows proxying TCP over HTTP, this document
      defines a new mechanism to proxy UDP.  It is built using HTTP
      Extended CONNECT.

  "Using Datagrams with HTTP", David Schinazi, Lucas Pardue, 2022-03-04,
  <draft-ietf-masque-h3-datagram-06.txt>

      The QUIC DATAGRAM extension provides application protocols running
      over QUIC with a mechanism to send unreliable data while leveraging
      the security and congestion-control properties of QUIC.  However,
      QUIC DATAGRAM frames do not provide a means to demultiplex
      application contexts.  This document describes how to use QUIC
      DATAGRAM frames with HTTP/3 by association with HTTP requests.
      Additionally, this document defines the Capsule Protocol that can
      convey datagrams over prior versions of HTTP.

  "IP Proxying Support for HTTP", Tommy Pauly, David Schinazi, Alex
  Chernyakhovsky, Mirja Kuehlewind, Magnus Westerlund, 2022-03-04,
  <draft-ietf-masque-connect-ip-01.txt>

      This document describes a method of proxying IP packets over HTTP.
      This protocol is similar to CONNECT-UDP, but allows transmitting
      arbitrary IP packets, without being limited to just TCP like CONNECT
      or UDP like CONNECT-UDP.

MBONE Deployment (mboned)
-------------------------

  "Multicast YANG Data Model", Zheng Zhang, Cui(Linda) Wang, Ying Cheng,
  Xufeng Liu, Mahesh Sivakumar, 2022-02-28,
  <draft-ietf-mboned-multicast-yang-model-06.txt>

      This document provides a general multicast YANG data model, which
      takes full advantages of existed multicast protocol models to control
      the multicast network, and guides the deployment of multicast
      service.

  "Asymmetric Manifest Based Integrity", Jake Holland, Kyle Rose, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-ietf-mboned-ambi-03.txt>

      This document defines Asymmetric Manifest-Based Integrity (AMBI).
      AMBI allows each receiver or forwarder of a stream of multicast
      packets to check the integrity of the contents of each packet in the
      data stream.  AMBI operates by passing cryptographically verifiable
      hashes of the data packets inside manifest messages, and sending the
      manifests over authenticated out-of-band communication channels.

  "Discovery Of Restconf Metadata for Source-specific multicast", Jake
  Holland, 2022-03-07, <draft-ietf-mboned-dorms-04.txt>

      This document defines DORMS (Discovery Of Restconf Metadata for
      Source-specific multicast), a method to discover and retrieve
      extensible metadata about source-specific multicast channels using
      RESTCONF.  The reverse IP DNS zone for a multicast sender's IP
      address is configured to use SRV resource records to advertise the
      hostname of a RESTCONF server that publishes metadata according to a
      new YANG module with support for extensions.  A new service name and
      the new YANG module are defined.

  "Circuit Breaker Assisted Congestion Control", Jake Holland, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-ietf-mboned-cbacc-04.txt>

      This document specifies Circuit Breaker Assisted Congestion Control
      (CBACC).  CBACC enables fast-trip Circuit Breakers by publishing rate
      metadata about multicast channels from senders to intermediate
      network nodes or receivers.  The circuit breaker behavior is defined
      as a supplement to receiver driven congestion control systems, to
      preserve network health if misbehaving or malicious receiver
      applications subscribe to a volume of traffic that exceeds capacity
      policies or capability for a network or receiving device.

  "Multicast Network Address Translation", Jake Holland, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-ietf-mboned-mnat-01.txt>

      This document defines a method for a network to maintain Network
      Address Translation address mappings for the transport of globally
      addressed multicast traffic within a network that can't otherwise
      forward the globally addressed traffic.  A new Multicast Network
      Address Translation (MNAT) service is defined to communicate the
      address mappings to ingress and egress points within the network, and
      considerations for operation of the MNAT service are described.

  "Multicast On-path Telemetry Solutions", Haoyu Song, Mike McBride, Greg
  Mirsky, Gyan Mishra, Hitoshi Asaeda, Tianran Zhou, 2022-01-04,
  <draft-ietf-mboned-multicast-telemetry-02.txt>

      This document discusses the requirement of on-path telemetry for
      multicast traffic.  The existing solutions are examined and their
      issues are identified.  Solution modifications are proposed to allow
      the original multicast tree to be correctly reconstructed without
      unnecessary replication of telemetry information.

Media Type Maintenance (mediaman)
---------------------------------

  "The 'haptics' Top-level Media Type", Yeshwant Muthusamy, Chris Ullrich,
  2021-11-19, <draft-ietf-mediaman-haptics-00.txt>

      This memo serves to register and document the 'haptics' top-level
      media type, under which subtypes for representation formats for
      haptics may be registered.  This document also serves as a
      registration application for a set of intended subtypes, which are
      representative of some existing subtypes already in use.

  "Media Types with Multiple Suffixes", Manu Sporny, Amy Guy, 2022-02-21,
  <draft-ietf-mediaman-suffixes-01.txt>

      This document updates RFC 6838 "Media Type Specifications and
      Registration Procedures" to describe how to interpret subtypes with
      multiple suffixes.

Messaging Layer Security (mls)
------------------------------

  "The Messaging Layer Security (MLS) Protocol", Richard Barnes, Benjamin
  Beurdouche, Raphael Robert, Jon Millican, Emad Omara, Katriel Cohn-Gordon,
  2022-03-07, <draft-ietf-mls-protocol-13.txt>

      Messaging applications are increasingly making use of end-to-end
      security mechanisms to ensure that messages are only accessible to
      the communicating endpoints, and not to any servers involved in
      delivering messages.  Establishing keys to provide such protections
      is challenging for group chat settings, in which more than two
      clients need to agree on a key but may not be online at the same
      time.  In this document, we specify a key establishment protocol that
      provides efficient asynchronous group key establishment with forward
      secrecy and post-compromise security for groups in size ranging from
      two to thousands.

  "The Messaging Layer Security (MLS) Architecture", Benjamin Beurdouche,
  Eric Rescorla, Emad Omara, Srinivas Inguva, Albert Kwon, Alan Duric,
  2021-10-04, <draft-ietf-mls-architecture-07.txt>

      The Messaging Layer Security (MLS) protocol [MLSPROTO] document has
      the role of defining a Group Key Agreement, all the necessary
      cryptographic operations, and serialization/deserialization functions
      necessary to create a scalable and secure group messaging protocol.
      The MLS protocol is meant to protect against eavesdropping,
      tampering, message forgery, and provide good properties such as
      forward-secrecy (FS) and post-compromise security (PCS) in the case
      of past or future device compromises.
      
      This document, on the other hand is intended to describe a general
      secure group messaging infrastructure and its security goals.  It
      provides guidance on building a group messaging system and discusses
      security and privacy tradeoffs offered by multiple security mechanism
      that are part of the MLS protocol (ie. frequency of public encryption
      key rotation).
      
      The document also extends the guidance to parts of the infrastructure
      that are not standardized by the MLS Protocol document and left to
      the application or the infrastructure architects to design.
      
      While the recommendations of this document are not mandatory to
      follow in order to interoperate at the protocol level, most will
      vastly influence the overall security guarantees that are achieved by
      the overall messaging system.  This is especially true in case of
      active adversaries that are able to compromise clients, the delivery
      service or the authentication service.

Multiparty Multimedia Session Control (mmusic)
----------------------------------------------

  "Using Multicast DNS to protect privacy when exposing ICE candidates",
  Youenn Fablet, Justin Uberti, Jeroen De Borst, Qingsi Wang, 2021-12-06,
  <draft-ietf-mmusic-mdns-ice-candidates-03.txt>

      WebRTC applications collect ICE candidates as part of the process of
      creating peer-to-peer connections.  To maximize the probability of a
      direct peer-to-peer connection, the endpoint's local IP addresses are
      included in this candidate collection.  However, these addresses are
      typically private and, as such, their disclosure has privacy
      implications.  This document describes a privacy-preserving way to
      share local IP addresses with other endpoints by concealing the
      addresses with dynamically generated Multicast DNS (mDNS) names.

Media OPerationS (mops)
-----------------------

  "Operational Considerations for Streaming Media", Jake Holland, Ali Begen,
  Spencer Dawkins, 2022-03-01, <draft-ietf-mops-streaming-opcons-09.txt>

      This document provides an overview of operational networking issues
      that pertain to quality of experience when streaming video and other
      high-bitrate media over the Internet.

  "Media Operations Use Case for an Augmented Reality Application on Edge
  Computing Infrastructure", Renan Krishna, Akbar Rahman, 2022-03-06,
  <draft-ietf-mops-ar-use-case-04.txt>

      This document explores the issues involved in the use of Edge
      Computing resources to operationalize media use cases that involve
      Extended Reality (XR) applications.  In particular, we discuss those
      applications that run on devices having different form factors and
      need Edge computing resources to mitigate the effect of problems such
      as a need to support interactive communication requiring low latency,
      limited battery power, and heat dissipation from those devices.  The
      intended audience for this document are network operators who are
      interested in providing edge computing resources to operationalize
      the requirements of such applications.

Multiprotocol Label Switching (mpls)
------------------------------------

  "Bidirectional Forwarding Detection (BFD) Directed Return Path for MPLS
  Label Switched Paths (LSPs)", Greg Mirsky, Jeff Tantsura, Ilya Varlashkin,
  Mach Chen, 2022-02-14, <draft-ietf-mpls-bfd-directed-19.txt>

      Bidirectional Forwarding Detection (BFD) is expected to be able to
      monitor a wide variety of encapsulations of paths between systems.
      When a BFD session monitors an explicitly routed unidirectional path
      there may be a need to direct egress BFD peer to use a specific path
      for the reverse direction of the BFD session.

  "Refresh-interval Independent FRR Facility Protection", Chandrasekar R,
  Tarek Saad, Ina Minei, Dante Pacella, 2021-12-19,
  <draft-ietf-mpls-ri-rsvp-frr-12.txt>

      RSVP-TE Fast ReRoute extensions specified in RFC 4090 defines two
      local repair techniques to reroute Label Switched Path (LSP) traffic
      over pre-established backup tunnel.  Facility backup method allows
      one or more LSPs traversing a connected link or node to be protected
      using a bypass tunnel.  The many-to-one nature of local repair
      technique is attractive from scalability point of view.  This
      document enumerates facility backup procedures in RFC 4090 that rely
      on refresh timeout and hence make facility backup method refresh-
      interval dependent.  The RSVP-TE extensions defined in this document
      will enhance the facility backup protection mechanism by making the
      corresponding procedures refresh-interval independent and hence
      compatible with Refresh-interval Independent RSVP (RI-RSVP) specified
      in RFC 8370.  Hence, this document updates RFC 4090 in order to
      support RI-RSVP capability specified in RFC 8370.

  "YANG Data Model for MPLS mLDP", Syed Raza, Xufeng Liu, Santosh Esale, Loa
  Andersson, Jeff Tantsura, Sowmya Krishnaswamy, 2021-11-11,
  <draft-ietf-mpls-mldp-yang-10.txt>

      This document describes a YANG data model for the Multiprotocol Label
      Switching (MPLS) Multipoint Label Distribution Protocol (mLDP).  The
      mLDP YANG data model augments the MPLS LDP YANG data model.
      
      The YANG modules in this document conform to the Network Management
      Datastore Architecture (NMDA).

  "RFC6374 Synonymous Flow Labels", Stewart Bryant, George Swallow, Mach
  Chen, Giuseppe Fioccola, Greg Mirsky, 2021-03-05,
  <draft-ietf-mpls-rfc6374-sfl-10.txt>

      RFC 6374 describes methods of making loss and delay measurements on
      Label Switched Paths (LSPs) primarily as used in MPLS Transport
      Profile (MPLS-TP) networks.  This document describes a method of
      extending RFC 6374 performance measurements from flows carried over
      MPLS-TP to flows carried over generic MPLS LSPs.  In particular, it
      extends the technique to allow loss and delay measurements to be made
      on multi-point to point LSPs and introduces some additional
      techniques to allow more sophisticated measurements to be made in
      both MPLS-TP and generic MPLS networks.

  "OSPFv3 CodePoint for MPLS LSP Ping", Nagendra Nainar, Carlos Pignataro,
  Mustapha Aissaoui, 2021-11-18,
  <draft-ietf-mpls-lsp-ping-ospfv3-codepoint-06.txt>

      IANA has created "Protocol in the Segment ID Sub-TLV" and "Protocol
      in the Label Stack Sub-TLV of the Downstream Detailed Mapping TLV"
      registries under the "Multi-Protocol Label Switching (MPLS) Label
      Switched Paths (LSPs) Ping Parameters" registry.  RFC8287 defines the
      code points for Open Shortest Path First (OSPF) and Intermediate
      System to Intermediate System (IS-IS) protocols.
      
      This document specifies the code point to be used in the Segment ID
      sub-TLV and Downstream Detailed Mapping TLV when the Interior Gateway
      Protocol (IGP) is OSPFv3.  This document also updates RFC8287 by
      clarifying that the existing "OSPF" code point is to be used only to
      indicate OSPFv2, and by defining the behavior when the Segment ID
      sub-TLV indicates the use of IPv6.

  "Label Switched Path (LSP) Ping/Traceroute for Segment Routing (SR) Egress
  Peer Engineering Segment Identifiers (SIDs) with MPLS Data Planes",
  Shraddha Hegde, Kapil Arora, Mukul Srivastava, Samson Ninan, Xiaohu Xu,
  2021-11-08, <draft-ietf-mpls-sr-epe-oam-04.txt>

      Egress Peer Engineering (EPE) is an application of Segment Routing to
      Solve the problem of egress peer selection.  The Segment Routing
      based BGP-EPE solution allows a centralized controller, e.g. a
      Software Defined Network (SDN) controller to program any egress peer.
      The EPE solution requires a node to program the PeerNode Segment
      Identifier(SID) describing a session between two nodes, the PeerAdj
      SID describing the link (one or more) that is used by sessions
      between peer nodes, and the PeerSet SID describing an arbitrary set
      of sessions or links between a local node and its peers.  This
      document provides new sub-TLVs for EPE Segment Identifiers (SID) that
      would be used in the MPLS Target stack TLV (Type 1), in MPLS Ping and
      Traceroute procedures.

  "Performance Measurement Using RFC 6374 for Segment Routing Networks with
  MPLS Data Plane", Rakesh Gandhi, Clarence Filsfils, Dan Voyer, Stefano
  Salsano, Mach Chen, 2022-02-28, <draft-ietf-mpls-rfc6374-sr-05.txt>

      Segment Routing (SR) leverages the source routing paradigm.  RFC 6374
      specifies protocol mechanisms to enable the efficient and accurate
      measurement of packet loss, one-way and two-way delay, as well as
      related metrics such as delay variation in MPLS networks.  This
      document utilizes these mechanisms for Performance Delay and Loss
      Measurements in SR networks with MPLS data plane (SR-MPLS), for both
      SR-MPLS links and end-to-end SR-MPLS paths including Policies.  In
      addition, this document defines Return Path TLV and Block Number TLV
      extensions for RFC 6374.

  "A Simple Control Protocol for MPLS SFLs", Stewart Bryant, George Swallow,
  Siva Sivabalan, 2022-01-21, <draft-ietf-mpls-sfl-control-02.txt>

      In RFC 8957 the concept of MPLS synonymos flow labels (SFL) was
      introduced.  This document describes a simple control protocol that
      runs over an associated control header to request, withdraw, and
      extend the lifetime of such labels.  It is not the only control
      protocol that might be used to support SFL, but it has the benefit of
      being able to be used without modifying of the existing MPLS control
      protocols.  The existence of this design is not intended to restrict
      the ability to enhance an existing MPLS control protocol to add a
      similar capability.
      
      A Querier MUST wait a configured time (suggested wait of 60 seconds)
      before re-attempting a Withdraw request.  No more than three Withdraw
      requests SHOULD be made.  These restrictions are to prevent
      overloading the control plane of the actioning router.

  "Encapsulation For MPLS Performance Measurement with Alternate Marking
  Method", Weiqiang Cheng, Xiao Min, Tianran Zhou, Ximing Dong, Yoav Peleg,
  2021-10-25, <draft-ietf-mpls-inband-pm-encapsulation-02.txt>

      This document defines the encapsulation for MPLS performance
      measurement with alternate marking method, which performs flow-based
      packet loss, delay, and jitter measurements on live traffic.

  "Egress TLV for Nil FEC in Label Switched Path Ping and Traceroute
  Mechanisms", Deepti Rathi, Kapil Arora, Shraddha Hegde, Zafar Ali, Nagendra
  Nainar, 2021-12-06, <draft-ietf-mpls-egress-tlv-for-nil-fec-03.txt>

      MPLS ping and traceroute mechanism as described in RFC 8029 and
      related extensions for SR as defined in RFC 8287 is very useful to
      precisely validate the control plane and data plane synchronization.
      There is a possibility that all intermediate or transit nodes may not
      have been upgraded to support these validation procedures.  A simple
      mpls ping and traceroute mechanism comprises of ability to traverse
      any path without having to validate the control plane state.  RFC
      8029 supports this mechanism with Nil FEC.  The procedures described
      in RFC 8029 are mostly applicable when the Nil FEC is used as
      intermediate FEC in the label stack.  When all labels in label stack
      are represented using single Nil FEC, it poses some challenges.
      
      This document introduces new TLV as additional extension to exisiting
      Nil FEC and describes mpls ping and traceroute procedures using Nil
      FEC with this additional extensions to overcome these challenges.

  "PMS/Head-end based MPLS Ping and Traceroute in Inter-domain SR Networks",
  Shraddha Hegde, Kapil Arora, Mukul Srivastava, Samson Ninan, Nagendra
  Nainar, 2021-12-13, <draft-ietf-mpls-spring-inter-domain-oam-02.txt>

      Segment Routing (SR) architecture leverages source routing and
      tunneling paradigms and can be directly applied to the use of a
      Multiprotocol Label Switching (MPLS) data plane.  A network may
      consist of multiple IGP domains or multiple ASes under the control of
      same organization.  It is useful to have the Label switched Path
      (LSP) Ping and traceroute procedures when an SR end-to-end path spans
      across multiple ASes or domains.  This document describes mechanisms
      to facilitae LSP ping and traceroute in inter-AS/inter-domain SR-MPLS
      networks in an efficient manner with simple Operations,
      Administration, and Maintenance (OAM) protocol extension which uses
      dataplane forwarding alone for sending echo reply.

  "BFD for Multipoint Networks over Point-to-Multi-Point MPLS LSP", Greg
  Mirsky, Gyan Mishra, Donald Eastlake, 2022-02-10,
  <draft-ietf-mpls-p2mp-bfd-01.txt>

      This document describes procedures for using Bidirectional Forwarding
      Detection (BFD) for multipoint networks to detect data plane failures
      in Multiprotocol Label Switching (MPLS) point-to-multipoint (p2mp)
      Label Switched Paths (LSPs) and Segment Routing (SR) point-to-
      multipoint policies with SR-MPLS data plane.
      
      It also describes the applicability of LSP Ping, as in-band, and the
      control plane, as out-band, solutions to bootstrap a BFD session.
      
      It also describes the behavior of the active tail for head
      notification.

Network Configuration (netconf)
-------------------------------

  "YANG Groupings for TLS Clients and TLS Servers", Kent Watsen, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-ietf-netconf-tls-client-server-27.txt>

      This document defines three YANG 1.1 modules: the first defines
      features and groupings common to both TLS clients and TLS servers,
      the second defines a grouping for a generic TLS client, and the third
      defines a grouping for a generic TLS server.
      
      Editorial Note (To be removed by RFC Editor)
      
      This draft contains placeholder values that need to be replaced with
      finalized values at the time of publication.  This note summarizes
      all of the substitutions that are needed.  No other RFC Editor
      instructions are specified elsewhere in this document.
      
      Artwork in this document contains shorthand references to drafts in
      progress.  Please apply the following replacements:
      
      *  AAAA --> the assigned RFC value for draft-ietf-netconf-crypto-
      types
      
      *  BBBB --> the assigned RFC value for draft-ietf-netconf-trust-
      anchors
      
      *  CCCC --> the assigned RFC value for draft-ietf-netconf-keystore
      
      *  DDDD --> the assigned RFC value for draft-ietf-netconf-tcp-client-
      server
      
      *  FFFF --> the assigned RFC value for this draft
      
      Artwork in this document contains placeholder values for the date of
      publication of this draft.  Please apply the following replacement:
      
      *  2022-03-07 --> the publication date of this draft
      
      The following Appendix section is to be removed prior to publication:
      
      *  Appendix B.  Change Log

  "RESTCONF Client and Server Models", Kent Watsen, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-ietf-netconf-restconf-client-server-25.txt>

      This document defines two YANG modules, one module to configure a
      RESTCONF client and the other module to configure a RESTCONF server.
      Both modules support the TLS transport protocol with both standard
      RESTCONF and RESTCONF Call Home connections.
      
      Editorial Note (To be removed by RFC Editor)
      
      This draft contains placeholder values that need to be replaced with
      finalized values at the time of publication.  This note summarizes
      all of the substitutions that are needed.  No other RFC Editor
      instructions are specified elsewhere in this document.
      
      Artwork in this document contains shorthand references to drafts in
      progress.  Please apply the following replacements (note: not all may
      be present):
      
      *  AAAA --> the assigned RFC value for draft-ietf-netconf-crypto-
      types
      
      *  BBBB --> the assigned RFC value for draft-ietf-netconf-trust-
      anchors
      
      *  CCCC --> the assigned RFC value for draft-ietf-netconf-keystore
      
      *  DDDD --> the assigned RFC value for draft-ietf-netconf-tcp-client-
      server
      
      *  EEEE --> the assigned RFC value for draft-ietf-netconf-ssh-client-
      server
      
      *  FFFF --> the assigned RFC value for draft-ietf-netconf-tls-client-
      server
      
      *  GGGG --> the assigned RFC value for draft-ietf-netconf-http-
      client-server
      
      *  HHHH --> the assigned RFC value for draft-ietf-netconf-netconf-
      client-server
      
      *  IIII --> the assigned RFC value for this draft
      
      Artwork in this document contains placeholder values for the date of
      publication of this draft.  Please apply the following replacement:
      
      *  2022-03-07 --> the publication date of this draft
      
      The following Appendix section is to be removed prior to publication:
      
      *  Appendix A.  Change Log

  "YANG Groupings for SSH Clients and SSH Servers", Kent Watsen, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-ietf-netconf-ssh-client-server-27.txt>

      This document defines three YANG 1.1 modules: the first defines
      features and groupings common to both SSH clients and SSH servers,
      the second defines a grouping for a generic SSH client, and the third
      defines a grouping for a generic SSH server.
      
      Editorial Note (To be removed by RFC Editor)
      
      This draft contains placeholder values that need to be replaced with
      finalized values at the time of publication.  This note summarizes
      all of the substitutions that are needed.  No other RFC Editor
      instructions are specified elsewhere in this document.
      
      Artwork in this document contains shorthand references to drafts in
      progress.  Please apply the following replacements:
      
      *  AAAA --> the assigned RFC value for draft-ietf-netconf-crypto-
      types
      
      *  BBBB --> the assigned RFC value for draft-ietf-netconf-trust-
      anchors
      
      *  CCCC --> the assigned RFC value for draft-ietf-netconf-keystore
      
      *  DDDD --> the assigned RFC value for draft-ietf-netconf-tcp-client-
      server
      
      *  EEEE --> the assigned RFC value for this draft
      
      Artwork in this document contains placeholder values for the date of
      publication of this draft.  Please apply the following replacement:
      
      *  2022-03-07 --> the publication date of this draft
      
      The following Appendix section is to be removed prior to publication:
      
      *  Appendix B.  Change Log

  "NETCONF Client and Server Models", Kent Watsen, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-ietf-netconf-netconf-client-server-25.txt>

      This document defines two YANG modules, one module to configure a
      NETCONF client and the other module to configure a NETCONF server.
      Both modules support both the SSH and TLS transport protocols, and
      support both standard NETCONF and NETCONF Call Home connections.
      
      Editorial Note (To be removed by RFC Editor)
      
      This draft contains placeholder values that need to be replaced with
      finalized values at the time of publication.  This note summarizes
      all of the substitutions that are needed.  No other RFC Editor
      instructions are specified elsewhere in this document.
      
      Artwork in this document contains shorthand references to drafts in
      progress.  Please apply the following replacements (note: not all may
      be present):
      
      *  AAAA --> the assigned RFC value for draft-ietf-netconf-crypto-
      types
      
      *  BBBB --> the assigned RFC value for draft-ietf-netconf-trust-
      anchors
      
      *  CCCC --> the assigned RFC value for draft-ietf-netconf-keystore
      
      *  DDDD --> the assigned RFC value for draft-ietf-netconf-tcp-client-
      server
      
      *  EEEE --> the assigned RFC value for draft-ietf-netconf-ssh-client-
      server
      
      *  FFFF --> the assigned RFC value for draft-ietf-netconf-tls-client-
      server
      
      *  GGGG --> the assigned RFC value for draft-ietf-netconf-http-
      client-server
      
      *  HHHH --> the assigned RFC value for this draft
      Artwork in this document contains placeholder values for the date of
      publication of this draft.  Please apply the following replacement:
      
      *  2022-03-07 --> the publication date of this draft
      
      The following Appendix section is to be removed prior to publication:
      
      *  Appendix A.  Change Log

  "A YANG Data Model for a Keystore", Kent Watsen, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-ietf-netconf-keystore-24.txt>

      This document defines a YANG module called "ietf-keystore" that
      enables centralized configuration of both symmetric and asymmetric
      keys.  The secret value for both key types may be encrypted or
      hidden.  Asymmetric keys may be associated with certificates.
      Notifications are sent when certificates are about to expire.
      
      Editorial Note (To be removed by RFC Editor)
      
      This draft contains placeholder values that need to be replaced with
      finalized values at the time of publication.  This note summarizes
      all of the substitutions that are needed.  No other RFC Editor
      instructions are specified elsewhere in this document.
      
      Artwork in this document contains shorthand references to drafts in
      progress.  Please apply the following replacements:
      
      *  AAAA --> the assigned RFC value for draft-ietf-netconf-crypto-
      types
      
      *  CCCC --> the assigned RFC value for this draft
      
      Artwork in this document contains placeholder values for the date of
      publication of this draft.  Please apply the following replacement:
      
      *  2022-03-07 --> the publication date of this draft
      
      The following Appendix section is to be removed prior to publication:
      
      *  Appendix A.  Change Log

  "YANG Data Types and Groupings for Cryptography", Kent Watsen, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-ietf-netconf-crypto-types-22.txt>

      This document presents a YANG 1.1 (RFC 7950) module defining
      identities, typedefs, and groupings useful to cryptographic
      applications.

  "A YANG Data Model for a Truststore", Kent Watsen, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-ietf-netconf-trust-anchors-17.txt>

      This document defines a YANG module for configuring bags of
      certificates and bags of public keys that can be referenced by other
      data models for trust.  Notifications are sent when certificates are
      about to expire.
      
      Editorial Note (To be removed by RFC Editor)
      
      This draft contains placeholder values that need to be replaced with
      finalized values at the time of publication.  This note summarizes
      all of the substitutions that are needed.  No other RFC Editor
      instructions are specified elsewhere in this document.
      
      Artwork in this document contains shorthand references to drafts in
      progress.  Please apply the following replacements:
      
      *  AAAA --> the assigned RFC value for draft-ietf-netconf-crypto-
      types
      
      *  BBBB --> the assigned RFC value for this draft
      
      Artwork in this document contains placeholder values for the date of
      publication of this draft.  Please apply the following replacement:
      
      *  2022-03-07 --> the publication date of this draft
      
      The following Appendix section is to be removed prior to publication:
      
      *  Appendix A.  Change Log

  "YANG Groupings for TCP Clients and TCP Servers", Kent Watsen, Michael
  Scharf, 2022-03-07, <draft-ietf-netconf-tcp-client-server-12.txt>

      This document defines three YANG 1.1 modules to support the
      configuration of TCP clients and TCP servers.  The modules include
      basic parameters of a TCP connection relevant for client or server
      applications, as well as client configuration required for traversing
      proxies.  The modules can be used either standalone or in conjunction
      with configuration of other stack protocol layers.

  "An HTTPS-based Transport for YANG Notifications", Mahesh Jethanandani,
  Kent Watsen, 2021-10-24, <draft-ietf-netconf-https-notif-09.txt>

      This document defines a protocol for sending notifications over
      HTTPS.  YANG modules for configuring publishers are also defined.
      Examples are provided illustrating how to configure various
      publishers.
      
      This document requires that the publisher is a "server" (e.g., a
      NETCONF or RESTCONF server), but does not assume that the receiver is
      a server.

  "YANG Groupings for HTTP Clients and HTTP Servers", Kent Watsen,
  2022-03-07, <draft-ietf-netconf-http-client-server-09.txt>

      This document defines two YANG modules: the first defines a minimal
      grouping for configuring an HTTP client, and the second defines a
      minimal grouping for configuring an HTTP server.  It is intended that
      these groupings will be used to help define the configuration for
      simple HTTP-based protocols (not for complete web servers or
      browsers).
      
      Editorial Note (To be removed by RFC Editor)
      
      This draft contains placeholder values that need to be replaced with
      finalized values at the time of publication.  This note summarizes
      all of the substitutions that are needed.  No other RFC Editor
      instructions are specified elsewhere in this document.
      
      Artwork in this document contains shorthand references to drafts in
      progress.  Please apply the following replacements (note: not all may
      be present):
      
      *  AAAA --> the assigned RFC value for draft-ietf-netconf-crypto-
      types
      
      *  DDDD --> the assigned RFC value for draft-ietf-netconf-tcp-client-
      server
      
      *  FFFF --> the assigned RFC value for draft-ietf-netconf-tls-client-
      server
      
      *  GGGG --> the assigned RFC value for this draft
      
      Artwork in this document contains placeholder values for the date of
      publication of this draft.  Please apply the following replacement:
      
      *  2022-03-07 --> the publication date of this draft
      
      The following Appendix section is to be removed prior to publication:
      
      *  Appendix A.  Change Log

  "Conveying a Certificate Signing Request (CSR) in a Secure Zero Touch
  Provisioning (SZTP) Bootstrapping Request", Kent Watsen, Russ Housley, Sean
  Turner, 2022-03-02, <draft-ietf-netconf-sztp-csr-14.txt>

      This draft extends the input to the "get-bootstrapping-data" RPC
      defined in RFC 8572 to include an optional certificate signing
      request (CSR), enabling a bootstrapping device to additionally obtain
      an identity certificate (e.g., an LDevID from IEEE 802.1AR) as part
      of the "onboarding information" response provided in the RPC-reply.

  "Subscription to Distributed Notifications", Tianran Zhou, Guangying Zheng,
  Eric Voit, Thomas Graf, Pierre Francois, 2022-01-10,
  <draft-ietf-netconf-distributed-notif-03.txt>

      This document describes extensions to the YANG notifications
      subscription to allow metrics being published directly from
      processors on line cards to target receivers, while subscription is
      still maintained at the route processor in a distributed forwarding
      system.

  "UDP-based Transport for Configured Subscriptions", Guangying Zheng,
  Tianran Zhou, Thomas Graf, Pierre Francois, Alex Feng, Paolo Lucente,
  2022-03-04, <draft-ietf-netconf-udp-notif-05.txt>

      This document describes an UDP-based notification mechanism to
      collect data from networking devices.  A shim header is proposed to
      facilitate the data streaming directly from the publishing process on
      network processor of line cards to receivers.  The objective is to
      provide a lightweight approach to enable higher frequency and less
      performance impact on publisher and receiver processes compared to
      already established notification mechanisms.

Network Modeling (netmod)
-------------------------

  "YANG Module Versioning Requirements", Joe Clarke, 2022-01-06,
  <draft-ietf-netmod-yang-versioning-reqs-06.txt>

      This document describes the problems that can arise because of the
      YANG language module update rules, that require all updates to YANG
      module preserve strict backwards compatibility.  It also defines the
      requirements on any solution designed to solve the stated problems.
      This document does not consider possible solutions, nor endorse any
      particular solution.

  "Common YANG Data Types", Juergen Schoenwaelder, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-ietf-netmod-rfc6991-bis-12.txt>

      This document defines a collection of common data types to be used
      with the YANG data modeling language.  This document obsoletes RFC
      6991.

  "Updated YANG Module Revision Handling", Robert Wilton, Reshad Rahman,
  Balazs Lengyel, Joe Clarke, Jason Sterne, 2021-11-08,
  <draft-ietf-netmod-yang-module-versioning-05.txt>

      This document specifies a new YANG module update procedure that can
      document when non-backwards-compatible changes have occurred during
      the evolution of a YANG module.  It extends the YANG import statement
      with an earliest revision filter to better represent inter-module
      dependencies.  It provides guidelines for managing the lifecycle of
      YANG modules and individual schema nodes.  It provides a mechanism,
      via the revision-label YANG extension, to specify a revision
      identifier for YANG modules and submodules.  This document updates
      RFC 7950, RFC 6020, RFC 8407 and RFC 8525.

  "YANG Packages", Robert Wilton, Reshad Rahman, Joe Clarke, Jason Sterne, Bo
  Wu, 2022-03-04, <draft-ietf-netmod-yang-packages-03.txt>

      This document defines YANG packages; a versioned organizational
      structure used to manage schema and conformance of YANG modules as a
      cohesive set instead of individually.
      
      It describes how packages: are represented on a server, can be
      defined in offline YANG instance data files, and can be used to
      define the content schema associated with YANG instance data files.

  "YANG Semantic Versioning", Joe Clarke, Robert Wilton, Reshad Rahman,
  Balazs Lengyel, Jason Sterne, Benoit Claise, 2021-11-30,
  <draft-ietf-netmod-yang-semver-06.txt>

      This document specifies a scheme and guidelines for applying an
      extended set of semantic versioning rules to revisions of YANG
      artifacts (e.g., modules and packages).  Additionally, this document
      defines an RFCAAAA-compliant revision-label-scheme for this YANG
      semantic versioning scheme.

  "Self-Describing Data Object Tags in YANG Data Models", Qin WU, Benoit
  Claise, Peng Liu, Zongpeng Du, Mohamed Boucadair, 2022-02-21,
  <draft-ietf-netmod-node-tags-06.txt>

      This document defines a method to tag data objects that are
      associated with operation and management data in YANG modules.  This
      method for tagging YANG data objects is meant to be used for
      classifying data objects from different YANG modules and identifying
      their characteristics data.  Tags may be registered as well as
      assigned during the module definition, assigned by implementations,
      or dynamically defined and set by users.
      
      This document also provides guidance to future YANG data model
      writers; as such, this document updates RFC 8407.

Network File System Version 4 (nfsv4)
-------------------------------------

  "Towards Remote Procedure Call Encryption By Default", Trond Myklebust,
  Chuck Lever, 2020-11-23, <draft-ietf-nfsv4-rpc-tls-11.txt>

      This document describes a mechanism that, through the use of
      opportunistic Transport Layer Security (TLS), enables encryption of
      Remote Procedure Call (RPC) transactions while they are in-transit.
      The proposed mechanism interoperates with ONC RPC implementations
      that do not support it.  This document updates RFC 5531.

  "RPC-over-RDMA Version 2 Protocol", Chuck Lever, David Noveck, 2022-01-02,
  <draft-ietf-nfsv4-rpcrdma-version-two-06.txt>

      This document specifies the second version of a transport protocol
      that conveys Remote Procedure Call (RPC) messages using Remote Direct
      Memory Access (RDMA).  This version of the protocol is extensible.

  "Network File System (NFS) Upper-Layer Binding To RPC-Over-RDMA Version 2",
  Chuck Lever, 2021-11-16, <draft-ietf-nfsv4-nfs-ulb-v2-06.txt>

      This document specifies Upper-Layer Bindings of Network File System
      (NFS) protocol versions to RPC-over-RDMA version 2.

  "Internationalization for the NFSv4 Protocols", David Noveck, 2021-09-26,
  <draft-ietf-nfsv4-internationalization-01.txt>

      This document describes the handling of internationalization for all
      NFSv4 protocols, including NFSv4.0, NFSv4.1, NFSv4.2 and extensions
      thereof, and future minor versions.
      
      It updates RFC7530 and RFC8881.

Network Management (nmrg)
-------------------------

  "Intent-Based Networking - Concepts and Definitions", Alexander Clemm,
  Laurent Ciavaglia, Lisandro Granville, Jeff Tantsura, 2021-12-15,
  <draft-irtf-nmrg-ibn-concepts-definitions-06.txt>

      Intent and Intent-Based Networking (IBN) are taking the industry by
      storm.  At the same time, IBN-related terms are often used loosely
      and inconsistently, in many cases overlapping and confused with other
      concepts such as "Policy."  This document clarifies the concept of
      "Intent" and provides an overview of the functionality that is
      associated with it.  The goal is to contribute towards a common and
      shared understanding of terms, concepts, and functionality that can
      be used as the foundation to guide further definition of associated
      research and engineering problems and their solutions.
      
      This document is a product of the IRTF Network Management Research
      Group (NMRG).  It reflects the consensus of the RG, receiving reviews
      and explicit support from many members.  It is published for
      informational purposes.

  "Intent Classification", Chen Li, Olga Havel, Adriana Olariu, Pedro
  Martinez-Julia, Jeferson Nobre, Diego Lopez, 2022-02-22,
  <draft-irtf-nmrg-ibn-intent-classification-06.txt>

      Intent is an abstract, high-level policy used to operate the network.
      Intent-based management system includes an interface for users to
      input requests and an engine to translate the intents into the
      network configuration and manage their life-cycle.
      
      This document discusses mostly the concept of network intents, but
      other types of intents are also being considered. Specifically, it
      highlights stakeholder perspectives of intent, methods to classify
      and encode intent, the associated intent taxonomy, and defines
      relevant intent terms where necessary. This document provides a
      foundation for intent related research and facilitates solution
      development.
      
      This document is a product of the IRTF Network Management Research
      Group (NMRG and is not issued by the IETF and is not an IETF
      standard.

Individual Submissions (none)
-----------------------------

  "Password Policy for LDAP Directories", Jim Sermersheim, Ludovic Poitou,
  Howard Chu, Ondrej Kuznik, 2022-02-22,
  <draft-behera-ldap-password-policy-11.txt>

      Password policy as described in this document is a set of rules that
      controls how passwords are used and administered in Lightweight
      Directory Access Protocol (LDAP) based directories.  In order to
      improve the security of LDAP directories and make it difficult for
      password cracking programs to break into directories, it is desirable
      to enforce a set of rules on password usage.  These rules are made to
      ensure that users change their passwords periodically, passwords meet
      construction requirements, the re-use of old password is restricted,
      and to deter password guessing attacks.

  "Mapping Between MIME Types, Content-Types, and URIs", Donald Eastlake,
  2021-12-26, <draft-eastlake-cturi-06.txt>

      Multipurpose Internet Mail Extension (MIME) Content-Type headers, the
      MIME types used therein, and Uniform Resource Identifiers (URIs) are
      being used, in different contexts, to label entities.  A mapping is
      specified from each kind of label into the other.  This makes it
      possible to express the meaning of almost any URI or Content-Type in
      the syntax of the other.

  "The ARK Identifier Scheme", John Kunze, Emmanuelle Bermes, 2022-01-19,
  <draft-kunze-ark-34.txt>

      The ARK (Archival Resource Key) naming scheme is designed to
      facilitate the high-quality and persistent identification of
      information objects.  The label "ark:" marks the start of a core ARK
      identifier that can be made actionable by prepending the beginning of
      a URL.  Meant to be usable after today's networking technologies
      become obsolete, that core should be recognizable in the future as a
      globally unique ARK independent of the URL hostname, HTTP, etc.  A
      founding principle of ARKs is that persistence is purely a matter of
      service and neither inherent in an object nor conferred on it by a
      particular naming syntax.  The best any identifier can do is lead
      users to services that support robust reference.  A full-functioning
      ARK leads the user to the identified object and, with the "?info"
      inflection appended, returns a metadata record and a commitment
      statement that is both human- and machine-readable.  Tools exist for
      minting, binding, and resolving ARKs.

  "An IPv4 Flowlabel Option", Thomas Dreibholz, 2021-09-06,
  <draft-dreibholz-ipv4-flowlabel-34.txt>

      This draft defines an IPv4 option containing a flowlabel that is
      compatible to IPv6.  It is required for simplified usage of IntServ
      and interoperability with IPv6.

  "Prepaid Extensions to Remote Authentication Dial-In User Service
  (RADIUS)", Avi Lior, Parviz Yegani, Kuntal Chowdhury, Hannes Tschofenig,
  Andreas Pashalidis, 2013-02-25,
  <draft-lior-radius-prepaid-extensions-22.txt>

      This document specifies an extension to the Remote Authentication
      Dial-In User Service (RADIUS) protocol that enables service providers
      to charge for prepaid services.  The supported charging models
      supported are volume-based, duration-based, and based on one-time
      events.

  "Applicability of Reliable Server Pooling for Real-Time Distributed
  Computing", Thomas Dreibholz, 2021-09-06,
  <draft-dreibholz-rserpool-applic-distcomp-31.txt>

      This document describes the applicability of the Reliable Server
      Pooling architecture to manage real-time distributed computing pools
      and access the resources of such pools.

  "Terms of Appointments for Nomcom-selected IETF Leadership Positions", John
  Klensin, 2021-10-22, <draft-klensin-nomcom-term-02.txt>

      A consensus is emerging in the IETF that very long tenure in
      leadership roles is not in the best interests of the community.
      While, in theory, that advice could simply be given to the Nomcom,
      there is reason to believe that a different model for consideration
      of renewal or replacement for members of the leadership would be more
      efficient for the Nomcom and would impose less hardship on incumbents
      and the community.  This document outlines that alternate method.

  "Secure SCTP", Carsten Hohendorf, Esbold Unurkhaan, Thomas Dreibholz,
  2021-09-06, <draft-hohendorf-secure-sctp-32.txt>

      This document explains the reason for the integration of security
      functionality into SCTP, and gives a short description of S-SCTP and
      its services.  S-SCTP is fully compatible with SCTP defined in
      RFC4960, it is designed to integrate cryptographic functions into
      SCTP.

  "Applicability of Reliable Server Pooling for SCTP-Based Endpoint
  Mobility", Thomas Dreibholz, Jobin Pulinthanath, 2021-09-06,
  <draft-dreibholz-rserpool-applic-mobility-30.txt>

      This document describes a novel mobility concept based on a
      combination of SCTP with Dynamic Address Reconfiguration extension
      and Reliable Server Pooling (RSerPool).

  "Reliable Server Pooling (RSerPool) Bakeoff Scoring", Thomas Dreibholz,
  Michael Tuexen, 2021-09-06, <draft-dreibholz-rserpool-score-29.txt>

      This memo describes some of the scoring to be used in the testing of
      Reliable Server Pooling protocols ASAP and ENRP at upcoming bakeoffs.

  "Considerations for Information Services and Operator Services Using SIP",
  John Haluska, Richard Ahern, Marty Cruze, Chris Blackwell, 2011-08-15,
  <draft-haluska-sipping-directory-assistance-11.txt>

      Information Services are services whereby information is provided in
      response to user requests, and may include involvement of a human or
      automated agent. A popular existing Information Service is Directory
      Assistance (DA). Moving ahead, Information Services providers
      envision exciting multimedia services that support simultaneous
      voice and data interactions with full operator backup at any time
      during the call. Information Services providers are planning to
      migrate to SIP based platforms, which will enable such advanced
      services, while continuing to support traditional DA services.
      
      Operator Services are traditional PSTN services which often involve
      providing human or automated assistance to a caller, and often
      require the specialized capabilities traditionally provided by an
      operator services switch. Market and/or regulatory factors in some
      jurisdictions dictate that some subset of Operator Services continue
      to be provided going forward.
      
      This document aims to identify how Operator and Information Services
      can be implemented using existing or currently proposed SIP
      mechanisms, to identity existing protocol gaps, and to provide a set
      of Best Current Practices to facilitate interoperability. For
      Operator Services, the intention is to describe how current operator
      services can continue to be provided to PSTN based subscribers via a
      SIP based operator services architecture. It also looks at how
      current operator services might be provided to SIP based subscribers
      via such an architecture, but does not consider the larger question
      of the need for or usefulness or suitability of each of these
      services for SIP based subscribers.
      
      This document addresses the needs of current Operator and
      Information Services providers; as such, the intended audience
      includes vendors of equipment and services to such providers.

  "Handle Resolution Option for ASAP", Thomas Dreibholz, 2021-09-06,
  <draft-dreibholz-rserpool-asap-hropt-29.txt>

      This document describes the Handle Resolution option for the ASAP
      protocol.

  "Definition of a Delay Measurement Infrastructure and Delay-Sensitive
  Least-Used Policy for Reliable Server Pooling", Thomas Dreibholz, Xing
  Zhou, 2021-09-06, <draft-dreibholz-rserpool-delay-28.txt>

      This document contains the definition of a delay measurement
      infrastructure and a delay-sensitive Least-Used policy for Reliable
      Server Pooling.

  "Takeover Suggestion Flag for the ENRP Handle Update Message", Thomas
  Dreibholz, Xing Zhou, 2021-09-06,
  <draft-dreibholz-rserpool-enrp-takeover-26.txt>

      This document describes the Takeover Suggestion Flag for the
      ENRP_HANDLE_UPDATE message of the ENRP protocol.

  "A Record of Discussions of Graceful Restart Extensions for Bidirectional
  Forwarding Detection (BFD)", Palanivelan Appanasamy, 2011-11-17,
  <draft-palanivelan-bfd-v2-gr-13.txt>

      This document is a historical record of discussions about extending
      the Bidirectional Forwarding Detection (BFD) protocol to provide
      additional capabilities to handle Graceful Restart.
      
      These discussions took place in the context of the IETF's BFD working
      group, and the consensus in that group was that these extensions
      should not be made.
      
      This document presents a summary of the challenges to BFD in
      surviving a graceful restart, and outlines a potential protocol
      solution that was discussed and rejected within the BFD working
      group.  The purpose of this document is to provide a record of the
      work done so that future effort will not be wasted.  This document
      does not propose or document any extensions to BFD, and there is no
      intention that it should be implemented in its current form.

  "The i;codepoint collation", Bjoern Hoehrmann, 2010-09-14,
  <draft-hoehrmann-cp-collation-01.txt>

      This memo describes the "i;codepoint" collation.  Character strings
      are compared based on the Unicode scalar values of the characters.
      The collation supports equality, substring, and ordering operations.

  "Xon/Xoff State Control for Telnet Com Port Control Option", Grant Edwards,
  2010-03-23, <draft-edwards-telnet-xon-xoff-state-control-00.txt,.pdf>

      This document defines new values for use with the telnet com port
      control option's SET-CONTROL sub-command defined in RFC2217.  These
      new values provide a mechanism for the telnet client to control and
      query the outbound Xon/Xoff flow control state of the telnet server's
      physical serial port.  This capability is exposed in the serial port
      API on some operating systems and is needed by telnet clients that
      implement a port-redirector service which provides applications local
      to the redirector/telnet-client with transparent access to the remote
      serial port on the telnet server.

  "Load Sharing for the Stream Control Transmission Protocol (SCTP)", Paul
  Amer, Martin Becke, Thomas Dreibholz, Nasif Ekiz, Jana Iyengar, Preethi
  Natarajan, Randall Stewart, Michael Tuexen, 2022-02-09,
  <draft-tuexen-tsvwg-sctp-multipath-23.txt>

      The Stream Control Transmission Protocol (SCTP) supports multi-homing
      for providing network fault tolerance.  However, mainly one path is
      used for data transmission.  Only timer-based retransmissions are
      carried over other paths as well.
      
      This document describes how multiple paths can be used simultaneously
      for transmitting user messages.

  "Clarification of Proper Use of "@" (at sign) in URI-style Components",
  Robert Simpson, 2010-07-30, <draft-accilent-at-sign-00.txt>

      Defacto standards have evolved that conflict with existing standards,
      specifically RFC 3986.  This document clarifies the use of the "@"
      (at sign) in URIs and partial URI-like addresses.

  "Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) Digest Authentication Using GSM 2G
  Authentication and Key Agreement (AKA)", Lionel Morand, 2014-04-14,
  <draft-morand-http-digest-2g-aka-05.txt>

      This document specifies a one-time password generation mechanism for
      Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) Digest access authentication based
      on Global System for Mobile Communications (GSM) authentication and
      key generation functions A3 and A8, also known as GSM AKA or 2G AKA.
      The HTTP Authentication Framework includes two authentication
      schemes: Basic and Digest.  Both schemes employ a shared secret based
      mechanism for access authentication.  The GSM AKA mechanism performs
      user authentication and session key distribution in GSM and Universal
      Mobile Telecommunications System (UMTS) networks.  GSM AKA is a
      challenge-response based mechanism that uses symmetric cryptography.

  "Extensions to Path Computation Element Communication Protocol (PCEP) for
  Backup Ingress of a Traffic Engineering Label Switched Path", Huaimo Chen,
  2022-01-10, <draft-chen-pce-compute-backup-ingress-19.txt>

      This document presents extensions to the Path Computation Element
      Communication Protocol (PCEP) for a PCC to send a request for
      computing a backup ingress for an MPLS TE P2MP LSP or an MPLS TE P2P
      LSP to a PCE and for a PCE to compute the backup ingress and reply to
      the PCC with a computation result for the backup ingress.

  "Extensions to the Path Computation Element Communication Protocol (PCEP)
  for Backup Egress of a Traffic Engineering Label Switched Path", Huaimo
  Chen, 2022-01-10, <draft-chen-pce-compute-backup-egress-19.txt>

      This document presents extensions to the Path Computation Element
      Communication Protocol (PCEP) for a PCC to send a request for
      computing a backup egress for an MPLS TE P2MP LSP or an MPLS TE P2P
      LSP to a PCE and for a PCE to compute the backup egress and reply to
      the PCC with a computation result for the backup egress.

  "OSPF Abnormal State Information", Huaimo Chen, 2022-02-22,
  <draft-chen-ospf-abnormal-state-info-07.txt>

      This document describes a couple of options for an OSPF router to
      advertise its abnormal state information in a routing domain.

  "Sender Queue Info Option for the SCTP Socket API", Thomas Dreibholz, Robin
  Seggelmann, Martin Becke, 2021-09-06,
  <draft-dreibholz-tsvwg-sctpsocket-sqinfo-23.txt>

      This document describes an extension to the SCTP sockets API for
      querying information about the sender queue.

  "SCTP Socket API Extensions for Concurrent Multipath Transfer", Thomas
  Dreibholz, Martin Becke, Hakim Adhari, 2021-09-06,
  <draft-dreibholz-tsvwg-sctpsocket-multipath-23.txt>

      This document describes extensions to the SCTP sockets API for
      configuring the CMT-SCTP and CMT/RP-SCTP extensions.

  "Encoding the graphemes of the SignWriting Script with the x-ISWA-2010",
  Stephen Slevinski, Valerie Sutton, 2011-01-03,
  <draft-slevinski-iswa-2010-00.txt>

      For concreteness, because the universal character set is not yet
      universal, because an undocumented and unlabeled coded character set
      hampers information interchange, a 12-bit coded character set has
      been created that encodes the graphemes of the SignWriting script as
      described in the open standard of the International SignWriting
      Alphabet 2010.  The x-ISWA-2010 coded character set is defined with
      hexadecimal characters and described with Unicode characters, either
      proposed characters on plane 1 or interchange characters on plane 15.
      
      This memo defines a standard coded character set for the Internet
      community.  It is published for reference, examination,
      implementation, and evaluation.  Distribution of this memo is
      unlimited.

  "A Forward-Search P2P TE LSP Inter-Domain Path Computation", Huaimo Chen,
  2022-01-10, <draft-chen-pce-forward-search-p2p-path-computation-22.txt>

      This document presents a forward search procedure for computing paths
      for Point-to-Point (P2P) Traffic Engineering (TE) Label Switched
      Paths (LSPs) crossing a number of domains using multiple Path
      Computation Elements (PCEs).  In addition, extensions to the Path
      Computation Element Communication Protocol (PCEP) for supporting the
      forward search procedure are described.

  "Route Flap Damping Deployment Status Survey", Shishio Tsuchiya, Seiichi
  Kawamura, Randy Bush, Cristel Pelsser, 2012-06-21,
  <draft-shishio-grow-isp-rfd-implement-survey-05.txt>

      BGP Route Flap Damping [RFC2439] is a mechanism that targets route
      stability.  It penalyzes routes that flap with the aim of reducing
      CPU load on the routers.
      
      But it has side-effects.  Thus, in 2006, RIPE recommended not to use
      Route Flap Damping (see [RIPE-378]).
      
      Now, some researchers propose to turn RFD, with less aggressive
      parameters, back on [draft-ymbk-rfd-usable].
      
      This document describes results of a survey conducted among service
      provider on their use of BGP Route Flap Damping.

  "A Forward-Search P2MP TE LSP Inter-Domain Path Computation", Huaimo Chen,
  2022-01-10, <draft-chen-pce-forward-search-p2mp-path-21.txt>

      This document presents a forward search procedure for computing a
      path for a Point-to-MultiPoint (P2MP) Traffic Engineering (TE) Label
      Switched Path (LSP) crossing a number of domains through using
      multiple Path Computation Elements (PCEs).  In addition, extensions
      to the Path Computation Element Communication Protocol (PCEP) for
      supporting the forward search procedure are described.

  "A SAVI Solution for WLAN", Jun Bi, Jianping Wu, Tao Lin, You Wang, Lin He,
  2021-11-10, <draft-bi-savi-wlan-22.txt>

      This document describes a source address validation solution for
      WLANs where 802.11i or other security mechanisms are enabled to
      secure MAC addresses.  This mechanism snoops NDP and DHCP packets to
      bind IP addresses to MAC addresses, and relies on the security of MAC
      addresses guaranteed by 802.11i or other mechanisms to filter IP
      spoofing packets.  It can work in the special situations described in
      the charter of SAVI (Source Address Validation Improvements)
      workgroup, such as multiple MAC addresses on one interface.  This
      document describes three different deployment scenarios, with
      solutions for migration of binding entries when hosts move from one
      access point to another.

  "GSS-API pre-authentication for Kerberos", Alejandro Perez-Mendez, Rafael
  Marin-Lopez, Fernando Pereniguez-Garcia, Gabriel Lopez-Millan, Luke Howard,
  2021-09-23, <draft-perez-krb-wg-gss-preauth-03.txt>

      This document describes a pre-authentication mechanism for Kerberos
      based on the Generic Security Service Application Program Interface
      (GSS-API), which allows a Key Distribution Center (KDC) to
      authenticate clients by using a GSS mechanism.

  "Unified User-Agent String", Mateusz Karcz, 2014-11-10,
  <draft-karcz-uuas-01.txt>

      User-Agent is a HTTP request-header field. It contains information
      about the user agent originating the request, which is often used by
      servers to help identify the scope of reported interoperability
      problems, to work around or tailor responses to avoid particular user
      agent limitations, and for analytics regarding browser or operating
      system use. Over the years contents of this field got complicated
      and ambiguous. That was the reaction for sending altered version of
      websites to web browsers other than popular ones. During the
      development of the WWW, authors of the new web browsers used to
      construct User-Agent strings similar to Netscape's one. Nowadays
      contents of the User-Agent field are much longer than 15 years ago.
      This Memo proposes the Uniform User-Agent String as a way to simplify
      the User-Agent field contents, while maintaining the previous
      possibility of their use.

  "SNMPD to use cache and shared database based on MIB Classification",
  Haresh Khandelwal, 2012-03-29,
  <draft-haresh-sushrut-mib-classification-01.txt>

      This memo defines classification of SNMP MIBs to either use SNMP
      cache database and shared database (SDB) mechanism to reduce high CPU
      usage while SNMP GET REQUEST, GETNEXT REQUEST, GETBULK REQUEST are
      continuously performed from network management system (NMS)/SNMP
      manager/SNMP MIB browser to managed device.

  "Analysis of Algorithms For Deriving Port Sets", Tina Tsou, Tetsuya
  Murakami, Simon Perreault, 2013-05-17,
  <draft-tsou-softwire-port-set-algorithms-analysis-04.txt>

      This memo analyzes some port set definition algorithms used for
      stateless IPv4 to IPv6 transition technologies.  The transition
      technologies using port set algorithms can be divided into two
      categories: fully stateless approach and binding approach.  Some
      algorithms can work for both approaches.

  "The Applicability of the PCE to Computing Protection and Recovery Paths
  for Single Domain and Multi-Domain Networks.", Huaimo Chen, 2021-10-24,
  <draft-chen-pce-protection-applicability-17.txt>

      The Path Computation Element (PCE) provides path computation
      functions in support of traffic engineering in Multiprotocol Label
      Switching (MPLS) and Generalized MPLS (GMPLS) networks.
      
      A link or node failure can significantly impact network services in
      large-scale networks.  Therefore it is important to ensure the
      survivability of large scale networks which consist of various
      connections provided over multiple interconnected networks with
      varying technologies.
      
      This document examines the applicability of the PCE architecture,
      protocols, and procedures for computing protection paths and
      restoration services, for single and multi-domain networks.
      
      This document also explains the mechanism of Fast Re-Route (FRR)
      where a point of local repair (PLR) needs to find the appropriate
      merge point (MP) to do bypass path computation using PCE.

  "An FTP Application Layer Gateway (ALG) for IPv4-to-IPv6 Translation", Tina
  Tsou, Simon Perreault, Jing Huang, 2013-09-16,
  <draft-tsou-behave-ftp46-01.txt>

      An FTP ALG for NAT64 was defined in RFC 6384.  Its scope was limited
      to an IPv6 client connecting to an IPv4 server.  This memo supports
      the case of an IPv4 client connecting to an IPv6 server.

  "Web Cache Communication Protocol V2, Revision 1", Douglas McLaggan,
  2012-08-02, <draft-mclaggan-wccp-v2rev1-00.txt>

      This document describes version 2 of the Web Cache Communication
      Protocol (WCCP).  The WCCP V2 protocol specifies interactions between
      one or more routers and one or more web-caches.  The interaction may
      take place within an IPv4 or IPv6 network.  The purpose of the
      interaction is to establish and maintain the transparent redirection
      of selected types of traffic flowing through a group of routers (or
      similar devices).  The selected traffic is redirected to a group of
      web-caches (or other traffic optimisation devices) with the aim of
      optimising resource usage and lowering response times.
      
      The protocol does not specify any interaction between the web-caches
      within a group or between a web-cache and a web-server.

  "The application/stream+json Media Type", James Snell, 2012-10-11,
  <draft-snell-activity-streams-type-01.txt>

      This specification defines and registers the application/stream+json
      Content Type for the JSON Activity Streams format.

  "Cryptographic Security Characteristics of 802.11 Wireless LAN Access
  Systems", Stephen Orr, Anthony Grieco, Dan Harkins, 2012-10-15,
  <draft-orr-wlan-security-architectures-00.txt>

      This note identifies all of the places that cryptography is used in
      Wireless Local Area Network (WLAN) architectures, to simplify the
      task of selecting the protocols, algorithms, and key sizes needed to
      achieve a consistent security level across the entire architecture.

  "Observations on the experience and nature of Large Interim Meetings", Joel
  Jaeggli, Jari Arkko, 2013-01-14, <draft-jaeggli-interim-observations-04.txt>

      Planning, particpipation and conclusions from the experience of
      participating in the IETF LIM activity on september 29th 2012.

  "I-PAKE: Identity-Based Password Authenticated Key Exchange", Taekyoung
  Kwon, Hyojin Yoon, Sang Kim, 2013-05-03, <draft-kwon-yoon-kim-ipake-01.txt>

      Although password authentication is the most widespread user
      authentication method today, cryptographic protocols for mutual
      authentication and key agreement, i.e., password authenticated key
      exchange (PAKE), in particular authenticated key exchange (AKE) based
      on a password only, are not actively used in the real world. This
      document introduces a quite novel form of PAKE protocols that employ
      a particular concept of ID-based encryption (IBE). The resulting
      cryptographic protocol is the ID-based password authenticated key
      exchange (I-PAKE) protocol which is a secure and efficient PAKE
      protocol in both soft- and hard-augmented models. I-PAKE achieves the
      security goals of AKE, PAKE, and hard-augmented PAKE. I-PAKE also
      achieves the great efficiency by allowing the whole pre-computation
      of the ephemeral Diffie-Hellman public keys by both server and
      client.

  "remoteStorage", Michiel de Jong, F. Kooman, S. Kippe, 2021-12-13,
  <draft-dejong-remotestorage-18.txt>

      This draft describes a protocol by which client-side applications,
      running inside a web browser, can communicate with a data storage
      server that is hosted on a different domain name. This way, the
      provider of a web application need not also play the role of data
      storage provider. The protocol supports storing, retrieving, and
      removing individual documents, as well as listing the contents of an
      individual folder, and access control is based on bearer tokens.

  "Ruoska Encoding", Jukka-Pekka Makela, 2013-10-12,
  <draft-ruoska-encoding-06.txt>

      This document describes hierarchically structured binary encoding
      format called Ruoska Encoding (later RSK).  The main design goals are
      minimal resource usage, well defined structure with good selection of
      widely known data types, and still extendable for future usage.
      
      The main benefit when compared to non binary hierarchically
      structured formats like XML is simplicity and minimal resource
      demands.  Even basic XML parsing is time and memory consuming
      operation.
      
      When compared to other binary formats like BER encoding of ASN.1 the
      main benefit is simplicity.  ASN.1 with many different encodings is
      complex and even simple implementation needs a lot of effort.  RSK is
      also more efficient than BER.

  "ICANN Registry Interfaces", Gustavo Ibarra, Eduardo Alvarez, 2021-09-14,
  <draft-lozano-icann-registry-interfaces-16.txt>

      This document describes the technical details of the interfaces
      provided by the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers
      (ICANN) to its contracted parties to fulfill reporting requirements.
      The interfaces provided by ICANN to Data Escrow Agents and Registry
      Operators to fulfill the requirements of Specifications 2 and 3 of
      the gTLD Base Registry Agreement are described in this document.
      Additionally, interfaces for retrieving the IP addresses of the probe
      nodes used in the SLA Monitoring System (SLAM) and interfaces for
      supporting maintenance window objects are described in this document.

  "QoS-level aware Transmission Protocol (QTP) for virtual networks", Julong
  Lan, Dongnian Cheng, Yuxiang Hu, Guozhen Cheng, Tong Duan, 2021-10-08,
  <draft-lan-nvo3-qtp-14.txt>

      This document provides a QoS-level aware Transmission Protocol (QTP)
      for virtual networks.

  "Remote APDU Call Secure (RACS)", Pascal Urien, 2021-10-02,
  <draft-urien-core-racs-15.txt>

      This document describes the Remote APDU Call Protocol Secure (RACS)
      protocol, dedicated to Grid of Secure Elements (GoSE). These servers
      host Secure Elements (SE), i.e. tamper resistant chips offering
      secure storage and cryptographic resources.
      
      Secure Elements are microcontrollers whose chip area is about 25mm2;
      they deliver trusted computing services in constrained environments.
      
      RACS supports commands for GoSE inventory and data exchange with
      secure elements. It is designed according to the representational
      State Transfer (REST) architecture. RACS resources are identified by
      dedicated URIs. An HTTP interface is also supported.
      
      An open implementation [OPENRACS] is available
      (https://github.com/purien) for various OS.

  "Use of the WebSocket Protocol as a Transport for the Remote Framebuffer
  Protocol", Nicholas Wilson, 2013-10-07, <draft-realvnc-websocket-02.txt>

      The Remote Framebuffer protocol (RFB) enables clients to connect to
      and control remote graphical resources.  This document describes a
      transport for RFB using the WebSocket protocol, and defines a
      corresponding WebSocket subprotocol, enabling an RFB server to offer
      resources to clients with WebSocket connectivity, such as web-
      browsers.

  "Metadata Query Protocol", Ian Young, 2022-01-10,
  <draft-young-md-query-16.txt>

      This document defines a simple protocol for retrieving metadata about
      named entities, or named collections of entities.  The goal of the
      protocol is to profile various aspects of HTTP to allow requesters to
      rely on certain, rigorously defined, behaviour.
      
      This document is a product of the Research and Education Federations
      (REFEDS) Working Group process.

  "Ideas for a Next Generation of the Reliable Server Pooling Framework",
  Thomas Dreibholz, 2021-09-06,
  <draft-dreibholz-rserpool-nextgen-ideas-16.txt>

      This document collects some idea for a next generation of the
      Reliable Server Pooling framework.

  "Extensions to PCEP for Distributing Label Cross Domains", Huaimo Chen,
  Autumn Liu, Mehmet Toy, Vic liu, 2022-01-10,
  <draft-chen-pce-label-x-domains-14.txt>

      This document specifies extensions to PCEP for distributing labels
      crossing domains for an inter-domain Point-to-Point (P2P) or Point-
      to-Multipoint (P2MP) Traffic Engineering (TE) Label Switched Path
      (LSP).

  "Informational Add-on for HTTP over the Secure Sockets Layer (SSL) Protocol
  and/or the Transport Layer Security (TLS) Protocol", Walter Hoehlhubmer,
  2013-11-25, <draft-hoehlhubmer-https-addon-07.txt>

      This document describes an Add-on for websites providing encrypted
      connectivity (HTTP over TLS).
      
      The Add-on has two parts,  one for the Domain Name System (DNS) -
      storing the X.509 certificate hashes - and one for the webserver
      itself - an additional webpage providing specific informations.

  "Generic Fault-Avoidance Routing Protocol for Data Center Networks", Bin
  Liu, Yantao Sun, Jing Cheng, Yichen Zhang, Bhumip Khasnabish, 2021-11-28,
  <draft-sl-rtgwg-far-dcn-17.txt>

      This document describes a generic routing method and protocol for a
      regular data center network, named the Fault-Avoidance Routing (FAR)
      protocol.  The FAR protocol provides a generic routing method for all
      types of regular topology network architectures that have been
      proposed for large-scale cloud-based data centers over the past few
      years.  The FAR protocol is designed to leverage any regularity in
      the topology and compute its routing table in a concise manner.  Fat-
      tree is taken as an example architecture to illustrate how the FAR
      protocol can be applied in real operational scenarios.

  "SAML Profile for the Metadata Query Protocol", Ian Young, 2022-01-10,
  <draft-young-md-query-saml-16.txt>

      This document profiles the Metadata Query Protocol for use with SAML
      metadata.
      
      This document is a product of the Research and Education Federations
      (REFEDS) Working Group process.
      
      Editorial Note (To be removed by RFC Editor before publication)
      
      Discussion of this draft takes place on the MDX mailing list
      (mdx@lists.iay.org.uk), which is accessed from [MDX.list].
      
      XML versions, latest edits and the issues list for this document are
      available from [md-query].
      
      The changes in this draft are summarized in Appendix A.17.

  "BGP Auto Discovery", Robert Raszuk, Jon Mitchell, Warren Kumari, Keyur
  Patel, John Scudder, 2021-10-13,
  <draft-raszuk-idr-bgp-auto-discovery-07.txt>

      This document describes a method for automating portions of a
      router's BGP configuration via discovery of BGP peers with which to
      establish further sessions from an initial "bootstrap" router.  This
      method can apply for establishment of either Internal or External BGP
      peering sessions.

  "Extensions to the Path Computation Element Protocol (PCEP) to Support
  Resource Sharing-based Path Computation", Xian Zhang, Haomian Zheng, Oscar
  de Dios, Victor Lopez, Yunbin Xu, 2021-10-24,
  <draft-zhang-pce-resource-sharing-15.txt>

      Resource sharing in a network means two or more Label Switched Paths
      (LSPs) use common pieces of resource along their paths.  This can
      help save network resources and is useful in scenarios such as LSP
      recovery or when two LSPs do not need to be active at the same time.
      A Path Computation Element (PCE) is responsible for path computation
      with such requirement.
      
      Existing extensions to the Path Computation Element Protocol (PCEP)
      allow one path computation request for an LSP to be associated with
      other (existing) LSPs through the use of the PCEP Association Object.
      
      This document extends PCEP in order to support resource-sharing-based
      path computation as another use of the Association Object to enable
      better efficiency in the computation and in the resultant paths and
      network resource usage.

  "Passive DNS - Common Output Format", Alexandre Dulaunoy, Aaron Kaplan,
  Paul Vixie, Henry Stern, 2022-02-11,
  <draft-dulaunoy-dnsop-passive-dns-cof-09.txt>

      This document describes a common output format of Passive DNS Servers
      which clients can query.  The output format description includes also
      in addition a common semantic for each Passive DNS system.  By having
      multiple Passive DNS Systems adhere to the same output format for
      queries, users of multiple Passive DNS servers will be able to
      combine result sets easily.

  "Just because it's an ID doesn't mean anything... at all...", Warren
  Kumari, 2021-11-22, <draft-wkumari-not-a-draft-15.txt>

      Anyone can publish an Internet Draft.  This doesn't mean that the
      "IETF thinks" or that "the IETF is planning..." or anything similar.

  "PCAP Next Generation (pcapng) Capture File Format", Michael Tuexen, Fulvio
  Risso, Jasper Bongertz, Gerald Combs, Guy Harris, Eelco Chaudron, Michael
  Richardson, 2021-10-04, <draft-tuexen-opsawg-pcapng-04.txt>

      This document describes a format to record captured packets to a
      file.  This format is extensible; Wireshark can currently read and
      write it, and libpcap can currently read some pcapng files.

  "Label Distribution Using ARP", Kireeti Kompella, Balaji Rajagopalan, Reji
  Thomas, 2021-12-13, <draft-kompella-mpls-larp-11.txt>

      This document describes extensions to the Address Resolution Protocol
      to distribute MPLS labels for IPv4 and IPv6 host addresses.
      Distribution of labels via ARP enables simple plug-and-play operation
      of MPLS, which is key to deploying MPLS in data centers and
      enterprises.

  "Ideas for a Next Generation of the Stream Control Transmission Protocol
  (SCTP)", Thomas Dreibholz, 2021-09-06,
  <draft-dreibholz-tsvwg-sctp-nextgen-ideas-14.txt>

      This document collects some ideas for a next generation of the Stream
      Control Transmission Protocol (SCTP) for further discussion.  It is a
      result of lessons learned from more than one decade of SCTP
      deployment.

  "TCP SYN Extended Option Space Using an Out-of-Band Segment", Joseph Touch,
  Ted Faber, 2021-10-12, <draft-touch-tcpm-tcp-syn-ext-opt-10.txt>

      This document describes an experimental method to extend the option
      space for connection parameters within the initial TCP SYN segment,
      at the start of a TCP connection. This method effectively extends
      the option space of an initial SYN by using an additional coupled
      segment that is sent 'out-of-band'. It complements the proposed
      Extended Data Offset (EDO) option that is applicable only after the
      initial segment.

  "Service Function Path Establishment", Julong Lan, Yuxiang Hu, Guozhen
  Cheng, Peng Wang, Tong Duan, 2021-10-08,
  <draft-lan-sfp-establishment-12.txt>

      Service Function Chain architecture leads to more adaptive network
      nodes. It allows splitting the network function into fine-grained
      build blocks --- service function, and combining the network
      functions into service function chain to formulate complicated
      services. Further, the service function chain should be instantiated
      by selecting the optimal instance from the candidates for each
      service function in it. This document discusses the required
      components during the instantiation of service function chain in the
      network.

  "Additional XML Security Uniform Resource Identifiers (URIs)", Donald
  Eastlake, 2022-03-15, <draft-eastlake-rfc6931bis-xmlsec-uris-27.txt>

      This document updates and corrects the IANA "XML Security URIs"
      registry that lists URIs intended for use with XML digital
      signatures, encryption, canonicalization, and key management.  These
      URIs identify algorithms and types of information.  This document
      also updates, corrects three errata against, and obsoletes RFC 6931.

  "LISP support for Multi-Tuple EIDs", AlbertoRodriguezNatal, Albert
  Cabellos-Aparicio, Sharon Barkai, Vina Ermagan, Darrel Lewis, Fabio Maino,
  Dino Farinacci, 2021-10-11,
  <draft-rodrigueznatal-lisp-multi-tuple-eids-12.txt>

      This document describes extensions for LISP to support EIDs based on
      tuples of multiple elements.

  "LISP Map Server Reliable Transport", Johnson Leong, Darrel Lewis, Balaji
  Venkatachalapathy, Chris Cassar, Isidor Kouvelas, Jesus Arango, 2022-01-18,
  <draft-kouvelas-lisp-map-server-reliable-transport-07.txt>

      The communication between LISP ETRs and Map-Servers is based on
      unreliable UDP message exchange coupled with periodic message
      transmission in order to maintain soft state.  The drawback of
      periodic messaging is the constant load imposed on both the ETR and
      the Map-Server.  New use cases for LISP have increased the amount of
      state that needs to be communicated with requirements that are not
      satisfied by the current mechanism.  This document introduces the use
      of a reliable transport for ETR to Map-Server communication in order
      to eliminate the periodic messaging overhead, while providing
      reliability, flow-control and endpoint liveness detection.

  "SMTP Service Extension for Client Identity", William Storey, 2021-11-24,
  <draft-storey-smtp-client-id-12.txt>

      This document defines an extension for the Simple Mail Transfer
      Protocol (SMTP) called "CLIENTID" to provide a method for clients to
      indicate an identity to the server.
      
      This identity is an additional token that may be used for security
      and/or informational purposes, and with it a server may optionally
      apply heuristics using this token.

  "Marking Announcements to BGP Collectors", Randy Bush, Emile Aben,
  2022-02-17, <draft-ymbk-grow-bgp-collector-communities-02.txt>

      When BGP route collectors such as RIPE RIS and Route Views are used
      by operators and researchers, currently one can not tell if the
      collection of paths announced to a collector represents the ISP's
      customer cone, includes internal routes, includes paths learned from
      peerings or transits.  This greatly reduces the utility of the
      collected data.  This document specifies the use of BGP communities
      to differentiate the kinds of views being presented to the
      collectors.

  "PCEP extensions for Distribution of Link-State and TE Information", Dhruv
  Dhody, Shuping Peng, Young Lee, Daniele Ceccarelli, Aijun Wang, Gyan
  Mishra, Siva Sivabalan, 2022-03-05, <draft-dhodylee-pce-pcep-ls-23.txt>

      In order to compute and provide optimal paths, a Path Computation
      Elements (PCEs) require an accurate and timely Traffic Engineering
      Database (TED).  Traditionally, this TED has been obtained from a
      link state (LS) routing protocol supporting the traffic engineering
      extensions.
      
      This document extends the Path Computation Element Communication
      Protocol (PCEP) with Link-State and TE Information as an experimental
      extension.

  "MS-originated SMRs", AlbertoRodriguezNatal, Albert Cabellos-Aparicio, Vina
  Ermagan, Fabio Maino, Sharon Barkai, 2021-10-11,
  <draft-rodrigueznatal-lisp-ms-smr-13.txt>

      This document extends [I-D.ietf-lisp-rfc6833bis] to allow Map Servers
      to send SMR messages.
      
      This extension is intended to be used in some SDN deployments that
      use LISP as a southbound protocol with (P)ITRs that are compliant
      with [I-D.ietf-lisp-rfc6833bis].  In this use-case mapping updates do
      not come from ETRs, but rather from a centralized controller that
      pushes the updates directly to the Mapping System.  In such
      deployments, Map Servers will benefit from having a mechanism to
      inform directly (P)ITRs about updates in the mappings they are
      serving.  Although implementations of this extension exist, this
      extension is deprecated by [I-D.ietf-lisp-pubsub] and it is being
      documented for informational purposes.  Newer implementations should
      look into [I-D.ietf-lisp-pubsub] to support PubSub in LISP
      deployments.

  "Node Potential Oriented Multi-NextHop Routing Protocol", Julong Lan,
  Jianhui Zhang, Bin Wang, Wenfen Liu, Tong Duan, 2021-10-08,
  <draft-lanzhangwang-rtgwg-npmnrp-12.txt>

      The Node Potential Oriented Multi-Nexthop Routing Protocol (NP-MNRP)
      bases on the idea of "hop-by-hop routing forwarding, multi-backup
      next hop" and combines with the phenomena that water flows from
      higher place to lower.  NP-MNRP defines a metric named as node
      potential, which is based on hop count and the actual link bandwidth,
      and calculates multiple next-hops through the potential difference
      between the nodes.

  "Multiple Ethernet - IPv6 address mapping encapsulation - fixed prefix",
  Naoki Matsuhira, 2021-12-17, <draft-matsuhira-me6e-fp-12.txt>

      This document specifies Multiple Ethernet - IPv6 address mapping
      encapsulation - fixed prefix (ME6E-FP) base specification.  ME6E-FP
      makes expantion ethernet network over IPv6 backbone network with
      encapsuation technoogy.  And also, E6ME-FP can stack multiple
      Ethernet networks.  ME6E-FP work on own routing domain.

  "Multiple Ethernet - IPv6 address mapping encapsulation - prefix
  resolution", Naoki Matsuhira, 2021-12-17, <draft-matsuhira-me6e-pr-12.txt>

      This document specifies Multiple Ethernet - IPv6 address mapping
      encapsulation - Prefix Resolution (ME6E-PR) specification.  ME6E-PR
      makes expantion ethernet network over IPv6 backbone network with
      encapsuation technoogy.  And also, E6ME-PR can stack multiple
      Ethernet networks.  ME6E-PR work on non own routing domain.

  "BGP Extensions for IDs Allocation", Huaimo Chen, Zhenbin Li, Zhenqiang Li,
  Yanhe Fan, Mehmet Toy, Lei Liu, 2021-10-24,
  <draft-wu-idr-bgp-segment-allocation-ext-08.txt>

      This document describes extensions to the BGP for IDs allocation.
      The IDs are SIDs for segment routing (SR), including SR for IPv6
      (SRv6).  They are distributed to their domains if needed.

  "A MILP Model to Solve the Problem of Loading Balance of Routing and
  Wavelength Assignment for Optical Transport Networks", Shan Yin, Shanguo
  Huang, Dajiang Wang, Xuan Wang, Yu Zhang, 2021-10-21,
  <draft-yin-milp-rwa-otn-13.txt>

      The RWA problem can be formulated as a Mixed-Integer linear program.
      Load balancing is a key factor for the optical transport networks.
      However, the existed approaches using mixed-Integer linear program to
      solve the RWA problem are not perfect enough without considering the
      load balancing of the networks.
      
      This documentary provides a model of Mixed-Integer Linear Programming
      to solve the problem of load balancing needed by routing and
      wavelength assignment (RWA) process in optical transport networks.

  "Mathematical Mesh 3.0 Part I: Architecture Guide", Phillip Hallam-Baker,
  2021-10-25, <draft-hallambaker-mesh-architecture-19.txt>

      The Mathematical Mesh is a Threshold Key Infrastructure that makes
      computers easier to use by making them more secure.  Application of
      threshold cryptography to key generation and use enables users to
      make use of public key cryptography across multiple devices with
      minimal impact on the user experience.
      
      This document provides an overview of the Mesh data structures,
      protocols and examples of its use.
      
      [Note to Readers] Discussion of this draft takes place on the
      MATHMESH mailing list (mathmesh@ietf.org), which is archived at
      https://mailarchive.ietf.org/arch/search/?email_list=mathmesh.
      
      This document is also available online at
      http://mathmesh.com/Documents/draft-hallambaker-mesh-
      architecture.html.

  "Multiple IPv4 - IPv6 mapped IPv6 address (M46A)", Naoki Matsuhira,
  2021-12-17, <draft-matsuhira-m46a-11.txt>

      This document specifies Multiple IPv4 - IPv6 mapped IPv6
      address(M46A) spefification.  M46A is IPv4 mapped IPv6 address with
      plane ID.  Unique allocation of plane id value enable IPv4 private
      address unique in IPv6 address space.  This address may use IPv4 over
      IPv6 encapsulation and IPv4 - IPv6 translation.

  "Multiple IPv4 - IPv6 address mapping encapsulation - fixed prefix
  (M46E-FP)", Naoki Matsuhira, 2021-12-17, <draft-matsuhira-m46e-fp-11.txt>

      This document specifies Multiple IPv4 - IPv6 address mapping
      encapsulation - fixed prefix (M46E-FP) specification.  M46E-FP makes
      backbone network to IPv6 only.  And also, M46E-FP can stack many IPv4
      networks, i.e. the networks using same IPv4 (private) addresses,
      without interdependence.

  "Multiple IPv4 - IPv6 address mapping encapsulation - prefix resolution
  (M46E-PR)", Naoki Matsuhira, 2021-12-17, <draft-matsuhira-m46e-pr-11.txt>

      This document specifies M46E Prefix Resolution (M46E-PR)
      specification.  M46E-PR connect IPv4 stub networks between IPv6
      backbone network.  And also, M46E-PR can stack many IPv4 networks,
      i.e. the nwtworks using same IPv4 private addresses without
      interdependence.

  "Multiple IPv4 - IPv6 address mapping encapsulation - prefix translator
  (M46E-PT)", Naoki Matsuhira, 2021-12-17, <draft-matsuhira-m46e-pt-11.txt>

      This document specifies Multiple IPv4 - IPv6 mapping encapsulation -
      Prefix Translator (M46E-PT) specification.  M46E-PT expand IPv4
      network plane by connecting M46E-FP domain and M46E-PR domain.  M46E-
      PT translate prefix part of M46E-FP address and M46E-PR address both
      are IPv6 address.  M46E-PT does not translate IPv4 packet which is
      encapsulated, so transparency of IPv4 packet is not broken.

  "Multiple IPv4 - IPv6 address mapping translator (M46T)", Naoki Matsuhira,
  2021-12-17, <draft-matsuhira-m46t-11.txt>

      This document specifies Multiple IPv4 - IPv6 address mapping
      Translator (M46T) specification.  M46T enable access to IPv4 only
      host from IPv6 host.  IPv4 host is identified as M46 address in IPv6
      address space.  The address assigned to IPv4 host may be global IPv4
      address or private IPv4 address.  M46T does not support access to
      IPv6 host from IPv4 only host.

  "Multiple IPv4 address and port number - IPv6 address mapping encapsulation
  (M4P6E)", Naoki Matsuhira, 2021-12-17, <draft-matsuhira-m4p6e-11.txt>

      This document specifies Multiple IPv4 address and port number - IPv6
      address mapping encapulation (M4P6E) specification.

  "Multi-Stage Transparent Server Load Balancing", Naoki Matsuhira,
  2021-12-17, <draft-matsuhira-mslb-11.txt>

      This document specifies Multi-Stage Transparent Server Load Balancing
      (MSLB) specification.  MSLB make server load balancing over Layer3
      network without packet header change at client and server.  MSLB make
      server load balancing with any protocol and protocol with encription
      such as IPsec ESP, SSL/TLS.

  "Conveying Vendor-Specific Information in the Path Computation Element
  (PCE) Communication Protocol (PCEP) extensions for Stateful PCE.", Cheng
  Li, Haomian Zheng, Siva Sivabalan, Samuel Sidor, Zafar Ali, 2021-10-20,
  <draft-dhody-pce-stateful-pce-vendor-13.txt>

      A Stateful Path Computation Element (PCE) maintains information on
      the current network state, including: computed Label Switched Path
      (LSPs), reserved resources within the network, and the pending path
      computation requests.  This information may then be considered when
      computing new traffic engineered LSPs, and for the associated and the
      dependent LSPs, received from a Path Computation Client (PCC).
      
      RFC 7470 defines a facility to carry vendor-specific information in
      Path Computation Element Communication Protocol (PCEP).
      
      This document extends this capability for the Stateful PCEP messages.

  "Additional Considerations for UDP Encapsulation of Stream Control
  Transmission Protocol (SCTP) Packets", Michael Tuexen, Randall Stewart,
  2022-02-27, <draft-tuexen-tsvwg-sctp-udp-encaps-cons-05.txt>

      RFC 6951 specifies the UDP encapsulation of SCTP packets.  The
      described handling of received packets requires the check of the
      verification tag.  However, RFC 6951 misses a specification of the
      handling of received packets for which this check is not possible.
      
      This document updates RFC 6951 by specifying the handling of received
      packets for which the verification tag can not be checked.

  "LISP Distinguished Name Encoding", Dino Farinacci, 2021-11-07,
  <draft-farinacci-lisp-name-encoding-13.txt>

      This draft defines how to use the AFI=17 Distinguished Names in LISP.

  "LISP Geo-Coordinate Use-Cases", Dino Farinacci, 2021-09-19,
  <draft-farinacci-lisp-geo-12.txt>

      This draft describes how Geo-Coordinates can be used in the LISP
      Architecture and Protocols.

  "Multiple Ethernet - IPv6 mapped IPv6 address (ME6A)", Naoki Matsuhira,
  2021-12-17, <draft-matsuhira-me6a-11.txt>

      This document specifies Multiple Ethernet - IPv6 mapped IPv6
      address(ME6A) spefification.  ME6A is Ethernet mapped IPv6 address
      with plane ID.  Unique allocation of plane id value enable duplicated
      MAC address unique in IPv6 address space.  This address may use
      Ethernet over IPv6 encapsulation.

  "ICANN TMCH functional specifications", Gustavo Ibarra, 2022-02-18,
  <draft-ietf-regext-tmch-func-spec-14.txt>

      This document describes the requirements, the architecture and the
      interfaces between the ICANN Trademark Clearinghouse (TMCH) and
      Domain Name Registries as well as between the ICANN TMCH and Domain
      Name Registrars for the provisioning and management of domain names
      during Sunrise and Trademark Claims Periods.

  "OpenPGP Web Key Directory", Werner Koch, 2021-11-14,
  <draft-koch-openpgp-webkey-service-13.txt>

      This specification describes a service to locate OpenPGP keys by mail
      address using a Web service and the HTTPS protocol.  It also provides
      a method for secure communication between the key owner and the mail
      provider to publish and revoke the public key.

  "IANA Considerations and IETF Protocol and Documentation Usage for IEEE 802
  Parameters", Donald Eastlake, Joe Abley, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-eastlake-rfc7042bis-06.txt>

      Some IETF protocols make use of Ethernet frame formats and IEEE 802
      parameters.  This document discusses several uses of such parameters
      in IETF protocols, specifies IANA considerations for assignment of
      points under the IANA OUI (Organizationally Unique Identifier), and
      provides some values for use in documentation.  This document
      obsoletes RFC 7042.

  "BGP Flow Specification Version 2", Susan Hares, Donald Eastlake, Chaitanya
  Yadlapalli, Sven Maduschke, 2022-02-04, <draft-hares-idr-flowspec-v2-05.txt>

      BGP flow specification version 1 (FSv1), defined in RFC 8955, RFC
      8956, and RFC 9117 describes the distribution of traffic filter
      policy (traffic filters and actions) distributed via BGP.  Multiple
      applications have used BGP FSv1 to distribute traffic filter policy.
      These applications include the following: mitigation of denial of
      service (DoS), enabling traffic filtering in BGP/MPLS VPNs,
      centralized traffic control of router firewall functions, and SFC
      traffic insertion.
      
      During the deployment of BGP FSv1 a number of issues were detected
      due to lack of consistent TLV encoding for rules for flow
      specifications, lack of user ordering of filter rules and/or actions,
      and lack of clear definition of interaction with BGP peers not
      supporting FSv1.  Version 2 of the BGP flow specification (FSv2)
      protocol addresses these features.  In order to provide a clear
      demarcation between FSv1 and FSv2, a different NLRI encapsulates
      FSv2.

  "Hierarchical PCE Determination", Huaimo Chen, Mehmet Toy, Xufeng Liu, Lei
  Liu, Zhenqiang Li, 2022-01-10, <draft-chen-pce-h-discovery-10.txt>

      This document presents extensions to the Path Computation Element
      Communication Protocol (PCEP) for determining parent child relations
      and exchanging the information between a parent and a child PCE in a
      hierarchical PCE system.

  "PCEP Link State Abstraction", Huaimo Chen, Mehmet Toy, Xufeng Liu, Lei
  Liu, Zhenqiang Li, 2022-01-10, <draft-chen-pce-h-connect-access-10.txt>

      This document presents extensions to the Path Computation Element
      Communication Protocol (PCEP) for a child PCE to abstract its domain
      information to its parent for supporting a hierarchical PCE system.

  "Static PCEP Link State", Huaimo Chen, Mehmet Toy, Xufeng Liu, Lei Liu,
  Zhenqiang Li, 2022-01-10, <draft-chen-pce-pcc-ted-10.txt>

      This document presents extensions to the Path Computation Element
      Communication Protocol (PCEP) for a PCC to advertise the information
      about the links without running IGP and for a PCE to build a TED
      based on the information received.

  "PCEP Extension for Distribution of Link-State and TE Information for
  Optical Networks", Young Lee, Haomian Zheng, Daniele Ceccarelli, Wei Wang,
  Peter Park, Bin-Yeong Yoon, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-lee-pce-pcep-ls-optical-11.txt>

      In order to compute and provide optimal paths, Path Computation
      Elements (PCEs) require an accurate and timely Traffic Engineering
      Database (TED). Traditionally this Link State and TE information has
      been obtained from a link state routing protocol (supporting traffic
      engineering extensions).
      
      An existing experimental document extends the Path Computation
      Element Communication Protocol (PCEP) with Link-State and Traffic
      Engineering (TE) Information.  This document provides further
      experimental extensions to collect Link-State and TE information for
      optical networks.

  "Formal SignWriting", Stephen Slevinski, 2022-01-30,
  <draft-slevinski-formal-signwriting-09.txt>

      Sutton SignWriting is the universal and complete solution for written
      sign language, ISO 15924 script code "Sgnw".  It has been applied by
      a wide and deep international community of sign language users.
      Sutton SignWriting is an international standard for writing sign
      languages by hand or with computers.  From education to research,
      from entertainment to religion, SignWriting has proven useful because
      people are using it to write signed languages.
      
      Formal SignWriting is one particular computerized design for Sutton
      SignWriting that envisions a sign as a two part word.  Each word is
      written as a string of characters that can be recognized and
      processed by regular expressions.  The design has been optimized for
      display, searching, sorting, text flow, and other character
      processing.
      
      Where as American Sign Language is a natural language, Formal
      SignWriting is a formal language.  A formal language uses words and
      punctuation to form text.  Each word is expressed as a string of
      characters.  Well-formed words are governed by the structural rules
      of the grammar.  A formal language is useful in mathematics, computer
      science, and linguistics.
      
      This memo defines a conceptual character encoding map for the
      Internet community.  It is published for reference, examination,
      implementation, and evaluation.  Distribution of this memo is
      unlimited.

  "Compact Format of IKEv2 Payloads", Valery Smyslov, 2021-09-17,
  <draft-smyslov-ipsecme-ikev2-compact-10.txt>

      This document describes a method for reducing the size of the
      Internet Key Exchange version 2 (IKEv2) messages by using an
      alternative format for IKE payloads.  Standard format of many IKE
      payloads contains a lot of redundancy.  This document takes advantage
      of this fact and specifies a way to eliminate some redundancy by
      using denser encoding.  Reducing size of IKEv2 messages is desirable
      for low power consumption battery powered devices.  It also helps to
      avoid IP fragmentation of IKEv2 messages.

  "MISP core format", Alexandre Dulaunoy, Andras Iklody, 2022-02-14,
  <draft-dulaunoy-misp-core-format-15.txt>

      This document describes the MISP core format used to exchange
      indicators and threat information between MISP (Open Source Threat
      Intelligence Sharing Platform formerly known as Malware Information
      Sharing Platform) instances.  The JSON format includes the overall
      structure along with the semantic associated for each respective key.
      The format is described to support other implementations which reuse
      the format and ensuring an interoperability with existing MISP
      [MISP-P] software and other Threat Intelligence Platforms.

  "Extension to the Link Management Protocol (LMP/DWDM -rfc4209) for Dense
  Wavelength Division Multiplexing (DWDM) Optical Line Systems to manage the
  application code of optical interface parameters in DWDM application",
  Dharini Hiremagalur, Gert Grammel, Gabriele Galimberti, Ruediger Kunze,
  2021-12-30, <draft-ggalimbe-ccamp-flex-if-lmp-13.txt>

      This experimental memo defines extensions to LMP(rfc4209) for
      managing Optical parameters associated with Wavelength Division
      Multiplexing (WDM) adding a set of parameters related to multicarrier
      DWDM interfaces to be used in Spectrum Switched Optical Networks
      (sson).

  "Terminology for Constrained-Node Networks", Carsten Bormann, Mehmet Ersue,
  Ari Keranen, Carles Gomez, 2021-10-25, <draft-bormann-lwig-7228bis-07.txt>

      The Internet Protocol Suite is increasingly used on small devices
      with severe constraints on power, memory, and processing resources,
      creating constrained-node networks.  This document provides a number
      of basic terms that have been useful in the standardization work for
      constrained-node networks.

  "BIER in BABEL", Zheng Zhang, Tony Przygienda, 2021-11-07,
  <draft-zhang-bier-babel-extensions-06.txt>

      BIER introduces a novel multicast architecture.  It does not require
      a signaling protocol to explicitly build multicast distribution
      trees, nor does it require intermediate nodes to maintain any per-
      flow state.
      
      Babel defines a distance-vector routing protocol that operates in a
      robust and efficient fashion both in wired as well as in wireless
      mesh networks.  This document defines a way to carry necessary BIER
      signaling information in Babel.

  "Encapsulating IPsec ESP in UDP for Load-balancing", Xiaohu Xu, Shraddha
  Hegde, Paul Bottorff, Boris Pismenny, Dacheng Zhang, Liang Xia, Mahendra
  Puttaswamy, 2022-03-07, <draft-xu-ipsecme-esp-in-udp-lb-09.txt>

      IPsec Virtual Private Network (VPN) is widely used by enterprises to
      interconnect their geographical dispersed branch office locations
      across the Wide Area Network (WAN) or the Internet, especially in the
      Software-Defined-WAN (SD-WAN) era.  In addition, IPsec is also
      increasingly used by cloud providers to encrypt IP traffic traversing
      data center networks and data center interconnect WANs so as to meet
      the security and compliance requirements, especially in financial
      cloud and governmental cloud environments.  To fully utilize the
      bandwidth available in the data center network, the data center
      interconnect WAN or the Internet, load balancing of IPsec traffic
      over Equal Cost Multi-Path (ECMP) and/or Link Aggregation Group (LAG)
      is much attractive to those enterprises and cloud providers.  This
      document defines a method to encapsulate IPsec Encapsulating Security
      Payload (ESP) packets over UDP tunnels for improving load-balancing
      of IPsec ESP traffic.

  "Service Function Chaining Use Cases in Fog RAN", Carlos Bernardos, Alain
  Mourad, 2021-10-22, <draft-bernardos-sfc-fog-ran-10.txt>

      Fog Radio Access Networks (RAN) refers to the part of the RAN that is
      virtualized at the very edge of the network, even at the end-user
      device.  Fog RAN support is considered critical for the 5G mobile
      network architectures currently being developed in various research,
      standardization and industry forums.  Since fog RAN builds on top of
      virtualization and can involve several virtual functions running on
      different virtualized resources, Service function chaining (SFC)
      support for the fog RAN will be critical.  This document describes
      the overall fog RAN approach and also gives some use cases.  Finally
      it proposes some requirements to be considered in the development of
      the SFC architecture and related protocols.

  "Equal-Cost Multipath Considerations for BGP", Petr Lapukhov, Jeff
  Tantsura, 2022-01-05, <draft-lapukhov-bgp-ecmp-considerations-08.txt>

      BGP (Border Gateway Protocol) [RFC4271] employs tie-breaking logic to
      select a single best path among multiple paths available, known as
      BGP best path selection.  At the same time, it has become a common
      practice to allow for "equal-cost multipath" (ECMP) selection and
      programming of multiple next-hops in routing tables.  This document
      summarizes some common considerations for the ECMP logic when BGP is
      used as the routing protocol, with the intent of providing common
      reference for otherwise unstandardized set of features.

  "Adaptive IPv4 Address Space", Abraham Chen, Ramamurthy Ati, Abhay
  Karandikar, David Crowe, 2021-12-08,
  <draft-chen-ati-adaptive-ipv4-address-space-10.txt>

      This document describes a solution to the Internet address depletion
      issue through the use of an existing Option mechanism that is part of
      the original IPv4 protocol. This proposal, named EzIP (phonetic for
      Easy IPv4), outlines the IPv4 public address pool expansion and the
      Internet system architecture enhancement considerations. EzIP may
      expand an IPv4 address by a factor of 256M without affecting the
      existing IPv4 based Internet, or the current private networks. It is
      in full conformance with the IPv4 protocol, and supports not only
      both direct and private network connectivity, but also their
      interoperability. EzIP deployments may coexist with existing Internet
      traffic and IoTs (Internet of Things) operations without perturbing
      their setups, while offering end-users the freedom to indepdently
      choose which service. EzIP may be implemented as a software or
      firmware enhancement to Internet edge routers or private network
      routing gateways, wherever needed, or simply installed as an inline
      adjunct hardware module between the two, enabling a seamless
      introduction. The 256M case detailed here establishes a complete
      spherical layer of an overlay of routers for interfacing between the
      Internet fabic (core plus edge routers) and the end user premises or
      IoTs. Incorporating caching proxy technology in the gateway, a fairly
      large geographical region may enjoy address expansion based on as few
      as one ordinary IPv4 public address utilizing IP packets with
      degenerated EzIP header. If IPv4 public pool allocations were
      reorganized, the assignable pool could be multiplied 512M fold or
      even more. Enabling hierarchical address architecture which
      facilitates both hierarchical and mesh routing, EzIP can provide
      nearly the same order of magnitude of address pool resources as IPv6
      while streamlining the administrative aspects of it. The basic EzIP
      will immediately resolve the local IPv4 address shortage, while being
      transparent to the rest of the Internet as a new parallel facility.
      Under the Dual-Stack environment, these proposed interim facilities
      will relieve the IPv4 address shortage issue, while affording IPv6
      more time to reach maturity for providing the availability levels
      required for delivering a long-term general service.

  "Mobility Capability Negotiation as a 5G Mobility Pattern", Zhiwei Yan,
  Jianfeng Guan, Jong-Hyouk Lee, Tao Huang, 2022-01-27,
  <draft-yan-dmm-man-09.txt>

      Mobility support is an important network capability for mobile node,
      and 5G introduces the Mobility Pattern used by the Access and
      Mobility Management Function (AMF) to optimize mobility support
      provided to the UE.  More specific, The AMF determines and updates
      Mobility Pattern of the UE according to the subscription of the UE,
      statistics of the UE mobility, network local policy, and the UE
      assisted information, or any combination of them with the help of
      NWDAF.  Based on different requirements, multiple mobility management
      protocols have been developed under IPv6.  However, different
      protocols have different functional requirements on the network
      element or the host and then a scheme should be used in order to
      support the negotiation and selection of adopted mobility management
      protocol when a host (or UE) accesses to a new network.  In this
      draft, this issue is analyzed.

  "Vehicular Neighbor Discovery for IP-Based Vehicular Networks", Jaehoon
  Jeong, Yiwen Shen, Zhong Xiang, Sandra Cespedes, 2022-02-21,
  <draft-jeong-ipwave-vehicular-neighbor-discovery-13.txt>

      This document specifies a Vehicular Neighbor Discovery (VND) as an
      extension of IPv6 Neighbor Discovery (ND) for IP-based vehicular
      networks.  An optimized Address Registration and a multihop Duplicate
      Address Detection (DAD) mechanism are performed for having operation
      efficiency and also saving both wireless bandwidth and vehicle
      energy.  In addition, three new ND options for prefix discovery,
      service discovery, and mobility information report are defined to
      announce the network prefixes and services inside a vehicle (i.e., a
      vehicle's internal network).

  "DNS Name Autoconfiguration for Internet-of-Things Devices in IP-Based
  Vehicular Networks", Jaehoon Jeong, Yoseop Ahn, Sejun Lee, J., PARK,
  2022-02-21, <draft-jeong-ipwave-iot-dns-autoconf-12.txt>

      This document specifies an autoconfiguration scheme for device
      discovery and service discovery in IP-based vehicular networks.
      Through the device discovery, this document supports the global (or
      local) DNS naming of Internet-of-Things (IoT) devices, such as
      sensors, actuators, and in-vehicle units.  By this scheme, the DNS
      name of an IoT device can be autoconfigured with the device's model
      information in wired and wireless target networks (e.g., vehicle,
      road network, home, office, shopping mall, and smart grid).  Through
      the service discovery, IoT users (e.g., drivers, passengers, home
      residents, and customers) in the Internet (or local network) can
      easily identify each device for monitoring and remote-controlling it
      in a target network.

  "Signaling extensions for Media Channel sub-carriers configuration in
  Spectrum Switched Optical Networks (SSON) in Lambda Switch Capable (LSC)
  Optical Line Systems.", Gabriele Galimberti, Domenico Fauci, Andrea
  Zanardi, Lorenzo Galvagni, Julien Meuric, 2021-12-29,
  <draft-ggalimbe-ccamp-flexigrid-carrier-label-12.txt>

      This memo defines the signaling extensions for managing Spectrum
      Switched Optical Network (SSON) parameters shared between the Client
      and the Network and inside the Network in accordance to the model
      described in [RFC7698].  The extensions are in accordance and
      extending the parameters defined in ITU-T Recommendation
      G.694.1.[ITU.G694.1] and its extensions and G.872.[ITU.G872].

  "OSPF Extensions for Broadcast Inter-AS TE Link", Huaimo Chen, Mehmet Toy,
  Xufeng Liu, Lei Liu, Zhenqiang Li, Yi Yang, 2022-01-10,
  <draft-chen-ospf-ias-lk-08.txt>

      This document presents extensions to the Open Shortest Path First
      (OSPF) for advertising broadcast inter-AS Traffic Engineering (TE)
      links.

  "ISIS Extensions for Broadcast Inter-AS TE Link", Huaimo Chen, Mehmet Toy,
  Xufeng Liu, Lei Liu, Zhenqiang Li, Yi Yang, 2022-01-10,
  <draft-chen-isis-ias-lk-08.txt>

      This document presents extensions to the ISIS protocol for
      advertising broadcast inter-AS Traffic Engineering (TE) links.

  "BGP Logical Link Discovery Protocol (LLDP) Peer Discovery", Acee Lindem,
  Keyur Patel, Shawn Zandi, Jeffrey Haas, Xiaohu Xu, 2022-02-15,
  <draft-acee-idr-lldp-peer-discovery-11.txt>

      Link Layer Discovery Protocol (LLDP) or IEEE Std 802.1AB is
      implemented in networking equipment from many vendors.  It is natural
      for IETF protocols to avail this protocol for simple discovery tasks.
      This document describes how BGP would use LLDP to discover directly
      connected and 2-hop peers when peering is based on loopback
      addresses.

  "SWORN: Secure Wake on Radio Nudging", Carsten Bormann, Yizhou Li,
  2022-02-06, <draft-bormann-t2trg-sworn-05.txt>

      Normally off devices (RFC7228) would need to expend considerable
      energy resources to be reachable at all times.  Instead, MAC layer
      mechanisms are often employed that allow the last hop router of the
      device to "wake" the device via radio when needed.  Activating these
      devices even for a short time still does expend energy and thus
      should be available to authorized correspondents only.
      Traditionally, this has been achieved by heavy firewalling, allowing
      only authorized hosts to reach the device at all.  This may be too
      inflexible for an Internet of Things.
      
      The present report describes how to use a combination of currently
      standardized technologies to securely effect this authorization.
      
      We also discuss how the general approach of the original SWORN
      protocol can be extended to cover additional use cases and
      implementation environments.

  "NEAT Sockets API", Thomas Dreibholz, 2022-02-09,
  <draft-dreibholz-taps-neat-socketapi-10.txt>

      This document describes a BSD Sockets-like API on top of the
      callback-based NEAT User API.  This facilitates porting existing
      applications to use a subset of NEAT's functionality.

  "Service and Neighbor Vehicle Discovery in IPv6-Based Vehicular Networks",
  Zhiwei Yan, Jian Weng, Guanggang Geng, Jong-Hyouk Lee, Jaehoon Jeong,
  2021-11-07, <draft-yan-ipwave-nd-09.txt>

      For Cooperative Adaptive Cruise Control (C-ACC), platooning and other
      typical use cases in Intelligent Transportation System (ITS), IPv6
      communication between neighbor vehicles and between vehicle and
      server pose the following two issues: 1) how to discover a neighbor
      vehicle and the demanded service; and 2) how to discover the link-
      layer address and other metadata of the neighbor vehicle and selected
      server.  This document presents a solution to these problems based on
      DNS-SD/mDNS [RFC6762][RFC6763].

  "Performance Measurement (PM) with Alternate Marking Method in Service
  Function Chaining (SFC) Domain", Greg Mirsky, Giuseppe Fioccola, Tal
  Mizrahi, 2021-09-24, <draft-mirsky-sfc-pmamm-14.txt>

      This document describes how the alternate marking method can be used
      as the efficient performance measurement method taking advantage of
      the actual data flows in a Service Function Chaining (SFC) domain.

  "Loop avoidance using Segment Routing", Ahmed Bashandy, Clarence Filsfils,
  Stephane Litkowski, Bruno Decraene, Pierre Francois, Peter Psenak,
  2021-12-22, <draft-bashandy-rtgwg-segment-routing-uloop-12.txt>

      This document presents a mechanism aimed at providing loop avoidance
      in the case of IGP network convergence event.  The solution relies on
      the temporary use of SR policies ensuring loop-freeness over the
      post-convergence paths from the converging node to the destination.

  "Responder Initiated IP Addresses Update in MOBIKE", Valery Smyslov,
  2021-11-15, <draft-smyslov-ipsecme-ikev2-r-mobike-09.txt>

      IKEv2 Mobility and Multihoming Protocol (MOBIKE), defined in
      [RFC4555] allows peers to update their IP addresses without re-
      establishing IKE and IPsec Security Associations (SAs).  In the
      MOBIKE protocol it is the initiator of the IKE SA, who is responsible
      for selecting new SA addresses and for initiating the IP addresses
      update procedure.  This document presents an extension to the MOBIKE
      protocol that allows the responder to initiate IP address update.
      The document updates [RFC4555].

  "BFD in Demand Mode over Point-to-Point MPLS LSP", Greg Mirsky, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-mirsky-bfd-mpls-demand-11.txt>

      This document describes procedures for using Bidirectional Forwarding
      Detection (BFD) in Demand mode to detect data plane failures in
      Multiprotocol Label Switching (MPLS) point-to-point Label Switched
      Paths.

  "BGP MultiNexthop attribute", Kaliraj Vairavakkalai, Jeyananth Jeganathan,
  Gyan Mishra, 2021-12-28, <draft-kaliraj-idr-multinexthop-attribute-02.txt>

      Today, a BGP speaker can advertise one nexthop for a set of NLRIs in
      an Update.  This nexthop can be encoded in either the BGP-Nexthop
      attribute (code 3), or inside the MP_REACH attribute (code 14).
      
      For cases where multiple nexthops need to be advertised, BGP-Addpath
      is used.  Though Addpath allows basic ability to advertise multiple-
      nexthops, it does not allow the sender to specify desired
      relationship between the multiple nexthops being advertised e.g.,
      relative-preference, type of load-balancing.  These are local
      decisions at the receiving speaker based on local configuration and
      path-selection between the various additional-paths, which may tie-
      break on some arbitrary step like Router-Id or BGP nexthop address.
      
      Some scenarios with a BGP-free core may benefit from having a
      mechanism, where egress-node can signal multiple-nexthops along with
      their relationship, in one BGP route, to ingress nodes.  This
      document defines a new BGP attribute "MultiNexthop (MNH)" that can be
      used for this purpose.
      
      This attribute can be used for both labeled and unlabled BGP
      families.  The MNH can be used to advertise MPLS label along with
      nexthop for unlabeled families (e.g.  Inet Unicast, Inet6 Unicast).
      Such that, mechanisms at the transport layer can work uniformly on
      labeled and unlabled BGP families.  Service route scale can be
      confined closer to the service edge nodes, making the transport layer
      nodes light and nimble.  They dont have any service route state, only
      have service end-point state.
      
      The MNH plays different role in "downstream allocation" scenario than
      "upstream allocation" scenario.  E.g. for RFC8277 families that
      advertise downstream allocated labels, the MNH can play the "Label
      Descriptor" role, describing the forwarding semantics of the label
      being advertised.  This can be useful in network visualization and
      controller based traffic engineering (e.g.  EPE).

  "BGP signalled MPLS-namespaces", Kaliraj Vairavakkalai, Jeyananth
  Jeganathan, 2021-12-28,
  <draft-kaliraj-bess-bgp-sig-private-mpls-labels-04.txt>

      The MPLS-forwarding-layer in a core network is a shared resource.
      The MPLS FIB at nodes in this layer contains labels that are
      dynamically allocated and locally significant at that node.
      
      For some usecases like upstream-label-allocation, it is useful to be
      able to create virtual private MPLS-forwarding-layers over this
      shared MPLS-forwarding-layer.  This allows installing deterministic
      private label-values in the private-FIBs created at nodes
      participating in this private MPLS forwarding-layer, while preserving
      the "locally significant" nature of the underlying shared 'public'
      MPLS-forwarding-layer.
      
      This specification describes the procedures to create such virtual
      private MPLS-forwarding layers (private MPLS-planes) using a new BGP
      family.  And gives a few example use-cases on how this private
      forwarding-layers can be used.

  "MPT Network Layer Multipath Library", Gabor Lencse, Szabolcs Szilagyi,
  Ferenc Fejes, Marius Georgescu, 2021-12-15, <draft-lencse-tsvwg-mpt-09.txt>

      Although several contemporary IT devices have multiple network
      interfaces, communication sessions are restricted to use only one of
      them at a time due to the design of the TCP/IP protocol stack: the
      communication endpoint is identified by an IP address and a TCP or
      UDP port number. The simultaneous use of these multiple interfaces
      for a communication session would improve user experience through
      higher throughput and improved resilience to network failures.
      
      MPT is a network layer multipath solution, which provides a tunnel
      over multiple paths using the GRE-in-UDP specification, thus being
      different from both MPTCP and Huawei's GRE Tunnel Bonding Protocol.
      
      MPT can also be used as a router, routing the packets among several
      networks between the tunnel endpoints, thus establishing a multipath
      site-to-site connection.
      
      The version of tunnel IP and the version of path IP are independent
      from each other, therefore MPT can also be used for IPv6 transition
      purposes.

  "EVPN Support for L3 Fast Convergence and Aliasing/Backup Path", Ali
  Sajassi, Gaurav Badoni, Priyanka Warade, S. Pasupula, Lukas Krattiger, John
  Drake, Jorge Rabadan, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-sajassi-bess-evpn-ip-aliasing-04.txt>

      This document proposes an EVPN extension to allow several of its
      multihoming functions, fast convergence and aliasing/backup path, to
      be used in conjunction with inter-subnet forwarding.

  "BBR Congestion Control", Neal Cardwell, Yuchung Cheng, Soheil Yeganeh, Ian
  Swett, Van Jacobson, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-cardwell-iccrg-bbr-congestion-control-02.txt>

      This document specifies the BBR congestion control algorithm.  BBR
      ("Bottleneck Bandwidth and Round-trip propagation time") uses recent
      measurements of a transport connection's delivery rate, round-trip
      time, and packet loss rate to build an explicit model of the network
      path.  BBR then uses this model to control both how fast it sends
      data and the maximum volume of data it allows in flight in the
      network at any time.  Relative to loss-based congestion control
      algorithms such as Reno [RFC5681] or CUBIC [RFC8312], BBR offers
      substantially higher throughput for bottlenecks with shallow buffers
      or random losses, and substantially lower queueing delays for
      bottlenecks with deep buffers (avoiding "bufferbloat").  BBR can be
      implemented in any transport protocol that supports packet-delivery
      acknowledgment.  Thus far, open source implementations are available
      for TCP [RFC793] and QUIC [RFC9000].  This document specifies version
      2 of the BBR algorithm, also sometimes referred to as BBRv2 or bbr2.

  "Delivery Rate Estimation", Yuchung Cheng, Neal Cardwell, Soheil Yeganeh,
  Van Jacobson, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-cheng-iccrg-delivery-rate-estimation-02.txt>

      This document describes a generic algorithm for a transport protocol
      sender to estimate the current delivery rate of its data.  At a high
      level, the algorithm estimates the rate at which the network
      delivered the most recent flight of outbound data packets for a
      single flow.  In addition, it tracks whether the rate sample was
      application-limited, meaning the transmission rate was limited by the
      sending application rather than the congestion control algorithm.
      This algorithm can be implemented in any transport protocol that
      supports packet-delivery acknowledgment (thus far, open source
      implementations are available for TCP [RFC793] and QUIC [RFC9000]).

  "LISP for the Mobile Network", Dino Farinacci, Padma Pillay-Esnault, Uma
  Chunduri, 2021-09-28, <draft-farinacci-lisp-mobile-network-13.txt>

      This specification describes how the LISP architecture and protocols
      can be used in a LTE/5G mobile network to support session survivable
      EID mobility.  A recommendation is provided to SDOs on how to
      integrate LISP into the mobile network.

  "HTTP Authentication with SASL", Rick van Rein, 2022-02-03,
  <draft-vanrein-httpauth-sasl-06.txt>

      Most application-level protocols standardise their authentication
      exchanges under the SASL framework.  HTTP has taken another course,
      and often ends up replicating the work to allow individual
      mechanisms.  This specification adopts full SASL authentication into
      HTTP.

  "Reassignment of System Ports to the IESG", Mirja Kuehlewind, Sabrina
  Tanamal, 2020-02-10, <draft-kuehlewind-system-ports-05.txt>

      In the IANA Service Name and Transport Protocol Port Number Registry,
      a large number of System Ports are currently assigned to individuals
      or companies who have registered the port for the use with a certain
      protocol before RFC6335 was published.  For some of these ports, RFCs
      exist that describe the respective protocol; for others, RFCs are
      under development that define, re-define, or assign the protocol used
      for the respective port, such as in case of so-far unused UDP ports
      that have been registered together with the respective TCP port.  In
      these cases the IESG has the change control about the protocol used
      on the port (as described in the corresponding RFC) but change
      control for the port allocation iis designated to others.  Under
      existing operational procedures, this means the original assignee
      needs to be involved in chnage to the port assignment.  As it is not
      always possible to get in touch with the original assignee,
      particularly because of out-dated contact information, this current
      practice of handling historical allocation of System Ports does not
      scale well on a case-by-case basis.  To address this, this document
      instructs IANA to perform actions with the goal to reassign System
      Ports to the IESG that were assigned to individuals prior to the
      publication of RFC6335, where appropriate.

  "IPv6 Source Routing for ultralow Latency", Andreas Foglar, Mike Parker,
  Theodoros Rokkas, Mikhail Khokhlov, 2021-11-22,
  <draft-foglar-ipv6-ull-routing-10.txt>

      This Internet-Draft describes a hierarchical addressing scheme
      for IPv6, intentionally very much simplified to allow for ultralow
      latency source routing experimentation using simple forwarding
      nodes. Research groups evaluate achievable latency reduction for
      special applications such as radio access networks, industrial net-
      works or other networks requiring very low latency.

  "MISP object template format", Alexandre Dulaunoy, Andras Iklody,
  2022-02-15, <draft-dulaunoy-misp-object-template-format-05.txt>

      This document describes the MISP object template format which
      describes a simple JSON format to represent the various templates
      used to construct MISP objects.  A public directory of common
      vocabularies MISP object templates [MISP-O] is available and relies
      on the MISP object reference format.

  "Simple Group Keying Protocol (SGKP)", Donald Eastlake, Dacheng Zhang,
  2021-11-27, <draft-ietf-trill-group-keying-09.txt>

      This document specifies a simple general group keying protocol that
      provides for the distribution of shared secret keys to group members
      and the management of such keys. It assumes that secure pairwise keys
      can be created between any two group members.

  "Elliptic curve 2y^2=x^3+x over field size 8^91+5", Daniel Brown,
  2021-09-30, <draft-brown-ec-2y2-x3-x-mod-8-to-91-plus-5-08.txt>

      Multi-curve elliptic curve cryptography with curve
      2y^2=x^3+x/GF(8^91+5) hedges a risk of new curve-specific attacks.
      This curve features: isomorphism to Miller's curve from 1985; low
      Kolmogorov complexity (little room for embedded weaknesses of
      Gordon, Young--Yung, or Teske); similarity to a Bitcoin curve;
      Montgomery form; complex multiplication by i
      (Gallant--Lambert--Vanstone); prime field; easy reduction,
      inversion, Legendre symbol, and square root; five 64-bit-word field
      arithmetic; string-as-point encoding; and 34-byte keys.

  "A YANG Data Model for Client-layer Tunnel", Haomian Zheng, Aihua Guo,
  Italo Busi, Yunbin Xu, Yang Zhao, Xufeng Liu, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-zheng-ccamp-client-tunnel-yang-10.txt>

      A transport network is a server-layer network to provide connectivity
      services to its client.  In this draft the tunnel of client is
      described, with the definition of client tunnel YANG model.

  "I2NSF on the NFV Reference Architecture", Hyunsik Yang, Sun Kj, Younghan
  Kim, Jaehoon Jeong, 2021-11-17, <draft-yang-i2nsf-nfv-architecture-07.txt>

      This document describes the integration of Interface to Network
      Security Functions (I2NSF) Framework into the Network Functions
      Virtualization (NFV) Reference Model.  This document explains how the
      components and interfaces in the I2NSF Framework can be placed in the
      NFV reference architecture, and also explains the procedures of the
      lifecycle management of Network Security Functions (NSFs) according
      to a user's security policy specification in the I2NSF framework on
      the NFV system.

  "YANG Model for QoS Operational Parameters", Aseem Choudhary, Ing-Wher
  Chen, 2022-03-07, <draft-asechoud-rtgwg-qos-oper-model-10.txt>

      This document describes a YANG model for Quality of Service (QoS)
      operational parameters.

  "DNS-SD Compatible Service Discovery in GeneRic Autonomic Signaling
  Protocol (GRASP)", Toerless Eckert, Mohamed Boucadair, Christian Jacquenet,
  Michael Behringer, 2022-03-04, <draft-eckert-anima-grasp-dnssd-03.txt>

      DNS Service Discovery (DNS-SD) defines a framework for applications
      to announce and discover services.  This includes service names,
      service instance names, common parameters for selecting a service
      instance (weight or priority) as well as other service-specific
      parameters.  For the specific case of autonomic networks, GeneRic
      Autonomic Signaling Protocol (GRASP) intends to be used for service
      discovery in addition to the setup of basic connectivity.
      Reinventing advanced service discovery for GRASP with a similar set
      of features as DNS-SD would result in duplicated work.  To avoid
      that, this document defines how to use GRASP to announce and discover
      services relying upon DNS-SD features while maintaining the intended
      simplicity of GRASP.  To that aim, the document defines name
      discovery and schemes for reusable elements in GRASP objectives.

  "CoAP: Non-traditional response forms", Carsten Bormann, Christian Amsuess,
  2022-02-03, <draft-bormann-core-responses-01.txt>

      In CoAP as defined by RFC 7252, responses are always unicast back to
      a client that posed a request.  The present memo describes two forms
      of responses that go beyond that model.  These descriptions are not
      intended as advocacy for adopting these approaches immediately, they
      are provided to point out potential avenues for development that
      would have to be carefully evaluated.

  "HTTP Live Streaming 2nd Edition", Roger Pantos, 2021-11-08,
  <draft-pantos-hls-rfc8216bis-10.txt>

      This document obsoletes RFC 8216.  It describes a protocol for
      transferring unbounded streams of multimedia data.  It specifies the
      data format of the files and the actions to be taken by the server
      (sender) and the clients (receivers) of the streams.  It describes
      version 10 of this protocol.

  "A Decent LISP Mapping System (LISP-Decent)", Dino Farinacci, Colin
  Cantrell, 2022-02-21, <draft-farinacci-lisp-decent-09.txt>

      This draft describes how the LISP mapping system designed to be
      distributed for scale can also be decentralized for management and
      trust.

  "Health Check Response Format for HTTP APIs", Irakli Nadareishvili,
  2021-10-16, <draft-inadarei-api-health-check-06.txt>

      This document proposes a service health check response format for
      HTTP APIs.

  "A feature freezer for the Concise Data Definition Language (CDDL)",
  Carsten Bormann, 2021-12-26, <draft-bormann-cbor-cddl-freezer-09.txt>

      In defining the Concise Data Definition Language (CDDL), some
      features have turned up that would be nice to have.  In the interest
      of completing this specification in a timely manner, the present
      document was started to collect nice-to-have features that did not
      make it into the first RFC for CDDL, RFC 8610, or the specifications
      exercising its extension points, such as RFC 9165.
      
      It is now time to discuss thawing some of the concepts discussed
      here.  A number of additional proposals have been added.

  "Simple Group Keying Protocol TRILL Use Profiles", Donald Eastlake, Dacheng
  Zhang, 2021-11-28, <draft-ietf-trill-link-gk-profiles-08.txt>

      This document specifies use profiles for the application of the
      simple group keying protocol (SGKP) to multi-destination TRILL
      Extended RBridge Channel message security (RFC 7978) and TRILL over
      IP packet security (draft-ietf-trill-over-ip).

  "IPv4+ The Extended Protocol Based On IPv4", ZiQiang Tang, 2022-01-24,
  <draft-tang-ipv4plus-08.txt>

      This document specifies version 4+ of the Internet Protocol
      (IPv4+). IPv4 is very successful,simple and elegant.
      continuation and expansion of the IPv4 is necessary. Existing
      systems, devices only need to upgrade the software to support
      IPv4+, without the need to update new hardwares,saving
      investment costs. Ipv4+ is also an interstellar Protocol,
      so the Internet will evolve into a star Internet.

  "Unified Identifier in IPv6 Segment Routing Networks", Weiqiang Cheng, Greg
  Mirsky, Shaofu Peng, Aihua Liu, Gyan Mishra, 2021-09-25,
  <draft-mirsky-6man-unified-id-sr-10.txt>

      Segment Routing architecture leverages the paradigm of source
      routing.  It can be realized in a network data plane by prepending
      the packet with a list of instructions, a.k.a. segments.  A segment
      can be encoded as a Multi-Protocol Label Switching (MPLS) label, IPv4
      address, or IPv6 address.  Segment Routing can be applied in the MPLS
      data plane by encoding segments in the MPLS label stack.  It also can
      be applied to the IPv6 data plane by encoding a list of segment
      identifiers in IPv6 Segment Routing Extension Header (SRH).  This
      document extends the use of the SRH to unified segment identifiers
      encoded, for example, as MPLS label or IPv4 address, to compress the
      SRH, and support more detailed network programming and interworking
      between SR-MPLS and SRv6 domains.

  "Hybrid Two-Step Performance Measurement Method", Greg Mirsky, Wang
  Lingqiang, Guo Zhui, Haoyu Song, 2022-01-26,
  <draft-mirsky-ippm-hybrid-two-step-12.txt>

      Development of, and advancements in, automation of network operations
      brought new requirements for measurement methodology.  Among them is
      the ability to collect instant network state as the packet being
      processed by the networking elements along its path through the
      domain.  This document introduces a new hybrid measurement method,
      referred to as hybrid two-step, as it separates the act of measuring
      and/or calculating the performance metric from the act of collecting
      and transporting network state.

  "Synchronizing Internet Clock frequency protocol (sic)", Jose
  Alvarez-Hamelin, David Samaniego, Alfredo Ortega, Ruediger Geib,
  2021-11-08, <draft-alavarez-hamelin-tictoc-sic-08.txt>

      Synchronizing Internet Clock (sic) Frequency specifies a new secure
      method to synchronize clocks on the Internet, assuring smoothness
      (i.e., frequency stability) and robustness to man-in-the-middle
      attacks.  This protocol is oriented to assure the quality of Internet
      performance measurements, where they are frequently obtained as the
      difference of timestamps, hence frequency stability is needed.  In
      90% of all cases, Synchronized Internet Clock Frequency is highly
      accurate, with a Maximum Time Interval Error of fewer than 25
      microseconds by a minute.  Synchronized Internet Clock Frequency is
      based on a regular packet exchange and works with commodity terminal
      hardware.

  "Hierarchy of IP Controllers (HIC)", Zhenbin Li, Dhruv Dhody, Huaimo Chen,
  2022-03-07, <draft-li-teas-hierarchy-ip-controllers-09.txt>

      This document describes the interactions between various IP
      controllers in a hierarchical fashion to provide various IP services.
      It describes how the Abstraction and Control of Traffic Engineered
      Networks (ACTN) framework is applied to the Hierarchy of IP
      controllers (HIC) as well as document the interactions with other
      protocols like BGP, Path Computation Element Communication Protocol
      (PCEP) to provide end to end dynamic services spanning multiple
      domains and controllers (e.g.  Layer 3 Virtual Private Network
      (L3VPN), Seamless MPLS etc).

  "Blockchain Transaction Protocol for Constraint Nodes", Pascal Urien,
  2021-12-16, <draft-urien-core-blockchain-transaction-protocol-07.txt>

      The goal of the blockchain transaction protocol for constraint nodes
      is to enable the generation of blockchain transactions by constraint
      nodes, according to the following principles:
      - transactions are triggered by Provisioning-Messages that include
      the needed blockchain parameters.
      - binary encoded transactions are returned in Transaction-Messages,
      which include sensors/actuators data. Constraint nodes, associated
      with blockchain addresses, compute the transaction signature.

  "EVPN All Active Usage Enhancement", Donald Eastlake, Zhenbin Li, Haibo
  Wang, Russ White, 2021-12-31,
  <draft-eastlake-bess-enhance-evpn-all-active-08.txt>

      A principal feature of EVPN is the ability to support multihoming
      from a customer equipment (CE) to multiple provider edge equipment
      (PE) active with all-active links. This draft specifies an
      improvement to load balancing such links.

  "Bidirectional Forwarding Detection (BFD) for Segment Routing Policies for
  Traffic Engineering", Zafar Ali, Ketan Talaulikar, Clarence Filsfils,
  Nagendra Nainar, Carlos Pignataro, 2021-11-13,
  <draft-ali-spring-bfd-sr-policy-08.txt>

      Segment Routing (SR) allows a headend node to steer a packet flow
      along any path using a segment list which is referred to as a SR
      Policy.  Intermediate per-flow states are eliminated thanks to source
      routing.  The header of a packet steered in an SR Policy is augmented
      with the ordered list of segments associated with that SR Policy.
      Bidirectional Forwarding Detection (BFD) is used to monitor different
      kinds of paths between node.  BFD mechanisms can be also used to
      monitor the availability of the path indicated by a SR Policy and to
      detect any failures.  Seamless BFD (S-BFD) extensions provide a
      simplified mechanism which is suitable for monitoring of paths that
      are setup dynamically and on a large scale.
      
      This document describes the use of Seamless BFD (S-BFD) mechanism to
      monitor the SR Policies that are used for Traffic Engineering (TE) in
      SR deployments.

  "mLDP Extensions for Multi-Topology Routing", IJsbrand Wijnands, Syed Raza,
  Mankamana Mishra, Anuj Budhiraja, Zhaohui Zhang, Arkadiy Gulko, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-wijnands-mpls-mldp-multi-topology-04.txt>

      Multi-Topology Routing (MTR) is a technology to enable service
      differentiation within an IP network.  Flexible Algorithm (FA) is
      another mechanism of creating a sub-topology within a topology using
      defined topology constraints and computation algorithm.  In order to
      deploy mLDP in a network that supports MTR and/or FA, mLDP is
      required to become topology and FA aware.  This document specifies
      extensions to mLDP to support MTR with FA such that when building a
      Multi-Point LSPs it can follow a particular topology and algorithm.

  "Service Function discovery in fog environments", Carlos Bernardos, Alain
  Mourad, 2021-10-20, <draft-bernardos-sfc-discovery-07.txt>

      Service function chaining (SFC) allows the instantiation of an
      ordered set of service functions and subsequent "steering" of traffic
      through them.  Service functions provide an specific treatment of
      received packets, therefore they need to be known so they can be used
      in a given service composition via SFC.  This document discusses the
      need for service function discovery mechanisms and propose some
      solutions for sfc-aware nodes to discover available service functions
      in fog environments.

  "EVPN VXLAN Bypass VTEP", Donald Eastlake, Zhenbin Li, Shunwan Zhuang, Russ
  White, 2021-12-29, <draft-eastlake-bess-evpn-vxlan-bypass-vtep-09.txt>

      A principal feature of EVPN is the ability to support multihoming
      from a customer equipment (CE) to multiple provider edge equipment
      (PE) with all-active links. This draft specifies a mechanism to
      simplify PEs used with VXLAN tunnels and enhance VXLAN Active-Active
      reliability.

  "Origin Validation Policy Considerations for Dropping Invalid Routes",
  Kotikalapudi Sriram, Oliver Borchert, Doug Montgomery, 2021-11-28,
  <draft-sriram-sidrops-drop-invalid-policy-08.txt>

      Deployment of Resource Public Key Infrastructure (RPKI) and Route
      Origin Authorizations (ROAs) is expected to occur gradually over
      several or many years.  During the incremental deployment period,
      network operators would wish to have a meaningful policy for dropping
      Invalid routes.  Their goal is to balance (A) dropping Invalid routes
      so hijacked routes can be eliminated, versus (B) tolerance for
      missing or erroneously created ROAs for customer prefixes.  This
      document considers a Drop Invalid if Still Routable (DISR) policy
      that is based on these considerations.  The key principle of DISR
      policy is that an Invalid route can be dropped if a Valid or NotFound
      route exists for a subsuming less specific prefix.

  "Traffic Accounting in Segment Routing Networks", Zafar Ali, Clarence
  Filsfils, Ketan Talaulikar, Siva Sivabalan, Martin Horneffer, Robert
  Raszuk, Stephane Litkowski, Dan Voyer, Rick Morton, 2021-11-13,
  <draft-ali-spring-sr-traffic-accounting-06.txt>

      Capacity planning is the continuous art of forecasting traffic
      load and failures to evolve the network topology, its capacity,
      and its routing to meet a defined Service-Level Agreement (SLA).
      This document takes a holistic view of network capacity planning
      and identifies the role of traffic accounting in network
      operation and capacity planning, without creating any additional
      states in the SR fabric.

  "In-situ OAM raw data export with IPFIX", Mickey Spiegel, Frank Brockners,
  Shwetha Bhandari, Ramesh Sivakolundu, 2022-02-21,
  <draft-spiegel-ippm-ioam-rawexport-06.txt>

      In-situ Operations, Administration, and Maintenance (IOAM) records
      operational and telemetry information in the packet while the packet
      traverses a path between two points in the network.  This document
      discusses how In-situ Operations, Administration, and Maintenance
      (IOAM) information can be exported in raw, i.e. uninterpreted, format
      from network devices to systems, such as monitoring or analytics
      systems using IPFIX.

  "Optimization of RWA Problem through OSNR", Shan Yin, Shanguo Huang, Shuang
  Zhou, Xiangkai Meng, Rong Ma, 2021-11-14, <draft-yin-rwa-osnr-09.txt>

      This documentary provides a kind of routing optimization method. In
      the basic of RWA solution method, both the output power of the route
      and the OSNR value of the optical signal noise ratio are considered.
      The selected optimal route has a lower bit error rate and the whole
      communication network performance is improved.

  "SR Policy Implementation and Deployment Considerations", Clarence
  Filsfils, Ketan Talaulikar, Przemyslaw Krol, Martin Horneffer, Paul Mattes,
  2021-10-22, <draft-filsfils-spring-sr-policy-considerations-08.txt>

      Segment Routing (SR) allows a headend node to steer a packet flow
      along any path.  Intermediate per-flow states are eliminated thanks
      to source routing.  SR Policy framework enables the instantiation and
      the management of necessary state on the headend node for flows along
      a source routed paths using an ordered list of segments associated
      with their specific SR Policies.  This document describes some of the
      implementation and deployment aspects that are useful for
      operationalizing the SR Policy architecture.

  "RSCA method with Dividing Frequency Slots Area in Space Division
  Multiplexing Elastic Optical Networks", Shanguo Huang, Shan Yin, Shuang
  Zhou, 2021-11-14, <draft-huang-rsca-sdm-eon-07.txt>

      This documentary provides a routing, spectrum and core assignment
      method with the dividing frequency slots area for space division
      multiplexing elastic optical networks. This effective RSCA method to
      solve this problem better. The proposed method utilizes the Frequency
      Slots Area (FSA) concept and first-last fit policy of frequency slots
      assignment to have less spectrum fragments, lower crosstalk, smaller
      traffic blocking probability and higher spectrum resource utilization.

  "IMAP Service Extension for Client Identity", Deion Yu, 2021-11-18,
  <draft-yu-imap-client-id-07.txt>

      This document defines an Internet Message Access Protocol (IMAP)
      service extension called "CLIENTID" which provides a method for
      clients to indicate an identity to the server.
      
      This identity is an additional token that may be used for security
      and/or informational purposes, and with it a server may optionally
      apply heuristics using this token.

  "Segment Routing Traffic Accounting Counters", Clarence Filsfils, Zafar
  Ali, Martin Horneffer, Dan Voyer, Muhammad Durrani, Robert Raszuk,
  2021-10-17, <draft-filsfils-spring-sr-traffic-counters-02.txt>

      Segment Routing (SR) allows a headend node to steer a packet flow
      along any path.  Intermediate per-flow states are eliminated thanks
      to source routing.  Traffic accounting plays a critical role in
      network operation.  A traffic account solution is required for SR
      networks that provides the necessary functionality without creating
      any additional per SR path states in the fabric.
      
      This document describes counters for traffic accounting in SR
      networks.

  "The IPv6 Tunnel Payload Forwarding (TPF) Option", Ron Bonica, Yuji Kamite,
  Luay Jalil, Yifeng Zhou, Gang Chen, 2022-01-17,
  <draft-bonica-6man-vpn-dest-opt-17.txt>

      This document explains how IPv6 options can be used in IPv6 tunnels.
      It also defines the IPv6 Tunnel Payload Forwarding (TPF) option.

  "Preferred Path Routing (PPR) in IS-IS", Uma Chunduri, Richard Li, Russ
  White, Luis Contreras, Jeff Tantsura, Yingzhen Qu, 2021-11-12,
  <draft-chunduri-lsr-isis-preferred-path-routing-07.txt>

      This document specifies a Preferred Path Routing (PPR), a routing
      protocol mechanism to simplify the path description using IS-IS
      protocol.  PPR builds on existing encapsulation to add the path
      identity to the packet and supports further extensions along the
      preferred paths.  PPR aims to provide path steering, services and
      support further extensions along the paths.  Preferred path routing
      is achieved through the addition of path descriptions to the IS-IS
      advertised prefixes, and mapping those to a PPR data-plane
      identifier.

  "PCE Controlled ID Space", Cheng Li, Mach Chen, Aijun Wang, Weiqiang Cheng,
  Chao Zhou, 2022-02-24, <draft-li-pce-controlled-id-space-10.txt>

      The Path Computation Element Communication Protocol (PCEP) provides a
      mechanisms for the Path Computation Elements (PCEs) to perform path
      computations in response to Path Computation Clients (PCCs) requests.
      The Stateful PCE extensions allow stateful control of Multiprotocol
      Label Switching (MPLS) Traffic Engineering (TE) Label Switched Paths
      (LSPs) using PCEP.  Furthermore, PCE can be used for computing paths
      in the SR networks.
      
      Stateful PCE provide active control of MPLS-TE LSPs via PCEP, for a
      model where the PCC delegates control over one or more locally
      configured LSPs to the PCE.  Further, stateful PCE could also create
      and remove PCE-initiated LSPs by itself.  A PCE-based Central
      Controller (PCECC) simplify the processing of a distributed control
      plane by integrating with elements of Software-Defined Networking
      (SDN).
      
      In some use cases, such as PCECC or Binding Segment Identifier (SID)
      for Segment Routing (SR), there are requirements for a stateful PCE
      to make allocation of labels, SIDs, etc.  These use cases require PCE
      aware of various identifier spaces from where to make allocations on
      behalf of a PCC.  This document describes a mechanism for a PCC to
      inform the PCE of the identifier space set aside for the PCE control
      via PCEP.  The identifier could be an MPLS label, a SID or any other
      to-be-defined identifier that can be allocated by a PCE.

  "IGP Extensions for Scalable Segment Routing based Enhanced VPN", Jie Dong,
  Zhibo Hu, Zhenbin Li, Xiongyan Tang, Ran Pang, Lee JooHeon, Stewart Bryant,
  2022-01-29, <draft-dong-lsr-sr-enhanced-vpn-07.txt>

      Enhanced VPN (VPN+) aims to provide enhanced VPN services to support
      some application's needs of enhanced isolation and stringent
      performance requirements.  VPN+ requires integration between the
      overlay VPN connectivity and the characteristics provided by the
      underlay network.  A Virtual Transport Network (VTN) is a virtual
      underlay network which has a customized network topology and a set of
      network resources allocated from the physical network.  A VTN could
      be used to support one or a group of VPN+ services.
      
      This document specifies the IGP mechanisms with necessary extensions
      to advertise the associated topology and resource attributes for
      scalable Segment Routing (SR) based VTNs.  Each VTN can have a
      customized topology and a set of network resources allocated from the
      physical network.  Multiple VTNs may shared the same topology, and
      multiple VTNs may share the same set of network resources on some
      network segments.  A group of resource-aware SIDs are allocated for
      each VTN.  This allows flexible combination of the network topology
      and network resource attributes to build a relatively large number of
      VTNs with a small number of logical topologies.  The proposed
      mechanism is applicable to both Segment Routing with MPLS data plane
      (SR-MPLS) and segment routing with IPv6 data plane (SRv6).  This
      document also describes the mechanisms of using dedicated VTN-ID in
      the data plane instead of the per-VTN resource-aware SIDs to further
      reduce the control plane overhead.

  "TLS 1.3 Authentication and Integrity only Cipher Suites", Nancy
  Cam-Winget, Jack Visoky, 2021-06-17,
  <draft-camwinget-tls-ts13-macciphersuites-12.txt>

      This document defines the use of HMAC-only cipher suites for TLS 1.3,
      which provides server and optionally mutual authentication and data
      authenticity, but not data confidentiality.  Cipher suites with these
      properties are not of general applicability, but there are use cases,
      specifically in Internet of Things (IoT) and constrained
      environments, that do not require confidentiality of exchanged
      messages while still requiring integrity protection, server
      authentication, and optional client authentication.  This document
      gives examples of such use cases, with the caveat that prior to using
      these integrity-only cipher suites, a threat model for the situation
      at hand is needed, and a threat analysis must be performed within
      that model to determine whether the use of integrity-only cipher
      suites is appropriate.  The approach described in this document is
      not endorsed by the IETF and does not have IETF consensus, but is
      presented here to enable interoperable implementation of a reduced
      security mechanism that provides authentication and message integrity
      without supporting confidentiality.

  "LISP Data-Plane Telemetry", Dino Farinacci, Said Ouissal, Erik Nordmark,
  2021-11-15, <draft-farinacci-lisp-telemetry-07.txt>

      This draft specs a JSON formatted RLOC-record for telemetry data
      which decapsulating xTRs include in RLOC-probe Map Reply messages.

  "Security Policy Translation in Interface to Network Security Functions",
  Jaehoon Jeong, Patrick Lingga, Jinhyuk Yang, Chaehong Chung, 2022-02-21,
  <draft-yang-i2nsf-security-policy-translation-10.txt>

      This document proposes a scheme of security policy translation (i.e.,
      Security Policy Translator) in Interface to Network Security
      Functions (I2NSF) Framework.  When I2NSF User delivers a high-level
      security policy for a security service, Security Policy Translator in
      Security Controller translates it into a low-level security policy
      for Network Security Functions (NSFs).  For this security policy
      translation, this document specifies the mapping between a high-level
      security policy based on the Consumer-Facing Interface YANG data
      model and a low-level security policy based on the NSF-Facing
      Interface YANG data model.  Also, it describes an architecture of a
      security policy translator along with an NSF database, and the
      process of security policy translation with the NSF database.

  "Design Discussion of Route Leaks Solution Methods", Kotikalapudi Sriram,
  2022-03-07, <draft-sriram-idr-route-leak-solution-discussion-07.txt>

      This document captures the design rationale of the route leaks
      solution document (see draft-ietf-idr-route-leak-detection-
      mitigation, draft-ietf-grow-route-leak-detection-mitigation).  The
      designers needed to balance many competing factors, and this document
      provides insights into the design questions and their resolution.

  "Terminology for Cryptoassets", Hirotaka Nakajima, Masanori Kusunoki,
  Keiichi Hida, Yuji Suga, Tatsuya Hayashi, 2022-01-05,
  <draft-nakajima-crypto-asset-terminology-07.txt>

      This document provides terminology used in cryptoassets.

  "MPLS Extension Header", Haoyu Song, Zhenbin Li, Tianran Zhou, Loa
  Andersson, Zhaohui Zhang, 2022-01-10,
  <draft-song-mpls-extension-header-06.txt>

      Motivated by the need to support multiple in-network services and
      functions in an MPLS network, this document describes a generic and
      extensible method to encapsulate extension headers into MPLS packets.
      The encapsulation method allows stacking multiple extension headers
      and quickly accessing any of them as well as the original upper layer
      protocol header and payload.  We show how the extension header can be
      used to support several new network applications and optimize some
      existing network services.

  "Flexible Session Protocol", Jun-an Gao, 2021-10-17,
  <draft-gao-flexible-session-protocol-07.txt>

      FSP is a connection-oriented transport layer protocol that provides
      mobility and multihoming support by introducing the concept of 'upper
      layer thread ID', which is associated with some shared secret that is
      applied with some secure hash or authenticated encryption algorithm
      to protect authenticity of the origin of the FSP packets.  It is able
      to provide following services to the upper layer application:
      
      o  Stream-oriented send-receive with native message boundary
      o  Flexibility to exploit authenticated encryption
      o  On-the-wire compression
      o  Light-weight session management

  "Implementation notes for RFC7991,", Henrik Levkowetz, 2021-09-16,
  <draft-levkowetz-xml2rfc-v3-implementation-notes-13.txt>

      This memo documents issues and observations found while implementing
      RFC 7991.  Individual notes are organised into separate sections,
      depending on their character.

  "The Multihash Data Format", Juan Benet, Manu Sporny, 2022-02-16,
  <draft-multiformats-multihash-04.txt>

      Cryptographic hash functions often have multiple output sizes and
      encodings.  This variability makes it difficult for applications to
      examine a series of bytes and determine which hash function produced
      them.  Multihash is a universal data format for encoding outputs from
      hash functions.  It is useful to write applications that can
      simultaneously support different hash function outputs as well as
      upgrade their use of hashes over time; Multihash is intended to
      address these needs.

  "Access Extensions for ANCP", Hongyu Li, Thomas Haag, Birgit Witschurke,
  2021-10-01, <draft-lihawi-ancp-protocol-access-extension-07.txt>

      The purpose of this document is to specify extensions to ANCP (Access
      Node Control Protocol) (RFC6320) to support PON as described in
      RFC6934 and some other DSL Technologies including G.fast.  This
      document updates RFC6320 by modifications to terminologies, flows and
      specifying new TLV types.
      
      This document updates RFC6320 by modifications to terminologies,
      flows and specifying new TLV types.

  "IPv6-based discovery and association of Virtualization Infrastructure
  Manager (VIM) and Network Function Virtualization Orchestrator (NFVO)",
  Carlos Bernardos, Alain Mourad, 2021-09-09,
  <draft-bernardos-intarea-vim-discovery-06.txt>

      Virtualized resources do not need to be limited to those available in
      traditional data centers, where the infrastructure is stable, static,
      typically homogeneous and managed by a single admin entity.
      Computational capabilities are becoming more and more ubiquitous,
      with terminal devices getting extremely powerful, as well as other
      types of devices that are close to the end users at the edge (e.g.,
      vehicular onboard devices for infotainment, micro data centers
      deployed at the edge, etc.).  It is envisioned that these devices
      would be able to offer storage, computing and networking resources to
      nearby network infrastructure, devices and things (the fog paradigm).
      These resources can be used to host functions, for example to
      offload/complement other resources available at traditional data
      centers, but also to reduce the end-to-end latency or to provide
      access to specialized information (e.g., context available at the
      edge) or hardware.
      
      This document describes mechanisms allowing dynamic discovery of
      virtualization resources and orchestrators in IPv6-based networks.
      In the current version, mechanisms based on piggybacking options on
      IPv6 neighbor discovery are explored.  New IPv6 neighbor discovery
      options are defined.  Additional mechanisms will be explored in
      future releases of this document.

  "Discovery of OSCORE Groups with the CoRE Resource Directory", Marco
  Tiloca, Christian Amsuess, Peter van der Stok, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-tiloca-core-oscore-discovery-11.txt>

      Group communication over the Constrained Application Protocol (CoAP)
      can be secured by means of Group Object Security for Constrained
      RESTful Environments (Group OSCORE).  At deployment time, devices may
      not know the exact security groups to join, the respective Group
      Manager, or other information required to perform the joining
      process.  This document describes how a CoAP endpoint can use
      descriptions and links of resources registered at the CoRE Resource
      Directory to discover security groups and to acquire information for
      joining them through the respective Group Manager.  A given security
      group may protect multiple application groups, which are separately
      announced in the Resource Directory as sets of endpoints sharing a
      pool of resources.  This approach is consistent with, but not limited
      to, the joining of security groups based on the ACE framework for
      Authentication and Authorization in constrained environments.

  "Inband Flow Analyzer", Jai Kumar, Surendra Anubolu, John Lemon, Rajeev
  Manur, Hugh Holbrook, Anoop Ghanwani, Dezhong Cai, Heidi Ou, Yizhou Li,
  Xiaojun Wang, 2022-01-20, <draft-kumar-ippm-ifa-04.txt>

      Inband Flow Analyzer (IFA) records flow specific information from an
      end station and/or switches across a network.  This document
      discusses the method to collect data on a per hop basis across a
      network and perform localized or end to end analytics operations on
      the data.  This document also describes a transport-agnostic header
      definition that may be used for tunneled and non-tunneled flows
      alike.

  "In-Situ OAM Marking-based Direct Export", Haoyu Song, Greg Mirsky,
  Clarence Filsfils, Ahmed Abdelsalam, Tianran Zhou, Zhenbin Li, Jongyoon
  Shin, Kyungtae Lee, 2021-11-15,
  <draft-song-ippm-postcard-based-telemetry-11.txt>

      The document describes a packet-marking variation of the IOAM DEX
      option, referred to as IOAM Marking.  Similar to IOAM DEX, IOAM
      Marking does not carry the telemetry data in user packets but send
      the telemetry data through a dedicated packet.  Unlike IOAM DEX, IOAM
      Marking does not require an extra instruction header.  IOAM Marking
      raises some unique issues that need to be considered.  This document
      formally describes the high level scheme and cover the common
      requirements and issues when applying IOAM Marking in different
      networks.  IOAM Marking is complementary to the other on-path
      telemetry schemes such as IOAM trace and E2E options.

  "Secure EVPN", Ali Sajassi, Ayan Banerjee, Samir Thoria, David Carrel,
  Brian Weis, John Drake, 2021-10-25, <draft-sajassi-bess-secure-evpn-05.txt>

      The applications of EVPN-based solutions ([RFC7432] and [RFC8365])
      have become pervasive in Data Center, Service Provider, and
      Enterprise segments.  It is being used for fabric overlays and inter-
      site connectivity in the Data Center market segment, for Layer-2,
      Layer-3, and IRB VPN services in the Service Provider market segment,
      and for fabric overlay and WAN connectivity in Enterprise networks.
      For Data Center and Enterprise applications, there is a need to
      provide inter-site and WAN connectivity over public Internet in a
      secured manner with same level of privacy, integrity, and
      authentication for tenant's traffic as IPsec tunneling using IKEv2.
      This document presents a solution where BGP point-to-multipoint
      signaling is leveraged for key and policy exchange among PE devices
      to create private pair-wise IPsec Security Associations without IKEv2
      point-to-point signaling or any other direct peer-to-peer session
      establishment messages.

  "Enhanced Alternate Marking Method", Tianran Zhou, Giuseppe Fioccola,
  Yisong Liu, Mauro Cociglio, Shinyoung Lee, Weidong Li, 2022-02-28,
  <draft-zhou-ippm-enhanced-alternate-marking-09.txt>

      This document extends the IPv6 Alternate Marking Option to provide
      enhanced capabilities and allow advanced functionalities.  With this
      extension, it can be possible to perform thicker packet loss
      measurements and more dense delay measurements with no limitation for
      the number of concurrent flows under monitoring.

  "Terminology, Power, and Exclusionary Language in Internet-Drafts and
  RFCs", Mallory Knodel, Niels ten Oever, 2022-02-09,
  <draft-knodel-terminology-09.txt>

      This document argues for more inclusive language conventions
      sometimes used by RFC authors and the RFC Production Centre in
      Internet-Drafts that are work in progress, and in new RFCs that may
      be published in any of the RFC series, in order to foster greater
      knowledge transfer and improve diversity of participation in the
      IETF.
      
      This document represents the opinion of the authors and does not have
      IETF consensus.

  "Path Computation Element Communication Protocol (PCEP) Procedures and
  Extensions for Using the PCE as a Central Controller (PCECC) for SRv6 SID
  Allocation and Distribution.", Zhenbin Li, Shuping Peng, Xuesong Geng,
  Mahendra Negi, 2022-03-06,
  <draft-dhody-pce-pcep-extension-pce-controller-srv6-08.txt>

      The Path Computation Element (PCE) is a core component of Software-
      Defined Networking (SDN) systems.
      
      A PCE-based Central Controller (PCECC) can simplify the processing of
      a distributed control plane by blending it with elements of SDN and
      without necessarily completely replacing it.  This document specifies
      the procedures and PCEP extensions when a PCE-based controller is
      also responsible for configuring the forwarding actions on the
      routers, in addition to computing the paths for packet flows in the
      for Segment Routing (SR) in IPv6 (SRv6) network and telling the edge
      routers what instructions to attach to packets as they enter the
      network.  PCECC is further enhanced for SRv6 SID (Segment Identifier)
      allocation and distribution.

  "Path Computation Element Communication Protocol (PCEP) Procedures and
  Extensions for Using the PCE as a Central Controller (PCECC) of
  point-to-multipoint (P2MP) LSPs", Zhenbin Li, Shuping Peng, Xuesong Geng,
  Mahendra Negi, 2022-03-06,
  <draft-dhody-pce-pcep-extension-pce-controller-p2mp-08.txt>

      The Path Computation Element (PCE) is a core component of Software-
      Defined Networking (SDN) systems.
      
      The PCE has been identified as an appropriate technology for the
      determination of the paths of point-to-multipoint (P2MP) TE Label
      Switched Paths (LSPs).
      
      A PCE-based Central Controller (PCECC) can simplify the processing of
      a distributed control plane by blending it with elements of SDN and
      without necessarily completely replacing it.  Thus, the P2MP LSP can
      be calculated/set up/initiated and the label-forwarding entries can
      also be downloaded through a centralized PCE server to each network
      device along the P2MP path, while leveraging the existing PCE
      technologies as much as possible.
      
      This document specifies the procedures and Path Computation Element
      Communication Protocol (PCEP) extensions for using the PCE as the
      central controller for provisioning labels along the path of the
      static P2MP LSP.

  "Architecture for Use of BGP as Central Controller", Yujia Luo, Liang Ou,
  Xiang Huang, Gyan Mishra, Huaimo Chen, Shunwan Zhuang, Zhenbin Li,
  2022-02-22, <draft-cth-rtgwg-bgp-control-08.txt>

      BGP is a core part of a network including Software-Defined Networking
      (SDN) system.  It has the traffic engineering information on the
      network topology and can compute optimal paths for a given traffic
      flow across the network.
      
      This document describes some reference architectures for BGP as a
      central controller.  A BGP-based central controller can simplify the
      operations on the network and use network resources efficiently for
      providing services with high quality.

  "SR-TE Path Midpoint Restoration", Zhibo Hu, Huaimo Chen, Junda Yao, Chris
  Bowers, Yongqing Zhu, Yisong Liu, 2022-02-28,
  <draft-hu-spring-segment-routing-proxy-forwarding-18.txt>

      Segment Routing Traffic Engineering (SR-TE) supports explicit paths
      using segment lists containing adjacency-SIDs, node-SIDs and binding-
      SIDs.  The current SR FRR such as TI-LFA provides fast re-route
      protection for the failure of a node along a SR-TE path by the direct
      neighbor or say point of local repair (PLR) to the failure.  However,
      once the IGP converges, the SR FRR is no longer sufficient to forward
      traffic of the path around the failure, since the non-neighbors of
      the failure will no longer have a route to the failed node.  This
      document describes a mechanism for the restoration of the routes to
      the failure of a SR-MPLS TE path after the IGP converges.  It
      provides the restoration of the routes to an adjacency segment, a
      node segment and a binding segment of the path.  With the restoration
      of the routes to the failure, the traffic is continuously sent to the
      neighbor of the failure after the IGP converges.  The neighbor as a
      PLR fast re-routes the traffic around the failure.

  "EtherType Protocol Identification of In-situ OAM Data", Brian Weis, Frank
  Brockners, Craig Hill, Shwetha Bhandari, Vengada Govindan, Carlos
  Pignataro, Nagendra Nainar, Hannes Gredler, John Leddy, Stephen Youell, Tal
  Mizrahi, Aviv Kfir, Barak Gafni, Petr Lapukhov, Mickey Spiegel, 2022-02-21,
  <draft-weis-ippm-ioam-eth-05.txt>

      In-situ Operations, Administration, and Maintenance (IOAM) records
      operational and telemetry information in the packet while the packet
      traverses a path between two points in the network.  This document
      defines an EtherType that identifies IOAM data fields as being the
      next protocol in a packet, and a header that encapsulates the IOAM
      data fields.

  "Multicast/BIER As A Service", Zhaohui Zhang, Eric Rosen, Daniel Awduche,
  Liang Geng, Greg Shepherd, 2021-10-14,
  <draft-zzhang-bier-multicast-as-a-service-03.txt>

      This document describes a framework for providing multicast as a
      service via Bit Index Explicit Replication (BIER) [RFC7279], and
      specifies a few enhancements to [draft-ietf-bier-idr-extensions]
      [RFC8279] [RFC8401] [RFC8444] to enable multicast/BIER as a service.

  "AC-Aware Bundling Service Interface in EVPN", Ali Sajassi, Patrice
  Brissette, Mankamana Mishra, Samir Thoria, Jorge Rabadan, John Drake,
  2022-02-03, <draft-sajassi-bess-evpn-ac-aware-bundling-05.txt>

      EVPN provides an extensible and flexible multi-homing VPN solution
      over an MPLS/IP network for intra-subnet connectivity among Tenant
      Systems and End Devices that can be physical or virtual.
      
      EVPN multihoming with IRB is one of the common deployment scenarios.
      There are deployments which requires capability to have multiple
      subnets designated with multiple VLAN IDs in single Broadcast Domain.
      
      EVPN technology defines three different types of service interface
      which serve different requirements but none of them address the
      requirement of supporting multiple subnets within single Broadcast
      Domain.  In this draft we define new service interface type to
      support multiple subnets in single Broadcast Domain.  Service
      interface proposed in this draft will be applicable to multihoming
      case only.

  "Flowspec Indirection-id Redirect for SRv6", Gunter Van de Velde, Keyur
  Patel, Zhenbin Li, Huaimo Chen, 2022-01-10,
  <draft-ietf0-idr-srv6-flowspec-path-redirect-07.txt>

      This document defines extensions to "FlowSpec Redirect to
      indirection-id Extended Community" for SRv6.  This extended community
      can trigger advanced redirection capabilities to flowspec clients for
      SRv6.  When activated, this flowspec extended community is used by a
      flowspec client to retrieve the corresponding next-hop and encoding
      information within a localised indirection-id mapping table.
      
      The functionality detailed in this document allows a network
      controller to decouple the BGP flowspec redirection instruction from
      the operation of the available paths.

  "A Framework for In-situ Flow Information Telemetry", Haoyu Song, Fengwei
  Qin, Huanan Chen, Jaewhan Jin, Jongyoon Shin, 2022-02-22,
  <draft-song-opsawg-ifit-framework-17.txt>

      As network scale increases and network operation becomes more
      sophisticated, existing Operation, Administration, and Maintenance
      (OAM) methods are no longer sufficient to meet the monitoring and
      measurement requirements.  Emerging data-plane on-path telemetry
      techniques which provide high-precision flow insight and which issue
      notifications in real time can supplement existing proactive and
      reactive methods that run in active and passive modes.  These new
      approaches are collectively known as in-situ flow information
      telemetry (IFIT).  They enable quality of experience for users and
      applications, and identification of network faults and deficiencies.
      
      This document outlines a high-level framework for IFIT to collect and
      correlate performance measurement information from the network.  It
      identifies the components that coordinate existing protocol tools and
      telemetry mechanisms, and addresses deployment challenges for flow-
      oriented on-path telemetry techniques, especially in carrier
      networks.
      
      The document is a guide for system designers applying the referenced
      techniques.  It is also intended to motivate further work to enhance
      the OAM ecosystem.

  "SRv6 and MPLS interworking", Swadesh Agrawal, Zafar Ali, Clarence
  Filsfils, Dan Voyer, Zhenbin Li, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-agrawal-spring-srv6-mpls-interworking-08.txt>

      This document describes SRv6 and MPLS/SR-MPLS interworking and co-
      existence procedures.

  "Segment Routing Header encapsulation for In-situ OAM Data", Zafar Ali,
  Rakesh Gandhi, Clarence Filsfils, Frank Brockners, Nagendra Nainar, Carlos
  Pignataro, Cheng Li, Mach Chen, Gaurav Dawra, 2022-01-12,
  <draft-ali-spring-ioam-srv6-05.txt>

      OAM and PM information from the SR endpoints can be piggybacked in
      the data packet.  The OAM and PM information piggybacking in the data
      packets is also known as In-situ OAM (IOAM). IOAM records
      operational and telemetry information in the data packet while the
      packet traverses a path between two points in the network.  This
      document defines how IOAM data fields are transported as part of the
      Segment Routing with IPv6 data plane (SRv6) header.

  "Uberlay Interconnection of Multiple LISP overlays", Victor Moreno, Dino
  Farinacci, AlbertoRodriguezNatal, Marc Portoles-Comeras, Fabio Maino,
  Sanjay Hooda, 2022-01-18, <draft-moreno-lisp-uberlay-05.txt>

      This document describes the use of the Locator/ID Separation Protocol
      (LISP) to interconnect multiple disparate and independent network
      overlays by using a transit overlay.  The transit overlay is referred
      to as the "uberlay" and provides connectivity and control plane
      abstraction between different overlays.  Each network overlay may use
      different control and data plane approaches and may be managed by a
      different organization.  Structuring the network into multiple
      network overlays enables the interworking of different overlay
      approaches to data and control plane methods.  The different network
      overlays are autonomous from a control and data plane perspective,
      this in turn enables failure survivability across overlay domains.
      This document specifies the mechanisms and procedures for the
      distribution of control plane information across overlay sites and in
      the uberlay as well as the lookup and forwarding procedures for
      unicast and multicast traffic within and across overlays.  The
      specification also defines the procedures to support inter-overlay
      mobility of EIDs and their integration with the intra-overlay EID
      mobility procedures defined in draft-ietf-lisp-eid-mobility.

  "Realm Crossover for SASL and GSS-API via Diameter", Rick van Rein, Henri
  Manson, 2022-01-28, <draft-vanrein-diameter-sasl-06.txt>

      SASL and GSS-API are used for authentication in many application
      protocols.  This specification extends them to allow credentials of
      an identity domain to be used against external services.  To this
      end, it introduces end-to-end encryption for SASL that is safe to
      relay through a foreign server.

  "Multiple Layer Resource Optimization for Optical as a Service", Hui Yang,
  Kaixuan Zhan, Ao Yu, Qiuyan Yao, Jie Zhang, 2021-10-18,
  <draft-multiple-layer-resource-optimization-06.txt>

      We have established a neural network model optimized by adaptive
      artificial fish swarm algorithm.  Then we propose a novel multi-path
      pre-reserved resource allocation strategy to increase resource
      utilization.  The results prove the effectiveness of our method.

  "Security Classes for IoT devices", Pascal Urien, 2021-12-16,
  <draft-urien-lwig-security-classes-07.txt>

      This draft attempts to define security classes for constraint IoT
      devices. A device security is characterized by five Boolean security
      attributes: one time programmable memory (OTP), firmware loader
      (FLD), secure firmware loader (FLD-SEC), tamper resistant key (TRT-
      KEY) and diversified key (DIV-KEY).
      
      This leads to the definition of 6 classes of devices, embedding or
      not OTP resource, whose security increases with the class number (0
      to 5). The suffix + indicates OTP availability.

  "MessageVortex Protocol", Martin Gwerder, 2021-10-03,
  <draft-gwerder-messagevortexmain-08.txt>

      The MessageVortex (referred to as Vortex) protocol achieves different
      degrees of anonymity, including sender, receiver, and third-party
      anonymity, by specifying messages embedded within the existing
      transfer protocols, such as SMTP or XMPP, sent via peer nodes to one
      or more recipients.
      
      The protocol outperforms others by decoupling the transport from the
      final transmitter and receiver.  No trust is placed into any
      infrastructure except for that of the sending and receiving parties
      of the message.  The creator of the routing block (routing block
      builder; RBB) has full control over the message flow.  Routing nodes
      gain no non-obvious knowledge about the messages even when
      collaborating.  While third-party anonymity is always achieved, the
      protocol also allows for either sender or receiver anonymity.

  "The Universal IPv6 Configuration Option", Timothy Winters, Ole Troan,
  2021-10-22, <draft-troan-6man-universal-ra-option-06.txt>

      One of the original intentions for the IPv6 host configuration, was
      to configure the network-layer parameters only with IPv6 ND, and use
      service discovery for other configuration information.  Unfortunately
      that hasn't panned out quite as planned, and we are in a situation
      where all kinds of configuration options are added to RAs.  This
      document proposes a new universal option for RA in a self-describing
      data format, with the list of elements maintained in an IANA
      registry, with greatly relaxed rules for registration.

  "The Multibase Data Format", Juan Benet, Manu Sporny, 2022-02-16,
  <draft-multiformats-multibase-05.txt>

      Raw binary data is often encoded using a mechanism that enables the
      data to be included in human-readable text-based formats.  This
      mechanism is often referred to as "base-encoding the data".  Base-
      encoding is often used when expressing binary data in hyperlinks,
      cryptographic keys in web pages, or security tokens in application
      software.  There are a variety of base-encodings, such as base32,
      base58, and base64.  It is not always possible to differentiate one
      base-encoding from another.  The purpose of this specification is to
      provide a mechanism to be able to deterministically identify the
      base-encoding for a particular string of data.

  "IPv6 Neighbor Discovery Unicast Lookup", Pascal Thubert, Eric
  Levy-Abegnoli, 2021-11-08, <draft-thubert-6lo-unicast-lookup-02.txt>

      This document updates RFC 8505 in order to enable unicast address
      lookup from a 6LoWPAN Border Router acting as an Address Registrar.

  "OAM for LPWAN using Static Context Header Compression (SCHC)", Dominique
  Barthel, Laurent Toutain, Arunprabhu Kandasamy, Diego Dujovne, Juan Zuniga,
  2022-02-09, <draft-barthel-lpwan-oam-schc-03.txt>

      With IP protocols now generalizing to constrained networks, users
      expect to be able to Operate, Administer and Maintain them with the
      familiar tools and protocols they already use on less constrained
      networks.
      
      OAM uses specific messages sent into the data plane to measure some
      parameters of a network.  Most of the time, no explicit values are
      sent is these messages.  Network parameters are obtained from the
      analysis of these specific messages.
      
      This can be used:
      
      *  To detect if a host is up or down.
      
      *  To measure the RTT and its variation over time.
      
      *  To learn the path used by packets to reach a destination.
      
      OAM in LPWAN is a little bit trickier since the bandwidth is limited
      and extra traffic added by OAM can introduce perturbation on regular
      transmission.
      
      Two scenarios can be investigated:
      
      *  OAM coming from internet.  In that case, the NGW should act as a

  "General Guidance for Implementing Branded Indicators for Message
  Identification (BIMI)", Alex Brotman, Terry Zink, Marc Bradshaw,
  2021-10-11, <draft-brotman-ietf-bimi-guidance-04.txt>

      This document is meant to provide guidance to various entities so
      that they may implement Brand Indicators for Message Identification
      (BIMI).  This document is a companion to various other BIMI drafts,
      which should first be consulted.

  "Dynamic MultiPath Routing Protocol", Hagen Pfeifer, Sebastian Widmann,
  2021-11-27, <draft-pfeifer-rtgwg-dmpr-01.txt>

      Dynamic MultiPath Routing (DMPR) is a loop free path vector routing
      protocol with built-in support for policy based multipath routing.
      It has been designed from scratch to work at both low and high
      bandwidth networks - even with high packet loss.  The objective was
      to keep routing overhead low and ensure a deterministic protocol
      exchange behavior.  DMPR can be used to manage larger networks with
      characteristics based on BGPv4 with transport and self-configuration
      properties taken from OSPF/OLSR.  Unlike BGPv4 or OSPF, DMPR does not
      support higher network separation concepts.  A DMPR network is a flat
      network in which DMPR nodes have equal tasks.  This also applies to
      DMPR communication.  Unlike OLSR/OSPF there is no flooding messages
      (topology broadcast), information are stored, accumulated/compressed
      and forwarded at each DMPR node.  This feature contributes to the
      message load being deterministic.

  "MPLS Extension Header Architecture", Loa Andersson, Jim Guichard, Haoyu
  Song, Stewart Bryant, 2021-10-06,
  <draft-andersson-mpls-eh-architecture-02.txt>

      Extension Headers (EH) carry information on in-network services and
      functions in an MPLS network.  This document describes an
      architecture for EHs and what actions an EH capable Label Switching
      Router (LSR) takes when finding or not finding an EH in the packet.
      
      Multiprotocol Label Switching (MPLS) is a widely deployed forwarding
      technology.  It uses label stack entries that are pre-pended to
      either the EH or the ACH which in turn is pre-pended to the payload.
      The label stack entries are used to identify the forwarding actions
      by each LSR.  Actions may include pushing, swapping or popping the
      labels, and using the labels to determine the next hop for forwarding
      the packet.  Labels may also be used to establish the context under
      which the packet is forwarded.
      
      The extension headers are carried after the MPLS Label Stack, and the
      presence of EHs are indicated in the label stack by an Extension
      Header Indicator (EHI).

  "Options for MPLS Extension Header Indicator", Haoyu Song, Zhenbin Li,
  Tianran Zhou, Loa Andersson, 2022-01-03,
  <draft-song-mpls-eh-indicator-04.txt>

      The intention of this document is to enumerate and describe the
      candidate schemes that can be used to indicate the presence of the
      MPLS extension header(s) following the MPLS label stack.  After a
      careful evaluation of these options by comparing their pros and cons,
      it is expected that one should be chosen as the final standard scheme
      for MPLS extension header indicator.

  "IKEv2 Optional SA&TS Payloads in Child Exchange", Sandeep Kampati, Wei
  Pan, Paul Wouters, Bharath Meduri, chenmeiling, Michael Richardson,
  2022-02-10, <draft-kampati-ipsecme-ikev2-sa-ts-payloads-opt-08.txt>

      This document describes a method for reducing the size of the
      Internet Key Exchange version 2 (IKEv2) CREATE_CHILD_SA exchanges
      used for rekeying of the IKE or Child SA by replacing the SA and TS
      payloads with a Notify Message payload.  Reducing size and complexity
      of IKEv2 exchanges is especially useful for low power consumption
      battery powered devices.

  "MPLS Label Operations in MPLS EH capable networks", Loa Andersson, Jim
  Guichard, Haoyu Song, Stewart Bryant, 2021-10-06,
  <draft-andersson-mpls-eh-label-stack-operations-02.txt>

      Extension Headers (EH) carry information on in-network services and
      functions in an MPLS network.  This document describes the operations
      on the MPLS label stack when an EH is found in the packet.

  "Mathematical Mesh 3.0 Part II: Uniform Data Fingerprint.", Phillip
  Hallam-Baker, 2021-10-25, <draft-hallambaker-mesh-udf-15.txt>

      This document describes the underlying naming and addressing schemes
      used in the Mathematical Mesh.  The means of generating Uniform Data
      Fingerprint (UDF) values and their presentation as text sequences and
      as URIs are described.
      
      A UDF consists of a binary sequence, the initial eight bits of which
      specify a type identifier code.  For convenience, UDFs are typically
      presented to the user in the form of a Base32 encoded string.  Type
      identifier codes have been selected so as to provide a useful
      mnemonic indicating their purpose when presented in Base32 encoding.
      
      Two categories of UDF are described.  Data UDFs provide a compact
      presentation of a fixed length binary data value in a format that is
      convenient for data entry.  A Data UDF may represent a cryptographic
      key, a nonce value or a share of a secret.  Fingerprint UDFs provide
      a compact presentation of a Message Digest or Message Authentication
      Code value.
      
      A Strong Internet Name (SIN) consists of a DNS name which contains at
      least one label that is a UDF fingerprint of a policy document
      controlling interpretation of the name.  SINs allow a direct trust
      model to be applied to achieve end-to-end security in existing
      Internet applications without the need for trusted third parties.
      
      UDFs may be presented as URIs to form either names or locators for
      use with the UDF location service.  An Encrypted Authenticated
      Resource Locator (EARL) is a UDF locator URI presenting a service
      from which an encrypted resource may be obtained and a symmetric key
      that may be used to decrypt the content.  EARLs may be presented on
      paper correspondence as a QR code to securely provide a machine-
      readable version of the same content.  This may be applied to
      automate processes such as invoicing or to provide accessibility
      services for the partially sighted.
      
      [Note to Readers]
      
      Discussion of this draft takes place on the MATHMESH mailing list
      (mathmesh@ietf.org), which is archived at
      https://mailarchive.ietf.org/arch/search/?email_list=mathmesh.
      
      This document is also available online at
      http://mathmesh.com/Documents/draft-hallambaker-mesh-udf.html.

  "Mathematical Mesh 3.0 Part III : Data At Rest Encryption (DARE)", Phillip
  Hallam-Baker, 2021-10-25, <draft-hallambaker-mesh-dare-14.txt>

      This document describes the Data At Rest Encryption (DARE) Envelope
      and Sequence syntax.
      
      The DARE Envelope syntax is used to digitally sign, digest,
      authenticate, or encrypt arbitrary content data.
      
      The DARE Sequence syntax describes an append-only sequence of
      entries, each containing a DARE Envelope.  DARE Sequences may support
      cryptographic integrity verification of the entire data container
      content by means of a Merkle tree.
      
      [Note to Readers]
      
      Discussion of this draft takes place on the MATHMESH mailing list
      (mathmesh@ietf.org), which is archived at
      https://mailarchive.ietf.org/arch/search/?email_list=mathmesh.
      
      This document is also available online at
      http://mathmesh.com/Documents/draft-hallambaker-mesh-dare.html.

  "The IPv6 Compact Routing Header (CRH)", Ron Bonica, Yuji Kamite, Andrew
  Alston, Daniam Henriques, Luay Jalil, 2021-11-15,
  <draft-bonica-6man-comp-rtg-hdr-27.txt>

      This document defines two new Routing header types.  Collectively,
      they are called the Compact Routing Headers (CRH).  Individually,
      they are called CRH-16 and CRH-32.

  "Considerations for Benchmarking Network Performance in Containerized
  Infrastructures", Sun Kj, Hyunsik Yang, Jangwon Lee, Tran Ngoc, Younghan
  Kim, 2022-03-05, <draft-dcn-bmwg-containerized-infra-08.txt>

      This draft describes considerations for benchmarking network
      performance in containerized infrastructures.  In the containerized
      infrastructure, Virtualized Network Functions(VNFs) are deployed on
      an operating-system-level virtualization platform by abstracting the
      user namespace as opposed to virtualization using a hypervisor.
      Hence, the system configurations and networking scenarios for
      benchmarking will be partially changed by how the resource allocation
      and network technologies are specified for containerized VNFs.  This
      draft compares the state of the art in the container networking
      architecture with VM-based virtualized systems networking
      architecture and provides several test scenarios for benchmarking
      network performance in containerized infrastructures.

  "Support for Path MTU (PMTU) in the Path Computation Element (PCE)
  communication Protocol (PCEP).", Shuping Peng, Cheng Li, Liuyan Han,
  Luc-Fabrice Ndifor, 2021-10-21, <draft-li-pce-pcep-pmtu-05.txt>

      The Path Computation Element (PCE) provides path computation
      functions in support of traffic engineering in Multiprotocol Label
      Switching (MPLS) and Generalized MPLS (GMPLS) networks.
      
      The Source Packet Routing in Networking (SPRING) architecture
      describes how Segment Routing (SR) can be used to steer packets
      through an IPv6 or MPLS network using the source routing paradigm.  A
      Segment Routed Path can be derived from a variety of mechanisms,
      including an IGP Shortest Path Tree (SPT), explicit configuration, or
      a Path Computation Element (PCE).
      
      Since the SR does not require signaling, the path maximum
      transmission unit (MTU) information for SR path is not available.
      This document specify the extension to PCE communication protocol
      (PCEP) to carry path (MTU) in the PCEP messages.

  "A YANG Data Model for Segment Routing (SR) Policy and SRv6 support in Path
  Computation Element Communications Protocol (PCEP)", Cheng Li, Siva
  Sivabalan, Shuping Peng, Mike Koldychev, Luc-Fabrice Ndifor, 2022-03-06,
  <draft-li-pce-pcep-srv6-yang-06.txt>

      This document augments a YANG data model for the management of Path
      Computation Element Communications Protocol (PCEP) for communications
      between a Path Computation Client (PCC) and a Path Computation
      Element (PCE), or between two PCEs in support for Segment Routing in
      IPv6 (SRv6) and SR Policy.  The data model includes configuration
      data and state data (status information and counters for the
      collection of statistics).

  "Composite Signatures For Use In Internet PKI", Mike Ounsworth,
  Massimiliano Pala, 2022-02-14, <draft-ounsworth-pq-composite-sigs-06.txt>

      With the widespread adoption of post-quantum cryptography will come
      the need for an entity to possess multiple public keys on different
      cryptographic algorithms.  Since the trustworthiness of individual
      post-quantum algorithms is at question, a multi-key cryptographic
      operation will need to be performed in such a way that breaking it
      requires breaking each of the component algorithms individually.
      This requires defining new structures for holding composite signature
      data.
      
      This document defines the structures CompositeSignatureValue, and
      CompositeParams, which are sequences of the respective structure for
      each component algorithm.  This document also defines processes for
      generating and verifying composite signatures.  This document makes
      no assumptions about what the component algorithms are, provided that
      their algorithm identifiers and signature generation and verification
      processes are defined.

  "A YANG Data Model for Network Interconnect Tester Management", Vladimir
  Vassilev, 2021-10-25,
  <draft-vassilev-bmwg-network-interconnect-tester-07.txt>

      This document introduces new YANG model for use in network
      interconnect testing containing modules of traffic generator and
      traffic analyzer.

  "SRv6 Midpoint Protection", Huanan Chen, Zhibo Hu, Huaimo Chen, Xuesong
  Geng, Yisong Liu, Gyan Mishra, 2021-12-19,
  <draft-chen-rtgwg-srv6-midpoint-protection-06.txt>

      The current local repair mechanism, e.g., TI-LFA, allows local repair
      actions on the direct neighbors of the failed node to temporarily
      route traffic to the destination.  This mechanism could not work
      properly when the failure happens in the destination point or the
      link connected to the destination.  In SRv6 TE, the IPv6 destination
      address in the outer IPv6 header could be the dedicated endpoint of
      the TE path rather than the destination of the TE path.  When the
      endpoint fails, local repair couldn't work on the direct neighbor of
      the failed endpoint either.  This document defines midpoint
      protection for SRv6 TE path, which enables the direct neighbor of the
      failed endpoint to do the function of the endpoint, replace the IPv6
      destination address to the other endpoint, and choose the next hop
      based on the new destination address.

  "Requirements and Challenges for User-level Service Managements of IoT
  Network by utilizing Artificial Intelligence", Junkyun Choi, Jaeseob Han,
  Gyeong Lee, 2021-12-30, <draft-choi-icnrg-aiot-08.txt,.pdf>

      This document describes the requirements and challenges to employ
      artificial intelligence (AI) into the constraint Internet of Things
      (IoT) service environment for embedding intelligence and increasing
      efficiency.
      
      The IoT service environment includes heterogeneous and multiple IoT
      devices and systems that work together in a cooperative and
      intelligent way to manage homes, buildings, and complex autonomous
      systems. Therefore, it is becoming very essential to integrate IoT
      and AI technologies to increase the synergy between them. However,
      there are several limitations to achieve AI enabled IoT as the
      availability of IoT devices is not always high, and IoT networks
      cannot guarantee a certain level of performance in real-time
      applications due to resource constraints.
      
      This document intends to present a right direction to empower AI in
      IoT for learning and analyzing the usage behaviors of IoT
      devices/systems and human behaviors based on previous records and
      experiences. With AI enabled IoT, the IoT service environment can be
      intelligently managed in order to compensate for the unexpected
      performance degradation often caused by abnormal situations.

  "BGP Route Policy and Attribute Trace Using BMP", Feng Xu, Thomas Graf,
  Yunan Gu, Shunwan Zhuang, Zhenbin Li, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-xu-grow-bmp-route-policy-attr-trace-06.txt>

      The generation of BGP adj-rib-in, local-rib or adj-rib-out comes from
      BGP route exchange and route policy processing.  BGP Monitoring
      Protocol (BMP) provides the monitoring of BGP adj-rib-in [RFC7854],
      BGP local-rib [RFC9069] and BGP adj-rib-out [RFC8671].  By monitoring
      these BGP RIB's the full state of the network is visible, but how
      route-policies affect the route propagation or changes BGP attributes
      is still not.  This document describes a method of using BMP to
      record the trace data on how BGP routes are (not) changed under the
      process of route policies.

  "Enhanced Topology Independent Loop-free Alternate Fast Re-route", Cheng
  Li, Zhibo Hu, Yongqing Zhu, Shraddha Hegde, 2021-10-21,
  <draft-li-rtgwg-enhanced-ti-lfa-05.txt>

      Topology Independent Loop-free Alternate Fast Re-route (TI-LFA) aims
      at providing protection of node and adjacency segments within the
      Segment Routing (SR) framework.  A key aspect of TI-LFA is the FRR
      path selection approach establishing protection over the expected
      post-convergence paths from the point of local repair.  However, the
      TI-LFA FRR path may skip the node even if it is specified in the SID
      list to be traveled.
      
      This document defines Enhanced TI-LFA(TI-LFA+) by adding a No-bypass
      indicator for segments to ensure that the FRR route will not bypass
      the specific node, such as firewall.  Also, this document defines No-
      bypass flag and No-FRR flag in SRH to indicate not to bypass nodes
      and not to perform FRR on all the nodes along the SRv6 path,
      respectively.

  "Arm's Platform Security Architecture (PSA) Attestation Token", Hannes
  Tschofenig, Simon Frost, Mathias Brossard, Adrian Shaw, Thomas Fossati,
  2022-03-07, <draft-tschofenig-rats-psa-token-09.txt>

      The Platform Security Architecture (PSA) is a family of hardware and
      firmware security specifications, as well as open-source reference
      implementations, to help device makers and chip manufacturers build
      best-practice security into products.  Devices that are PSA compliant
      are able to produce attestation tokens as described in this memo,
      which are the basis for a number of different protocols, including
      secure provisioning and network access control.  This document
      specifies the PSA attestation token structure and semantics.
      
      The PSA attestation token is a profiled Entity Attestation Token
      (EAT).
      
      This specification describes what claims are used in an attestation
      token generated by PSA compliant systems, how these claims get
      serialized to the wire, and how they are cryptographically protected.

  "Autonomic setup of fog monitoring agents", Carlos Bernardos, Alain Mourad,
  Pedro Martinez-Julia, 2021-10-22,
  <draft-bernardos-anima-fog-monitoring-05.txt>

      The concept of fog computing has emerged driven by the Internet of
      Things (IoT) due to the need of handling the data generated from the
      end-user devices.  The term fog is referred to any networked
      computational resource in the continuum between things and cloud.  In
      fog computing, functions can be stiched together composing a service
      function chain.  These functions might be hosted on resources that
      are inherently heterogeneous, volatile and mobile.  This means that
      resources might appear and disappear, and the connectivity
      characteristics between these resources may also change dynamically.
      This calls for new orchestration solutions able to cope with dynamic
      changes to the resources in runtime or ahead of time (in anticipation
      through prediction) as opposed to today's solutions which are
      inherently reactive and static or semi-static.
      
      A fog monitoring solution can be used to help predicting events so an
      action can be taken before an event actually takes place.  This
      solution is composed of agents running on the fog nodes plus a
      controller hosted at another device (running in the infrastructure or
      in another fog node).  Since fog environments are inherently volatile
      and extremely dynamic, it is convenient to enable the use of
      autonomic technologies to autonomously set-up the fog monitoring
      platform.  This document aims at presenting this use case as well as
      specifying how to use GRASP as needed in this scenario.

  "In Situ OAM Profiles", Tal Mizrahi, Frank Brockners, Shwetha Bhandari,
  Ramesh Sivakolundu, Carlos Pignataro, Aviv Kfir, Barak Gafni, Mickey
  Spiegel, Tianran Zhou, 2022-02-17, <draft-mizrahi-ippm-ioam-profile-06.txt>

      In Situ Operations, Administration and Maintenance (IOAM) is used for
      monitoring network performance and for detecting traffic bottlenecks
      and anomalies.  This is achieved by incorporating IOAM data into in-
      flight data packets.  This document introduces the concept of use
      case-driven IOAM profiles.  An IOAM profile defines a use case or a
      set of use cases for IOAM, and an associated set of rules that
      restrict the scope and features of the IOAM specification, thereby
      limiting it to a subset of the full functionality.  The motivation
      for defining profiles is to limit the scope of IOAM features,
      allowing simpler implementation, verification, and interoperability
      testing in the context of specific use cases that do not require the
      full functionality of IOAM.

  "Time-Based Uni-Directional Attestation", Andreas Fuchs, Henk Birkholz, Ira
  McDonald, Carsten Bormann, 2022-01-12, <draft-birkholz-rats-tuda-06.txt>

      This document defines the method and bindings used to convey Evidence
      via Time-based Uni-Directional Attestation (TUDA) in Remote
      ATtestation procedureS (RATS).  TUDA does not require a challenge-
      response handshake and thereby does not rely on the conveyance of a
      nonce to prove freshness of remote attestation Evidence.  TUDA
      enables the creation of Secure Audit Logs that can constitute
      believable Evidence about both current and past operational states of
      an Attester.  In TUDA, RATS entities require access to a Handle
      Distributor to which a trustable and synchronized time-source is
      available.  The Handle Distributor takes on the role of a Time Stamp
      Authority (TSA) to distribute Handles incorporating Time Stamp Tokens
      (TST) to the RATS entities.  RATS require an Attesting Environment
      that generates believable Evidence.  While a TPM is used as the
      corresponding root of trust in this specification, any other type of
      root of trust can be used with TUDA.

  "SRv6 Implementation and Deployment Status", Satoru Matsushima, Clarence
  Filsfils, Zafar Ali, Zhenbin Li, Kalyani Rajaraman, Amit Dhamija,
  2022-02-10, <draft-matsushima-spring-srv6-deployment-status-12.txt>

      This draft provides an overview of IPv6 Segment Routing (SRv6)
      deployment status.  It lists various SRv6 features that have been
      deployed in the production networks.  It also provides an overview of
      SRv6 implementation and interoperability testing status.

  "The SODP (Secure Object Delivery Protocol) Server Interfaces: NSA's
  Profile for Delivery of Certificates, CRLs, and Symmetric Keys to Clients",
  Michael Jenkins, Sean Turner, 2020-09-08, <draft-turner-sodp-profile-08.txt>

      This document specifies protocol interfaces profiled by the US NSA
      (United States National Security Agency) for NSS (National Security
      System) servers that provide public key certificates, CRLs
      (Certificate Revocation Lists), and symmetric keys to NSS clients.
      Servers that support these interfaces are referred to as SODP (Secure
      Object Delivery Protocol) servers. The intended audience for this
      profile comprises developers of client devices that will obtain key
      management services from NSA-operated SODP servers.  Interfaces
      supported by SODP servers include: EST (Enrollment over Secure
      Transport) and its extensions as well as CMC (Certificate Management
      over CMS (Cryptographic Message Syntax)).
      
      This profile applies to the capabilities, configuration, and
      operation of all components of US National Security Systems (SP 800-
      59). It is also appropriate for other US Government systems that
      process high-value information. It is made publicly available for use
      by developers and operators of these and any other system
      deployments.

  "Vehicular Mobility Management for IP-Based Vehicular Networks", Jaehoon
  Jeong, Bien Mugabarigira, Yiwen Shen, Zhong Xiang, 2022-02-21,
  <draft-jeong-ipwave-vehicular-mobility-management-07.txt>

      This document specifies a Vehicular Mobility Management (VMM) scheme
      for IP-based vehicular networks.  The VMM scheme takes advantage of a
      vehicular link model based on a multi-link subnet.  With a vehicle's
      mobility information (e.g., position, speed, acceleration/
      deceleration, and direction) and navigation path (i.e., trajectory),
      it can provide a moving vehicle with proactive and seamless handoff
      along with its trajectory.

  "Mathematical Mesh 3.0 Part IX Security Considerations", Phillip
  Hallam-Baker, 2021-09-20, <draft-hallambaker-mesh-security-08.txt>

      The Mathematical Mesh 'The Mesh' is an end-to-end secure
      infrastructure that facilitates the exchange of configuration and
      credential data between multiple user devices.  The core protocols of
      the Mesh are described with examples of common use cases and
      reference data.
      
      [Note to Readers]
      
      Discussion of this draft takes place on the MATHMESH mailing list
      (mathmesh@ietf.org), which is archived at
      https://mailarchive.ietf.org/arch/search/?email_list=mathmesh.
      
      This document is also available online at
      http://mathmesh.com/Documents/draft-hallambaker-mesh-security.html.

  "Mathematical Mesh 3.0 Part V: Protocol Reference", Phillip Hallam-Baker,
  2021-10-25, <draft-hallambaker-mesh-protocol-12.txt>

      The Mathematical Mesh 'The Mesh' is an end-to-end secure
      infrastructure that facilitates the exchange of configuration and
      credential data between multiple user devices.  The core protocols of
      the Mesh are described with examples of common use cases and
      reference data.
      
      [Note to Readers]
      
      Discussion of this draft takes place on the MATHMESH mailing list
      (mathmesh@ietf.org), which is archived at
      https://mailarchive.ietf.org/arch/search/?email_list=mathmesh.
      
      This document is also available online at
      http://mathmesh.com/Documents/draft-hallambaker-mesh-protocol.html.

  "Mathematical Mesh 3.0 Part IV: Schema Reference", Phillip Hallam-Baker,
  2021-10-25, <draft-hallambaker-mesh-schema-09.txt>

      The Mathematical Mesh 'The Mesh' is an end-to-end secure
      infrastructure that facilitates the exchange of configuration and
      credential data between multiple user devices.  The core protocols of
      the Mesh are described with examples of common use cases and
      reference data.
      
      [Note to Readers]
      
      Discussion of this draft takes place on the MATHMESH mailing list
      (mathmesh@ietf.org), which is archived at
      https://mailarchive.ietf.org/arch/search/?email_list=mathmesh.
      
      This document is also available online at
      http://mathmesh.com/Documents/draft-hallambaker-mesh-schema.html.

  "Programming Methodology Framework aka PMF", Alexandre Dulaunoy, Andras
  Iklody, 2021-10-01,
  <draft-dulaunoy-programming-methodology-framework-01.txt>

      This document describes the Programming Methodology Framework also
      known under the PMF methodology.  The methodology is based on the
      manifesto written by Zed A.  Shaw [PROGRAMMING-MF-MANIFESTO] which
      describes a natural approach to software engineering with a strong
      focus on the act of programming.  The PMF methodology uses a soft
      naming to allow for a non-partisan reference to official engineering
      or project documents describing one of the most used software
      engineering methodologies.

  "IPv6 Neighbor Discovery on Wireless Networks", Pascal Thubert, 2021-12-15,
  <draft-thubert-6man-ipv6-over-wireless-11.txt>

      This document describes how the original IPv6 Neighbor Discovery and
      Wireless ND (WiND) can be applied on various abstractions of wireless
      media.

  "BGP-LS Filters : A Framework for Network Slicing and Enhanced VPNs", John
  Drake, Adrian Farrel, Luay Jalil, Avinash Lingala, 2021-11-15,
  <draft-drake-bess-enhanced-vpn-07.txt>

      Future networks that support advanced services, such as those enabled
      by 5G mobile networks, envision a set of overlay networks each with
      different performance and scaling properties.  These overlays are
      known as network slices and are realized over a common underlay
      network.  In the context of IETF technologies, they are known as IETF
      network slices.
      
      In order to support IETF network slicing, as well as to offer
      enhanced VPN services in general, it is necessary to define a
      mechanism by which specific resources (links and/or nodes) of an
      underlay network can be used by a specific network slice, VPN, or set
      of VPNs.  This document sets out such a mechanism for use in Segment
      Routing networks.

  "IS-IS Extensions To Support The IPv6 Compressed Routing Header (CRH)",
  Parag Kaneriya, Rejesh Shetty, Shraddha Hegde, Ron Bonica, 2022-02-24,
  <draft-bonica-lsr-crh-isis-extensions-06.txt>

      Source nodes can use the IPv6 Compressed Routing Header (CRH) to
      steer packets through a specified path.  This document defines IS-IS
      extensions that support the CRH.

  "Security Considerations for SRv6 Networks", Cheng Li, Zhenbin Li,
  Chongfeng Xie, Hui Tian, Jianwei Mao, 2021-10-21,
  <draft-li-spring-srv6-security-consideration-07.txt>

      SRv6 inherits potential security vulnerabilities from Source Routing
      in general, and also from IPv6.  This document describes various
      threats and security concerns related to SRv6 networks and existing
      approaches to solve these threats.

  "Design of the native Cyberspace Map", Jilong Wang, Miao Congcong,
  Changqing An, Shuying Zhuang, 2021-12-05,
  <draft-jilongwang-opsawg-cybersmap-05.txt>

      This memo discusses the design of the native cyberspace map which is
      stable and flexible to describe cyberspace.  Although we have
      accepted the cyberspace as a parallel new world, we even have not
      defined its basic coordinate system, which means cyberspace have no
      its basic space dimension till now.  The objective of this draft is
      to illustrate the basic design methodology of the native coordinate
      system of cyberspace, and show how to design cyberspace map on this
      basis.

  "A Framework for Constructing Service Function Chaining Systems Based on
  Segment Routing", Cheng Li, Ahmed El Sawaf, Ruizhao Hu, Zhenbin Li,
  2021-10-21, <draft-li-spring-sr-sfc-control-plane-framework-05.txt>

      Segment Routing (SR) allows for a flexible definition of end-to-end
      paths by encoding paths as sequences of topological sub-paths, called
      "segments".  Segment routing architecture can be implemented over an
      MPLS data plane as well as an IPv6 data plane.
      
      Service Function Chaining (SFC) provides support for the creation of
      composite services that consist of an ordered set of Service
      Functions (SF) that are to be applied to packets and/or frames
      selected as a result of classification.
      
      SFC can be implemented based on several technologies, such as Network
      Service Header (NSH) and SR.  This document describes a framework for
      constructing SFC based on Segment Routing.  The document reviews the
      control plane solutions for route distribution of service function
      instance and service function path, and steering packets into a
      service function chain.

  "Multicast-only Fast Reroute Based on Topology Independent Loop-free
  Alternate Fast Reroute", Yisong Liu, Mike McBride, Zheng Zhang, Jingrong
  Xie, Changwang Lin, 2022-03-04, <draft-liu-pim-mofrr-tilfa-05.txt>

      Multicast-only Fast Reroute (MoFRR) has been defined in [RFC7431],
      but the selection of the secondary multicast next hop only according
      to the loop-free alternate fast reroute, which has restrictions in
      multicast deployments. This document describes a mechanism for
      Multicast-only Fast Reroute by using Topology Independent Loop-free
      Alternate fast reroute, which is independent of network topology and
      can achieve covering more network environments.

  "Preferred Path Loop-Free Alternate (pLFA)", Stewart Bryant, Uma Chunduri,
  Toerless Eckert, 2021-12-24, <draft-bryant-rtgwg-plfa-03.txt>

      Fast re-route (FRR) is a technique that allows productive forwarding
      to continue in a network after a failure has occurred, but before the
      network has has time to re-converge.  This is achieved by forwarding
      a packet on an alternate path that will not result in the packet
      looping.  Preferred Path Routing (PPR) provides a method of injecting
      explicit paths into the routing protocol.  The use of PPR to support
      FRR has a number of advantages.  This document describes the
      advantages of using PPR to provide a loop-free alternate FRR path,
      and provides a framework for its use in this application.

  "PCEP Operational Clarification", Mike Koldychev, Siva Sivabalan, Shuping
  Peng, Diego Achaval, Hari Kotni, 2022-02-19,
  <draft-koldychev-pce-operational-05.txt>

      This document proposes some important simplifications to the original
      PCEP protocol and also serves to clarify certain aspects of PCEP
      operation.  The content of this document has been compiled based on
      the feedback from several multi-vendor interop exercises.  Several
      constructs are introduced, such as the LSP-DB and the ASSO-DB.

  "A well-known URI for publishing ECHConfigList values.", Stephen Farrell,
  2021-11-30, <draft-farrell-tls-wkesni-02.txt>

      We propose use of a well-known URI at which web servers can publish
      ECHConfigList values as a way to help get those published in the DNS.

  "Using GOST ciphers in ESP and IKEv2", Valery Smyslov, 2022-02-07,
  <draft-smyslov-esp-gost-14.txt>

      This document defines a set of encryption transforms for use in the
      Encapsulating Security Payload (ESP) and in the Internet Key Exchange
      version 2 (IKEv2) protocols which are parts of the IP Security
      (IPsec) protocols suite.  The transforms are based on the GOST R
      34.12-2015 block ciphers (which are named "Magma" and "Kuznyechik")
      in a Multilinear Galois Mode (MGM) and the external re-keying
      approach.
      
      This specification is developed to facilitate implementations that
      wish to support the GOST algorithms.  This document does not imply
      IETF endorsement of the cryptographic algorithms used in this
      document.

  "BMP Extension for Path Status TLV", Camilo Cardona, Paolo Lucente, Pierre
  Francois, Yunan Gu, Thomas Graf, 2021-11-08,
  <draft-cppy-grow-bmp-path-marking-tlv-09.txt>

      The BGP Monitoring Protocol (BMP) provides an interface for obtaining
      BGP Path information.  BGP Path Information is conveyed within BMP
      Route Monitoring (RM) messages.  This document proposes an extension
      to BMP to convey the status of a BGP path before and after being
      processed by the BGP best-path selection algorithm.  This extension
      makes use of the TLV mechanims described in draft-ietf-grow-bmp-tlv
      [I-D.ietf-grow-bmp-tlv] and draft-lucente-grow-bmp-tlv-ebit
      [I-D.lucente-grow-bmp-tlv-ebit].

  "Group OSCORE Profile of the Authentication and Authorization for
  Constrained Environments Framework", Marco Tiloca, Rikard Hoeglund, Ludwig
  Seitz, Francesca Palombini, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-tiloca-ace-group-oscore-profile-08.txt>

      This document specifies a profile for the Authentication and
      Authorization for Constrained Environments (ACE) framework.  The
      profile uses Group OSCORE to provide communication security between a
      Client and a (set of) Resource Server(s) as members of an OSCORE
      Group.  The profile securely binds an OAuth 2.0 Access Token with the
      public key of the Client associated with the private key used in the
      OSCORE group.  The profile uses Group OSCORE to achieve server
      authentication, as well as proof-of-possession for the Client's
      public key.  Also, it provides proof of the Client's membership to
      the correct OSCORE group, by binding the Access Token to information
      from the Group OSCORE Security Context, thus allowing the Resource
      Server(s) to verify the Client's membership upon receiving a message
      protected with Group OSCORE from the Client.

  "SR Path Ingress Protection", Huaimo Chen, Mehmet Toy, Aijun Wang,
  Zhenqiang Li, Lei Liu, Xufeng Liu, 2021-10-24,
  <draft-chen-idr-sr-ingress-protection-05.txt>

      This document describes extensions to Border Gateway Protocol (BGP)
      for protecting the ingress node of a Segment Routing (SR) tunnel or
      path.

  "Path Ingress Protections", Huaimo Chen, Mike McBride, Mehmet Toy, Gyan
  Mishra, Aijun Wang, Zhenqiang Li, Yisong Liu, Boris Khasanov, Lei Liu,
  Xufeng Liu, 2021-11-13, <draft-chen-pce-sr-ingress-protection-07.txt>

      This document describes extensions to Path Computation Element (PCE)
      communication Protocol (PCEP) for fast protecting the ingress nodes
      of two types of paths or tunnels, which are Segment Routing (SR)
      paths and Bit Index Explicit Replication Tree/Traffic Engineering
      (BIER-TE) paths.  The extensions comprise a foundation for protecting
      the ingress nodes of different types of paths.  Based on this, the
      ingress protection of a new type of paths can be easily supported.

  "Test Tools for IoT DDoS vulnerability scanning", Sorin Faibish, Mashruf
  Chowdhury, 2021-12-19, <draft-faibish-iot-ddos-usecases-06.txt>

      This document specifies several usecases related to the different
      ways IoT devices are exploited by malicious adversaries to
      instantiate Distributed Denial of Services (DDoS) attacks. The
      attacks are generted from IoT devices that have no proper protection
      against generating unsolicited communication messages targeting a
      certain network and creating large amounts of network traffic. The
      attackers take advantage of breaches in the configuration data in
      unprotected IoT devices exploited for DDoS attacks. The attackers
      take advantage of the IoT devices that can send network packets
      that were generated by malicious code that interacts with an OS
      implementation that runs on the IoT devices. The prupose of this
      draft is to present possible IoT DDoS usecases that need to be
      prevented by TEE. The major enabler of such attacks is related to
      IoT devices that have no OS or unprotected EE OS and run
      code that is downloaded to them from the TA and modified by
      man-in-the-middle that inserts malicious code in the OS. This draft
      adds list of MUD files for most IoT devices.

  "The DOCSIS(r) Queue Protection Algorithm to Preserve Low Latency", Bob
  Briscoe, Greg White, 2022-03-07, <draft-briscoe-docsis-q-protection-03.txt>

      This informational document explains the specification of the queue
      protection algorithm used in DOCSIS technology since version 3.1.  A
      shared low latency queue relies on the non-queue-building behaviour
      of every traffic flow using it.  However, some flows might not take
      such care, either accidentally or maliciously.  If a queue is about
      to exceed a threshold level of delay, the queue protection algorithm
      can rapidly detect the flows most likely to be responsible.  It can
      then prevent harm to other traffic in the low latency queue by
      ejecting selected packets (or all packets) of these flows.  The
      document is designed for four types of audience: a) congestion
      control designers who need to understand how to keep on the 'good'
      side of the algorithm; b) implementers of the algorithm who want to
      understand it in more depth; and c) designers of algorithms with
      similar goals, perhaps for non-DOCSIS scenarios; d) researchers
      interested in evaluating the algorithm.

  "Distributed SFC control for fog environments", Carlos Bernardos, Alain
  Mourad, 2022-01-27, <draft-bernardos-sfc-distributed-control-05.txt>

      Service function chaining (SFC) allows the instantiation of an
      ordered set of service functions and subsequent "steering" of traffic
      through them.  In order to set up and maintain SFC instances, a
      control plane is required, which typically is centralized.  In
      certain environments, such as fog computing ones, such centralized
      control might not be feasible, calling for distributed SFC control
      solutions.  This document introduces the role of SFC pseudo-
      controller and specifies solutions to select and initialize such new
      logical function.

  "Network Programming extension: SRv6 uSID instruction", Clarence Filsfils,
  Pablo Camarillo, Dezhong Cai, Dan Voyer, Israel Meilik, Keyur Patel, Wim
  Henderickx, Prem Jonnalagadda, David Melman, Yisong Liu, Jim Guichard,
  2021-12-13, <draft-filsfils-spring-net-pgm-extension-srv6-usid-12.txt>

      The SRv6 "micro segment" (SRv6 uSID or uSID for short) instruction is
      a straightforward extension of the SRv6 Network Programming model:
      
      *  The SRv6 Control Plane is leveraged without any change
      
      *  The SRH dataplane encapsulation is leveraged without any change
      
      *  Any SID in the SID list can carry micro segments
      
      *  Based on the Compressed SRv6 Segment List Encoding in SRH

  "Describing Protocol Data Units with Augmented Packet Header Diagrams",
  Stephen McQuistin, Vivian Band, Dejice Jacob, Colin Perkins, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-mcquistin-augmented-ascii-diagrams-10.txt>

      This document describes a machine-readable format for specifying the
      syntax of protocol data units within a protocol specification.  This
      format is comprised of a consistently formatted packet header
      diagram, followed by structured explanatory text.  It is designed to
      maintain human readability while enabling support for automated
      parser generation from the specification document.  This document is
      itself an example of how the format can be used.

  "Segment Routing Generic TLV for MPLS Label Switched Path (LSP)
  Ping/Traceroute", Nagendra Nainar, Carlos Pignataro, Zafar Ali, Clarence
  Filsfils, Tarek Saad, 2021-11-24,
  <draft-nainar-mpls-spring-lsp-ping-sr-generic-sid-06.txt>

      RFC8402 introduces Segment Routing architecture that leverages source
      routing and tunneling paradigms and can be directly applied to the
      Multi Protocol Label Switching (MPLS) data plane.  A node steers a
      packet through a controlled set of instructions called segments, by
      prepending the packet with Segment Routing header.  SR architecture
      defines different types of segments with different forwarding
      semantics associated.  SR can be applied to the MPLS directly and to
      IPv6 dataplane using a new routing header.
      
      RFC8287 defines the extensions to MPLS LSP Ping and Traceroute for
      Segment Routing IGP-Prefix and IGP-Adjacency Segment Identifier
      (SIDs) with an MPLS data plane.  Various SIDs are proposed as part of
      SR architecture with different associated instructions that raises a
      need to come up with new Target FEC Stack Sub-TLV for each such SIDs.
      
      This document defines a new Target FEC Stack Sub-TLV that is used to
      validate the instruction associated with any SID.

  "SRv6 for Inter-Layer Network Programming", Jie Dong, Zongpeng Du,
  2021-10-24, <draft-dong-spring-srv6-inter-layer-programming-02.txt>

      This document defines a new SRv6 network function which can be used
      for SRv6 inter-layer network programming.  It is a variant of the
      End.X function.  Instead of pointing to an L3 adjacency, this
      function points to an underlay interface.  Such a interface can stand
      for a underlay link or path/connection between two routers, which may
      be invisible in the L3 topology.

  "PCEP Extension for SR-MPLS Entropy Label Position", Quan Xiong, Shaofu
  Peng, Fengwei Qin, 2022-03-02,
  <draft-peng-pce-entropy-label-position-07.txt>

      This document proposes a set of extensions for PCEP to configure the
      entropy label position for SR-MPLS networks.

  "Maintaining CCNx or NDN flow balance with highly variable data object
  sizes", David Oran, 2021-10-25, <draft-oran-icnrg-flowbalance-06.txt>

      Deeply embedded in some ICN architectures, especially Named Data
      Networking (NDN) and Content-Centric Networking (CCNx) is the notion
      of flow balance.  This captures the idea that there is a one-to-one
      correspondence between requests for data, carried in Interest
      messages, and the responses with the requested data object, carried
      in Data messages.  This has a number of highly beneficial properties
      for flow and congestion control in networks, as well as some
      desirable security properties.  For example, neither legitimate users
      nor attackers are able to inject large amounts of un-requested data
      into the network.
      
      Existing congestion control approaches however have a difficult time
      dealing effectively with a widely varying MTU of ICN data messages,
      because the protocols allow a dynamic range of 1-64K bytes.  Since
      Interest messages are used to allocate the reverse link bandwidth for
      returning Data, there is large uncertainty in how to allocate that
      bandwidth.  Unfortunately, most current congestion control schemes in
      CCNx and NDN only count Interest messages and have no idea how much
      data is involved that could congest the inverse link.  This document
      proposes a method to maintain flow balance by accommodating the wide
      dynamic range in Data message size.

  "Support for Data Reduction Attributes in nfsv4 Version 2", Sorin Faibish,
  Philip Shilane, 2021-12-19,
  <draft-faibish-nfsv4-data-reduction-attributes-06.txt>

      This document proposes extending NFSv4 operations to add new
      RECOMMENDED attributes to be used in the protocol to provide
      information about the data reduction properties of files. The new
      data reduction attributes are proposed to allow the client
      application to communicate to the NFSv4 server data reduction
      attributes associated with files and directories using new metadata,
      communicated to the Block Storage data reduction engines.
      Corresponding new RECOMMENDED attributes are proposed to allow
      clients and client applications to query the server for data
      reduction attributes support and allow to get and set data reduction
      attributes on files and directories. Such data reduction
      metadata is used as hints to the file server about what type of data
      reduction to apply. The proposed data reduction attributes include
      achievable ratios for compression and deduplication plus whether
      each data reduction technique applies to a file or directory.

  "YANG Data Model for OSPFv3 Segment Routing", Acee Lindem, Yingzhen Qu,
  2021-10-19, <draft-acee-lsr-ospfv3-sr-yang-06.txt>

      This document defines a YANG data module augmenting the IETF OSPF
      Segment Routing (SR) YANG model to support OSPFv3 extensions for SR.
      It can be used to configure and manage OSPFv3 Segment Routing in MPLS
      data plane.

  "Commercial National Security Algorithm (CNSA) Suite Profile for TLS and
  DTLS 1.2 and 1.3", Deb Cooley, 2021-01-20,
  <draft-cooley-cnsa-dtls-tls-profile-07.txt>

      This document defines a base profile for TLS protocol versions 1.2
      and 1.3, as well as DTLS protocol versions 1.2 and 1.3 for use with
      the United States Commercial National Security Algorithm (CNSA)
      Suite.
      
      The profile applies to the capabilities, configuration, and operation
      of all components of US National Security Systems that use TLS or
      DTLS.  It is also appropriate for all other US Government systems
      that process high-value information.
      
      The profile is made publicly available here for use by developers and
      operators of these and any other system deployments.

  "A YANG Module for uCPE management.", Dmytro Shytyi, Laurent Beylier, Luigi
  Iannone, 2021-09-09, <draft-shytyi-opsawg-vysm-10.txt,.pdf>

      This document provides a YANG data model for uCPE management (VYSM)
      and definition of the uCPE equipment.  The YANG Model serves as a
      base framework for managing an universal Customer-Premises Equipment
      (uCPE) subsystem.  The model can be used by a Network Orchestrator.

  "SRv6 NET-PGM extension: Insertion", Clarence Filsfils, Pablo Camarillo,
  John Leddy, Dan Voyer, Satoru Matsushima, Zhenbin Li, 2022-02-22,
  <draft-filsfils-spring-srv6-net-pgm-insertion-06.txt>

      Traffic traversing an SR domain is encapsulated in an outer IPv6
      header for its journey through the SR domain.
      
      To implement transport services strictly within the SR domain, the SR
      domain may require insertion or deletion of an SRH after the outer
      IPv6 header of the SR domain.  Any segment within the SRH is strictly
      contained within the SR domain.
      
      This document extends SRv6 Network Programming [RFC8986] with new SR
      endpoint and transit behaviors to be performed only within the SR
      domain in any packet owned by the domain.

  "Link Local Next Hop Handling for BGP", Russ White, Donald Sharp, Dinesh
  Dutt, Biswajit Sadhu, Jeff Tantsura, Donatas Abraitis, 2021-11-07,
  <draft-white-linklocalnh-02.txt>

      BGP, described in [RFC4271], was originally designed to provide
      reachability between domains and between the edges of a domain.  As
      such, BGP assumes the next hop towards any reachable destination may
      not reside on the advertising speaker, but rather may either be
      through a router connected to the same subnet as the speaker, or
      through a router only reachable by traversing multiple hops through
      the network.  Because of this, BGP does not recognize the use of IPv6
      link local addresses, as described in [RFC4291], as a valid next hop
      for forwarding purposes.
      
      However, BGP speakers are now often deployed on point-to-point links
      in networks where multihop reachability of any kind is not assumed or
      desired (all next hops are assumed to be the speaker reachable
      through a directly connected point-to-point link).  This is common,
      for instance, in data center fabrics.  In these situations, a global
      IPv6 address is not required for the advertisement of reachability
      information; in fact, providing global IPv6 addresses in these kinds
      of networks can be detrimental to Zero Touch Provisioning (ZTP).
      
      This draft standardizes the operation of BGP over a point-to-point
      link using link local IPv6 addressing only.

  "Oblivious DNS Over HTTPS", Eric Kinnear, Patrick McManus, Tommy Pauly,
  Tanya Verma, Christopher Wood, 2022-02-17,
  <draft-pauly-dprive-oblivious-doh-11.txt>

      This document describes a protocol that allows clients to hide their
      IP addresses from DNS resolvers via proxying encrypted DNS over HTTPS
      (DoH) messages.  This improves privacy of DNS operations by not
      allowing any one server entity to be aware of both the client IP
      address and the content of DNS queries and answers.
      
      This experimental protocol is developed outside the IETF and is
      published here to guide implementation, ensure interoperability among
      implementations, and enable wide-scale experimentation.

  "Path Steering in CCNx and NDN", Ilya Moiseenko, David Oran, 2021-11-08,
  <draft-oran-icnrg-pathsteering-05.txt>

      Path Steering is a mechanism to discover paths to the producers of
      ICN content objects and steer subsequent Interest messages along a
      previously discovered path.  It has various uses, including the
      operation of state-of-the-art multipath congestion control algorithms
      and for network measurement and management.  This specification
      derives directly from the design published in _Path Switching in
      Content Centric and Named Data Networks_ (4th ACM Conference on
      Information-Centric Networking - ICN'17) and therefore does not
      recapitulate the design motivations, implementation details, or
      evaluation of the scheme.  Some technical details are different
      however, and where there are differences, the design documented here
      is to be considered definitive.

  "LISP Site External Connectivity", Prakash Jain, Victor Moreno, Sanjay
  Hooda, 2021-10-22, <draft-jain-lisp-site-external-connectivity-04.txt>

      This draft defines how to register/retrieve pETR mapping information
      in LISP when the destination is not registered/known to the local
      site and its mapping system (e.g. the destination is an internet or
      external site destination).

  "Prefix Unreachable Announcement", Aijun Wang, Gyan Mishra, Zhibo Hu, Yaqun
  Xiao, 2021-10-15, <draft-wang-lsr-prefix-unreachable-annoucement-08.txt>

      This document describes a mechanism to solve an existing issue with
      Longest Prefix Match (LPM), that exists where an operator domain is
      divided into multiple areas or levels where summarization is
      utilized.  This draft addresses a fail-over issue related to a multi
      areas or levels domain, where a link or node down event occurs
      resulting in an LPM component prefix being omitted from the FIB
      resulting in black hole sink of routing and connectivity loss.  This
      draft introduces a new control plane convergence signaling mechanism
      using a negative prefix called Prefix Unreachable Announcement
      Mechanism(PUAM), utilized to detect a link or node down event and
      signal the RIB that the event has occurred to force immediate control
      plane convergence.

  "Lzip Compressed Format and the 'application/lzip' Media Type", Antonio
  Diaz, 2021-10-23, <draft-diaz-lzip-04.txt>

      Lzip is a lossless compressed data format designed for data sharing,
      long-term archiving, and parallel compression/decompression.  Lzip
      uses a simplified form of the LZMA stream format and provides a 3
      factor integrity checking to maximize interoperability and optimize
      safety.  Lzip can achieve higher compression ratios than gzip.  This
      document describes the lzip format and registers a media type, a
      content encoding, and a structured syntax suffix to be used when
      transporting lzip-compressed content via MIME or HTTP.

  "PEM file format for ECH", Stephen Farrell, 2021-11-19,
  <draft-farrell-tls-pemesni-02.txt>

      Encrypted ClientHello (ECH) key pairs need to be configured into TLS
      servers, some of which can be built with different TLS libraries, so
      there is a benefit and little cost in documenting a file format to
      use for these, similar to how RFC7468 defines other PEM file formats.

  "Stateless OpenPGP Command Line Interface", Daniel Gillmor, 2021-10-25,
  <draft-dkg-openpgp-stateless-cli-03.txt>

      This document defines a generic stateless command-line interface for
      dealing with OpenPGP messages, known as sop.  It aims for a minimal,
      well-structured API covering OpenPGP object security.

  "The Computerate Specifying Paradigm", Marc Petit-Huguenin, 2021-11-22,
  <draft-petithuguenin-computerate-specifying-16.txt>

      This document specifies a paradigm named Computerate Specifying,
      designed to simultaneously document and formally specify
      communication protocols.  This paradigm can be applied to any
      document produced by any Standard Developing Organization (SDO), but
      this document targets specifically documents produced by the IETF.

  "Using GOST R 34.10-2012 and GOST R 34.11-2012 algorithms with the Internet
  X.509 Public Key Infrastructure", Dmitry Baryshkov, Vasily Nikolaev,
  Aleksandr Chelpanov, 2022-01-17, <draft-deremin-rfc4491-bis-11.txt>

      This document describes encoding formats, identifiers, and parameter
      formats for the algorithms GOST R 34.10-2012 and GOST R 34.11-2012
      for use in Internet X.509 Public Key Infrastructure (PKI).
      
      This specification is developed to facilitate implementations that
      wish to support the GOST algorithms.  This document does not imply
      IETF endorsement of the cryptographic algorithms used in this
      document.

  "GOST Cipher Suites for Transport Layer Security (TLS) Protocol Version
  1.3", Stanislav Smyshlyaev, Evgeny Alekseev, Ekaterina Griboedova,
  Alexandra Babueva, Lidiya Nikiforova, 2021-12-10,
  <draft-smyshlyaev-tls13-gost-suites-05.txt>

      The purpose of this document is to make the Russian cryptographic
      standards available to the Internet community for their
      implementation in the Transport Layer Security (TLS) Protocol Version
      1.3.
      
      This specification defines four new cipher suites, seven new
      signature schemes and a key exchange mechanism for the TLS 1.3
      protocol, that are based on Russian cryptographic standards (called
      GOST algorithms).  Additionally, this document specifies a profile of
      TLS 1.3 with GOST algorithms so that implementers can produce
      interoperable implementations.  This document does not imply IETF
      endorsement of the cipher suites, signature schemes key exchange
      mechanism.

  "Advertising p2mp policies in BGP", Hooman Bidgoli, Dan Voyer, Andrew
  Stone, Rishabh Parekh, Serge Krier, Arvind Venkateswaran, 2021-10-07,
  <draft-hb-idr-sr-p2mp-policy-04.txt>

      SR P2MP policies are set of policies that enable architecture for
      P2MP service delivery.
      
      A P2MP policy consists of candidate paths that connects the Root of
      the Tree to a set of Leaves.  The P2MP policy is composed of
      replication segments.  A replication segment is a forwarding
      instruction for a candidate path which is downloaded to the Root,
      transit nodes and the leaves.
      
      This document specifies a new BGP SAFI with a new NLRI in order to
      advertise P2MP policy from a controller to a set of nodes.
      
      This document introduces three new route types within this NLRI, one
      for P2MP policy and its candidate paths that need to be programmed on
      the Root node, one for the replication segment incoming SID which
      uniquely will identify the cross connect and another for each
      outgoing interface that the packets get replicated to.  The last two
      route types are forwarding instructions that needs to be programmed
      on the Root, and optionally on Transit and Leaf nodes.
      
      It should be noted that this document does not specify how the Root
      and the Leaves are discovered on the controller, it only describes
      how the P2MP Policy and Replication Segments are programmed from the
      controller to the nodes.

  "Compressed Routing Header (CRH) Helper Option", Xing Li, Congxiao Bao,
  Eddie Ruan, Ron Bonica, 2021-10-11,
  <draft-bonica-6man-crh-helper-opt-04.txt>

      This document defines the IPv6 Compressed Routing Header (CRH) Helper
      option.  When a source node sends a packet with a CRH, it can use the
      CRH Helper option to provide additional information to downstream
      nodes.

  "Architecture Discussion on SRv6 Mobile User plane", Miya Kohno, Francois
  Clad, Pablo Camarillo, Zafar Ali, 2021-11-08,
  <draft-kohno-dmm-srv6mob-arch-05.txt>

      SRv6 mobile user plane is standardized in IETF.  It accomplishes the
      mobile user-plane functions in a simple, flexible and scalable
      manner, by utilizing the network programming nature of SRv6.  It
      leverages common native IPv6 data plane and creates interoperable
      overlays with underlay optimization.
      
      This document discusses the solution approach and its architectural
      benefits of common data plane across domains and across overlay/
      underlay.

  "DetNet Data Plane: IEEE 802.1 Time Sensitive Networking over SRv6",
  Xueshun Wang, Jinyou Dai, Jianhua Liu, Feng Zhang, 2021-11-08,
  <draft-wang-detnet-tsn-over-srv6-04.txt>

      This document specifies the Deterministic Networking data plane when
      TSN networks interconnected over an Segment Routing IPv6 Packet
      Switched Networks.

  "Support for Enterprise-specific TLVs in the BGP Monitoring Protocol",
  Paolo Lucente, Yunan Gu, 2022-01-17,
  <draft-lucente-grow-bmp-tlv-ebit-02.txt>

      Message types defined by the BGP Monitoring Protocol (BMP) do
      provision for data in TLV - Type, Length, Value - format, either in
      the shape of optional TLVs at the end of a BMP message or Stats
      Reports TLVs.  However the space for Type value is unique and
      governed by IANA.  To allow the usage of vendor-specific TLVs, a
      mechanism to define per-vendor Type values is required.  In this
      document we introduce an Enterprise Bit, or E-bit, for such purpose.

  "State-updating mechanism in RSVP-TE for MPLS network", Jun Gao, Jinyou
  Dai, 2022-01-10, <draft-gao-mpls-teas-rsvpte-state-update-04.txt>

      RSVP-TE has the following advantages: source routing capability,
      and the ability to reserve resources hop by hop along the LSP path.
      The two advantages are used by Deterministic Networking (DetNet)
      to provide DetNet Quality of Service (QoS) in a fully distributed
      control plane utilizing dynamic signaling protocols or in a
      Combined Control Plane (partly centralized, partly distributed).
      
      RSVP takes a "soft state" approach to manage the reservation
      state in routers and hosts. The use of 'Refresh messages' to cover
      many possible failures has resulted in a number of operational
      problems.  One problem relates to scaling, another relates to the
      reliability and latency of RSVP Signaling.
      
      This document describes a number of mechanisms that can be used to
      reduce processing overhead requirements of refresh messages. These
      extension present no backwards compatibility issues.

  "Predictable Multipath TCP (MPTCP) extension", Qian Wu, Hewu Li, Qi Zhang,
  Jun Liu, 2021-09-13, <draft-qian-mptcp-predict-01.txt>

      Multipath TCP (MPTCP) adds the capability of using multiple paths to
      a regular TCP session, which is quite suitable for integrated network
      scenarios where multiple paths almost always exist.  However, link
      handover and link on-off switching happen frequently in network
      systems that integrate different systems (especially the systems that
      continually move), which defeats the quality of MPTCP connections.
      Information about the link handover and on-off switching in above-
      mentioned scenarios can be predicted in advance, but MPTCP is not
      capable of utilizing the prediction information.  This document
      suggests MPTCP be extended with the capacity of obtaining and
      utilizing the prediction information.  Furthermore, the document
      describes one possible way to enhance MPTCP with prediction
      information, which proposes a modified MPTCP scheduler utilizing link
      on-off prediction information.

  "Performance Measurement for Geneve", Xiao Min, Greg Mirsky, Santosh
  Pallagatti, 2021-11-11, <draft-xiao-nvo3-pm-geneve-04.txt>

      This document describes the method to achieve Performance Measurement
      (PM) in point-to-point Generic Network Virtualization Encapsulation
      (Geneve) tunnels used to make up an overlay network.

  "A YANG Data Model for Client Signal Performance Monitoring", Haomian
  Zheng, Italo Busi, Zheng Yanlei, Victor Lopez, Oscar de Dios, 2022-01-05,
  <draft-zheng-ccamp-client-pm-yang-05.txt>

      A transport network is a server-layer network to provide connectivity
      services to its client.  Given the client signal is configured, the
      followup function for performance monitoring, such as latency and bit
      error rate, would be needed for network operation.
      
      This document describes the data model to support the performance
      monitoring functionalities.

  "BGP-LS Extensions for Scalable Segment Routing based Enhanced VPN", Jie
  Dong, Zhibo Hu, Zhenbin Li, Xiongyan Tang, Ran Pang, 2022-03-04,
  <draft-dong-idr-bgpls-sr-enhanced-vpn-04.txt>

      Enhanced VPN (VPN+) aims to provide enhanced VPN services to support
      some applications' needs of enhanced isolation and stringent
      performance requirements.  VPN+ requires integration between the
      overlay VPN connectivity and the resources and characteristics
      provided by the underlay network.  A Virtual Transport Network (VTN)
      is a virtual underlay network which can be used to support one or a
      group of VPN+ services.  In the context of network slicing, a VTN
      could be instantiated as a network resource partition (NRP).
      
      This document specifies the BGP-LS mechanisms with necessary
      extensions to advertise the information of scalable Segment Routing
      (SR) based NRPs to a centralized network controller.  Each NRP can
      have a customized topology and a set of network resources allocated
      from the physical network.  Multiple NRPs may shared the same
      topology, and multiple NRPs may share the same set of network
      resources on specific network segments.  This allows flexible
      combination of network topology and network resource attributes to
      build a large number of NRPs with a relatively small number of
      logical topologies.  The proposed mechanism is applicable to both
      segment routing with MPLS data plane (SR-MPLS) and segment routing
      with IPv6 data plane (SRv6).

  "Context-Aware Navigation Protocol for IP-Based Vehicular Networks",
  Jaehoon Jeong, Bien Mugabarigira, Yiwen Shen, Zhong Xiang, Zeung Kim,
  2022-02-21, <draft-jeong-ipwave-context-aware-navigator-05.txt>

      This document proposes a Context-Aware Navigation Protocol (CNP) for
      IP-based vehicular networks for cooperative navigation among vehicles
      in road networks.  This CNP aims at the enhancement of driving safety
      through a light-weight driving information sharing method.  The CNP
      protocol uses an IPv6 Neighbor Discovery (ND) option to convey
      driving information such as a vehicle's position, speed,
      acceleration/deceleration, and direction, and a driver's driving
      action (e.g., braking and accelerating).

  "Basic Support for Security and Privacy in IP-Based Vehicular Networks",
  Jaehoon Jeong, Yiwen Shen, J., PARK, 2022-02-21,
  <draft-jeong-ipwave-security-privacy-05.txt>

      This document describes possible attacks of security and privacy in
      IP Wireless Access in Vehicular Environments (IPWAVE).  It also
      proposes countermeasures for those attacks.

  "Destination-IP-Origin-AS Filter for BGP Flow Specification", Haibo Wang,
  Aijun Wang, Shunwan Zhuang, 2022-02-12,
  <draft-wang-idr-flowspec-dip-origin-as-filter-05.txt>

      BGP Flowspec mechanism (BGP-FS) [RFC8955] [RFC8956] propagates both
      traffic Flow Specifications and Traffic Filtering Actions by making
      use of the BGP NLRI and the BGP Extended Community encoding formats.
      This document specifies a new BGP-FS component type to support AS-
      level filtering.  The match field is the origin AS number of the
      destination IP address that is encoded in the Flowspec NLRI.  This
      function is applied in a single administrative domain.

  "Alternative Delta Time Encoding for CCNx Using Compact Floating-Point
  Arithmetic", Cenk Gundogan, Thomas Schmidt, David Oran, Matthias Waehlisch,
  2022-01-21, <draft-gundogan-icnrg-ccnx-timetlv-05.txt>

      CCNx utilizes delta time for a number of functions.  When using CCNx
      in environments with constrained nodes and/or bandwidth constrained
      networks, it is valuable to have a compressed representation of delta
      time.  In order to do so, either accuracy or dynamic range has to be
      sacrificed.  Since the current uses of delta time do not require both
      simultaneously, one can consider a logarithmic encoding such as that
      specified in [IEEE.754.2019].  This document updates _CCNx messages
      in TLV Format_ (RFC8609) to specify this alternative encoding.

  "IETF Network Slice YANG Data Model", Xufeng Liu, Jeff Tantsura, Igor
  Bryskin, Luis Contreras, Qin WU, Sergio Belotti, Reza Rokui, 2022-03-06,
  <draft-liu-teas-transport-network-slice-yang-05.txt>

      This document describes a YANG data model for managing and
      controlling IETF network slices, defined in
      [I-D.ietf-teas-ietf-network-slices].

  "Transport Protocol Issues of In-Network Computing Systems", Ike Kunze,
  Klaus Wehrle, Dirk Trossen, 2021-10-25,
  <draft-kunze-coinrg-transport-issues-05.txt>

      Today's transport protocols offer a variety of functionality based on
      the notion that the network is to be treated as an unreliable
      communication medium.  Some, like TCP, establish a reliable
      connection on top of the unreliable network while others, like UDP,
      simply transmit datagrams without a connection and without guarantees
      into the network.  These fundamental differences in functionality
      have a significant impact on how COIN approaches can be designed and
      implemented.  Furthermore, traditional transport protocols are not
      designed for the multi-party communication principles that underlie
      many COIN approaches.  This document raises several questions
      regarding the use of transport protocols in connection with COIN.

  "IETF Network Slice Use Cases and Attributes for Northbound Interface of
  IETF Network Slice Controllers", Luis Contreras, Shunsuke Homma, Jose
  Ordonez-Lucena, Jeff Tantsura, Hidetaka Nishihara, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-contreras-teas-slice-nbi-06.txt>

      This document analyses the needs of potential customers of network
      slices realized with IETF techniques in several use cases, identifies
      the functionalities for the North Bound Interface (NBI) of an IETF
      Network Slice Controller to satisfy such requests.

  "Use of ALTO for Determining Service Edge", Luis Contreras, Danny Perez,
  Christian Rothenberg, Sabine Randriamasy, 2022-03-01,
  <draft-contreras-alto-service-edge-04.txt>

      Service providers are starting to deploy and interconnect computing
      capabilities across the network for hosting network functions and
      applications.  In distributed computing environments, both computing
      and topological information are necessary in order to determine the
      more convenient infrastructure where to deploy such a service or
      application.  This document proposes an initial approach towards the
      use of ALTO to provide such information and assist the selection of
      appropriate deployment locations for services and applications.

  "MVPN and EVPN BUM Signaling with Controllers", Zhaohui Zhang, Rishabh
  Parekh, Zheng Zhang, Hooman Bidgoli, 2021-10-25,
  <draft-zzhang-mvpn-evpn-controller-01.txt>

      This document specifies optional procedures for BGP-MVPN and EVPN BUM
      signaling with controllers.  When P2MP tunnels used for BGP-MVPN and
      EVPN BUM are to be signaled from controllers, the controllers can
      learn tunnel information (identifier, root, leaf) by participating
      BGP-MVPN and EVPN BUM signaling, instead of relying on ingress PEs to
      collect the information and then pass to the controllers.
      Additionally, Inclusive/Selective PMSI Auto Discovery Routes can be
      originated from controllers based on central provisioning, instead of
      from PEs based on local provisioning.

  "Bijective MAC for Constraint Nodes", Pascal Urien, 2021-12-16,
  <draft-urien-core-bmac-09.txt>

      In this draft context, things are powered by micro controllers units
      (MCU) comprising a set of memories such as static RAM (SRAM), FLASH
      and EEPROM. The total memory size, ranges from 10KB to a few
      megabytes. In this context code and data integrity are major
      security issues, for the deployment of Internet of Things
      infrastructure. The goal of the bijective MAC (bMAC) is to compute
      an integrity value, which cannot be guessed by malicious software.
      In classical keyed MACs, MAC is computing according to a fixed
      order.
      In the bijective MAC, the content of N addresses is hashed according
      to a permutation P (i.e. bijective application).
      The bijective MAC key is the permutation P.
      The number of permutations for N addresses is N!. So the computation
      of the bMAC requires the knowledge of the whole space memory; this
      is trivial for genuine software, but could very difficult for
      corrupted software, especially for time stamped bMAC.

  "User Plane Message Encoding", Tetsuya Murakami, Satoru Matsushima, Kentaro
  Ebisawa, Pablo Camarillo, Ravi Shekhar, 2022-03-05,
  <draft-murakami-dmm-user-plane-message-encoding-05.txt,.pdf>

      This document defines the encoding of User Plane messages into
      Segment Routing Header (SRH).  The SRH carries the User Plane
      messages over SRv6 Network.

  "Deadline-aware Transport Protocol", Yong Cui, Zhiwen Liu, Jie Zhang, Hang
  Shi, Kai Zheng, Wei Wang, 2022-01-25, <draft-shi-quic-dtp-05.txt>

      This document defines Deadline-aware Transport Protocol (DTP) to
      provide block-based deliver-before-deadline transmission.  The
      intention of this memo is to describe a mechanism to fulfill
      unreliable transmission based on QUIC as well as how to enhance
      timeliness of data delivery.

  "SR-MPLS Data Plane with IPv6 Control Plane", Clarence Filsfils, Francois
  Clad, Ketan Talaulikar, 2021-11-10,
  <draft-filsfils-spring-sr-mpls-ipv6-control-plane-05.txt>

      This document reminds the existence of the "Segment Routing (SR) MPLS
      data-plane with IPv6 control-plane" solution that is mature from a
      standardization, productization and commercial deployment viewpoint.

  "Segment Routing Mapped To IPv6 (SRm6)", Ron Bonica, Shraddha Hegde, Yuji
  Kamite, Andrew Alston, Daniam Henriques, Luay Jalil, Joel Halpern, Jen
  Linkova, Gang Chen, 2021-09-27, <draft-bonica-spring-sr-mapped-six-04.txt>

      This document describes Segment Routing Mapped to IPv6 (SRm6).  SRm6
      is a Segment Routing (SR) solution that supports a wide variety of
      use-cases while complying with IPv6 specifications.  SRm6 is
      optimized for ASIC-based routers that operate at high data rates.

  "Data Aggregation in IPv6-based Vehicular Networks", Zhiwei Yan, Jong-Hyouk
  Lee, Jaehoon Jeong, Hidenori Nakazato, Yong-Jin Park, 2021-11-10,
  <draft-yan-ipwave-aggregation-04.txt>

      Considering the large-scale but small-sized information exchange in
      the vehicular information network, this draft document aims at
      outlining the requirements to support the data aggregation in
      vehicular networks based on the concept of Information-centric
      networking (ICN), in order to make the information retrieval and
      dissemination in an efficient way.

  "Operational Considerations for BRSKI Registrar", Michael Richardson, Wei
  Pan, 2022-03-06, <draft-richardson-anima-registrar-considerations-05.txt>

      This document describes a number of operational modes that a BRSKI
      Registration Authority (Registrar) may take on.
      
      Each mode is defined, and then each mode is given a relevance within
      an over applicability of what kind of organization the Registrar is
      deployed into.  This document does not change any protocol
      mechanisms.
      
      This document includes operational advice about avoiding unwanted
      consequences.

  "Operatonal Considerations for Voucher infrastructure for BRSKI MASA",
  Michael Richardson, Wei Pan, 2021-11-13,
  <draft-richardson-anima-masa-considerations-06.txt>

      This document describes a number of operational modes that a BRSKI
      Manufacturer Authorized Signing Authority (MASA) may take on.
      
      Each mode is defined, and then each mode is given a relevance within
      an over applicability of what kind of organization the MASA is
      deployed into.  This document does not change any protocol
      mechanisms.

  "RPKI validated cache Update in SLURM over HTTPs (RUSH)", Di Ma, Hanbing
  Yan, Melchior Aelmans, 2021-11-07, <draft-madi-sidrops-rush-05.txt>

      This document defines a method for transferring RPKI validated cache
      update information in JSON object format over HTTPs.

  "Abstract", Hongjie Wu, Zhiping Li, Jian Chen, Xiaotian Fan, 2021-12-19,
  <draft-wu-identifier-sln-objects-mapping-04.txt>

      This document specifies the format, contents and semantics of data
      escrow deposits for Industrial Internet Identifier Second-level Node
      (SLN). SLN directly serves enterprises and provides services such as
      identifier registration, identifier resolution, data sharing, etc.
      The mapping objects in this document mainly refers to the enterprise
      registration information of the SLN and the Enterprise-level Node
      (ELN) registered in the SLN.

  "Abstract", Hongjie Wu, Zhiping Li, Jian Chen, Xiaotian Fan, 2021-12-19,
  <draft-industrial-internet-identifier-data-escrow-04.txt>

      This document specifies the format and contents of data escrow
      deposits targeted primarily for Industrial Internet Identifier Node
      (IIIN) which provides identifier registration. However, this
      specification was designed to be independent of the underlying
      objects that are being escrowed, therefore it could be used for
      purposes other than IIIN.

  "HTTP Usage in the Industrial Internet Identifier Data Access Protocol
  (IIIDAP)", Chendi Ma, Jian Chen, Xiaotian Fan, Meilan Chen, Zhiping Li,
  2021-12-19, <draft-ma-identifier-access-http-04.txt>

      This document describes an Extensible Provisioning Protocol (EPP)
      for the provisioning and management of enterprises and identifiers
      between the server which is called Business Management System (BMS)
      and is entitled to manage the identifier top-level node and the
      client which is also referred to as Second Node Management System
      (SNMS). Specified in XML, the mapping defines EPP command syntax and
      semantics as applied to enterprise and identifier management.

  "Security Services for the Industrial Internet Identifier Data Access
  Protocol (IIIDAP)", Chendi Ma, Jian Chen, Xiaotian Fan, Meilan Chen,
  Zhiping Li, 2021-12-19, <draft-mcd-identifier-access-security-04.txt>

      The Industrial Internet Identifier Data Access Protocol (IIIDAP)
      provides "RESTful" web services to retrieve identifier metadata from
      Second-Level Node (SLN). This document describes information
      security services, including access control, authentication,
      authorization, availability, data confidentiality, and data
      integrity for IIIDAP.

  "JSON Responses for the Industrial Internet Identifier Data Access Protocol
  (IIIDAP)", Chendi Ma, Jian Chen, Xiaotian Fan, Meilan Chen, 2021-12-19,
  <draft-mcd-identifier-access-responce-04.txt>

      This document describes JSON data structures representing identifier
      information maintained by Second-Level Nodes (SLN). These data
      structures are used to form Industrial Internet Identifier Data
      Access Protocol (IIIDAP) query responses.

  "Finding the Authoritative Registration Data (IIIDAP) Service", Chendi Ma,
  Jian Chen, Xiaotian Fan, Meilan Chen, Zhiping Li, 2021-12-19,
  <draft-mcd-identifier-access-authority-04.txt>

      This document specifies a method to find which Industrial Internet
      Identifier Data Access Protocol (IIIDAP) server is authoritative to
      answer queries for a request of identifier data.

  "Industrial Internet Identifier Data Access Protocol (IIIDAP) Query
  Format", Chendi Ma, Jian Chen, Xiaotian Fan, Meilan Chen, Zhiping Li,
  2021-12-19, <draft-mcd-identifier-access-query-04.txt>

      This document describes uniform patterns to construct HTTP URLs that
      may be used to retrieve identifier information from Second-Level
      Nodes (SLN) using "RESTful" web access patterns. These uniform
      patterns define the query syntax for the Industrial Internet
      Identifier Data Access Protocol (IIIDAP).

  "Resource Allocation Model for Hybrid Switching Networks", Weiqiang Sun,
  Junyi Shao, Weisheng Hu, 2021-12-05,
  <draft-sun-nmrg-hybrid-switching-04.txt>

      The fast increase in traffic volumn within and outside Datacenters is
      placing an unprecendented challenge on the underline network, in both
      the capacity it can provide, and the way it delivers traffic.  When a
      large portion of network traffic is contributed by large flows,
      providing high capacity and slow to change optical circuit switching
      along side fine-granular packet services may potentially improve
      network utility and reduce both CAPEX and OpEX.  This gives rise to
      the concept of hybrid switching - a paradigm that seeks to make the
      best of packet and circuit switching.
      
      However, the full potential of hybrid switching networks (HSNs) can
      only be realized when such a network is optimally designed and
      operated, in the sense that "an appropriate amount of resource is
      used to handle an appropriate amount of traffic in both switching
      planes."  The resource allocation problem in HSNs is in fact complex
      ineractions between three components: resource allocation between the
      two switching planes, traffic partitioning between the two switching
      planes, and the overall cost or performance constraints.
      
      In this memo, we explore the challenges of planning and operating
      hybrid switching networks, with a particular focus on the resource
      allocation problem, and provide a high-level model that may guide
      resource allocation in future hybrid switching networks.

  "Inter-domain Network Slicing via BGP-LU", Ran Chen, Chunning Dai, Shaofu
  Peng, 2022-03-07, <draft-zhou-idr-inter-domain-lcu-04.txt>

      This document aims to solve inter-domain network slicing problems
      using existing technologies.  It attempts to establish multiple BGP-
      LU LSPs of different colors for a/multiple prefix to stitch multiple
      network segments.

  "OSPF Graceful Restart Enhancements", Sami Boutros, Ankur Dubey,
  Vijayalaxmi Basavaraj, Acee Lindem, 2021-12-14,
  <draft-basavaraj-lsr-ospf-gr-enhancements-04.txt>

      This document describes enhancements to the OSPF graceful restart
      procedures to improve routing convergence in some OSPF network
      deployments.  This document updates RFC 3623 and RFC 5187.

  "(strong) AuCPace, an augmented PAKE", Bjoern Haase, 2022-01-22,
  <draft-haase-aucpace-05.txt>

      This document describes AuCPace which is an augmented PAKE protocol
      for two parties.  The protocol was tailored for constrained devices
      and smooth migration for compatibility with legacy user credential
      databases.  It is designed to be compatible with any group of both
      prime- and non-prime order and comes with a security proof providing
      composability guarantees.

  "Stateless and Scalable Network Slice Identification for SRv6", Clarence
  Filsfils, Francois Clad, Pablo Camarillo, Syed Raza, Dan Voyer, Reza Rokui,
  2022-01-30, <draft-filsfils-spring-srv6-stateless-slice-id-05.txt>

      This document defines a stateless and scalable solution to achieve
      network slicing with SRv6.

  "SRv6 vSID: Network Programming extension for variable length SIDs", Bruno
  Decraene, Robert Raszuk, Zhenbin Li, Cheng Li, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-decraene-spring-srv6-vlsid-07.txt>

      This document proposes an extension to Segment Routing IPv6 (SRv6)
      Network Programming to allow for SRv6 Segment Identifier (SID) of
      smaller variable length.  The use of smaller SRv6 SID reduces the
      size the SRv6 Header (SRH).  This reduces the overhead for both the
      traffic volume and the network processor.  It is a straightforward
      extension to the SRv6 Network Programming model and its SRH
      encapsulation.

  "BGP-LS Extensions for Network Resource Partition identifier", Ran Chen,
  Shaofu Peng, Tarek Saad, Vishnu Beeram, 2021-12-27,
  <draft-chen-idr-bgp-ls-transport-slice-04.txt>

      This draft defines extensions to BGP-LS protocol in order to
      advertise Network Resource Partition SR segments that share the same
      IGP computed forwarding path but offer a forwarding treatment (e.g.
      scheduling and drop policy) that is associated with a specific
      Network Resource.  The draft is applicable to both SR-MPLS and SRv6
      dataplanes

  "VLSM Tree Routing Protocol", Shyam Bandyopadhyay, 2021-11-08,
  <draft-shyam-vlsmtrp-01.txt>

      This is a light weight routing protocol applicable inside a network
      that appears in the form of a tree and distribution of address space
      takes place with the approach of VLSM. It is based on setting default
      route inside VLSM tree.  With this approach, routing information of
      the external world need not be passed down to the VLSM tree. Thus,
      load inside a router gets reduced substantially.  This document
      includes IP-VPN with MPLS inside VLSM tree by extending RSVP-TE.

  "Lightweight Authorization for Authenticated Key Exchange.", Goeran
  Selander, John Mattsson, Malisa Vucinic, Michael Richardson, Aurelio
  Schellenbaum, 2021-10-22, <draft-selander-ace-ake-authz-04.txt>

      This document describes a procedure for augmenting the lightweight
      authenticated Diffie-Hellman key exchange protocol EDHOC with third
      party assisted authorization, targeting constrained IoT deployments
      (RFC 7228).

  "Using GOST algorithms in IKEv2", Valery Smyslov, 2021-11-09,
  <draft-smyslov-ike2-gost-07.txt>

      This document defines a set of cryptographic transforms for use in
      the Internet Key Exchange version 2 (IKEv2) protocol.  The transforms
      are based on Russian cryptographic standard algorithms (GOST).

  "5G End-to-end Network Slice Mapping from the view of Transport Network",
  Xuesong Geng, Jie Dong, Ran Pang, Liuyan Han, Reza Rokui, Jaewhan Jin, Jeff
  Tantsura, 2022-03-07, <draft-geng-teas-network-slice-mapping-05.txt>

      Network Slicing is one of the core features in 5G.  End-to-end
      network slice consists of 3 major types of network segments: Access
      Network (AN), Mobile Core Network (CN) and Transport Network (TN).
      This draft describes the procedure of mapping 5G end-to-end network
      slice to transport network slice defined in IETF.  This draft also
      intends to expose some gaps in the existing network management plane
      and data plane technologies to support inter-domain network slice
      mapping.  Further work may require collaboration between IETF and
      3GPP (or other standard organizations).  Data model specification,
      signaling protocol extension and new encapsulation definition are out
      of the scope of this draft.

  "BGP Extension for SR-MPLS Entropy Label Position", Liu Yao, Shaofu Peng,
  2022-03-01, <draft-zhou-idr-bgp-srmpls-elp-04.txt>

      This document proposes extensions for BGP to indicate the entropy
      label position in the SR-MPLS label stack when delivering SR Policy
      via BGP.

  "New UUID Formats", Brad Peabody, Kyzer Davis, 2021-10-07,
  <draft-peabody-dispatch-new-uuid-format-02.txt>

      This document presents new time-based UUID formats which are suited
      for use as a database key.
      
      A common case for modern applications is to create a unique
      identifier for use as a primary key in a database table.  This
      identifier usually implements an embedded timestamp that is sortable
      using the monotonic creation time in the most significant bits.  In
      addition the identifier is highly collision resistant, difficult to
      guess, and provides minimal security attack surfaces.  None of the
      existing UUID versions, including UUIDv1, fulfill each of these
      requirements in the most efficient possible way.  This document is a
      proposal to update [RFC4122] with three new UUID versions that
      address these concerns, each with different trade-offs.

  "Quic Timestamps For Measuring One-Way Delays", Christian Huitema,
  2022-03-06, <draft-huitema-quic-ts-07.txt>

      The TIMESTAMP frame can be added to Quic packets when one way delay
      measurements are useful.  The timestamp is set to the number of
      microseconds from the beginning of the node's epoch to the time at
      which the packet is sent.  The draft defines the "enable_timestamp"
      transport parameter for negotiating the use of this extension frame,
      and the TIMESTAMP frame.

  "Metadata in SR-MPLS Service Programming", Liu Yao, 2021-09-15,
  <draft-liu-spring-sr-sfc-metadata-01.txt>

      This document proposes methods to carry metadata in SR service
      programming with SR-MPLS data plane.

  "Adaptive Subscription to YANG Notification", Qin WU, Wei Song, Peng Liu,
  Qiufang Ma, Wei Wang, 2022-02-24,
  <draft-wang-netconf-adaptive-subscription-09.txt>

      This document defines a YANG data model and associated mechanism
      enabling the subscriber's adaptive subscriptions to a publisher's
      event streams with various different period intervals to report
      updates.  Applying these elements allows servers automatically adjust
      the rate and volume of telemetry traffic sent from a publisher to
      receivers.

  "Data Export Notification Capability", Qin WU, Qiufang Ma, Peng Liu, Wei
  Wang, 2022-02-24, <draft-tao-netconf-data-export-capabilities-07.txt>

      This document proposes a YANG module for data export notification
      capabilities which augments "ietf-system-capabilities" YANG module
      defined in [RFC9196] and provides additional data export attributes
      associated with system capabilities for transport specific
      Notification.  This YANG module can be used by the client to learn
      capability information from the server at runtime or at
      implementation time, by making use of the YANG instance data file
      format.

  "Application-aware Networking (APN) Framework", Zhenbin Li, Shuping Peng,
  Dan Voyer, Cong Li, Peng Liu, Chang Cao, Gyan Mishra, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-li-apn-framework-05.txt>

      A multitude of applications are carried over the network, which have
      varying needs for network bandwidth, latency, jitter, and packet
      loss, etc.  Some new emerging applications have very demanding
      performance requirements.  However, in current networks, the network
      and applications are decoupled, that is, the network is not aware of
      the applications' requirements in a fine granularity.  Therefore, it
      is difficult to provide truly fine-granularity traffic operations for
      the applications and guarantee their SLA requirements.
      
      This document proposes a new framework, named Application-aware
      Networking (APN), where application-aware information (i.e.  APN
      attribute) including APN identification (ID) and/or APN parameters
      (e.g.  network performance requirements) is encapsulated at network
      edge devices and carried in packets traversing an APN domain in order
      to facilitate service provisioning, perform fine-granularity traffic
      steering and network resource adjustment.

  "Problem Statement and Use Cases of Application-aware Networking (APN)",
  Zhenbin Li, Shuping Peng, Dan Voyer, Chongfeng Xie, Peng Liu, Zhuangzhuang
  Qin, Gyan Mishra, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-li-apn-problem-statement-usecases-06.txt>

      Network operators are facing the challenge of providing better
      network services for users.  As the ever-developing 5G and industrial
      verticals evolve, more and more services that have diverse network
      requirements such as ultra-low latency and high reliability are
      emerging, and therefore differentiated service treatment is desired
      by users.  On the other hand, as network technologies such as
      Hierarchical QoS (H-QoS), SR Policy, and Network Slicing keep
      evolving, the network has the capability to provide more fine-
      granularity differentiated services.  However, network operators are
      typically unware of the applications that are traversing their
      network infrastructure, which means that not very effective
      differentiated service treatment can be provided to the traffic
      flows.  As network technologies evolve including deployments of IPv6,
      SRv6, Segment Routing over MPLS dataplane, the programmability
      provided by IPv6 and Segment Routing can be augmented by conveying
      application related information into the network satifying the fine-
      granularity requirements.
      
      This document analyzes the existing problems caused by lack of
      service awareness, and outlines various use cases that could benefit
      from an Application-aware Networking (APN) framework.

  "Inserting, Processing And Deleting IPv6 Extension Headers", Ron Bonica,
  Tatuya Jinmei, 2022-02-24, <draft-bonica-6man-ext-hdr-update-07.txt>

      This document provides guidance regarding the processing, insertion,
      and deletion of IPv6 extension headers.  It updates RFC 8200.

  "Bootstrapped TLS Authentication", Owen Friel, Dan Harkins, 2022-02-04,
  <draft-friel-tls-eap-dpp-04.txt>

      This document defines a TLS extension that enables a server to prove
      to a client that it has knowledge of the public key of a key pair
      where the client has knowledge of the private key of the key pair.
      Unlike standard TLS key exchanges, the public key is never exchanged
      in TLS protocol messages.  Proof of knowledge of the public key is
      used by the client to bootstrap trust in the server.  The use case
      outlined in this document is to establish trust in an EAP server.

  "A User-Focused Internet Threat Model", Dominique Lazanski, 2022-01-05,
  <draft-lazanski-users-threat-model-t-04.txt>

      RFC 3552 introduces a threat model that does not include endpoint
      security. Yet increasingly protocol development is making assumptions
      about endpoint security capabilities which have not been defined. RFC
      3552 is 17 years old and threat landscape has changed. Security issues
      and cyber attacks have increased and there are more devices, users, and
      applications on the endpoint than ever. This draft proposes a new
      approach to the Internet threat model which will include endpoint
      security, focus on users and provide an update to the threat model in
      RFC 3552. It brings together Security Considerations for Protocol
      Designers draft-lazanski-protocol-sec-design-model-t-04 which is a
      comprehensive document that lists threats, attack vectors, examples and
      considerations for designing protocols, as well as draft-taddei-smart-
      cless-introduction-03 which lays out security concerns, capabilities
      and limitations for endpoints in general and draft-mcfadden-smart-
      endpoint-taxonomy-for-cless-02 which outlines a clear taxonomy for
      endpoint security and identifies changes in technology, economic and
      protocol development that has impacted and changed endpoint security.
      Taken together these drafts reflect a comprehensive and clear set of
      security threats and design considerations for the Internet.

  "BGP for Network High Availability", Huaimo Chen, Yanhe Fan, Aijun Wang,
  Lei Liu, Xufeng Liu, 2021-09-15, <draft-chen-idr-ctr-availability-03.txt>

      This document describes protocol extensions to BGP for improving the
      reliability or availability of a network controlled by a controller
      cluster.

  "PCE for Network High Availability", Huaimo Chen, Aijun Wang, Lei Liu,
  Xufeng Liu, 2021-09-15, <draft-chen-pce-ctr-availability-03.txt>

      This document describes extensions to Path Computation Element (PCE)
      communication Protocol (PCEP) for improving the reliability or
      availability of a network controlled by a controller cluster.

  "IGP for Network High Availability", Huaimo Chen, Mehmet Toy, Aijun Wang,
  Lei Liu, Xufeng Liu, 2021-09-15, <draft-chen-lsr-ctr-availability-03.txt>

      This document describes protocol extensions to OSPF and IS-IS for
      improving the reliability or availability of a network controlled by
      a controller cluster.

  "Egress Protection for Segment Routing (SR) networks", Shraddha Hegde, Wen
  Lin, Shaofu Peng, 2022-03-02,
  <draft-hegde-rtgwg-egress-protection-sr-networks-02.txt>

      This document specifies a Fast Reroute(FRR) mechanism for protecting
      IP/MPLS services that use Segment Routing (SR) paths for transport
      against egress node and egress link failures.  The mechanism is based
      on egress protection framework described in [RFC8679].  The egress
      protection mechanism can be further simplified in Segment Routing
      networks with anycast SIDs and anycast Locators.  This document
      addresses all kinds of networks that use Segment Routing transport
      such as SR-MPLS over IPv4, SR-MPLS over IPv6, SRv6 and SRm6.

  "Use cases of Application-aware Networking (APN) in Edge Computing", Peng
  Liu, Zongpeng Du, Shuping Peng, Zhenbin Li, 2021-12-13,
  <draft-liu-apn-edge-usecase-04.txt>

      The ever-emerging new services are imposing more and more highly
      demanding requirements on the network.  However, the current
      deployments could not fully accommodate those requirements due to
      limited capabilities.  For example, it is difficult to utilize the
      traditional centralized deployment mode to meet the low-latency
      demand of some latency-sensitive applications.  Moreover, the total
      amount of centralized service data is growing exponentially, which
      brings great pressure on the network bandwidth.  There has been a
      clear trend that decentralized sites comprising of computing and
      storage resources are deployed at various locations to provide
      services.  In particular, when the sites are deployed at the network
      edge, i.e. the Edge Computing, it can better handle the business
      needs of the users nearby, which provides the possibilities to
      provide differentiated network and computing services.  In order to
      achieve the full benefits of the edge computing, it actually implies
      a precondition that the network should be aware of the applications'
      requirements in order to steer their traffic to the network paths
      that can satisfy their requirements.  Application-aware networking
      (APN) aims to accommodate the edge services' needs, fully releasing
      the benefits of the edge computing.
      
      This document describes the various application scenarios in edge
      computing to which the APN can be beneficial, including augmented
      reality, cloud gaming and remote control, which empowers the video
      business, users interaction business and user-device interaction
      business.  In those scenarios, APN can identify the specific
      requirements of edge computing applications on the network, process
      close to the users, provide SLA guaranteed network services such as
      low latency and high reliability.

  "An Architecture for Network Function Interconnect", Colin Bookham, Andrew
  Stone, Jeff Tantsura, Muhammad Durrani, Bruno Decraene, 2022-01-05,
  <draft-bookham-rtgwg-nfix-arch-04.txt>

      The emergence of technologies such as 5G, the Internet of Things
      (IoT), and Industry 4.0, coupled with the move towards network
      function virtualization, means that the service requirements demanded
      from networks are changing.  This document describes an architecture
      for a Network Function Interconnect (NFIX) that allows for
      interworking of physical and virtual network functions in a unified
      and scalable manner across wide-area network and data center domains
      while maintaining the ability to deliver against SLAs.

  "Redundancy Policy for Redundancy Protection", Xuesong Geng, Mach Chen, Fan
  Yang, 2022-03-07, <draft-geng-spring-redundancy-policy-02.txt>

      Redundancy Protection is a generalized protection mechanism to
      achieve the high reliability of service transmission in Segment
      Routing network.  Specifically, packets of flows are replicated at a
      network node into two or more copies, which are transported via
      different and disjoint paths in parallel.  To support redundancy
      protection in Segment Routing domain, this document introduces
      Redundancy Policy, as a variant of SR Policy, to intrust the
      replication of service packets and the multiple ordered lists of
      segments used for packet carrying.

  "Distributed SFC control operation", Carlos Bernardos, Alain Mourad,
  2021-09-09, <draft-bernardos-sfc-distributed-control-operation-03.txt>

      Service function chaining (SFC) allows the instantiation of an
      ordered set of service functions and subsequent "steering" of traffic
      through them.  In order to set up and maintain SFC instances, a
      control plane is required, which typically is centralized.  In
      certain environments, such as fog computing ones, such centralized
      control might not be feasible, calling for distributed SFC control
      solutions.  This document describes a general framework for
      distributed SFC operation.

  "NSH extensions for local distributed SFC control", Carlos Bernardos, Alain
  Mourad, 2021-09-09, <draft-bernardos-sfc-nsh-distributed-control-03.txt>

      Service function chaining (SFC) allows the instantiation of an
      ordered set of service functions and subsequent "steering" of traffic
      through them.  In order to set up and maintain SFC instances, a
      control plane is required, which typically is centralized.  In
      certain environments, such as fog computing ones, such centralized
      control might not be feasible, calling for distributed SFC control
      solutions.  This document specifies several NSH extensions to provide
      in-band SFC control signaling.

  "SFC function mobility with Mobile IPv6", Carlos Bernardos, Alain Mourad,
  2021-09-09, <draft-bernardos-dmm-sfc-mobility-03.txt>

      Service function chaining (SFC) allows the instantiation of an
      ordered set of service functions and subsequent "steering" of traffic
      through them.  In order to set up and maintain SFC instances, a
      control plane is required, which typically is centralized.  In
      certain environments, such as fog computing ones, such centralized
      control might not be feasible, calling for distributed SFC control
      solutions.  This document specifies Mobile IPv6 extensions to enable
      function migration in SFC.

  "Using Flex-Algo for Segment Routing based VTN", Yongqing Zhu, Jie Dong,
  Zhibo Hu, 2022-03-06, <draft-zhu-lsr-isis-sr-vtn-flexalgo-04.txt>

      Enhanced VPN (VPN+) aims to provide enhanced VPN service to support
      some application's needs of enhanced isolation and stringent
      performance requirements.  VPN+ requires integration between the
      overlay VPN connectivity and the characteristics provided by the
      underlay network.  A Virtual Transport Network (VTN) is a virtual
      underlay network which has a customized network topology and a set of
      network resources allocated from the physical network.  A VTN could
      be used as the underlay for one or a group of VPN+ services.
      
      The topological constraints of a VTN can be defined using Flex-Algo.
      In some network scenarios, each VTN can be associated with a unique
      Flex-Algo, and the set of network resources allocated to a VTN can be
      instantiated as layer-2 sub-interfaces or member links of the layer-3
      interfaces.  This document describes the mechanisms to build the SR
      based VTNs using SR Flex-Algo and IGP L2 bundle with minor
      extensions.

  "Security Considerations for Protocol Designers", Dominique Lazanski,
  2022-01-05, <draft-lazanski-protocol-sec-design-model-t-04.txt>

      This document is a non-exhaustive set of considerations for protocol
      designers and implementers with regards to attack defence. This
      document follows on from the way forward outlined in draft-lazanski-
      users-threat-model-t-04. These considerations both supplement and
      support the work on threat models. They can be used as an aid to
      analyse protocol design choice and in turn to help combat threats
      and defend users of these protocols and systems against malicious
      attacks.
      
      First, we list well-known classes of attacks that pose threats, with
      relevant case studies and descriptions. Next, we give a list of
      defence measures against these attacks to be considered when
      designing and deploying protocols. Naturally, deployments of
      protocols vary greatly between use cases; therefore, some attacks
      and defensive measures outlined may require more consideration than
      others, dependent on use case.
      
      This RFC can be used by protocol designers to write the Security
      Considerations section in an RFC. The impact on attack defence of a
      protocol should be considered in multiple use cases across the
      multiple layers of the internet. Defence against malicious attacks
      can be improved and it can be weakened by design features of
      protocols. Designers should acknowledge the role of protocols in
      attack prevention, detection and mitigation; this document aims to
      be a useful guide in doing so.

  "Auto-adjustment of Encapsulation Information in APN6", Zongpeng Du, Peng
  Liu, 2022-03-02, <draft-du-apn6-auto-encapsulation-adjustment-02.txt>

      This document introduces a method to adjust the encapsulation
      information in Application-aware IPv6 Networking.

  "Micro-burst Decreasing in Layer3 Network for Low-Latency Traffic",
  Zongpeng Du, Peng Liu, 2021-10-25,
  <draft-du-detnet-layer3-low-latency-04.txt>

      It is complex to support deterministic forwarding in a large scale
      network because there is too much dynamic traffic in the network and
      the data model becomes hard to predict after aggregation in the
      intermediate nodes.  This document introduces the problem of micro-
      bursts in layer3 network, and analyses the method to decrease the
      micro-bursts in layer3 network for low-latency traffic.

  "BCP72 - A Problem Statement", Mark McFadden, 2022-01-22,
  <draft-mcfadden-smart-threat-changes-04.txt>

      RFC3552/BCP72 describes an Internet Threat model that has been used
      in Internet protocol design. More than eighteen years have passed
      since RFC3552 was written and the structure and topology of the
      Internet have changed. With those changes comes a question: has the
      Internet Threat Model changed? Or, is the model described in RFC3552
      still mostly accurate?  This draft attempts to describe a non-
      exhaustive list of changes in the current threat environment. It
      finds that there are both qualitative and quantitative differences
      from the environment described in RFC3552 and is intended as input
      to the IAB program on the Internet threat model started in 2020.

  "Forwarding Layer Problem Statement", Stewart Bryant, Uma Chunduri,
  Toerless Eckert, Alexander Clemm, 2022-01-24,
  <draft-bryant-arch-fwd-layer-ps-04.txt>

      This document considers the problems that need to addressed in IP in
      order to address the use cases and new network services described in
      draft-bryant-arch-fwd-layer-uc-00.

  "Connection-oriented Path in SRv6 Network", Zongpeng Du, Peng Liu,
  2022-03-02, <draft-du-spring-connection-oriented-srv6-01.txt>

      This document proposes a method to support connection-oriented path
      in the SRv6 network.

  "SPAKE2+, an Augmented PAKE", Tim Taubert, Christopher Wood, 2022-02-11,
  <draft-bar-cfrg-spake2plus-07.txt>

      This document describes SPAKE2+, a Password Authenticated Key
      Exchange (PAKE) protocol run between two parties for deriving a
      strong shared key with no risk of disclosing the password.  SPAKE2+
      is an augmented PAKE protocol, as only one party has knowledge of the
      password.  This method is simple to implement, compatible with any
      prime order group and is computationally efficient.
      
      This document was produced outside of the IETF and IRTF, and
      represents the opinions of the authors.  Publication of this document
      as an RFC in the Independent Submissions Stream does not imply
      endorsement of SPAKE2+ by the IETF or IRTF.

  "Enhancing Security and Privacy with In-Network Computing", Ina Fink, Klaus
  Wehrle, 2021-10-22, <draft-fink-coin-sec-priv-03.txt>

      With the growing interconnection of devices, cyber security and data
      protection are of increasing importance.  This is especially the case
      regarding cyber-physical systems due to their close entanglement with
      the physical world.  Misbehavior and information leakage can lead to
      financial and physical damage and endanger human lives and well-
      being.  Thus, hard security and privacy requirements are necessary to
      be met.  Furthermore, a thorough investigation of incidents is
      essential for ultimate protection.  Computing in the Network (COIN)
      allows the processing of traffic and data directly in the network and
      at line-rate.  Thus, COIN presents a promising solution for
      efficiently providing security and privacy mechanisms as well as
      network monitoring.  This document discusses select mechanisms to
      demonstrate how COIN concepts can be applied to counter existing
      shortcomings of cyber security and data privacy.

  "Proxy Operations for CoAP Group Communication", Marco Tiloca, Esko Dijk,
  2022-03-07, <draft-tiloca-core-groupcomm-proxy-06.txt>

      This document specifies the operations performed by a proxy, when
      using the Constrained Application Protocol (CoAP) in group
      communication scenarios.  Such a proxy processes a single request
      sent by a client over unicast, and distributes the request over IP
      multicast to a group of servers.  Then, the proxy collects the
      individual responses from those servers and relays those responses
      back to the client, in a way that allows the client to distinguish
      the responses and their origin servers through embedded addressing
      information.  This document updates RFC7252 with respect to caching
      of response messages at proxies.

  "IETF Network Slice Intent", Luis Contreras, Panagiotis Demestichas, Jeff
  Tantsura, 2022-01-11, <draft-contreras-nmrg-transport-slice-intent-05.txt>

      Slicing at the transport network is expected to be offered as part of
      end-to-end network slices, fostered by the introduction of new
      services such as 5G.  This document explores the usage of intent
      technologies for requesting IETF network slices.

  "BGP Well Known Large Community", Jakob Heitz, Kotikalapudi Sriram, Brian
  Dickson, John Heasley, 2022-03-07, <draft-heitz-idr-wklc-04.txt>

      A range of BGP Autonomous System Numbers is reserved to create a set
      of BGP Well Known Large Communities.

  "Multipath schedulers", Olivier Bonaventure, Maxime Piraux, Quentin De
  Coninck, Matthieu Baerts, Christoph Paasch, Markus Amend, 2021-10-25,
  <draft-bonaventure-iccrg-schedulers-02.txt>

      This document proposes a series of abstract packet schedulers for
      multipath transport protocols equipped with a congestion controller.

  "Abstract", Hongjie Wu, Jian Chen, Xiaotian Fan, Zhiping Li, 2021-12-19,
  <draft-wu-identifier-data-escrow-interface-04.txt>

      This document describes the Data Escrow report requirement and
      technical details of the interfaces provides by the Top-level Node
      (TLN) to its contracted parties. Second-level Node (SLN) MUST
      periodically send data escrow report to Top-level Node (TLN) and
      Data Escrow Agent (DEA). DEA MUST sends report verify result to TLN
      and SLN after processing the report.

  "DNS Server Selection: DNS Server Information with Assertion Token",
  Tirumaleswar Reddy.K, Dan Wing, Michael Richardson, Mohamed Boucadair,
  2021-10-07, <draft-reddy-add-server-policy-selection-09.txt>

      The document defines a mechanism that is meant to communicate DNS
      resolver information to DNS clients for use as a criteria for server
      selection decisions.  Such an information that is cryptographically
      signed to attest its authenticity is used for the selection of DNS
      resolvers.  Typically, evaluating the resolver information and the
      signatory, DNS clients with minimal or no human intervention can
      select the DNS servers for resolving domain names.
      
      This assertion is useful for encrypted DNS (e.g., DNS-over-TLS, DNS-
      over-HTTPS, or DNS-over-QUIC) servers that are either public
      resolvers or discovered in a local network.

  "Real-time text solutions for multi-party sessions", Gunnar Hellstrom,
  2021-12-30, <draft-hellstrom-avtcore-multi-party-rtt-solutions-08.txt>

      This document specifies methods for Real-Time Text (RTT) media
      handling in multi-party calls.  The main discussed transport is to
      carry Real-Time text by the RTP protocol in a time-sampled mode
      according to RFC 4103.  The mechanisms enable the receiving
      application to present the received real-time text media, separated
      per source, in different ways according to user preferences.  Some
      presentation related features are also described explaining suitable
      variations of transmission and presentation of text.
      
      Call control features are described for the SIP environment.  A
      number of alternative methods for providing the multi-party
      negotiation, transmission and presentation are discussed and a
      recommendation for the main ones is provided.  The main solution for
      SIP based centralized multi-party handling of real-time text is
      achieved through a media control unit coordinating multiple RTP text
      streams into one RTP stream.
      
      Alternative methods using a single RTP stream and source
      identification inline in the text stream are also described, one of
      them being provided as a lower functionality fallback method for
      endpoints with no multi-party awareness for RTT.
      
      Bridging methods where the text stream is carried without the
      contents being dealt with in detail by the bridge are also discussed.
      
      Brief information is also provided for multi-party RTT in the WebRTC
      environment.
      
      The intention is to provide background for decisions, specification
      and implementation of selected methods.  The recommendations have
      resulted in the published RFC 9071.  This document is maintained
      mainly to present the reasoning behind the recommendations and
      provide material for any further work in other application areas.

  "Per-Node Capabilities for Optimum Operational Data Collection", Benoit
  Claise, Munish Nayyar, Adithya Sesani, 2022-01-25,
  <draft-claise-netconf-metadata-for-collection-03.txt>

      This document proposes a YANG module that provides per-node
      capabilities for optimum operational data collection.  This YANG
      module augments the YANG Modules for describing System Capabilities
      and YANG-Push Notification capabilities.
      
      This module defines augmented nodes to publish the metadata
      information specific to YANG node-identifier as per ietf-system-
      capabilities datatree.
      
      Complementary RPCs, based on the same node capabilities, simplify the
      data collection operations.

  "UAS Operator Privacy for RemoteID Messages", Robert Moskowitz, Stuart
  Card, Adam Wiethuechter, 2021-10-07,
  <draft-moskowitz-drip-operator-privacy-09.txt>

      This document describes a method of providing privacy for UAS
      Operator/Pilot information specified in the ASTM UAS Remote ID and
      Tracking messages.  This is achieved by encrypting, in place, those
      fields containing Operator sensitive data using a hybrid ECIES.

  "Reflexive Forwarding for CCNx and NDN Protocols", David Oran, Dirk
  Kutscher, 2022-02-16, <draft-oran-icnrg-reflexive-forwarding-02.txt>

      Current Information-Centric Networking protocols such as CCNx and NDN
      have a wide range of useful applications in content retrieval and
      other scenarios that depend only on a robust two-way exchange in the
      form of a request and response (represented by an _Interest-Data
      exchange_ in the case of the two protocols noted above).  A number of
      important applications however, require placing large amounts of data
      in the Interest message, and/or more than one two-way handshake.
      While these can be accomplished using independent Interest-Data
      exchanges by reversing the roles of consumer and producer, such
      approaches can be both clumsy for applications and problematic from a
      state management, congestion control, or security standpoint.  This
      specification proposes a _Reflexive Forwarding_ extension to the CCNx
      and NDN protocol architectures that eliminates the problems inherent
      in using independent Interest-Data exchanges for such applications.
      It updates RFC8569 and RFC8609.

  "Secure UAS Network RID and C2 Transport", Robert Moskowitz, Stuart Card,
  Adam Wiethuechter, Andrei Gurtov, 2021-10-21,
  <draft-moskowitz-drip-secure-nrid-c2-04.txt>

      This document provides the mechanisms for secure transport of
      Unmanned Aircraft System (UAS) Network Remote ID (N-RID) and Command-
      and-Control (C2) messaging.  Both HIP and DTLS based methods are
      described.

  "QUIC Version Aliasing", Martin Duke, 2021-10-25,
  <draft-duke-quic-version-aliasing-07.txt>

      The QUIC transport protocol preserves its future extensibility partly
      by specifying its version number.  There will be a relatively small
      number of published version numbers for the foreseeable future.  This
      document provides a method for clients and servers to negotiate the
      use of other version numbers in subsequent connections and encrypts
      Initial Packets using secret keys instead of standard ones.  If a
      sizeable subset of QUIC connections use this mechanism, this should
      prevent middlebox ossification around the current set of published
      version numbers and the contents of QUIC Initial packets, as well as
      improving the protocol's privacy properties.

  "LTP Fragmentation", Fred Templin, 2022-02-01,
  <draft-templin-dtn-ltpfrag-08.txt>

      The Licklider Transmission Protocol (LTP) provides a reliable
      datagram convergence layer for the Delay/Disruption Tolerant
      Networking (DTN) Bundle Protocol.  In common practice, LTP is often
      configured over UDP/IP sockets and inherits its maximum segment size
      from the maximum-sized UDP/IP datagram, however when this size
      exceeds the maximum IP packet size for the path a service known as IP
      fragmentation must be employed.  This document discusses LTP
      interactions with IP fragmentation and mitigations for managing the
      amount of IP fragmentation employed.

  "BGP Maximum Prefix Limits Inbound", Melchior Aelmans,
  stucchi-lists@glevia.com, Job Snijders, 2022-01-19,
  <draft-sas-idr-maxprefix-inbound-04.txt>

      This document describes mechanisms to limit the negative impact of
      route leaks [RFC7908] and/or resource exhaustion in BGP [RFC4271]
      implementations.

  "RPL Storing Root-ACK", Rahul Jadhav, 2021-11-09,
  <draft-jadhav-roll-storing-rootack-03.txt>

      This document explains problems with DAO-ACK handling in RPL Storing
      MOP and provides updates to RFC6550 to solve those problems.

  "Optimizing ACK mechanism for QUIC", Tong Li, Kai Zheng, Rahul Jadhav, Jiao
  Kang, 2021-11-22, <draft-li-quic-optimizing-ack-in-wlan-03.txt>

      The dependence on frequent acknowledgments (ACKs) is an artifact of
      current transport protocol designs rather than a fundamental
      requirement.  This document analyzes the problems caused by
      contentions and collisions on wireless medium between data packets
      and ACKs in WLAN and it proposes an ACK mechanism that minimizes the
      intensity of ACK Frame in QUIC, improving the performance of
      transport layer connection.

  "Describing QUIC's Protocol Data Units with Augmented Packet Header
  Diagrams", Stephen McQuistin, Vivian Band, Dejice Jacob, Colin Perkins,
  2021-10-25, <draft-mcquistin-quic-augmented-diagrams-05.txt>

      This document describes the core transport protocol data units used
      in the QUIC protocol using a machine-readable augmented packet header
      diagram format.  It is intended as an example of the augmented packet
      header diagram language, and not as a contribution to the development
      of the QUIC protocol.

  "BGP Classful Transport Planes", Kaliraj Vairavakkalai, Natrajan
  Venkataraman, Balaji Rajagopalan, Gyan Mishra, Mazen Khaddam, Xiaohu Xu,
  Rafal Szarecki, Deepak Gowda, 2022-01-19,
  <draft-kaliraj-idr-bgp-classful-transport-planes-13.txt>

      This document specifies a mechanism, referred to as "service
      mapping", to express association of overlay routes with underlay
      routes satisfying a certain SLA, using BGP.  The document describes a
      framework for classifying underlay routes into transport classes, and
      mapping service routes to specific transport class.
      
      The "Transport class" construct maps to a desired SLA, and can be
      used to realize the "Topology Slice" in 5G Network slicing
      architecture.
      
      This document specifies BGP protocol procedures that enable
      dissemination of such service mapping information that may span
      multiple co-operating administrative domains.  These domains may be
      administetered by the same provider or closely co-ordinating provider
      networks.
      
      It makes it possible to advertise multiple tunnels to the same
      destination address, thus avoiding need of multiple loopbacks on the
      egress node.
      
      A new BGP transport layer address family (SAFI 76) is defined for
      this purpose that uses RFC-4364 technology and follows RFC-8277 NLRI
      encoding.  This new address family is called "BGP Classful
      Transport", aka BGP CT.
      
      It carries transport prefixes across tunnel domain boundaries (e.g.
      in Inter-AS Option-C networks), parallel to BGP LU (SAFI 4) . It
      disseminates "Transport class" information for the transport prefixes
      across the participating domains, which is not possible with BGP LU.
      This makes the end-to-end network a "Transport Class" aware tunneled
      network.

  "Use Identity as Raw Public Key in EAP-TLS", chenmeiling, Li Su, Haiguang
  Wang, 2021-11-14, <draft-chen-emu-eap-tls-ibs-03.txt>

      This document specifies the use of identity as a raw public key in
      EAP-TLS, EAP-TLS for TLS1.2 is defined in RFC 5216 and EAP-TLS for
      TLS1.3 is defined in the draft draft-ietf-emu-eap-tls13 and draft-
      ietf-tls-dtls13.  The procedures of EAP-TLS-IBS will consistent with
      EAP-TLS's interactive process, Identity-based signature will be
      extended to support EAP-TLS's signature algorithms.

  "Notable CBOR Tags", Carsten Bormann, 2022-02-23,
  <draft-bormann-cbor-notable-tags-06.txt>

      The Concise Binary Object Representation (CBOR, RFC 8949) is a data
      format whose design goals include the possibility of extremely small
      code size, fairly small message size, and extensibility without the
      need for version negotiation.
      
      In CBOR, one point of extensibility is the definition of CBOR tags.
      RFC 8949's original edition, RFC 7049, defined a basic set of tags as
      well as a registry that can be used to contribute additional tag
      definitions [IANA.cbor-tags].  Since RFC 7049 was published, some 80
      tag definitions have been added to that registry.
      
      The present document provides a roadmap to a large subset of these
      tag definitions.  Where applicable, it points to a IETF standards or
      standard development document that specifies the tag.  Where no such
      document exists, the intention is to collect specification
      information from the sources of the registrations.  After some more
      development, the present document is intended to be useful as a
      reference document for the IANA registrations of the CBOR tags the
      definitions of which have been collected.

  "SCRAM-SHA-512 and SCRAM-SHA-512-PLUS Simple Authentication and Security
  Layer (SASL) Mechanisms", Alexey Melnikov, 2021-10-19,
  <draft-melnikov-scram-sha-512-02.txt>

      This document registers the Simple Authentication and Security Layer
      (SASL) mechanisms SCRAM-SHA-512 and SCRAM-SHA-512-PLUS.

  "Generalized SRv6 Network Programming for SRv6 Compression", Weiqiang
  Cheng, Zhenbin Li, Cheng Li, Francois Clad, Aihua Liu, Chongfeng Xie,
  Yisong Liu, Shay Zadok, 2021-10-24,
  <draft-cl-spring-generalized-srv6-for-cmpr-04.txt>

      This document proposes Generalized Segment Routing over IPv6 (G-SRv6)
      Networking Programming for SRv6 compression.
      
      G-SRv6 can reduce the overhead of SRv6 by encoding the Generalized
      SIDs(G-SID) in SID list, and it also supports to program SRv6 SIDs
      and G-SIDs in a single SRH to support incremental deployment and
      smooth upgrade.
      
      G-SRv6 is fully compatible with SRv6 with no modification of SRH, no
      new address consumption, no new route creation, and even no
      modification of control plane.
      
      G-SRv6 for Compression is designed based on the Compressed SRv6
      Segment List Encoding in SRH
      [I-D.filsfilscheng-spring-srv6-srh-compression] framework.

  "A Simple LISP NAT-Traversal Implementation", Dino Farinacci, 2021-11-07,
  <draft-farinacci-lisp-simple-nat-03.txt>

      This informational draft documents the lispers.net LISP NAT-Traversal
      implementation.

  "Secure Frame (SFrame)", Emad Omara, Justin Uberti, Alex Gouaillard, Sergio
  Murillo, 2021-09-17, <draft-omara-sframe-03.txt>

      This document describes the Secure Frame (SFrame) end-to-end
      encryption and authentication mechanism for media frames in a
      multiparty conference call, in which central media servers (SFUs) can
      access the media metadata needed to make forwarding decisions without
      having access to the actual media.  The proposed mechanism differs
      from other approaches through its use of media frames as the
      encryptable unit, instead of individual RTP packets, which makes it
      more bandwidth efficient and also allows use with non-RTP transports.

  "The GNU Name System", Martin Schanzenbach, Christian Grothoff, Bernd Fix,
  2022-02-26, <draft-schanzen-gns-10.txt>

      This document contains the GNU Name System (GNS) technical
      specification.  GNS is a decentralized and censorship-resistant name
      system that provides a privacy-enhancing alternative to the Domain
      Name System (DNS).
      
      This document defines the normative wire format of resource records,
      resolution processes, cryptographic routines and security
      considerations for use by implementers.
      
      This specification was developed outside the IETF and does not have
      IETF consensus.  It is published here to inform readers about the
      function of GNS, guide future GNS implementations, and ensure
      interoperability among implementations including with the pre-
      existing GNUnet implementation.

  "Advertising SID Algorithm Information in BGP", Liu Yao, Shaofu Peng,
  2022-03-03, <draft-peng-idr-segment-routing-te-policy-attr-02.txt>

      This document proposes extensions of BGP and defines some new Segment
      Types with algorithm information to meet more requirements when
      delivering SR Policy via BGP.

  "Use cases of Application-aware Networking (APN) in Game Acceleration",
  Shuai Zhang, Chang Cao, Shuping Peng, Zhenbin Li, 2021-12-08,
  <draft-zhang-apn-acceleration-usecase-03.txt>

      With the development of the Internet, game industry has risen
      rapidly, from handheld game consoles to PC games and mobile games.
      The types of games are diversified, while the number of game users is
      increasing year by year.  The game market is maturing quickly.
      
      Nowadays, the scale of game users is large and they belong to the
      easy-to-consume groups.  Among all the games, those require frequent
      interactions and involve video streaming usually have highly
      demanding requirements on the network in terms of guaranteed network
      latency and reliability.  Therefore, from the aspect of ensuring
      better gaming experience, it is desirable of differentiating the
      particular gaming application flows and providing high-priority
      network services for those demanding gamers.
      
      This document describes the game acceleration scenarios using
      Application-aware Networking (APN) technology.  In these scenarios,
      APN can identify the specific requirements of particular gaming
      applications, steer the flows to the game processors close to the
      users, and provide SLA guaranteed network services such as low
      latency and high reliability.

  "Identity Module for TLS Version 1.3", Pascal Urien, 2022-01-25,
  <draft-urien-tls-im-06.txt>

      TLS 1.3 will be deployed in the Internet of Things ecosystem. In
      many IoT frameworks, TLS or DTLS protocols, based on pre-shared key
      (PSK), are used for device authentication. So PSK tamper resistance,
      is a critical market request, in order to prevent hijacking issues.
      If DH exchange is used with certificate bound to DH ephemeral public
      key, there is also a benefit to protect its signature procedure. The
      TLS identity module (im) MAY be based on secure element; it realizes
      some HKDF operations bound to PSK, and cryptographic signature if
      certificates are used. Secure Element form factor could be
      standalone chip, or embedded in SoC like eSIM.

  "Trusted Path Routing", Eric Voit, Chennakesava Gaddam, Guy Fedorkow, Henk
  Birkholz, chenmeiling, 2022-03-02,
  <draft-voit-rats-trustworthy-path-routing-05.txt>

      There are end-users who believe encryption technologies like IPSec
      alone are insufficient to protect the confidentiality of their highly
      sensitive traffic flows.  These end-users want their flows to
      traverse devices which have been freshly appraised and verified for
      trustworthiness.  This specification describes Trusted Path Routing.
      Trusted Path Routing protects sensitive flows as they transit a
      network by forwarding traffic to/from sensitive subnets across
      network devices recently appraised as trustworthy.

  "Real-time Transport Object delivery over Unidirectional Transport
  (ROUTE)", Waqar Zia, Thomas Stockhammer, Lena Chaponniere, Giridhar
  Mandyam, Mike Luby, 2022-02-04, <draft-zia-route-06.txt>

      The Real-time Transport Object delivery over Unidirectional Transport
      protocol (ROUTE protocol) is specified for robust delivery of
      Application Objects, including Application Objects with real-time
      delivery constraints, to receivers over a unidirectional transport.
      Application Objects consist of data that has meaning to applications
      that use the ROUTE protocol for delivery of data to receivers, for
      example, it can be a file, or a DASH or HLS segment, a WAV audio
      clip, etc. The ROUTE protocol also supports low-latency streaming
      applications.
      
      The ROUTE protocol is suitable for unicast, broadcast, and multicast
      transport. Therefore, it can be run over UDP/IP including multicast
      IP. The ROUTE protocol can leverage the features of the underlying
      protocol layer, e.g. to provide security it can leverage IP security
      protocols such as IPSec.
      
      This document specifies the ROUTE protocol such that it could be used
      by a variety of services for delivery of Application Objects by
      specifying their own profiles of this protocol (e.g. by adding or
      constraining some features).
      
      This is not an IETF specification and does not have IETF consensus.

  "Initializing a DNS Resolver with Priming Queries", Peter Koch, Matt
  Larson, Paul Hoffman, 2021-11-08, <draft-klh-dnsop-rfc8109bis-03.txt>

      This document describes the queries that a DNS resolver should emit
      to initialize its cache.  The result is that the resolver gets both a
      current NS Resource Record Set (RRset) for the root zone and the
      necessary address information for reaching the root servers.
      
      This document, when published, obsoletes RFC 8109.

  "Multipath TCP Extension for Robust Session Establishment", Markus Amend,
  Jiao Kang, 2022-03-07, <draft-amend-tcpm-mptcp-robe-02.txt>

      Multipath TCP extends the plain, single-path limited, TCP towards the
      capability of multipath transmission.  This greatly improves the
      reliability and performance of TCP communication.  For backwards
      compatibility reasons the Multipath TCP was designed to setup
      successfully an initial path first, after which subsequent paths can
      be added for multipath transmission.  For that reason the Multipath
      TCP has the same limitations as the plain TCP during connection
      setup, in case the selected path is not functional.
      
      This document proposes a set of implementations and possible
      combinations thereof, that provide a more Robust Establishment (RobE)
      of MPTCP sessions.  It includes RobE_TIMER, RobE_SIM, RobE_eSIM and
      RobE_IPS.
      
      RobE_TIMER is designed to stay close to MPTCP in that standard
      functionality is used wherever possible.  Resiliency against network
      outages is achieved by modifying the SYN retransmission timer: If one
      path is defective, another path is used.
      
      RobE_SIM and RobE_eSIM provides the ability to simultaneously use
      multiple paths for connection setup.  They ensure connectivity if at
      least one functional path out of a bunch of paths is given and offers
      beside that the opportunity to significantly improve loading times of
      Internet services.
      
      RobE_IPS provides a heuristic to select properly an initial path for
      connection establishment with a remote host based on empirical data
      derived from previous connection information.
      
      In practice, these independent solutions can be complementary used.
      This document also presents the design and protocol procedure for
      those combinations in addition to the respective stand-alone
      solutions.

  "Distributed Ledger Time-Stamp", Emanuele Cisbani, Daniele Ribaudo,
  Giuseppe Damiano, 2021-11-26, <draft-intesigroup-dlts-03.txt>

      This document defines a standard to extend Time Stamp Tokens with
      Time Attestations recorded on Distributed Ledgers.
      
      The aim is to provide long-term validity to Time Stamp Tokens,
      backward compatible with currently available software.

  "Multipath sequence maintenance", Markus Amend, Dirk Hugo, 2021-10-25,
  <draft-amend-iccrg-multipath-reordering-03.txt>

      This document discusses the issue of packet reordering which occurs
      as a specific problem in multi-path connections without reliable
      transport protocols such as TCP.  The topic is relevant for devices
      connected via multiple accesses technologies towards the network as
      is foreseen, e.g., within Access Traffic Selection, Switching, and
      Splitting (ATSSS) service of 3rd Generation Partnership Project
      (3GPP) enabling fixed mobile converged (FMC) scenario.

  "Digital Twin Network: Concepts and Reference Architecture", Cheng Zhou,
  Hongwei Yang, Xiaodong Duan, Diego Lopez, Antonio Pastor, Qin WU, Mohamed
  Boucadair, Christian Jacquenet, 2022-03-05,
  <draft-zhou-nmrg-digitaltwin-network-concepts-07.txt>

      Digital Twin technology has been seen as a rapid adoption technology
      in Industry 4.0.  The application of Digital Twin technology in the
      networking field is meant to develop various rich network
      applications and realize efficient and cost effective data driven
      network management and accelerate network innovation.
      
      This document presents an overview of the concepts of Digital Twin
      Network, provides the basic definitions and a reference architecture,
      lists a set of application scenarios, and discusses the benefits and
      key challenges of such technology.

  "Stateless SRv6 Point-to-Multipoint Path", Huaimo Chen, Mike McBride, Yanhe
  Fan, Zhenbin Li, Xuesong Geng, Mehmet Toy, Gyan Mishra, Aijun Wang, Lei
  Liu, Xufeng Liu, 2021-11-11, <draft-chen-pim-srv6-p2mp-path-05.txt>

      This document describes a solution for a SRv6 Point-to-Multipoint
      (P2MP) Path/Tree to deliver the traffic from the ingress of the path
      to the multiple egresses/leaves of the path in a SR domain.  There is
      no state stored in the core of the network for a SR P2MP path like a
      SR Point-to-Point (P2P) path in this solution.

  "Principles for the Involvement of Intermediaries in Internet Protocols",
  Martin Thomson, 2022-03-07, <draft-thomson-tmi-03.txt>

      This document proposes a set of principles for designing protocols
      with rules for intermediaries.  The goal of these principles is to
      limit the ways in which intermediaries can produce undesirable
      effects and to protect the useful functions that intermediaries
      legitimately provide.

  "Seamless SR Problem Statement", Shraddha Hegde, Chris Bowers, Xiaohu Xu,
  Arkadiy Gulko, Alex Bogdanov, Jim Uttaro, Luay Jalil, Mazen Khaddam, Andrew
  Alston, Luis Contreras, 2021-09-24,
  <draft-hegde-spring-mpls-seamless-sr-06.txt>

      This draft documents a set of use cases and requirements for end-to-
      end intent-based paths spanning multi-domain packet networks.  The
      document explicitly focuses on use cases that require high scale and
      availability, which will likely benefit from distributed solutions.
      It is intended that the requirements in this document serve as a
      basis for future IETF work to develop distributed solutions for
      inter-domain intent-based transport paths.

  "TCP ACK Rate Request Option", Carles Gomez, Jon Crowcroft, 2022-03-06,
  <draft-gomez-tcpm-ack-rate-request-03.txt>

      TCP Delayed Acknowledgments (ACKs) is a widely deployed mechanism
      that allows reducing protocol overhead in many scenarios.  However,
      Delayed ACKs may also contribute to suboptimal performance.  When a
      relatively large congestion window (cwnd) can be used, less frequent
      ACKs may be desirable.  On the other hand, in relatively small cwnd
      scenarios, eliciting an immediate ACK may avoid unnecessary delays
      that may be incurred by the Delayed ACKs mechanism.  This document
      specifies the TCP ACK Rate Request (TARR) option.  This option allows
      a sender to request the ACK rate to be used by a receiver, and it
      also allows to request immediate ACKs from a receiver.

  "Bit Index Explicit Replication (BIER) Encapsulation for In-situ OAM (IOAM)
  Data", Xiao Min, Zheng Zhang, Yisong Liu, Nagendra Nainar, Carlos
  Pignataro, 2022-01-12, <draft-xzlnp-bier-ioam-03.txt>

      In-situ Operations, Administration, and Maintenance (IOAM) records
      operational and telemetry information in the packet while the packet
      traverses a path in the network.  Bit Index Explicit Replication
      (BIER) is an architecture that provides optimal multicast forwarding
      through a "multicast domain", without requiring intermediate routers
      to maintain any per-flow state or to engage in an explicit tree-
      building protocol.  The BIER header contains a bit-string in which
      each bit represents exactly one egress router to forward the packet
      to.  This document outlines the requirements to carry IOAM data in
      BIER header and specifies how IOAM data fields are encapsulated in
      BIER header.

  "Traffic Steering using BGP Flowspec with SRv6 Policy", Jiang Wenying,
  Yisong Liu, Shuanglong Chen, Shunwan Zhuang, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-jiang-idr-ts-flowspec-srv6-policy-06.txt>

      BGP Flow Specification (FlowSpec) [RFC8955] [RFC8956] has been
      proposed to distribute BGP FlowSpec NLRI to FlowSpec clients to
      mitigate (distributed) denial-of-service attacks, and to provide
      traffic filtering in the context of a BGP/MPLS VPN service.
      Recently, traffic steering applications in the context of SRv6 using
      FlowSpec aslo attract attention.  This document introduces the usage
      of BGP FlowSpec to steer packets into an SRv6 Policy.

  "Accurate Data Scheduling by Server in MPTCP", Jiao Kang, liangqiandeng,
  2022-02-08, <draft-kang-tcpm-accurate-data-scheduling-by-server-02.txt>

      This document defines a new mechanism that enables MPTCP server to
      send requests to MPTCP client for data scheduling between specified
      subflows during a MPTCP session.

  "Forwarding Layer Use Cases", Stewart Bryant, Uma Chunduri, Toerless
  Eckert, Alexander Clemm, 2022-01-24, <draft-bryant-arch-fwd-layer-uc-03.txt>

      This document considers the new and emerging use cases for IP.  These
      use cases are difficult to address with IP in its current format and
      demonstrate the need to evolve the protocol.

  "A YANG Data Model for MPLS-TE Topology", Italo Busi, Aihua Guo, Xufeng
  Liu, Tarek Saad, Rakesh Gandhi, 2021-10-25,
  <draft-busizheng-teas-yang-te-mpls-topology-02.txt>

      This document describes a YANG data model for Multi-Protocol Label
      Switching (MPLS) with Traffic Engineering (MPLS-TE) networks.

  "SCRAM-SHA3-512 and SCRAM-SHA3-512-PLUS Simple Authentication and Security
  Layer (SASL) Mechanisms", Alexey Melnikov, 2021-10-19,
  <draft-melnikov-scram-sha3-512-02.txt>

      This document registers the Simple Authentication and Security Layer
      (SASL) mechanisms SCRAM-SHA3-512 and SCRAM-SHA3-512-PLUS.

  "Interconnection Intents", Luis Contreras, Paolo Lucente, 2022-01-20,
  <draft-contreras-nmrg-interconnection-intents-02.txt>

      This memo introduces the use case of the usage of intents for
      expressing advance interconnection features, further than traditional
      IP peering.

  "Trustworthiness Vectors for the Software Updates of Internet of Things
  (SUIT) Workflow Model", Henk Birkholz, Brendan Moran, 2022-01-12,
  <draft-birkholz-rats-suit-claims-03.txt>

      The IETF Remote Attestation Procedures (RATS) architecture defines
      Conceptual Messages as input and output of the appraisal process that
      assesses the trustworthiness of remote peers: Evidence and
      Attestation Results.  Based on the Trustworthiness Vectors defined in
      Trusted Path Routing, this document defines a core set of Claims to
      be used in Evidence and Attestation Results for the Software Update
      for the Internet of Things (SUIT) Workflow Model.  Consecutively,
      this document is in support of the Trusted Execution Environment
      Provisioning (TEEP) architecture, which defines the assessment of
      remote peers via RATS and uses SUIT for evidence generation as well
      as a remediation measure to improve trustworthiness of given remote
      peers.

  "YANG Data Model for MPLS LSP Ping", Nagendra Nainar, Carlos Pignataro,
  Madhan Sankaranarayanan, Guangying Zheng, 2022-01-28,
  <draft-nainar-mpls-lsp-ping-yang-02.txt>

      This document describes the YANG data model for Multi-Protocol Label
      Switching (MPLS) LSP Ping.  The model is based on YANG 1.1 as defined
      in RFC 7950 and conforms to the Network Management Datastore
      Architecture (NMDA) as described in RFC 8342.

  "Cacheable OSCORE", Christian Amsuess, Marco Tiloca, 2022-03-06,
  <draft-amsuess-core-cachable-oscore-04.txt>

      Group communication with the Constrained Application Protocol (CoAP)
      can be secured end-to-end using Group Object Security for Constrained
      RESTful Environments (Group OSCORE), also across untrusted
      intermediary proxies.  However, this sidesteps the proxies' abilities
      to cache responses from the origin server(s).  This specification
      restores cacheability of protected responses at proxies, by
      introducing consensus requests which any client in a group can send
      to one server or multiple servers in the same group.

  "BGP Extension for Advertising In-situ Flow Information Telemetry (IFIT)
  Capabilities", Yali Wang, Shunwan Zhuang, Yunan Gu, Ran Pang, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-wang-idr-bgp-ifit-capabilities-04.txt>

      This document defines extensions to BGP to advertise the In-situ Flow
      Information Telemetry (IFIT) capabilities.  Within an IFIT domain,
      IFIT-capability advertisement from the tail node to the head node
      assists the head node to determine whether a particular IFIT Option
      type can be encapsulated in data packets.  Such advertisement would
      be useful for mitigating the leakage threat and facilitating the
      deployment of IFIT measurements on a per-service and on-demand basis.

  "AS Hijack Detection and Mitigation", Kotikalapudi Sriram, Doug Montgomery,
  2022-01-10, <draft-sriram-sidrops-as-hijack-detection-03.txt>

      This document proposes a method for detection and mitigation of AS
      hijacking.  In this mechanism, an AS operator registers a new object
      in the RPKI called 'ROAs Exist for All Prefixes (REAP)'.  REAP is
      digitally signed using the AS holder's certificate.  By registering a
      REAP object, the AS operator is declaring that they have Route Origin
      Authorization (ROA) coverage for all prefixes originated by their AS.
      A receiving AS will mark a route as Invalid if the prefix is not
      covered by any Validated ROA Payload (VRP) and the route origin AS
      has signed a REAP.  Here Invalid means that the route is determined
      to be an AS hijack.

  "Extensions to enable wireless reliability and availability in multi-access
  edge deployments", Carlos Bernardos, Alain Mourad, 2022-01-27,
  <draft-bernardos-raw-mec-03.txt>

      There are several scenarios involving multi-hop heterogeneous
      wireless networks requiring reliable and available features combined
      with multi-access edge computing, such as Industry 4.0.  This
      document describes solutions integrating IETF RAW and ETSI MEC,
      fostering discussion about extensions at both IETF and ETSI MEC to
      better support these scenarios.

  "P2MP Policy Ping", Hooman Bidgoli, Dan Voyer, Rishabh Parekh, Zhaohui
  Zhang, 2021-11-13, <draft-hb-pim-p2mp-policy-ping-03.txt>

      SR P2MP policies are set of policies that enable architecture for
      P2MP service delivery.  A P2MP Policy consists of candidate paths
      that connects the Root of the Tree to a set of Leaves.  The P2MP
      policy is composed of replication segments.  A replication segment is
      a forwarding instruction for a candidate path which is downloaded to
      the Root, transit nodes and the leaves.
      
      This document describes a simple and efficient mechanism that can be
      used to detect data plane failures in P2MP Policy Candidate Paths
      (CPs) and Path Instances (PIs).

  "IP Flow Information Export (IPFIX) Information Elements Extension for
  Forwarding Exceptions", Venkata Munukutla, Shivam Vaid, Aditya Mahale,
  Devang Patel, 2022-02-07, <draft-mvmd-opsawg-ipfix-fwd-exceptions-04.txt>

      This draft proposes couple of new Forwarding exceptions related
      Information Elements (IEs) and Templates for the IP Flow Information
      Export (IPFIX) protocol.  These new Information Elements and
      Exception Template can be used to export information about any
      forwarding errors in a network.  This essential information is
      adequate to correlate packet drops to any control plane entity and
      map it to an impacted service.  Once exceptions are correlated to a
      particular entity, an action can be assigned to mitigate such
      problems essentially enabling self-driving networks.

  "SVG Tiny Portable/Secure", Alex Brotman, J. Adams, 2021-10-11,
  <draft-svg-tiny-ps-abrotman-02.txt>

      This document specifies SVG Tiny Portable/Secure (SVG Tiny PS) -- A
      Scalable Vector Graphics (SVG) profile to be used with documents that
      are intended for use with more secure requirements, and in some
      cases, in conjunction with a limited rendering engine.

  "A Taxonomy of operational security considerations for manufacturer
  installed keys and Trust Anchors", Michael Richardson, 2022-02-03,
  <draft-richardson-t2trg-idevid-considerations-06.txt>

      This document provides a taxonomy of methods used by manufacturers of
      silicon and devices to secure private keys and public trust anchors.
      This deals with two related activities: how trust anchors and private
      keys are installed into devices during manufacturing, and how the
      related manufacturer held private keys are secured against
      disclosure.
      
      This document does not evaluate the different mechanisms, but rather
      just serves to name them in a consistent manner in order to aid in
      communication.
      
      RFCEDITOR: please remove this paragraph.  This work is occurring in
      https://github.com/mcr/idevid-security-considerations

  "Path Computation Element Communication Protocol (PCEP) Extensions to
  Enable IFIT", Hang Yuan, Tianran Zhou, Weidong Li, Giuseppe Fioccola, Yali
  Wang, 2022-02-04, <draft-chen-pce-pcep-ifit-06.txt>

      This document defines PCEP extensions to distribute In-situ Flow
      Information Telemetry (IFIT) information.  So that IFIT behavior can
      be enabled automatically when the path is instantiated.  In-situ Flow
      Information Telemetry (IFIT) refers to network OAM data plane on-path
      telemetry techniques, in particular the most popular are In-situ OAM
      (IOAM) and Alternate Marking.  The IFIT attributes here described can
      be generalized for all path types but the application to Segment
      Routing (SR) is considered in this document.  This document extends
      PCEP to carry the IFIT attributes under the stateful PCE model.

  "Usage scenarios of Application-aware Networking (APN) for SD-WAN", Feng
  Yang, Weiqiang Cheng, Shuping Peng, Zhenbin Li, 2022-03-04,
  <draft-yang-apn-sd-wan-usecase-04.txt>

      This document describes the usage of Application-aware Networking
      (APN) in SD-WAN scenarios.  In these scenarios, APN is able to
      identify a application group, steer its traffic flows along explicit
      path across the network, and provide SLA guaranteed network services
      such as low latency and high reliability.

  "The "id-" prefix for Digest Algorithms", Roberto Polli, 2021-12-02,
  <draft-polli-id-digest-algorithms-02.txt>

      This document defines the "id-" prefix for digest-algorithms used in
      the Digest Fields.  This prefix explicits that the computed checksum
      value is independent from Content-Encoding.

  "Secure Element for TLS Version 1.3", Pascal Urien, 2021-09-24,
  <draft-urien-tls-se-03.txt>

      This draft presents ISO7816 interface for TLS1.3 stack running in
      secure element. It presents supported cipher suites and key exchange
      modes, and describes embedded software architecture. TLS 1.3 is the
      de facto security stack for emerging Internet of Things (IoT)
      devices. Some of them are constraint nodes, with limited computing
      resources. Furthermore cheap System on Chip (SoC) components usually
      provide tamper resistant features, so private or pre shared keys are
      exposed to hacking. According to the technology state of art, some
      ISO7816 secure elements are able to process TLS 1.3, but with a
      limited set of cipher suites. There are two benefits for TLS-SE;
      first fully tamper resistant processing of TLS protocol, which
      increases the security level insurance; second embedded software
      component ready for use, which relieves the software of the burden
      of cryptographic libraries and associated attacks. TLS-SE devices
      may also embed standalone applications, which are accessed via
      internet node, using a routing procedure based on SNI extension.

  "PCEP Procedures and Protocol Extensions for Using PCE as a Central
  Controller (PCECC) of BIER", Ran Chen, BenChong Xu, Huaimo Chen, Aijun
  Wang, 2022-03-07, <draft-chen-pce-pcep-extension-pce-controller-bier-03.txt>

      This draft specify a new mechanism where PCE allocates the BIER
      information centrally and uses PCEP to distribute them to all nodes,
      then PCC generate a "Bit Index Forwarding Table"(BIFT).

  "PCEP Procedures and Protocol Extensions for Using PCE as a Central
  Controller (PCECC) of BIER-TE", Ran Chen, BenChong Xu, Huaimo Chen, Aijun
  Wang, 2022-03-07, <draft-chen-pce-controller-bier-te-03.txt>

      This draft specify extensions to PCEP protocol when a PCE-based
      controller is responsible for allocates the BIER-TE information(BIER
      subdomain-id, adjacencies BitPosition(s), and Adjacency Types etc),
      then PCC generate a "Bit Index Forwarding Table"(BIFT).

  "YANG data model for BGP Segment Routing Extensions", krishnadeevi, Syed
  Raza, Kausik Majumdar, Bruno Decraene, 2022-01-26,
  <draft-deevi-spring-bgp-sr-yang-03.txt>

      This document defines a YANG data model that can be used to configure
      and manage Segment Routing extensions in BGP.

  "YANG data model for BGP Segment Routing TE Extensions", krishnadeevi, Syed
  Raza, Kausik Majumdar, Bruno Decraene, Zhichun Jiang, 2022-01-26,
  <draft-deevi-idr-bgp-srte-yang-03.txt>

      This document defines a YANG data model that can be used to configure
      and manage Segment Routing TE extensions in BGP.

  "Interoperability Architecture for DLT Gateways", Thomas Hardjono, Martin
  Hargreaves, Ned Smith, Venkatraman Ramakrishna, 2021-11-06,
  <draft-hardjono-blockchain-interop-arch-03.txt>

      With the increasing interest in the potential use of blockchains and
      decentralized ledger technology (DLT) networksorks for virtual asset
      management, there is a need for these networks to have
      interoperability to support applications and services built atop
      these networks.  An interoperability architecture for DLT networks is
      therefore needed in order to permit the secure flow of digital assets
      different DLT networks, satisfying the properties of transfer
      atomicity, consistency and durability.  The architecture must
      recognize that there are different DLT networks and that the interior
      constructs in these networks maybe incompatible with one another.
      This document proposes an interoperability architecture based on DLT
      Gateways, which are points of interconnection between networks.
      Among others, the gateways implement one or more protocols for the
      transfer (or exchange) digital assets between DLT networks.  A
      gateway belonging to a DLT network peers with another gateway
      belonging to a different DLT network to perform the asset transfer
      between the two networks.

  "Open Digital Asset Protocol", Martin Hargreaves, Thomas Hardjono, Rafael
  Belchior, 2021-11-06, <draft-hargreaves-odap-03.txt>

      This memo describes the Open Digital Asset Protocol (ODAP).  ODAP is
      an asset transfer protocol that operates between two gateway devices.
      The protocol includes a description of virtual or digital assets held
      on distributed ledgers in an open and interoperable format, a session
      negotiation part and message passing flows between gateways
      connecting disparate distributed ledger technologies (DLTs).

  "Federated TLS Authentication", Jakob Schlyter,
  =?utf-8?q?Stefan_Hal=C3=A9n?=, 2021-10-12, <draft-halen-fed-tls-auth-02.txt>

      This document describes how to establish a secure end-to-end channel
      between two parties within a federation, where both client and server
      are mutually authenticated.  The trust relationship is based upon a
      trust anchor held and published by the federation.  A federation is a
      trusted third party that inter-connect different trust domains with a
      common set of policies and standards.

  "MSYNC", Sophie Bale, Remy Brebion, Guillaume Bichot, 2021-10-04,
  <draft-bichot-msync-02.txt>

      This document describes the  Multicast Synchronisation (MSYNC)
      Protocol that aims at transferring video media objects over IP
      multicast operating preferably RTP. Although generic, MSYNC has been
      primarily designed for transporting HTTP adaptive streaming (HAS)
      objects including manifest/playlists and media segments (e.g. MP4,
      CMAF) according to an HAS protocol such as Apple HLS or MPEG DASH
      between a multicast server and a multicast gateway.

  "BGP Extensions of SR Policy for Path Protection", Liu Yao, Shaofu Peng,
  2021-12-19, <draft-lp-idr-sr-path-protection-02.txt>

      This document proposes extensions of BGP to provide protection
      information of segment lists within a candidate path when delivering
      SR policy.  And it also extends BGP-LS to provide some extra
      information of the segment list in the advertisement.

  "QUIC-Aware Proxying Using HTTP", Tommy Pauly, David Schinazi, 2022-03-04,
  <draft-pauly-masque-quic-proxy-03.txt>

      This document defines an extension to UDP Proxying over HTTP that
      adds specific optimizations for proxied QUIC connections.  This
      extension allows a proxy to reuse UDP 4-tuples for multiple
      connections.  It also defines a mode of proxying in which QUIC short
      header packets can be forwarded using an HTTP/3 proxy rather than
      being re-encapsulated and re-encrypted.

  "Binary Application Record Encoding (BARE)", Drew DeVault, 2022-03-11,
  <draft-devault-bare-02.txt>

      The Binary Application Record Encoding (BARE) is a data format used
      to represent application records for storage or transmission between
      programs.  BARE messages are concise and have a well-defined schema,
      and implementations may be simple and broadly compatible.  A schema
      language is also provided to express message schemas out-of-band.
      
      Comments
      
      Comments are solicited and should be addressed to the mailing list at
      ~sircmpwn/public-inbox@lists.sr.ht and/or the author(s).

  "Short Hierarchical IP Addresses at Edge Networks", Haoyu Song, 2021-10-11,
  <draft-song-ship-edge-02.txt>

      To mitigate the IPv6 header overhead in edge networks, this draft
      proposes to use short hierarchical addresses excluding the network
      prefix within edge networks.  An edge network can be further
      organized into a hierarchical architecture containing one or more
      levels of networks.  The border routers for each hierarchical level
      are responsible for address augmenting and pruning when a packet
      leaves or enter a lower level network.  Specifically, the top-level
      border routers convert the internal IP header to and from the
      standard IPv6 header.  This draft presents an incrementally
      deployable scheme allowing packet header to be effectively compressed
      in edge networks without affecting the network interoperability.

  "Multicast Redundant Ingress Router Failover", Greg Shepherd, Zheng Zhang,
  Yisong Liu, Ying Cheng, 2022-02-13,
  <draft-szcl-mboned-redundant-ingress-failover-02.txt>

      This document discusses the redundant ingress router failover in
      multicast domain.

  "IP Layer Metrics for 5G Edge Computing Service", Linda Dunbar, Haoyu Song,
  John Kaippallimalil, 2022-02-03,
  <draft-dunbar-ippm-5g-edge-compute-ip-layer-metrics-02.txt>

      This draft describes the IP Layer metrics and methods to
      measure the Edge Computing Servers running status and
      environment for IP networks to select the optimal Edge
      Computing server location in 5G Edge Computing (EC)
      environment. Those measurements are for IP network to
      dynamically optimize the forwarding of 5G edge computing
      service without any knowledge above IP layer.

  "User Devices Explicit Monitoring", Mauro Cociglio, Massimo Nilo, Fabio
  Bulgarella, Giuseppe Fioccola, 2021-10-25,
  <draft-cnbf-ippm-user-devices-explicit-monitoring-03.txt>

      This document describes a methodology to monitor network performance
      exploiting user devices.  This can be achieved using the Explicit
      Flow Measurement Techniques, protocol independent methods that employ
      few marking bits, inside the header of each packet, for loss and
      delay measurement.  User devices and servers, marking the traffic,
      signal these metrics to intermediate network observers allowing them
      to measure connection performance, and to locate the network segment
      where impairments happen.  In addition or in alternative to network
      observers, a probe can be installed on the user device with
      remarkable benefits in terms of hardware deployment and measurement
      scalability.

  "IPv6 Solution for 5G Edge Computing Sticky Service", Linda Dunbar, John
  Kaippallimalil, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-dunbar-6man-5g-edge-compute-sticky-service-06.txt>

      This draft describes the IPv6-based solutions that can stick an
      application flow originated from a mobile device to the same
      ANYCAST server location when the mobile device moves from one
      5G cell site to another.

  "Revised Cookie Processing in the IKEv2 Protocol", Valery Smyslov,
  2021-10-21, <draft-smyslov-ipsecme-ikev2-cookie-revised-02.txt>

      This document defines a revised processing of cookies in the Internet
      Key Exchange protocol Version 2 (IKEv2).  It is intended to solve a
      problem in IKEv2 when due to packets loss and reordering peers may
      erroneously fail to authenticate each other when cookies are used in
      the initial IKEv2 exchange.

  "An MPLS SR OAM option reducing the number of end-to-end path validations",
  Ruediger Geib, 2021-10-25, <draft-geib-spring-oam-opt-02.txt>

      MPLS traceroute implementations validate dataplane connectivity and
      isolate faults by sending messages along every end-to-end Label
      Switched Path (LSP) combination between a source and a destination
      node.  This requires a growing number of path validations in networks
      with a high number of equal cost paths between origin and
      destination.  Segment Routing (SR) introduces MPLS topology awareness
      combined with Source Routing.  By this combination, SR can be used to
      implement an MPLS traceroute option lowering the total number of LSP
      validations as compared to commodity MPLS traceroute.

  "Bidirectional Forwarding Detection (BFD) on Multi-chassis Link Aggregation
  Group (MC-LAG) Interfaces", Greg Mirsky, Jeff Tantsura, Gyan Mishra,
  2021-09-26, <draft-mtm-rtgwg-bfd-mc-lag-03.txt>

      This document describes the use of Bidirectional Forwarding Detection
      for Multi-chassis Link Aggregation Group to provide faster than Link
      Aggregation Control Protocol convergence.  This specification
      enhances RFC 7130 "Bidirectional Forwarding Detection (BFD) on Link
      Aggregation Group (LAG) Interfaces".

  "Blockchain Gateways: Use-Cases", Aetienne Sardon, Thomas Hardjono, Mike
  McBride, 2021-10-25, <draft-sardon-blockchain-gateways-usecases-02.txt>

      In the past five years there has been a growing interest in using
      blockchains and DLT systems as a means to create a new mechanism to
      issue, distribute and manage virtual assets.  However, as DLT systems
      consisting of peer-to-peer (P2P) network of nodes increase in number,
      there is an increasing need to interconnect these networks to permit
      virtual assets to flow into and out of them.  This document captures
      a number of use-cases driving the need for interoperability between
      DLT systems.

  "SLAAC with prefixes of arbitrary length in PIO (Variable SLAAC)", Gyan
  Mishra, Alexandre Petrescu, Naveen Kottapalli, Dusan Mudric, Dmytro Shytyi,
  2022-01-20, <draft-mishra-6man-variable-slaac-05.txt>

      This draft proposes the use of arbitrary length prefixes in PIO for
      SLAAC.  A prefix of length 63 in PIO, for example, would be permitted
      to form an address whose interface identifier length is 65, which
      allows several benefits.  A prefix of length 65 would be allowed too,
      but it SHOULD NOT be used on a large scale, like at a large ISP; this
      is to avoid a race to the bottom.
      
      The implementation uses a parameter in the Host; this option is off
      by default.  In that case, the Host respects the 64bit boundary.
      When the parameter is set to on the Host accepts prefixes of lengths
      different than 64 and forms 128bit addresses.
      
      In the past, various IPv6 addressing models have been proposed based
      on a subnet hierarchy embedding a 64-bit prefix.  The last remnant of
      IPv6 classful addressing is a inflexible interface identifier
      boundary at /64.  This document proposes flexibility to the fixed
      position of that boundary for interface addressing.

  "SLAAC with prefixes of arbitrary length in PIO (Variable SLAAC) - A
  Problem Statement", Gyan Mishra, Alexandre Petrescu, Naveen Kottapalli,
  Dusan Mudric, Dmytro Shytyi, 2022-01-20,
  <draft-mishra-v6ops-variable-slaac-problem-stmt-03.txt>

      In the past, various IPv6 addressing models have been proposed based
      on a subnet hierarchy embedding a 64-bit prefix.  The last remnant of
      IPv6 classful addressing is a inflexible interface identifier
      boundary at /64.  This document details the 64-bit boundary problem
      statement.

  "Label Switched Path (LSP) Ping for Segment Routing (SR) Path Segment
  Identifiers (SIDs) with MPLS Data Planes", Xiao Min, Shaofu Peng,
  2022-03-04, <draft-xp-mpls-spring-lsp-ping-path-sid-03.txt>

      Path Segment is a type of SR segment, which is used to identify an SR
      path.  This document provides Target Forwarding Equivalence Class
      (FEC) stack TLV definitions for Path Segment Identifiers.

  "Beyond 64KB Limit of IKEv2 Payloads", C. Tjhai, Tobias Heider, Valery
  Smyslov, 2022-01-28, <draft-tjhai-ikev2-beyond-64k-limit-02.txt>

      The maximum Internet Key Exchange Version 2 (IKEv2) payload size is
      limited to 64KB.  This makes IKEv2 not usable for conservative post-
      quantum cryptosystem whose public-key is larger than 64KB.  This
      document discusses the considerations and defines a mechanism to
      exchange large post-quantum public keys and signatures in IKEv2.

  "Realizing Network Slices in IP/MPLS Networks", Tarek Saad, Vishnu Beeram,
  Jie Dong, Bin Wen, Daniele Ceccarelli, Joel Halpern, Shaofu Peng, Ran Chen,
  Xufeng Liu, Luis Contreras, Reza Rokui, Luay Jalil, 2022-02-02,
  <draft-bestbar-teas-ns-packet-08.txt>

      Network slicing provides the ability to partition a physical network
      into multiple logical networks of varying sizes, structures, and
      functions so that each slice can be dedicated to specific services or
      customers.  Network slices need to co-exist on the same network while
      ensuring slice elasticity in terms of network resource allocation.
      The Differentiated Service (Diffserv) model allows for carrying
      multiple services on top of a single physical network by relying on
      compliant domains and nodes to provide forwarding treatment
      (scheduling and drop policy) on to packets that carry the respective
      Diffserv code point.  This document adopts a similar approach to
      Diffserv and proposes a scalable approach to realize network slicing
      in IP/MPLS networks.  The solution does not mandate Diffserv to be
      enabled in the network to provide a specific forwarding treatment,
      but can co-exist with and complement it when enabled.

  "BGP Update for 5G Edge Computing Service Metadata", Linda Dunbar, Kausik
  Majumdar, Haibo Wang, Gyan Mishra, 2022-02-23,
  <draft-dunbar-idr-5g-edge-compute-app-meta-data-06.txt>

      This draft describes a new AppMetaData subTLV carried by
      Tunnel Encap[RFC9012] Path Attribute for egress router to
      advertise the running status and environment for the directly
      attached 5G Edge Computing (EC) servers. The AppMetaData can
      be used by the ingress routers in the 5G Local Data Network to
      make path selection not only based on the routing distance but
      also the running environment of the destinations. The goal is
      to improve latency and performance for 5G EC services.
      
      The extension enables an EC server at one specific location to
      be more preferred than the others with the same IP address to
      receive data flows from a specific source (UE).

  "A Simplified Scalable ELAN Service Model with Segment Routing Underlay",
  Sami Boutros, Siva Sivabalan, Himanshu Shah, Jim Uttaro, Dan Voyer, Bin
  Wen, Luay Jalil, 2021-10-11,
  <draft-boutros-bess-elan-services-over-sr-03.txt>

      This document proposes a new approach for deploying Ethernet LAN
      (ELAN) services with an objective of achieving high scalability,
      faster network convergence, and reduced operational complexity.
      Furthermore, it naturally brings the benefits of All-Active
      multihoming as well as MAC learning in data-plane.

  "Provisioning Initial Device Identifiers into Home Routers", Michael
  Richardson, 2021-11-14, <draft-richardson-homerouter-provisioning-02.txt>

      This document describes a method to provisioning an 802.1AR-style
      certificate into a router intended for use in the home.
      
      The proceedure results in a certificate which can be validated with a
      public trust anchor ("WebPKI"), using a name rather than an IP
      address.  This method is focused on home routers, but can in some
      cases be used by other classes of IoT devices.
      
      (RFCEDITOR please remove: this document can be found at
      https://github.com/mcr/homerouter-provisioning)

  "Separation of Data Path and Data Flow Sublayers in the Transport Layer",
  Hirochika Asai, 2021-09-15, <draft-asai-tsvwg-transport-review-02.txt>

      This document reviews the architectural design of the transport
      layer.  In particular, this document proposes to separate the
      transport layer into two sublayers; the data path and the data flow
      layers.  The data path layer provides functionality on the data path,
      such as connection handling, path quality and trajectory monitoring,
      waypoint management, and congestion control for the data path
      resource management.  The data flow layer provides additional
      functionality upon the data path layer, such as flow control for the
      receive buffer management, retransmission for reliable data delivery,
      and transport layer security.  The data path layer multiplexes
      multiple data flow layer protocols and provides data path information
      to the data flow layer to control data transmissions, such as
      prioritization and inverse multiplexing for multipath protocols.

  "Network measurement intent - one of IBN use cases", Danyang Chen, Hongwei
  Yang, Kehan Yao, Giuseppe Fioccola, 2022-03-05,
  <draft-yang-nmrg-network-measurement-intent-04.txt>

      As an important technical means to detect network state, network
      measurement has attracted more and more attention in the development
      of network.  However, the current network measurement technology has
      the problem that the measurement method and the measurement purpose
      cannot match well.  To solve this problem, this memo introduces
      network measurement intent, namely the process of realizing user or
      network operator to allocate network states as needed.  And it can be
      as a specified user case of intent based network.

  "NETCONF Extensions to Support List Pagination", Kent Watsen, Qin WU, Olof
  Hagsand, Hongwei Li, Per Andersson, 2021-10-25,
  <draft-wwlh-netconf-list-pagination-nc-02.txt>

      This document defines a mapping of the list pagination mechanism
      defined in [I-D.wwlh-netconf-list-pagination] to NETCONF [RFC6241].
      
      This document updates [RFC6241], to augment the <get> and <get-
      config> "rpc" statements, and [RFC8526], to augment the <get-data>
      "rpc" statement, to define input parameters necessary for list
      pagination.

  "RESTCONF Extensions to Support List Pagination", Kent Watsen, Qin WU, Olof
  Hagsand, Hongwei Li, Per Andersson, 2021-10-25,
  <draft-wwlh-netconf-list-pagination-rc-02.txt>

      This document defines a mapping of the list pagination mechanism
      defined in [I-D.wwlh-netconf-list-pagination] to RESTCONF [RFC8040].
      
      This document updates RFC 8040, to declare "list" and "leaf-list" as
      valid resource targets for the RESTCONF GET and DELETE operations, to
      define GET query parameters necessary for list pagination, and to
      define a media-type for XML-based lists.

  "IETF Network Slice Controller and its associated data models", Luis
  Contreras, Reza Rokui, Jeff Tantsura, Bo Wu, Xufeng Liu, Dhruv Dhody,
  Sergio Belotti, 2022-03-06,
  <draft-contreras-teas-slice-controller-models-02.txt>

      This document describes the major functional components of an IETF
      Network Slice Controller (NSC) as well as references the data models
      required for supporting the requests of IETF network slices and their
      realization.

  "Privacy Pass: Centralization Problem Statement", Mark McFadden,
  2022-03-07, <draft-mcfadden-pp-centralization-problem-03.txt>

      This document discusses the problems associated with strict upper
      bounds on the number of Privacy Pass servers in the proposed Privacy
      Pass ecosystem. It documents a proposed problem statement.

  "Protocol and Engineering Effects of Consolidation", Dominique Lazanski,
  Mark McFadden, 2022-01-10, <draft-lazanski-consolidation-03.txt>

      This document contributes to the continuing discussion on Internet
      consolidation. Over the last several years there have been many
      types of discussions around consolidation at a technical level, a
      economic or market level and also at an engineering level. This
      document aims to discuss recent areas of Internet consolidation amd
      provide some suggestions for advancing the discussion.

  "A Simplified Scalable E-Line Service Model with Segment Routing Underlay",
  Sami Boutros, Siva Sivabalan, Jim Uttaro, Dan Voyer, Bin Wen, Luay Jalil,
  2021-10-11, <draft-boutros-bess-eline-services-over-sr-01.txt>

      This document proposes a new approach for realizing Ethernet line
      (E-Line) services over Segment Routing (SR) networks.  This approach
      significantly improves scalability and convergence of control plane,
      and simplifies network operation.  Furthermore, it naturally yields
      All-Active multi-homing support for E-Line services without relying
      on any overlay techniques.

  "BIER Egress Protection", Huaimo Chen, Mike McBride, Aijun Wang, Gyan
  Mishra, Yisong Liu, Michael Menth, Boris Khasanov, Xuesong Geng, Yanhe Fan,
  Lei Liu, Xufeng Liu, 2021-10-25, <draft-chen-bier-egress-protect-03.txt>

      This document describes a mechanism for fast protection against the
      failure of an egress node of a "Bit Index Explicit Replication"
      (BIER) domain.  It is called BIER egress protection.  It does not
      require any per-flow state in the core of the domain.  With BIER
      egress protection the failure of a primary BFER (Bit Forwarding
      Egress Router) is protected with a backup BFER such that traffic
      destined to the primary BFER in the BIER domain is fast rerouted by a
      neighbor BFR to the backup BFER on the BIER layer.  The mechanism is
      applicable if all BIER traffic sent to the primary BFER can reach its
      destination also via the backup BFER.  It is complementary to BIER-
      FRR which cannot protect against the failure of a BFER.

  "BIER Fast ReRoute", Huaimo Chen, Mike McBride, Steffen Lindner, Michael
  Menth, Aijun Wang, Gyan Mishra, Yisong Liu, Yanhe Fan, Lei Liu, Xufeng Liu,
  2022-01-02, <draft-chen-bier-frr-04.txt>

      BIER is a scalable multicast overlay [RFC8279] that utilizes a
      routing underlay, e.g., IP, to build up its Bit Index Forwarding
      Tables (BIFTs).  This document proposes Fast Reroute Extensions for
      BIER (BIER-FRR).  It protects BIER traffic after detecting the
      failure of a link or node in the core of a BIER domain until affected
      BIFT entries are recomputed after reconvergence of the routing
      underlay.  The BIER-FRR extensions are applied locally at the point
      of local repair (PLR) and do not introduce any per-flow state.  The
      document specifies nomenclature for BIER-FRR and gives examples for
      its integration in BIER forwarding.  Furthermore, it presents
      operation modes for BIER-FRR.  Link and node protection may be chosen
      as protection level.  Moreover, the backup strategies tunnel-based
      BIER-FRR and LFA-based BIER-FRR are defined and compared.

  "A Simplified Scalable L3VPN Service Model with Segment Routing Underlay",
  Sami Boutros, Siva Sivabalan, Jim Uttaro, Dan Voyer, Bin Wen, Luay Jalil,
  2021-10-11, <draft-boutros-bess-l3vpn-services-over-sr-01.txt>

      This document proposes a new approach for realizing classical L3VPN
      (vpnv4/vpnv6/6PE/6VPE) over Segment Routing (SR) networks.  It
      significantly improves scalability and convergence of the L3VPN
      control plane.  Furthermore, it naturally brings the benefits of All-
      Active multi-homing support to the classical L3VPN.

  "YANG Data Model for SR Service Programming", Jaganbabu Rajamanickam, Syed
  Raza, Daniel Bernier, Gaurav Dawra, Cheng Li, 2022-01-26,
  <draft-jags-spring-sr-service-programming-yang-03.txt>

      This document describes a YANG data model for Segment Routing (SR)
      Service Programming.  The model serves as a base framework for
      configuring and managing an SR based service programming.
      Additionally, this document specifies the model for a Service Proxy
      for SR-unaware services.
      
      The YANG modules in this document conform to the Network Management
      Datastore Architecture (NMDA).

  "Describing TCP with Augmented Packet Header Diagrams", Stephen McQuistin,
  Vivian Band, Dejice Jacob, Colin Perkins, 2021-10-25,
  <draft-mcquistin-augmented-tcp-example-02.txt>

      This document describes TCP, and a number of its extensions, using
      Augmented Packet Header Diagrams.  This document is an example of the
      Augmented Packet Header Diagram language: it is not intended as a
      contribution to any ongoing or future work on maintaining or
      extending TCP.

  "Describing UDP with Augmented Packet Header Diagrams", Stephen McQuistin,
  Vivian Band, Dejice Jacob, Colin Perkins, 2021-10-25,
  <draft-mcquistin-augmented-udp-example-02.txt>

      This document describes UDP using Augmented Packet Header Diagrams.
      This document is an example of the Augmented Packet Header Diagram
      language: it is not intended as a contribution to any ongoing or
      future work on maintaining or extending UDP.

  "An Extension of I2NSF Framework for Security Management Automation in
  Cloud-Based Security Services", Jaehoon Jeong, Patrick Lingga, J., PARK,
  2022-02-21, <draft-jeong-i2nsf-security-management-automation-03.txt>

      This document describes an extension of the framework of Interface to
      Network Security Functions (I2NSF) for Security Management Automation
      (SMA) in cloud-based security services.  The security management
      automation in this document deals with a security polity translation
      and a feedback-based security service enforcement.  To support these
      two features in SMA, this document specifies an augmented
      architecture of the I2NSF framework with a new system component and a
      new interface.

  "Transaction ID Mechanism for NETCONF", Jan Lindblad, 2021-10-22,
  <draft-lindblad-netconf-transaction-id-01.txt>

      NETCONF clients and servers often need to have a synchronized view of
      the server's configuration data stores.  The volume of configuration
      data in a server may be very large, while data store changes
      typically are small when observed at typical client resynchronization
      intervals.
      
      Rereading the entire data store and analyzing the response for
      changes is an inefficient mechanism for synchronization.  This
      document specifies an extension to NETCONF that allows clients and
      servers to keep synchronized with a much smaller data exchange and
      without any need for servers to store information about the clients.

  "Mailing List Manager (MLM) Transformations", Alessandro Vesely,
  2022-01-04, <draft-vesely-dmarc-mlm-transform-04.txt>

      The widespread adoption of Domain-based Message Authentication,
      Reporting, and Conformance (DMARC) led Mailing List Managers (MLM) to
      rewrite the From: header field as a workaround.
      
      This document describes reverting MLM transformations in IETF mailing
      lists.  That way, it is possible to verify DomainKeys Identified Mail
      (DKIM) signatures that were applied at submission time and thereby
      restore original identifiers.
      
      For reliable results, some compliance is required of all agents
      involved, author domain signers, MLMs, forwarders, and final
      recipients' verifiers.

  "Identity Header Error Handling", Chris Wendt, 2021-10-25,
  <draft-wendt-stir-identity-header-errors-handling-03.txt>

      This document extends STIR and the Authenticated Identity Management
      in the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) error handling procedures to
      include the mapping of verification failure reasons to STIR defined
      4xx codes so the failure reason of an Identity header field can be
      conveyed to the upstream authentication service when local policy
      dictates that the call should continue in the presence of a
      verification failure.  This document also defines procedures that
      enable enable a failure reason to be mapped to a specific Identity
      header for scenarios that use multiple Identity header fields where
      some may have errors and others may not and the handling of those
      situations is defined.

  "RADIUS Extension for Certificate-based SSH Authentication", Devendra
  Vishwakarma, Prakash suthar, Vivek Agarwal, Anil Jangam, 2021-12-28,
  <draft-vishwakarma-opsawg-ssh-cert-radius-02.txt>

      A scalable and centralized mechanism is required for a certificate-
      based administrative access to multitude of virtualized and physical
      network functions.  While there are mechanisms that exist today to
      provide secure administrative command-line and API-based access,
      there are certain management and maintenance overheads as well as
      certain scalability challenges related to it.  In this draft we
      discuss these challenges and propose a standardized, centralized
      server-based mechanism to authenticate a user over an SSH session
      using its client certificate.

  "JWS Clear Text JSON Signature Option (JWS/CT)", Bret Jordan, Samuel
  Erdtman, Anders Rundgren, 2021-12-24, <draft-jordan-jws-ct-07.txt>

      This document describes a method for extending the scope of the JSON
      Web Signature (JWS) specification, called JWS/CT (JWS "Clear Text").
      By combining the detached mode of JWS with the JSON Canonicalization
      Scheme (JCS), JWS/CT enables JSON objects to remain in the JSON
      format after being signed.  In addition to supporting a consistent
      data format, this arrangement also simplifies documentation,
      debugging, and logging.  The ability to embed signed JSON objects in
      other JSON objects, makes the use of counter-signatures
      straightforward.
      
      This informational specification has been produced outside the IETF,
      is not an IETF standard, and does not have IETF consensus.  The
      intended audiences of this document are JSON tool vendors as well as
      designers of JSON-based cryptographic solutions.

  "NTPv5 use cases and requirements", James Gruessing, 2021-11-13,
  <draft-gruessing-ntp-ntpv5-requirements-04.txt>

      This document describes the use cases, requirements, and
      considerations that should be factored in the design of a successor
      protocol to supersede version 4 of the NTP protocol [RFC5905]
      presently referred to as NTP version 5 ("NTPv5").  This document is
      non-exhaustive and does not in its current version represent working
      group consensus.

  "Network Time Protocol Version 5", Miroslav Lichvar, 2022-02-15,
  <draft-mlichvar-ntp-ntpv5-04.txt>

      This document describes the version 5 of the Network Time Protocol
      (NTP).

  "IS-IS Optimal Distributed Flooding for Dense Topologies", Russ White,
  Shraddha Hegde, Tony Przygienda, 2022-03-02,
  <draft-white-lsr-distoptflood-01.txt>

      In dense topologies (such as data center fabrics based on the Clos
      and butterfly, though not limited to these topologies), flooding
      mechanisms designed for sparse topologies can flood excessively, or
      carry too many copies of topology and reachability to fabric devices.
      This results in slower convergence times and higher resource
      utilization.  The modifications to the flooding mechanism in the
      Intermediate System to Intermediate System (IS-IS) link state
      protocol described in this document reduce resource utilization to a
      minimum, while increasing convergence performance in dense
      topologies.
      
      Note that a Clos fabric is used as the primary example of a dense
      flooding topology throughout this document.  However, the flooding
      optimizations described in this document apply to any dense topology.

  "Trusted Resolution System and Protocol Extension", Yuying Chen, Jiahui
  Wang, Bo Zhang, Zhipeng Fan, Xufeng Ma, Zhiping Li, Jiagui Xie, 2021-11-16,
  <draft-chen-trusted-resolution-02.txt>

      The Handle System [1][2]is a name service system for handle
      resolution and management over the public Internet. Handle System
      protocol [3] is designed to be transmitted as a byte stream via a TCP
      connection. This document describes a Trusted Resolution System and
      the protocol extension based on Handle System protocol. Trusted
      resolution aims to achieve credibility verification through data
      signing. The Trusted Resolution System determines whether to perform
      trusted resolution and verification on the response according to the
      trusted flag requested by the client.

  "Use of the SM2 and SM3 Algorithms in Handle System", Yuying Chen, Jiahui
  Wang, Bo Zhang, Zhipeng Fan, Xufeng Ma, Zhiping Li, Jiagui Xie, 2021-11-16,
  <draft-chen-sm2-sm3-algorithms-02.txt>

      The Handle System is a global name service that allows secured handle
      resolution and administration over the public Internet according to
      [1][5][3]. Handle System protocol [3] is designed to be transmitted
      as a byte stream via a TCP connection. In this document, SM2 and SM3
      algorithms [4][5]are introduced into the handle system to enhance the
      security and compactivity. Trusted resolution and message credential
      are extended to support SM2 and SM3 algorithms.

  "In-band Edge-to-Edge Round Trip Time Measurement", Haoyu Song, Linda
  Dunbar, 2021-11-29, <draft-song-ippm-inband-e2e-rtt-measurement-02.txt>

      This draft describes a lightweight in-band edge-to-edge flow-based
      network round trip time measurement architecture and proposes the
      implementation over IOAM E2E option.  By augmenting the IOAM E2E
      option header, the process can be fully done in data plane without
      needing to involve the control plane to maintain any states.

  "SRH TLV Processing Programming", Cheng Li, Yang Xia, Dhruv Dhody, Zhenbin
  Li, 2021-11-29, <draft-li-spring-srh-tlv-processing-programming-02.txt>

      This document proposes a mechanism to program the processing rules of
      Segment Routig Header (SRH) optional TLVs explicitly on the ingress
      node.  In this mechanism, there is no need to configure local
      configuration at the node to support SRH TLV processing.  A network
      operator can program to process specific TLVs on specific segment
      endpoint nodes for specific packets on the ingress node, which is
      more efficient for SRH TLV processing.

  "http2 window size setting", chenmeiling, Li Su, 2021-12-14,
  <draft-chen-httpbis-window-size-02.txt>

      This document proposed the minimum value setting mechanism for
      HTTP2.0 Window and Window_update, and a Window_update frame sending
      mechanism, used to solve the gap caused by the inconsistency of the
      minimum value.

  "APN Scope and Gap Analysis", Shuping Peng, Zhenbin Li, Gyan Mishra,
  2022-03-06, <draft-peng-apn-scope-gap-analysis-04.txt>

      The APN work in IETF is focused on developing a framework and set of
      mechanisms to derive, convey and use an attribute allowing the
      implementation of fine-grain user group-level and application group-
      level requirements in the network layer.  APN aims to apply various
      policies in different nodes along a network path onto a traffic flow
      altogether, for example, at the headend to steer into corresponding
      path, at the midpoint to collect corresponding performance
      measurement data, and at the service function to execute particular
      policies.  Currently there is still no way to efficiently realize
      this composite network service provisioning along the path.  This
      document further clarifies the scope of the APN work and describes
      the solution gap analysis.

  "SRv6 In-situ Active Measurement with IOAM", Haoyu Song, Gyan Mishra, Tian
  Pan, 2022-03-04, <draft-song-spring-siam-03.txt>

      This draft describes an active measurement method for SRv6 which can
      support hop-by-hop and end-to-end measurement on any SRv6 path using
      existing protocols such as IOAM.  A packet containing an SRH uses a
      flag bit to indicate the packet is an active probing packet.  The
      measurement information, such as the IOAM header and data, is
      encapsulated in UDP payload, indicated by a dedicated port number.
      The probing packet originates from a segment source node, traverses
      an arbitrary segment path, and terminates at a segment endpoint node,
      as configured by the segment list in SRH.  Each segment node on the
      path, when detecting the flag, shall parse the UDP header and the
      payload.  In the case of IOAM, the node shall process the IOAM option
      conforming to the standard procedures defined in the IOAM documents.
      The method is compatible with some other SRv6 active measurement
      proposals and support multiple applications.

  "Using Entropy Label for Network Slice Identification in MPLS networks.",
  Bruno Decraene, Clarence Filsfils, Wim Henderickx, Tarek Saad, Vishnu
  Beeram, Luay Jalil, 2022-02-11,
  <draft-decraene-mpls-slid-encoded-entropy-label-id-03.txt>

      This document defines a solution to encode a slice identifier in MPLS
      in order to distinguish packets that belong to different slices, to
      allow enforcing per network slice policies (.e.g, Qos).
      
      The slice identification is independent of the topology.  It allows
      for QoS/DiffServ policy on a per slice basis in addition to the per
      packet QoS/DiffServ policy provided by the MPLS Traffic Class field.
      
      In order to minimize the size of the MPLS stack and to ease
      incremental deployment the slice identifier is encoded as part of the
      Entropy Label.
      
      This document also extends the use of the TTL field of the Entropy
      Label in order to provide a flexible set of flags called the Entropy
      Label Control field.

  "Scalable Network Slicing over SR Networks", Tarek Saad, Vishnu Beeram, Ran
  Chen, Shaofu Peng, Bin Wen, Daniele Ceccarelli, 2021-09-16,
  <draft-bestbar-spring-scalable-ns-02.txt>

      Multiple network slices can be realized on top of a single shared
      network.  A router that requires forwarding of a packet that belongs
      to a slice aggregate may have to decide on the forwarding action to
      take based on selected next-hop(s), and the forwarding treatment
      (e.g., scheduling and drop policy) to enforce based on the slice
      aggregate per-hop behavior.  Segment Routing is a technology that
      enables the steering of packets in a network by encoding pre-
      established segments within the network into the packet header.  This
      document introduces mechanisms to enable forwarding of packets over a
      specific slice aggregate along a Segment Routing (SR) path.

  "On loading MUD URLs from QR codes", Michael Richardson, Jacques Latour,
  Hassan Gharakheili, 2022-03-02, <draft-richardson-mud-qrcode-06.txt>

      This informational document details a protocol to load MUD
      definitions for devices which have no integrated Manufacturer Usage
      Description (MUD) as described in RFC8520.
      
      This document is published to inform the Internet community of this
      mechanism to allow interoperability and to serve as a basis of other
      standards work if there is interest.
      
      
      // RFC-EDITOR-please-remove: This work is tracked at
      // https://github.com/mcr/mud-qrcode

  "Photonic firewall oriented routing and spectrum allocation strategy in
  optical networks", Li Xin, Lu Zhang, Ying Tang, Zicheng Shi, Shanguo Huang,
  2021-12-26, <draft-li-rtgwg-photonic-firewall-rsa-02.txt>

      The photonic firewall oriented routing and spectrum allocation
      strategy in elastic optical networks is proposed. For the security
      detecting requirement, each light-path should pass through at least a
      photonic firewall. To reduce the blocking rate and improve the
      spectrum efficiency, the whole network is divided into several parts
      according to the locations of all deployed photonic firewalls. A
      photonic firewall is responsible for the security detecting for each
      part. This strategy has a low complexity and is suitable for large-
      scale optical networks.

  "Architecture and application scenario for fused service function chain",
  Jinyou Dai, Xueshun Wang, Jun Gao, 2022-01-26,
  <draft-dai-sfc-fused-architecture-and-scenario-02.txt>

      This document discusses the architecture and application scenarios
      of fused service function chain. Fused service function chain means
      that two or more service function chains are fused to become a single
      service function chain from the view of data plane and control plane.
      Fused service function chain is a expansion for service function chain.
      Anyhow, some mechanism or methods need to be used when two or more
      service function chains are fused to be a single service function
      chain based on architecture described in this memo.

  "Network File System (NFS) Version 4 Minor Version 1 Protocol", David
  Noveck, 2021-11-25, <draft-dnoveck-nfsv4-rfc5661bis-03.txt>

      This document describes the Network File System (NFS) version 4 minor
      version 1, including features retained from the base protocol (NFS
      version 4 minor version 0, which is specified in RFC 7530) and
      protocol extensions made subsequently.  The later minor version has
      no dependencies on NFS version 4 minor version 0, and was, until
      recently, documented as a completely separate protocol.
      
      This document will give rise to a suite of documents which
      collectively obsolete RFC 8881.  In addition to many corrections and
      clarifications, it will rely on NFSv4-wide documents to substantially
      revise the treatment of protocol extension, internationalization, and
      security, superseding the descriptions of those aspects of the
      protocol appearing in RFCs 5661 and 8881.

  "Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (LDAP) Procedures and Schema
  Definitions for the Storage of X.660 Registration Information", Jesse
  Coretta, 2022-01-23, <draft-coretta-x660-ldap-08.txt>

      This specification defines models, procedures and schema definitions
      meant to facilitate the storage of [X.660] registration data within
      a Lightweight Directory Access Protocol Directory Information Tree.

  "SR-MPLS / SRv6 Transport Interworking", Shraddha Hegde, Parag Kaneriya,
  Ron Bonica, Shaofu Peng, Greg Mirsky, Zheng Zhang, Bruno Decraene,
  2022-01-05, <draft-bonica-spring-srv6-end-dtm-07.txt>

      This document describes procedures for interworking between an SR-
      MPLS transit domain and an SRv6 transit domain.  Each domain contains
      Provider Edge (PE) and Provider (P) routers.  Area Border Routers
      (ABR) provide connectivity between domains.
      
      The procedures described in this document require the ABR to carry a
      route to each PE router.  However, they do not required the ABR to
      carry service (i.e., customer) routes.  In that respect, these
      procedures resemble L3VPN Interprovider Option C.
      
      Procedures described in this document support interworking for global
      IPv4 and IPv6 service prefixes.  They do not support interworking for
      VPN services prefixes where the SR-MPLS domain uses MPLS service
      labels.

  "Profiles for Traffic Engineering (TE) Topology Data Model and
  Applicability to non-TE Use Cases", Italo Busi, Xufeng Liu, Igor Bryskin,
  Tarek Saad, Oscar de Dios, 2022-02-04,
  <draft-busi-teas-te-topology-profiles-03.txt>

      This document describes how profiles of the Traffic Engineering (TE)
      Topology Model, defined in RFC8795, can be used to address
      applications beyond "Traffic Engineering".

  "DLT Gateway Crash Recovery Mechanism", Rafael Belchior, Miguel Correia,
  Thomas Hardjono, 2021-10-11, <draft-belchior-gateway-recovery-03.txt>

      This memo describes the crash recovery mechanism for the Open Digital
      Asset Protocol (ODAP), called ODAP-2PC.  The goal is to assure
      gateways running ODAP to be able to recover from crashes, and thus
      preserve the consistency of an asset across ledgers (i.e., double
      spend does not occur).  This draft includes the description of the
      messaging and logging flow necessary for the correct functioning of
      ODAP-2PC.

  "Segment Routing Header encapsulation for Alternate Marking Method",
  Giuseppe Fioccola, Tianran Zhou, Mauro Cociglio, 2022-02-03,
  <draft-fz-spring-srv6-alt-mark-02.txt>

      This document describes how the Alternate Marking Method can be used
      as the passive performance measurement tool in an SRv6 network.  It
      defines how Alternate Marking data fields are transported as part of
      the Segment Routing with IPv6 data plane (SRv6) header.

  "Segment Routing for Unaffiliated BFD Echo Function", Mach Chen, Cheng Li,
  Xinjun Chen, 2022-01-23, <draft-chen-spring-sr-policy-for-ubfd-03.txt>

      This document describes how to leverage Segment Routing (SR) to
      ensure that the Unaffiliated BFD (U-BFD) Echo packets must reach the
      remote system before being looped back to the local system.  This
      enables that U-BFD works not only for one hop scenario but for
      multiple hops scenario as well.
      
      In addition, this document also defines a way to explicitly specify
      the loop back path of the U-BFD Echo packets.  This is useful in the
      case where the forward and reverse path of the Echo packets are
      required to follow the same path.

  "DLEP Radio Band Extension", Henning Rogge, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-rogge-manet-dlep-radio-band-03.txt>

      This document defines an extension to the Dynamic Link Exchange
      Protocol (DLEP) to provide the frequency bands used by the radio.

  "Dynamic-Anycast (Dyncast) Use Cases and Problem Statement", Peng Liu,
  Philip Eardley, Dirk Trossen, Mohamed Boucadair, Luis Contreras, Cheng Li,
  2022-03-07, <draft-liu-dyncast-ps-usecases-03.txt>

      Many service providers have been exploring distributed computing
      techniques to achieve better service response time and optimized
      energy consumption.  Such techniques rely upon the distribution of
      computing services and capabilities over many locations in the
      network, such as its edge, the metro region, virtualized central
      office, and other locations.  In such a distributed computing
      environment, providing services by utilizing computing resources
      hosted in various computing facilities (e.g., edges) is being
      considered, e.g., for computationally intensive and delay sensitive
      services.  Ideally, services should be computationally balanced using
      service-specific metrics instead of simply dispatching the service
      requests in a static way or optimizing solely connectivity metrics.
      For example, systematically directing end user-originated service
      requests to the geographically closest edge or some small computing
      units may lead to an unbalanced usage of computing resources, which
      may then degrade both the user experience and the overall service
      performance.
      
      This document provides an overview of scenarios and problems
      associated with realizing such scenarios, identifying key engineering
      investigation areas which require adequate architectures and
      protocols to achieve balanced computing and networking resource
      utilization among facilities providing the services.

  "Uninterruptible Power Supply (UPS) Management Protocol -- Commands and
  Responses", Roger Price, 2022-02-26,
  <draft-rprice-ups-management-protocol-07.txt>

      This document describes the command/response protocol currently used
      in the management of Uninterruptible Power Supply (UPS) units and
      other power devices often deployed in small offices, and in IT
      installations subject to an erratic public power supply.  The UPS
      units typically interface to an Attachment Daemon in the system they
      protect.  This daemon is in turn polled by a Management Daemon which
      notifies users and system administrators of power supply incidents,
      and automates system shutdown decisions.  The commands and responses
      described by this document are exchanged between the UPS Attachment
      Daemon and the Management Daemon.  Current practice when this text
      was written risks weak security and this is addressed in the Security
      Considerations sections of this document.

  "DLEP Radio Channel Utilization Extension", Henning Rogge, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-rogge-manet-dlep-channel-utilization-02.txt>

      This document defines an extension to the Dynamic Link Exchange
      Protocol (DLEP) to provide the utilization of a radio channel.

  "BGP Extensions of SR Policy for Composite Candidate Path", Hao Li,
  Mengxiao Chen, Changwang Lin, Jiang Wenying, Weiqiang Cheng, 2022-03-06,
  <draft-li-idr-sr-policy-composite-path-02.txt>

      Segment Routing is a source routing paradigm that explicitly
      indicates the forwarding path for packets at the ingress node.  An SR
      Policy is associated with one or more candidate paths.  A candidate
      path is either dynamic, explicit or composite.  This document defines
      extensions to BGP to distribute SR policies carrying composite
      candidate path information.  So that composite candidate paths can be
      installed when the SR policy is applied.

  "Signaling Composite Candidate Path of SR Policy using BGP-LS", Hao Li,
  Mengxiao Chen, Changwang Lin, Jiang Wenying, Weiqiang Cheng, 2022-03-06,
  <draft-li-idr-bgpls-sr-policy-composite-path-02.txt>

      Segment Routing is a source routing paradigm that explicitly
      indicates the forwarding path for packets at the ingress node.  An SR
      Policy is associated with one or more candidate paths, and each
      candidate path is either dynamic, explicit or composite.  This
      document specifies the extensions to BGP Link State (BGP-LS) to carry
      composite candidate path information in the advertisement of an SR
      policy.

  "Delivered-To Email Header Field", Dave Crocker, 2022-02-09,
  <draft-crocker-email-deliveredto-10.txt>

      The address to which email is delivered might be different than any
      of the addresses shown in any of the content header fields that were
      created by the email's author.  For example, the address used by the
      email transport service is provided separately, such as through
      SMTP's "RCPT TO" command, and might not match any address in the To:
      or cc: fields.  In addition before final delivery, handling can
      entail a sequence of submission/delivery events, using a sequence of
      different destination addresses that (eventually) lead to the
      recipient.  As well, a receiving system's delivery process can
      produce local address transformations.
      
      It can be helpful for a message to have a common way to record each
      delivery in such a sequence, and to note each address used in the
      sequence to that recipient, such as for analyzing the path a message
      has taken, or for loop detection, or for formulating the author's
      address in a reply message.  This document defines a header field for
      this information.
      
      Email handling information discloses details about the email
      infrastructure, as well as about a particular recipient; this can
      raise privacy concerns.
      
      A header field such as this is not automatically assured of
      widespread use.  Therefore this is being published as an Experiment,
      looking for constituency and for operational utility.  The document
      is produced through the Independent RFC stream and was not subject to
      the IETF's approval process.

  "Updates to SID Verification for SR-MPLS in RFC 8664", Ran Chen, Samuel
  Sidor, Chun Zhu, Alexej Tokar, Mike Koldychev, 2022-01-04,
  <draft-chen-pce-sr-mpls-sid-verification-03.txt>

      This document updates [RFC8664] to clarify usage of "SID
      verification" bit signalled in Path Computation Element Protocol
      (PCEP), and this document proposes to define a new flag for
      indicating the headend is explicitly requested to verify SID(s) by
      the PCE.

  "BGP Color-Aware Routing Problem Statement", Dhananjaya Rao, Swadesh
  Agrawal, Clarence Filsfils, Ketan Talaulikar, Bruno Decraene, Dirk
  Steinberg, Luay Jalil, Jim Guichard, Keyur Patel, Wim Henderickx,
  2021-11-22, <draft-dskc-bess-bgp-car-problem-statement-04.txt>

      This document explores the scope, use-cases and requirements for a
      BGP based routing solution to establish end-to-end intent-aware paths
      across a multi-domain service provider network environment.

  "A YANG Model for MPLS MSD", Yingzhen Qu, Acee Lindem, Stephane Litkowski,
  Jeff Tantsura, 2022-02-02, <draft-qu-mpls-mpls-msd-yang-03.txt>

      This document defines a YANG data module augmenting the IETF MPLS
      YANG model to provide support for MPLS Maximum SID Depths (MSDs) as
      defined in RFC 8476 and RFC 8491.

  "One-way/Two-way Active Measurement Protocol Extensions for Performance
  Measurement on LAG", Zhenqiang Li, Tianran Zhou, Guo Jun, Greg Mirsky,
  Rakesh Gandhi, 2022-03-06, <draft-li-ippm-otwamp-on-lag-03.txt>

      This document defines extensions to One-way Active Measurement
      Protocol (OWAMP), and Two-way Active Measurement Protocol (TWAMP) to
      implement performance measurement on every member link of a Link
      Aggregation Group (LAG).  Knowing the measured metrics of each member
      link of a LAG enables operators to enforce the performance based
      traffic steering policy across the member links.

  "Challenges for the Internet Routing Infrastructure Introduced by Semantic
  Routing", Daniel King, Adrian Farrel, Christian Jacquenet, 2022-01-22,
  <draft-king-irtf-challenges-in-routing-07.txt>

      Historically, the meaning of an IP address has been to identify an
      interface on a network device.  Routing protocols were developed
      based on the assumption that a destination address had this semantic.
      
      Over time, routing decisions were enhanced to route packets according
      to additional information carried within the packets and dependent on
      policy coded in, configured at, or signaled to the routers.
      
      Many proposals have been made to add semantics to IP packets by
      placing additional information into existing fields, by adding
      semantics to IP addresses, or by adding fields to the packets.  The
      intent is to facilitate routing decisions based on these additional
      semantics in order to provide differentiated paths for different
      packet flows distinct from shortest path first or path vector
      routing.  We call this approach "Semantic Routing".
      
      This document describes the challenges to the existing routing system
      that are introduced by Semantic Routing.  It then summarizes the
      opportunities for research into new or modified routing protocols to
      make use of additional semantics.
      
      This document is presented as a study to support further research
      into clarifying and understanding the issues.  It does not pass
      comment on the advisability or practicality of any of the proposals
      and does not define any technical solutions.

  "Simple Two-Way Direct Loss Measurement Procedure", Rakesh Gandhi, Clarence
  Filsfils, Dan Voyer, Mach Chen, Bart Janssens, Stefano Salsano, 2022-02-04,
  <draft-gandhi-ippm-simple-direct-loss-02.txt>

      This document defines Simple Two-Way Direct Loss Measurement (DLM)
      procedure that can be used for Alternate-Marking Method for detecting
      accurate data packet loss in a network.  Specifically, DLM probe
      packets are defined for both unauthenticated and authenticated modes
      and they are efficient for hardware-based implementation.

  "Dynamic-Anycast (Dyncast) Requirements", Peng Liu, Tianji Jiang, Philip
  Eardley, Dirk Trossen, Cheng Li, 2022-03-07, <draft-liu-dyncast-reqs-02.txt>

      This draft provides requirements for an architecture addressing the
      problems outlined in the use case and problem statement draft for
      Dyncast[I-D.liu-dyncast-ps-usecases] .

  "Dynamic-Anycast Architecture", Yizhou Li, Luigi Iannone, Dirk Trossen,
  Peng Liu, Cheng Li, 2022-03-07, <draft-li-dyncast-architecture-03.txt>

      This document describes a proposal for an architecture for the
      Dynamic-Anycast (Dyncast).  It includes an architecture overview,
      main components that shall exist, and the workflow.  An example of
      workflow is provided, focusing on the load-balance multi-edge based
      service use-case, where load is distributed in terms of both
      computing and networking resources through the dynamic anycast
      architecture.

  "DNSSEC automation", Ulrich Wisser, Shumon Huque, 2022-03-06,
  <draft-wisser-dnssec-automation-03.txt>

      This document describes an algorithm and a protocol to automate
      DNSSEC Multi-Signer [RFC8901] "Multi-Signer DNSSEC Models" setup,
      operations and decomissioning.  Using Model 2 of the Multi-Signer
      specification, where each operator has their own distinct KSK and ZSK
      sets (or CSK sets), [RFC8078] "Managing DS Records from the Parent
      via CDS/CDNSKEY" and [RFC7477] "Child-to-Parent Synchronization in
      DNS" to accomplish this.

  "Simple Two-Way Active Measurement Protocol Extensions for Performance
  Measurement on LAG", Zhenqiang Li, Tianran Zhou, Guo Jun, Greg Mirsky,
  Rakesh Gandhi, 2022-03-06, <draft-li-ippm-stamp-on-lag-02.txt>

      This document extends Simple Two-Way Active Measurement Protocol
      (STAMP) to implement performance measurement on every member link of
      a Link Aggregation Group (LAG).  Knowing the measured metrics of each
      member link of a LAG enables operators to enforce a performance based
      traffic steering policy across the member links.

  "Advertising SRv6 SIDs for Layer 2 Bundle Member Links in IGP", Jie Dong,
  Zhibo Hu, 2021-10-24, <draft-dong-lsr-l2bundle-srv6-01.txt>

      There are deployments where the Layer-3 interface on which IGP
      operates is a Layer-2 interface bundle.  Existing IGP advertisements
      only support advertising link attributes of the Layer-3 interface.
      If entities external to IGP wish to control traffic flows on the
      individual physical links that comprise the Layer-2 interface bundle,
      link attribute information about the bundle members is advertised by
      IGP extensions for Layer-2 (L2) bundle.
      
      When Segment Routing over IPv6 (SRv6) is used with Layer-2 interface
      bundle to control traffic flows on the individual member links, the
      SRv6 SIDs which represent the Layer 2 member links of the L2 bundle
      needs to be advertised in IGP.
      
      This document proposes the IGP extensions to advertise the SRv6 SIDs
      of the Layer 2 (L2) bundle member links.

  "Split-Horizon DNS Configuration", Tirumaleswar Reddy.K, Dan Wing, Kevin
  Smith, Benjamin Schwartz, 2022-03-02,
  <draft-reddy-add-enterprise-split-dns-09.txt>

      When split-horizon DNS is deployed by a network, certain domains can
      be resolved authoritatively by the network-provided DNS resolver.
      DNS clients that don't always use this resolver might wish to do so
      for these domains.  This specification enables networks to inform DNS
      clients about domains that are inside the split-horizon DNS, and
      describes how clients can confirm the local resolver's authority over
      these domains.

  "PCE for BIER-TE Path", Huaimo Chen, Mike McBride, Aijun Wang, Gyan Mishra,
  Yisong Liu, Yanhe Fan, Lei Liu, Xufeng Liu, 2021-10-17,
  <draft-chen-pce-bier-te-path-02.txt>

      This document describes extensions to Path Computation Element (PCE)
      communication Protocol (PCEP) for supporting Bit Index Explicit
      Replication (BIER) Traffic Engineering (TE) paths.

  "BIER-TE Fast ReRoute", Huaimo Chen, Mike McBride, Yisong Liu, Aijun Wang,
  Gyan Mishra, Yanhe Fan, Lei Liu, Xufeng Liu, 2022-02-22,
  <draft-chen-bier-te-frr-02.txt>

      This document describes a mechanism for fast re-route (FRR)
      protection against the failure of a transit node or link on an
      explicit point to multipoint (P2MP) multicast path/tree in a "Bit
      Index Explicit Replication" (BIER) Traffic Engineering (TE) domain.
      It does not have any per-path state in the core.  For a multicast
      packet to traverse a transit node along an explicit P2MP path, when
      the node fails, its upstream hop node as a PLR reroutes the packet
      around the failed node along the P2MP path once it detects the
      failure.

  "BIER-TE Egress Protection", Huaimo Chen, Mike McBride, Aijun Wang, Gyan
  Mishra, Yisong Liu, Yanhe Fan, Lei Liu, Xufeng Liu, 2022-02-22,
  <draft-chen-bier-te-egress-protect-02.txt>

      This document describes a mechanism for fast protection against the
      failure of an egress node of an explicit point to multipoint (P2MP)
      multicast path/tree in a "Bit Index Explicit Replication" (BIER)
      Traffic Engineering (TE) domain.  It does not have any per-flow state
      in the core of the domain.  For a multicast packet to the egress
      node, when the egress node fails, its upstream hop as a PLR sends the
      packet to the egress' backup node once the PLR detects the failure.

  "Intentionally Temporarily Degraded or Insecure", Wes Hardaker, 2021-10-21,
  <draft-hardaker-dnsop-intentionally-temporary-insec-01.txt>

      Performing DNSKEY algorithm transitions with DNSSEC signing is
      unfortunately challenging to get right in practice without decent
      tooling support.  This document weighs the correct, completely secure
      way of rolling keys against an alternate, significantly simplified,
      method that takes a zone through an insecure state.

  "Terminal-based joint selection and configuration of MEC host and RAW
  network", Carlos Bernardos, Alain Mourad, 2021-09-09,
  <draft-bernardos-raw-joint-selection-raw-mec-01.txt>

      There are several scenarios involving multi-hop heterogeneous
      wireless networks requiring reliable and available features combined
      with multi-access edge computing, such as Industry 4.0.  This
      document discusses mechanisms to allow a terminal influencing the
      selection of a MEC host for instantiation of the terminal-targeted
      MEC applications and functions, and (re)configuring the RAW network
      lying in between the terminal and the selected MEC host.  This
      document assumes IETF RAW and ETSI MEC integration, fostering
      discussion about extensions at both IETF and ETSI MEC to better
      support these scenarios.

  "One-way Delay Measurement Based on Reference Delay", Yang Li, Tao Sun,
  Hongwei Yang, Danyang Chen, Yali Wang, 2022-02-09,
  <draft-li-ippm-ref-delay-measurement-02.txt>

      The end-to-end network one-way delay is an important performance
      metric in the 5G network.  For realizing the accurate one-way delay
      measurement, existing methods requires the end-to-end deployment of
      accurate clock synchronization mechanism, such as PTP or GPS, which
      results in relatively high deployment cost.  Another method can
      derive the one-way delay from the round-trip delay.  In this case,
      since the delay of the downlink and uplink may be asymmetric, the
      measurement accuracy is relatively low.  Hence, this document
      introduces a method to measure the end-to-end network one-way delay
      based on a reference delay guaranteed by deterministic networking
      without clock synchronization.The advantage of this solution is that
      it has high measurement accuracy and can test any flow type.

  "Analysis of VPN Routes Control in Shared BGP Session", Aijun Wang, Wei
  Wang, Gyan Mishra, Haibo Wang, Shunwan Zhuang, Jie Dong, 2021-09-06,
  <draft-wang-idr-vpn-routes-control-analysis-04.txt>

      This draft analyzes some scenarios and the necessaries for VPN routes
      control in the shared BGP session, which can be the used as the base
      for the design of related solutions.

  "Challenging Scenarios and Problems in Internet Addressing", Yihao Jia,
  Dirk Trossen, Luigi Iannone, Nirmala Shenoy, Paulo Mendes, Donald Eastlake,
  Peng Liu, Dino Farinacci, 2022-03-06,
  <draft-jia-intarea-scenarios-problems-addressing-03.txt>

      The Internet Protocol (IP) has been the major technological success
      in information technology of the last half century.  As the Internet
      becomes pervasive, IP has been replacing communication technology for
      many domain-specific solutions.  However, domains with specific
      requirements as well as communication behaviors and semantics still
      exist and represent what [RFC8799] recognizes as "limited domains".
      
      This document describes well-recognized scenarios that showcase
      possibly different addressing requirements, which are challenging to
      be accommodated in the IP addressing model.  These scenarios
      highlight issues related to the Internet addressing model and call
      for starting a discussion on a way to re-think/evolve the addressing
      model so to better accommodate different domain-specific
      requirements.
      
      The issues identified in this document are complemented and deepened
      by a detailed gap analysis in a separate companion document
      [I-D.jia-intarea-internet-addressing-gap-analysis].

  "Carrying Virtual Transport Network Identifier in MPLS Packet", Zhenbin Li,
  Jie Dong, 2022-03-07, <draft-li-mpls-enhanced-vpn-vtn-id-02.txt>

      A Virtual Transport Network (VTN) is a virtual network which has a
      customized network topology and a set of dedicated or shared network
      resources allocated from the underlying network infrastructure.
      Multiple VTNs can be created by network operator for using as the
      underlay for one or a group of VPNs services to provide enhanced VPN
      (VPN+) services.  In packet forwarding, some fields in the data
      packet needs to be used to identify the VTN the packet belongs to, so
      that the VTN-specific processing can be executed.  In the context of
      network slicing, a VTN can be instantiated as a Network Resource
      Partition (NRP).
      
      This document proposes a mechanism to carry the VTN-ID in an MPLS
      packet to identify the VTN the packet belongs to.  The procedure for
      processing the VTN ID is also specified.

  "Precise Network Measurement Protocol", Hongwei Yang, Kehan Yao, Tao Sun,
  Cheng Zhou, Cheng Wei, Junjie Wang, 2021-10-25,
  <draft-yang-ippm-pnmp-01.txt>

      PNMP, precise network measurement protocol, is used for out-of-band
      network measurement.  As 5G is continuously evolving, there become
      many more time sensitive services which require high precision of
      measurements.  In addition, in order to better simulate the
      transmission of packets of monitored services, the length and
      priorities of the measurement packets SHOULD be customized,
      especially for some network that is inclined to get congested.  PNMP
      can not only support PTP, precise time protocol, but also allow some
      customization on packet payload.  It only introduces a little
      overhead by adding an extendable header over IP header.

  "BGP SPF for Virtual Transport Network (VTN)", Jie Dong, Zhenbin Li, Haibo
  Wang, 2021-10-24, <draft-dong-lsvr-bgp-spf-vtn-02.txt>

      A Virtual Transport Network (VTN) is a virtual underlay network which
      consists of a customized network topology and a set of network
      resource allocated from the physical network.  In a network, multiple
      VTNs can be created to meet different service requirements, and
      services may be mapped to the same or different VTNs.
      
      In networks where BGP Shortest Path First (SPF) is used to distribute
      the link-state information among network nodes, the information of
      VTNs needs to be distributed along with the basic network
      information.  This document specifies the BGP SPF mechanisms with
      necessary extensions to distribute the VTN information and perform
      VTN-specific path computaton.

  "Dynamically Recreatable Keys", Juan Garcia-Pardo, Cyrill Krahenbuhl,
  Benjamin Rothenberger, Adrian Perrig, 2022-01-12,
  <draft-garciapardo-panrg-drkey-02.txt>

      DRKey is a pragmatic Internet-scale key-establishment system that
      allows any host to locally obtain a symmetric key to enable a remote
      service to perform source-address authentication, and enables first-
      packet authentication.  The remote service can itself locally derive
      the same key with efficient cryptographic operations.
      
      DRKey was developed with path aware networks in mind, but it is also
      applicable to today's Internet.  It can be incrementally deployed and
      it offers incentives to the parties using it independently of its
      dissemination in the network.

  "Gateway Based Trust Relationship Between the Endpoint and the Intermediate
  Node", Zongpeng Du, Peng Liu, 2022-01-03,
  <draft-du-panrg-gateway-based-trust-relationship-01.txt>

      This document describes a mechanism about establishing trust
      relationship between the endpoint and the intermediate node along the
      path based on the gateway of the endpoint.

  "NTS4PTP - Key Management System for the Precision Time Protocol Based on
  the Network Time Security Protocol", Martin Langer, Rainer Bermbach,
  2022-02-20, <draft-langer-ntp-nts-for-ptp-03.txt>

      This document defines a key management service for automatic key
      management for the integrated security mechanism (prong A) of IEEE
      Std 1588[TM]-2019 (PTPv2.1) described there in Annex P.  It
      implements a key management for the immediate security processing
      approach and offers a security solution for all relevant PTP modes.
      The key management service for PTP is based on and extends the NTS
      Key Establishment protocol defined in IETF RFC 8915 for securing NTP,
      but works completely independent from NTP.

  "RPKI Validation Re-reconsidered", Job Snijders, Ben Maddison, 2022-02-27,
  <draft-spaghetti-sidrops-rpki-validation-update-02.txt>

      This document describes an improved validation procedure for Resource
      Public Key Infrastructure (RPKI) signed objects.  This document
      updates RFC 6482.  This document updates RFC 6487.  This document
      obsoletes RFC 8360.

  "Enhancing Transport Protocols over Satellite Networks", Tom Jones, Gorry
  Fairhurst, Nicolas Kuhn, John Border, Stephan Emile, 2021-10-25,
  <draft-jones-tsvwg-transport-for-satellite-02.txt>

      IETF transport protocols such as TCP, SCTP and QUIC are designed to
      function correctly over any network path.  This includes networks
      paths that utilise a satellite link or network.  While transport
      protocols function, the characteristics of satellite networks can
      impact performance when using the defaults in standard mechanisms,
      due to the specific characteristics of these paths.
      
      [RFC2488] and [RFC3135] describe mechanisms that enable TCP to more
      effectively utilize the available capacity of a network path that
      includes a satellite system.  Since publication, both application and
      transport layers and satellite systems have evolved.  Indeed, the
      development of encrypted protocols such as QUIC challenges currently
      deployed solutions, for satellite systems the capacity has increased
      and commercial systems are now available that use a range of
      satellite orbital positions.
      
      This document follows the terminology proposed in
      [I-D.irtf-panrg-path-properties] to describe the current
      characterises of common satellite paths.  This document also
      describes considerations when implementing and deploying reliable
      transport protocols that are intended to work efficiently over paths
      that include a satellite system.  It discusses available network
      mitigations and offers advice to designers of protocols and operators
      of satellite networks.

  "Extended Communities Derived from Route Targets", Zhaohui Zhang, Jeffrey
  Haas, Keyur Patel, 2022-03-04,
  <draft-zzhang-idr-rt-derived-community-02.txt>

      This document specifies a way to derive an Extended Community from a
      Route Target and describes some example use cases.

  "Multi-purpose Special Purpose Label for Forwarding Actions", Kireeti
  Kompella, Vishnu Beeram, Tarek Saad, Israel Meilik, 2022-02-09,
  <draft-kompella-mpls-mspl4fa-02.txt>

      The MPLS architecture introduced Special Purpose Labels (SPLs) to
      indicate special forwarding actions and offered a few simple
      examples, such as Router Alert.  In the two decades since the
      original architecture was crafted, the range, complexity and sheer
      number of such actions has grown; in addition, there now is need for
      "associated data" for some of the forwarding actions.  Likewise, the
      capabilities and scale of forwarding engines has also improved vastly
      over the same time period.  There is a pressing need to match the
      needs with the capabilities to deliver the next generation of MPLS
      architecture.
      
      In this memo, we propose an alternate mechanism whereby a single SPL
      can encode multiple forwarding actions and carry associated data,
      some in the label stack and some after the label stack.  This
      proposal also solves the problem of scarcity of base SPLs.
      
      This approach can immediately address several use cases:
      
      *  to carry a Slice Selector for IETF network slicing;
      
      *  to signal that further fast reroute may have harmful consequences;
      
      *  to indicate that there is relevant data after the label stack;
      
      *  among others.

  "SRH and IP header protection", Dongjie Lu, chenmeiling, Li Su, Wei Pan,
  Cheng Li, 2021-12-26, <draft-chen-spring-srv6-srh-security-02.txt>

      This document proposes a method to protect SRH and IP header using
      signature which stored in the TLV, this scheme can apply to SRv6 and
      G-SRv6.

  "Instantiation of IETF Network Slices in Service Providers Networks",
  samier barguil, Luis Contreras, Victor Lopez, Reza Rokui, Oscar de Dios,
  2022-03-07, <draft-barguil-teas-network-slices-instantation-03.txt>

      Network Slicing (NS) is an integral part of Service Provider
      networks.  The IETF has produced several YANG data models to support
      the Software-Defined Networking and network slice architecture and
      YANG-based service models for network slice (NS) instantiation.
      
      This document describes the relationship between IETF Network Slice
      models for requesting the IETF Network Slices and (e.g., Layer-3
      Service Model, Layer-2 Service Model) and Network Models (e.g.,
      Layer-3 Network Model, Layer-2 Network Model) used during their
      realizations.  In addition, this document describes the communication
      between the IETF Network Slice Controller and the network controllers
      for the realization of IETF network slices.
      
      The IETF Network Slice YANG model provides the customer-oriented view
      of the network slice.  Thus, once the IETF Network Slice controller
      (NSC) receives a request, it needs to map it to accomplish the
      specific parameters expected by the network controllers.  The network
      models are analyzed to satisfy the IETF Network Slice requirements,
      and the gaps in existing models are reported.
      
      The document also provides operational and security considerations
      when deploying network slices in Service Provider networks.

  "Key Consistency and Discovery", Alex Davidson, Matthew Finkel, Martin
  Thomson, Christopher Wood, 2022-03-04, <draft-wood-key-consistency-02.txt>

      This document describes the key consistency and correctness
      requirements of protocols such as Privacy Pass, Oblivious DoH, and
      Oblivious HTTP for user privacy.  It discusses several mechanisms and
      proposals for enabling user privacy in varying threat models.  In
      concludes with discussion of open problems in this area.

  "BGP Color-Aware Routing (CAR)", Dhananjaya Rao, Swadesh Agrawal, Clarence
  Filsfils, Ketan Talaulikar, Dirk Steinberg, Luay Jalil, Yuanchao Su, Bruno
  Decraene, Jim Guichard, Keyur Patel, Haibo Wang, 2021-10-25,
  <draft-dskc-bess-bgp-car-03.txt>

      This document describes a BGP based routing solution to establish
      end-to-end intent-aware paths across a multi-domain service provider
      transport network.  This solution is called BGP Color-Aware Routing
      (BGP CAR).

  "Definition of End-to-end Encryption", Mallory Knodel, Fred Baker, Olaf
  Kolkman, Sofia Celi, Gurshabad Grover, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-knodel-e2ee-definition-03.txt>

      End-to-end encryption (E2EE) is an application of cryptography in
      communications systems between endpoints.  E2EE systems are unique in
      providing features of confidentiality, integrity and authenticity for
      users.  Improvements to E2EE strive to maximise the system's security
      while balancing usability and availability.  Users of E2EE
      communications expect trustworthy providers of secure implementations
      to respect and protect their right to whisper.

  "Diversity and Inclusiveness in the IETF", Fernando Gont, Keith Moore,
  2022-01-27, <draft-gont-diversity-analysis-01.txt>

      This document discusses a number of structural issues that currently
      hinders diversity and inclusiveness in the IETF.  The issues
      discussed in this document are non-exhaustive, but still provide a
      good starting point for the IETF to establish a more comprehensive
      agenda to foster diversity and inclusiveness.

  "ECDSA Signatures in Verification-Friendly Format", Rene Struik,
  2021-10-25, <draft-struik-lamps-verification-friendly-ecdsa-02.txt,.pdf>

      This document specifies how to represent ECDSA signatures so as to
      facilitate accelerated verification of single signatures and fast
      batch verification.  We demonstrate that this representation
      technique can be applied retroactively by any device (rather than
      only by the signer), thereby facilitating transitioning to always
      generating ECDSA signatures in this way, without changing
      standardized ECDSA specifications with instantiations with prime-
      order curves.  This facilitates verifying devices to reap the
      significant speed-up potential (ranging from ~1.3x to ~6x) fast
      verification techniques afford.

  "Semantic Definition Format (SDF) for Data and Interactions of Things:
  Compact Notation", Carsten Bormann, 2022-02-28,
  <draft-bormann-asdf-sdf-compact-02.txt>

      The Semantic Definition Format (SDF) is a format for domain experts
      to use in the creation and maintenance of data and interaction models
      in the Internet of Things.  It was created as a common language for
      use in the development of the One Data Model liaison organization
      (OneDM) definitions.  Tools convert this format to database formats
      and other serializations as needed.
      
      The SDF format is mainly intended for interchange between machine
      generation and machine processing.  However, there is often a need
      for humans to look at and edit SDF models.
      
      Similar to the way Relax-NG as defined in ISO/IEC 19757-2 has an XML
      format and a compact format (Annex C), this specification defines a
      compact format to go along SDF's JSON format.
      
      The present version of this document is mostly a proof of concept,
      but was deemed useful to obtain initial feedback on the approach
      taken.

  "The SRT Protocol", Maria Sharabayko, Maxim Sharabayko, Jean Dube,
  Joonwoong Kim, Jeongseok Kim, 2021-09-07, <draft-sharabayko-srt-01.txt>

      This document specifies Secure Reliable Transport (SRT) protocol.
      SRT is a user-level protocol over User Datagram Protocol and provides
      reliability and security optimized for low latency live video
      streaming, as well as generic bulk data transfer.  For this, SRT
      introduces control packet extension, improved flow control, enhanced
      congestion control and a mechanism for data encryption.

  "The Privacy Token HTTP Authentication Scheme", Tommy Pauly, Frederic
  Jacobs, Christopher Wood, 2021-09-07, <draft-privacy-token-01.txt>

      This documents defines an authentication scheme for HTTP called
      Privacy Token.
      
      Discussion Venues
      
      This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.
      
      Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
      https://github.com/tfpauly/privacy-proxy.

  "The Time Zone Information Format (TZif)", Arthur Olson, Paul Eggert,
  Kenneth Murchison, 2021-12-10, <draft-murchison-rfc8536bis-04.txt>

      This document specifies the Time Zone Information Format (TZif) for
      representing and exchanging time zone information, independent of any
      particular service or protocol.  Two media types for this format are
      also defined.
      
      This document replaces and obsoletes RFC 8536.

  "Scalable Remote Attestation for Systems, Containers, and Applications",
  Kathleen Moriarty, Antonio Fontes, 2021-12-10,
  <draft-moriarty-attestationsets-04.txt>

      This document establishes an architectural pattern whereby a remote
      attestation could be issued for a complete set of benchmarks or
      controls that are defined and grouped by an external entity,
      preventing the need to send over individual attestations for each
      item within a benchmark or control framework.  This document
      establishes a pattern to list sets of benchmarks and controls within
      CWT and JWT formats for use as an Entity Attestation Token (EAT).

  "PKI-Authenticated Certificate Discovery Using DANE TLSA records", Ash
  Wilson, Shumon Huque, 2021-09-13, <draft-wilson-dane-pkix-cd-02.txt>

      The DNS-Based Authentication of Named Entities (DANE) TLSA
      specification [RFC6698] and The DNS-Based Authentication of Named
      Entities (DANE) Protocol: Updates and Operational Guidance [RFC7671]
      describe how to publish Transport Layer Security (TLS) server
      certificates or public keys in the DNS.  This document updates
      [RFC6698] and [RFC7671].  It describes how to use the TLSA record to
      enable entity and CA certificate discovery for object security and
      trust chain discovery use cases, and how to use PKIX validation for
      TLSA records queried without the benefit of DNSSEC.

  "Survey of Domain Verification Techniques using DNS", Shivan Sahib, Shumon
  Huque, Paul Wouters, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-sahib-domain-verification-techniques-03.txt>

      Many services on the Internet need to verify ownership or control of
      a domain in the Domain Name System (DNS) [RFC1034] [RFC1035].  This
      verification is often done by requesting a specific DNS record to be
      visible in the domain.  This document surveys various techniques in
      wide use today, the pros and cons of each, and proposes some
      practises to avoid known problems.

  "DLEP Radio Quality Extension", Henning Rogge, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-rogge-manet-dlep-radio-quality-02.txt>

      This document defines an extension to the Dynamic Link Exchange
      Protocol (DLEP) to provide the quality of incoming radio signals.

  "The Base45 Data Encoding", Patrik Faltstrom, Fredrik Ljunggren,
  Dirk-Willem van Gulik, 2022-02-03, <draft-faltstrom-base45-10.txt>

      This document describes the Base45 encoding scheme which is built
      upon the Base64, Base32 and Base16 encoding schemes.

  "A SIP Response Code (497) for Call Transfer Failure", Shrawan Khatri,
  Vikram Singh, Marcelo Pazos, Cherng-Shung Hsu, Yong Xie, 2022-01-24,
  <draft-khatri-sipcore-call-transfer-fail-response-02.txt>

      Internet-Draft          Call Transfer Failure             January 24
      
      This document defines the 497 (Call Transfer Failure) SIP
      response code, allowing Call Pull and Call Push parties to
      indicate that the operation was rejected. Optional warning codes
      are defined to carry granular information. SIP entities may use
      this information to adjust how subsequent calls can be handled
      intelligently.

  "CoAP Protocol Indication", Christian Amsuess, 2022-03-03,
  <draft-amsuess-core-transport-indication-03.txt>

      The Constrained Application Protocol (CoAP, [RFC7252]) is available
      over different transports (UDP, DTLS, TCP, TLS, WebSockets), but
      lacks a way to unify these addresses.  This document provides
      terminology and provisions based on Web Linking [RFC8288] to express
      alternative transports available to a device, and to optimize
      exchanges using these.

  "Security Technical Specification for Smart Devices of IoT", Bin Wang, Xing
  Wang, Li Wan, Wenyuan Xu, Chonghua Wang, 2021-09-15,
  <draft-wang-iot-devices-security-01.txt>

      With the development of IoT, security of smart devices becomes an
      important issues for us to discuss.  This draft for smart devices of
      Internet of Things (IoT), proposes a security framework and detailed
      requirements in terms of hardware, system, data, network, and
      management to ensure the security of IoT smart devices.
      Specifically, hardware security includes interface security and
      security components.  System security includes firmware security,
      security audit, etc.  Data security includes data verification and
      sensitive data protection.  Network security includes stream
      protection and session security, etc.

  "Technical Requirements for Secure Access and Management of IoT Smart
  Terminals", Bin Wang, Song Liu, Li Wan, Jun Li, Xing Wang, 2021-09-14,
  <draft-wang-secure-access-of-iot-terminals-02.txt>

      It is difficult to supervise the great deal of Internet of Things
      (IoT) smart terminals which are widely distributed.  Furthermore, a
      large number of smart terminals (such as IP cameras, access control
      terminals, traffic cameras, etc.) running on the network have high
      security risks in access control.  This draft introduces the
      technical requirements for access management and control of IoT smart
      terminals, which is used to solve the problem of personate and
      illegal connection in the access process, and enables users to
      strengthen the control of devices and discover devices that is
      offline in time, so as to ensure the safety and stability of smart
      terminals in the access process.

  "Guidelines for the Organization of Fully Online Meetings", Mirja
  Kuehlewind, Martin Duke, 2022-03-01,
  <draft-kuehlewind-shmoo-online-meeting-04.txt>

      This document provides guidelines for the planning and organization
      of fully online meetings, regarding the number, length, and
      composition of sessions on the meeting agenda.  These guidelines are
      based on the experience during the COVID-19 pandemic.

  "Structured Flow Label", Clarence Filsfils, Ahmed Abdelsalam, Shay Zadok,
  Xiaohu Xu, Weiqiang Cheng, Dan Voyer, Pablo Camarillo, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-filsfils-6man-structured-flow-label-02.txt>

      This document defines the IPv6 Structured Flow Label.  The seamless
      nature of the change to [RFC6437] is demonstrated.  Benefits of the
      solution are explained.  Use-cases are illustrated.

  "LISP Transport for Policy Distribution", Michael Kowal, Marc
  Portoles-Comeras, Amit Jain, Dino Farinacci, 2021-09-15,
  <draft-kowal-lisp-policy-distribution-01.txt>

      This document describes the use of the Locator/ID Separation Protocol
      (LISP) to encode and transport data models for the configuration of
      LISP ITRs.

  "Open Service Access Protocol for IoT Smart Devices", Bin Wang, Shaopeng
  Zhou, Chao Li, Chunming Wu, Zizhao Wang, 2021-09-14,
  <draft-wang-open-service-access-protocol-01.txt>

      With the development of IoT(Internet of Things) technology,
      everything is interconnected.  Mass IoT data, devices, businesses,
      and services adopt different data descriptions and service access
      methods, resulting in fragmentation issues, such as data
      heterogeneous, device heterogeneous, and application heterogeneous,
      which hinders the development of the industry.  In order to solve the
      problem, this draft proposes the requirements for IoT smart devices
      to transmit and control, as well as transmission and protocol
      interfaces.  It is for the program design, system testing and
      acceptance, and related research.  Structured, unified, and
      standardized open service interconnection model reduces business
      replication cost and removes service barriers to push industrial
      development.

  "IPv6 Oversized Packets Analysis", Eduard, XiPeng Xiao, Dmitriy Khaustov,
  2021-09-18, <draft-vasilenko-v6ops-ipv6-oversized-analysis-01.txt>

      The IETF has some initiatives relying on IPv6 Extension Headers
      added in transit: SRv6, iOAM. Additionally, some recent developments
      are overlays (SRv6, VxLAN, NVO3, L2TPv3, and LISP). It could create
      oversized packets that need to be dealt with. This document analyzes
      available standards for the resolution of oversized packet drops.

  "Fetch and Validation of Verified Mark Certificates", Wei Chuang, Marc
  Bradshaw, Thede Loder, Alex Brotman, 2021-10-11,
  <draft-fetch-validation-vmc-wchuang-01.txt>

      A description of how entities wishing to validate a Verified Mark
      Certificate (VMC) should retrieve and validate these documents.
      This document is a companion to BIMI core specification, which should
      be consulted alongside this document.

  "BIMI Reporting", J. Adams, Alex Brotman, 2021-10-11,
  <draft-adams-bimi-reporting-01.txt>

      To support the utility of Brand Indicators for Message Identification
      (BIMI), domains publishing BIMI records may find it useful to know
      when their logos are failing to be displayed as expected.  When an
      entity, for example a mailbox operator, determines whether or not to
      display the logo identified in the BIMI record, they may encounter
      errors trying to retrieve the image file.  Similarly, the associated
      evidence document used to validate the logo may fail evaluation.  In
      other cases, the evaluator may decide that despite everything
      validating, they may rely on local policies that determine validated
      logos should still not be displayed.  This specification defines how
      BIMI evaluators should report their evaluation outcome back to the
      publisher within the context of existing Domain-based Message
      Authentication, Reporting, and Conformance (DMARC) reports.

  "Common implementation anti-patterns related to Domain Name System (DNS)
  resource record (RR) processing", Stanislav Dashevskyi, Daniel Santos, Jos
  Wetzels, Amine Amri, 2022-02-14,
  <draft-dashevskyi-dnsrr-antipatterns-01.txt>

      This memo describes common vulnerabilities related to Domain Name
      System (DNS) response record (RR) processing as seen in several DNS
      client implementations. These vulnerabilities may lead to successful
      Denial-of-Service and Remote Code Execution attacks against the
      affected software. Where applicable, violations of RFC 1035 are
      mentioned.

  "Automatic Extended Route Optimization (AERO)", Fred Templin, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-templin-6man-aero-40.txt>

      This document specifies an Automatic Extended Route Optimization
      (AERO) service for IP internetworking over Overlay Multilink Network
      (OMNI) interfaces.  AERO/OMNI use an IPv6 link-local address format
      that supports operation of the IPv6 Neighbor Discovery (IPv6 ND)
      protocol.  Prefix delegation/registration services are employed for
      network admission and to manage the IP forwarding and routing
      systems.  Secure multilink operation, mobility management, multicast,
      traffic path selection and route optimization are naturally supported
      through dynamic neighbor cache updates.  AERO is a widely-applicable
      mobile internetworking service especially well-suited to aviation
      services, intelligent transportation systems, mobile end user devices
      and many other applications.

  "Transmission of IP Packets over Overlay Multilink Network (OMNI)
  Interfaces", Fred Templin, 2022-03-07, <draft-templin-6man-omni-55.txt>

      Mobile nodes (e.g., aircraft of various configurations, terrestrial
      vehicles, seagoing vessels, space systems, enterprise wireless
      devices, pedestrians with cell phones, etc.) communicate with
      networked correspondents over multiple access network data links and
      configure mobile routers to connect end user networks.  A multilink
      virtual interface specification is presented that enables mobile
      nodes to coordinate with a network-based mobility service and/or with
      other mobile node peers.  The virtual interface provides an
      adaptation layer service that also applies for more static
      deployments such as enterprise and home networks.  This document
      specifies the transmission of IP packets over Overlay Multilink
      Network (OMNI) Interfaces.

  "Deprecating infrastructure "int" domains", Kim Davies, Amanda Baber,
  2022-01-05, <draft-davies-int-historic-03.txt>

      The document marks as historic any "int" domain names that were
      designated for infrastructure purposes, and identifies them for
      removal from the "int" top-level domain.  Any implementation that
      involves these domains should be considered deprecated.  This
      document also marks RFC 1528 and RFC 1706 as historic, and updates
      RFC 1591 by removing the documented use of "int" for international
      databases.

  "Common Format and MIME Type for Comma-Separated Values (CSV) Files", Yakov
  Shafranovich, 2021-09-19, <draft-shafranovich-rfc4180-bis-01.txt>

      This RFC documents the common format used for Comma-Separated Values
      (CSV) files and updates the associated MIME type "text/csv".

  "DNS Resolver Information", Tirumaleswar Reddy.K, Mohamed Boucadair,
  2021-10-07, <draft-reddy-add-resolver-info-04.txt>

      This document specifies a method for DNS resolvers to publish
      information about themselves.  Clients can use the resolver
      information to identify the capabilities of DNS resolvers.

  "IETF Discussion List Charter", Lars Eggert, 2022-02-24,
  <draft-eggert-bcp45bis-08.txt>

      The Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) discussion mailing list
      furthers the development and specification of Internet technology
      through the general discussion of technical, procedural, operational
      and other topics for which no dedicated mailing lists exists.  As
      this is the most general IETF mailing list, considerable latitude in
      terms of topics is allowed, but there are posts and topics that are
      unsuitable for this mailing list.  This document defines the charter
      for the IETF discussion list and explains its scope.
      
      This document obsoletes RFC3005 and updates RFC3683.

  "Status of this Memo", Fotis Foukalas, Athanasios Tziouvaras, 2021-09-27,
  <draft-distributed-ml-iot-edge-cmp-foukalas-01.txt>

      Next generation Internet requires decentralized and distributed
      intelligence in order to make available a new type of
      experience to serve the user's interests. Such new services
      will be enabled by deploying the intelligence
      over a high volume of IoT devices in a form of distributed
      protocol. Such a  protocol will orchestrate the machine learning
      (ML) application in order to train the aggregated data available
      from the IoT devices. The training is not an easy task in such
      a distributed environment, where the amount of connected IoT
      devices will scale up and the needs for both interoperability
      and computing are high. This draft, addresses both issues
      by combining two emerging technologies known as edge AI
      and fog computing. The protocol procedures aggregate the data
      collected by the IoT devices into a fog node and apply edge AI
      for data analysis at the edge of the infrastructure. The
      analysis of the IoT requirements resulted in an end-to-end ML
      protocol specification which is presented throughout this draft.

  "A Primer on the Development of MPLS", Stewart Bryant, 2021-12-24,
  <draft-bryant-mpls-dev-primer-01.txt>

      There has been significant recent interest in developing MPLS to
      address new needs.  This memo collects together various documents
      that together describe the key aspects of the MPLS architecture
      together with the development proposals that the author is aware of.
      
      The purpose of this document is to bring everyone up to speed on the
      rational for the existing design and to alert them to the new
      proposals.

  "Mathematical Mesh 3.0 Part VII: Mesh Callsign Service", Phillip
  Hallam-Baker, 2021-10-23, <draft-hallambaker-mesh-callsign-01.txt>

      The Mesh Callsign Registry is a name registry that provides a mapping
      from human-friendly callsigns to root of trusts and a service
      assigned by the callsign holder to service the account bound to that
      callsign.  An append only sequence authenticated by means of a Merkle
      Tree and periodic third party notarizations provides ground truth for
      the integrity of the registry and for all the assertions enrolled in
      the sequence.
      
      https://mailarchive.ietf.org/arch/browse/mathmesh/
      (http://whatever)Discussion of this draft should take place on the
      MathMesh mailing list (mathmesh@ietf.org), which is archived at .

  "LAG indication", Bruno Decraene, Shraddha Hegde, Joel Halpern, 2022-01-31,
  <draft-decraene-lsr-lag-indication-02.txt>

      This document defines a new link flag to advertise that a layer-three
      link is composed of multiple layer-two sub-links, such as when this
      link is a Link Aggregation Group (LAG).  This allows a large single
      flow (an elephant flow) to be aware that the link capacity will be
      lower than expected as this single flow is not load-balanced across
      the multiple layer-two sub-links.  A path computation logic may use
      that information to route that elephant flow along a different path.

  "TAPS Transport Discovery", Martin Duke, 2021-10-25,
  <draft-duke-taps-transport-discovery-02.txt>

      The Transport Services architecture decouples applications from the
      protocol implementations that transport their data.  While it is
      often straightforward to connect applications with transports that
      are present in the host operating system, providing a means of
      discovering user-installed implementations dramatically enlarges the
      use cases.  This document discusses considerations for the design of
      a discovery mechanism and an example of such a design.
      
      Discussion of this work is encouraged to happen on the TAPS IETF
      mailing list taps@ietf.org or on the GitHub repository which contains
      the draft: https://github.com/martinduke/draft-duke-taps-transport-
      discovery.

  "Token Cell Routing Data Plane Concepts", Stewart Bryant, Alexander Clemm,
  2021-10-19, <draft-bcx-rtgwg-tcr-01.txt>

      Token Cell Routing is a powerful yet hardware friendly method of
      constructing data plane packets to meet the needs of new
      applications.  It is based on the use of token cells (special kinds
      of lightly structured tokens) to provide pointers to procedures pre-
      positioned in the forwarding layer together with the parameters
      needed to provide the required processing context.  A packet can be
      composed from multiple token cells as needed to result in new new
      network processing and forwarding semantics.

  "ND Prefix Robustness Improvements", Eduard, Paolo Volpato, Loba Olopade,
  2022-03-04, <draft-vv-6man-nd-prefix-robustness-02.txt>

      IPv6 prefixes could become invalid abruptly as a result of outages,
      network administrator actions, or particular product shortcomings.
      
      That could lead to connectivity problems for the hosts attached to
      the subtended network.
      
      This document has two targets: on one hand, to analyze the cases
      that may lead to network prefix invalidity; on the other to develop
      a root cause analysis for those cases and propose a solution.
      
      This may bring to extensions of the protocols used to convey prefix
      information and other options.

  "Framework for End-to-End IETF Network Slicing", Zhenbin Li, Jie Dong, Ran
  Pang, Yongqing Zhu, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-li-teas-e2e-ietf-network-slicing-02.txt>

      Network slicing can be used to meet the connectivity and performance
      requirement of different services or customers in a shared network.
      An IETF network slice may be used for 5G or other network scenarios.
      In the context of 5G, the 5G end-to-end network slices consist of
      three major types of network technology domains: Radio Access Network
      (RAN), Transport Network (TN) and Core Network (CN).  The transport
      network slice can be realized as IETF network slices.  In the
      transport network, the IETF network slice may span multiple network
      administrative domains.
      
      In order to facilitate the mapping between network slices in
      different network technology domains and administrative domains, it
      is beneficial to carry the identifiers related to the 5G end-to-end
      network slice, the multi-domain IETF network slice together with the
      intra-domain network slice related identifier in the data packet.
      
      This document describes the framework of end-to-end IETF network
      slicing, and introduces the identifiers related to 5G end-to-end
      network slice and the multi-domain IETF network slice.  These
      identifiers can be carried in the data packet.  The roles of the
      different identifiers in packet forwarding is also described.  The
      network slice identifiers may be instantiated with different data
      planes.

  "OSPF Extensions for BIER-TE", Huaimo Chen, Mike McBride, Aijun Wang, Gyan
  Mishra, Yanhe Fan, Lei Liu, Xufeng Liu, 2021-11-24,
  <draft-chen-bier-te-ospf-03.txt>

      This document describes OSPF extensions for distributing BitPositions
      configured on the links in "Bit Index Explicit Replication Traffic
      Engineering" (BIER-TE) domain.

  "Data Transmission Security of Identity Resolution in Industrial Internet",
  Bin Wang, Kezhang Lin, Chonghua Wang, Xing Wang, 2021-10-11,
  <draft-wang-data-transmission-security-irii-01.txt>

      This draft provides an overview of the security of data transmission
      in the identity resolution system for the Industrial Internet.
      Identity resolution systems play a vital role in the Industrial
      Internet by providing secure sharing and intelligent association of
      heterogeneous information among different organizations.  This draft
      focuses on the security services that identity resolution systems
      should provide for resolution data transmission.

  "Deterministic Networking (DetNet): Packet Ordering Function", Balazs
  Varga, Janos Farkas, Stephan Kehrer, Tobias Heer, 2021-10-22,
  <draft-varga-detnet-pof-02.txt>

      Replication and Elimination functions of DetNet [RFC8655] may result
      in out-of-order packets, which may not be acceptable for some time-
      sensitive applications.  The Packet Ordering Function (POF) algorithm
      described herein enables to restore the correct packet order when
      replication and elimination functions are used in DetNet networks.

  "Border Gateway Protocol 4 (BGP-4) Send Hold Timer", Job Snijders, Ben
  Cartwright-Cox, 2021-10-17, <draft-spaghetti-idr-bgp-sendholdtimer-03.txt>

      This document defines the SendHoldTimer session attribute for the
      Border Gateway Protocol (BGP) Finite State Machine (FSM).
      Implementation of a SendHoldTimer should help overcome situations
      where BGP sessions are not terminated after it has become detectable
      for the local system that the remote system is not processing BGP
      messages.  For robustness, this document specifies that the local
      system should close BGP connections and not solely rely on the remote
      system for session tear down when BGP timers have expired.  This
      document updates RFC4271.

  "Retrieving information about Object Identifiers using a text-based
  protocol", Daniel Marschall, 2021-09-30, <draft-viathinksoft-oidip-01.txt>

      This document defines a method for retrieving information about
      Object Identifiers (OIDs) and their associated Registration
      Authorities (RAs) using a text-based protocol, in a way that is both
      human-readable and machine-readable.

  "A File Format for the Discoverable Use of Analytics", Frederik Ring,
  Hendrik Niefeld, 2022-01-27, <draft-ring-analyticstxt-03.txt>

      Internet privacy has become an important feature for users of
      websites and services.  This document proposes a way for websites and
      services to declare and disclose their usage of analytics and
      tracking software. analytics.txt aims to be an elaborate file format
      that describes the privacy related characteristics of analytics and
      tracking software in a non-biased way.  An analytics.txt file is
      understandable for a non-technical audience, while also useful for
      the automated consumption by tools and software.

  "Segment Routing for End-to-End IETF Network Slicing", Zhenbin Li, Jie
  Dong, Ran Pang, Yongqing Zhu, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-li-spring-sr-e2e-ietf-network-slicing-02.txt>

      Network slicing can be used to meet the connectivity and performance
      requirement of different services or customers in a shared network.
      An IETF network slice can be realized as enhanced VPNs (VPN+), which
      is delivered by integrating the overlay VPN service with a Virtual
      Transport Network (VTN) as the underlay.  An end-to-end IETF network
      slice may span multiple network domains.  Within each domain, traffic
      of the end-to-end network slice service is mapped to a domain VTN.
      In the context of IETF network slicing, a VTN can be instantiated as
      a Network Resource Partition (NRP).
      
      When segment routing (SR) is used to build a multi-domain IETF
      network slices, information of the local network slices in each
      domain can be specified using special SR binding segments called VTN
      binding segments (VTN BSID).  The multi-domain IETF network slice can
      be specified using a list of VTN BSIDs in the packet, each of which
      can be used by the corresponding domain edge nodes to steer the
      traffic of end-to-end IETF network slice into the specific VTN in the
      local domain.
      
      This document describes the functionality of VTN binding segment and
      its instantiation in SR-MPLS and SRv6.

  "HPCC++: Enhanced High Precision Congestion Control", Rui Miao, Hongqiang
  Liu, Rong Pan, Jeongkeun Lee, Changhoon Kim, Barak Gafni, Yuval Shpigelman,
  Jeff Tantsura, 2021-12-07, <draft-miao-iccrg-hpccplus-01.txt>

      Congestion control (CC) is the key to achieving ultra-low latency,
      high bandwidth and network stability in high-speed networks.
      However, the existing high-speed CC schemes have inherent limitations
      for reaching these goals.
      
      In this document, we describe HPCC++ (High Precision Congestion
      Control), a new high-speed CC mechanism which achieves the three
      goals simultaneously.  HPCC++ leverages inband telemetry to obtain
      precise link load information and controls traffic precisely.  By
      addressing challenges such as delayed signaling during congestion and
      overreaction to the congestion signaling using inband and granular
      telemetry, HPCC++ can quickly converge to utilize all the available
      bandwidth while avoiding congestion, and can maintain near-zero in-
      network queues for ultra-low latency.  HPCC++ is also fair and easy
      to deploy in hardware, implementable with commodity NICs and
      switches.

  "Using NETCONF over QUIC connection", Jinyou Dai, Xueshun Wang, Yang Kou,
  Lifen Zhou, 2021-11-08, <draft-dai-netconf-quic-netconf-over-quic-01.txt>

      The Network Configuration Protocol (NETCONF) provides mechanisms to
      install, manipulate, and delete the configuration of network devices.
      At present, almost all implementations of NETCONF are based on TCP
      based protocol. QUIC, a new UDP-based, secure and multiplexed transport
      protocol, can facilitate to improve the transportation performance,
      information security and resource utility when being used as an
      infrastructure layer of NETCONF. This document describes how to use the
      QUIC protocol as the transport protocol of NETCONF(It is so called
      NETCONFoQUIC).

  "Generating Password-based Keys Using the GOST Algorithms", Karelina
  Ekaterina, 2022-01-28, <draft-pkcs5-gost-02.txt>

      This document specifies how to use the Password-Based Cryptography
      Specification version 2.1 defined in [RFC8018] to generate password-
      based keys in conjunction with the Russian national standard GOST
      algorithms.
      
      This specification is developed outside the IETF and is published to
      facilitate interoperable implementations that wish to support the
      GOST algorithms.  This document does not imply IETF endorsement of
      the cryptographic algorithms used in this document.

  "Reserving Additional IPv6 Address Prefixes for Use in Documentation", Ed
  Horley, Tom Coffeen, Scott Hogg, Nick Buraglio, Chris Cummings, Kevin
  Myers, Russ White, 2022-01-26, <draft-horley-v6ops-expand-doc-02.txt>

      To reduce the likelihood of conflict and confusion when relating
      documented examples to deployed systems, the IPv6 unicast address
      prefix 2001:db8::/32 is reserved for use in examples in documentation
      including RFCs, books, articles, vendor manuals, etc.  This document
      proposes the reservation of additional IPv6 prefixes for this
      purpose; specifically, 3ffe::/16 (formerly 6bone) and fec0::/10
      (formerly site-local).

  "Protected QUIC Initial Packets", Martin Duke, David Schinazi, 2021-10-25,
  <draft-duke-quic-protected-initial-03.txt>

      QUIC encrypts its Initial Packets using keys derived from well-known
      constants, meaning that observers can inspect the contents of these
      packets and successfully spoof them.  This document proposes a new
      version of QUIC that encrypts Initial Packets more securely by
      leveraging a Public Key distributed via the Domain Name System (DNS)
      or other out-of-band system.

  "A Survey of Semantic Internet Routing Techniques", Daniel King, Adrian
  Farrel, 2021-11-26, <draft-king-irtf-semantic-routing-survey-03.txt>

      The Internet Protocol (IP) has become the global standard in any
      computer network, independent of the connectivity to the Internet.
      Generally, an IP address is used to identify an interface on a
      network device.  Routing protocols are also required and developed
      based on the assumption that a destination address has this semantic
      with routing decisions made on addresses and additional fields in the
      packet headers.
      
      Over time, routing decisions were enhanced to route packets according
      to additional information carried within the packets and dependent on
      policy coded in, configured at, or signaled to the routers.  Many
      proposals have been made to add semantics to IP addresses.  The
      intent is usually to facilitate routing decisions based solely on the
      address and without finding and processing information carried in
      other fields within the packets.
      
      This document is presented as a survey to support the study and
      further research into clarifying and understanding the issues.  It
      does not pass comment on the advisability or practicality of any of
      the proposals and does not define any technical solutions

  "I-Regexp: An Interoperable Regexp Format", Carsten Bormann, Tim Bray,
  2022-03-07, <draft-bormann-jsonpath-iregexp-03.txt>

      This document specifies I-Regexp, a flavor of regular expressions
      that is limited in scope with the goal of interoperation across many
      different regular-expression libraries.

  "Internet of Secure Elements", Pascal Urien, 2021-10-04,
  <draft-urien-coinrg-iose-04.txt>

      This draft defines an infrastructure for secure elements over
      internet, and features needed for their secure remote use.
      It describes a network architecture based on the TLS 1.3 protocol,
      which enables remote calls of cryptographic procedures, identified
      by Unified Resource Identifier (URI) such as
      schemeS://sen@server.com:443/?query
      The Internet of Secure Element (IoSE) is a set of secure elements
      providing TLS servers, communication interfaces, and identified by
      their name (Secure Element Name, sen).

  "Benchmarking Methodology for Stateful NATxy Gateways using RFC 4814
  Pseudorandom Port Numbers", Gabor Lencse, Keiichi Shima, 2022-03-04,
  <draft-lencse-bmwg-benchmarking-stateful-03.txt>

      RFC 2544 has defined a benchmarking methodology for network
      interconnect devices.  RFC 5180 addressed IPv6 specificities and it
      also provided a technology update, but excluded IPv6 transition
      technologies.  RFC 8219 addressed IPv6 transition technologies,
      including stateful NAT64.  However, none of them discussed how to
      apply RFC 4814 pseudorandom port numbers to any stateful NAT (NAT44,
      NAT64, NAT66) technologies.  We discuss why using pseudorandom port
      numbers with stateful NAT gateways is a hard problem and recommend a
      solution.

  "PCEP Procedures and Extension for VLAN-based Traffic Forwarding", Yue
  Wang, Aijun Wang, Fengwei Qin, Huaimo Chen, Chun Zhu, 2022-03-03,
  <draft-wang-pce-vlan-based-traffic-forwarding-05.txt>

      This document defines the Path Computation Element Communication
      Protocol (PCEP) extension for VLAN-based traffic forwarding in native
      IP network and describes the essential elements and key processes of
      the data packet forwarding system based on VLAN info to accomplish
      the End to End (E2E) traffic assurance for VLAN-based traffic
      forwarding in native IP network.

  "HESP - High Efficiency Streaming Protocol", Pieter-Jan Speelmans,
  2021-11-20, <draft-theo-hesp-01.txt>

      This document describes a protocol for delivering multimedia data,
      enabling ultra-low latency and fast channel change over HTTP
      networks.  It specifies the data format of the files and the actions
      to be taken by the server (sender) and the clients (receivers) of the
      streams.  It describes version 1 of this protocol.

  "Attestation of File Content using an X.509 Certificate", Chuck Lever,
  2021-11-08, <draft-cel-nfsv4-hash-tree-interchange-format-02.txt>

      This document describes a compact open format for transporting and
      storing an abbreviated form of a cryptographically signed hash tree.
      Receivers use this representation to reconstitute the hash tree and
      verify the integrity of file content protected by that tree.
      
      An X.509 certificate encapsulates and protects the hash tree metadata
      and provides cryptographic provenance.  Therefore this document
      updates the Internet X.509 certificate profile specified in RFC 5280.

  "BGP Flow Specification for DetNet and TSN Flow Mapping", Quan Xiong,
  Haisheng Wu, Junfeng Zhao, 2022-03-06,
  <draft-xiong-idr-detnet-flow-mapping-02.txt>

      This document proposes extensions to BGP Flow Specification for the
      flow mapping of Deterministic Networking (DetNet) when interconnected
      with IEEE 802.1 Time-Sensitive Networking (TSN).  The BGP flowspec is
      used for the filtering of the packets that match the DetNet newtworks
      and the mapping between TSN streams and DetNet flows in the control
      plane.

  "Use TEE Identification in EAP-TLS", Penglin Yang, chenmeiling, Li Su,
  2021-10-22, <draft-chen-rats-tee-identification-03.txt>

      In security considerations, identities of devices like
      certifications, private keys should be protected and cannot be
      exposed in public in plaintext during whole lifecycle.  When using
      these identities to make authentications a unified architecture to
      prevent identity information leakage is needed.  This document
      creates a secure and trusted TEE authentication architecture to
      authenticate a device's identity based on EAP-TLS and TEE.  In this
      architecture, certificate and handshake keys which are used for EAP-
      TLS will be executed in TEE.  Communication establishment with EAP-
      TLS Server will be executed in REE.  A middle layer is introduced to
      communicate between TEE and REE to compose the original function of
      EAP-TLS Client.  TEE authentication could be used in LAN or WLAN
      scenarios.

  "IPv6 Performance and Diagnostic Metrics Version 2 (PDMv2) Destination
  Option", Nalini Elkins, mackermann@bcbsm.com, Ameya Deshpande, Tommaso
  Pecorella, Adnan Rashid, 2022-02-28,
  <draft-elkins-ippm-encrypted-pdmv2-02.txt>

      RFC8250 describes an optional Destination Option (DO) header embedded
      in each packet to provide sequence numbers and timing information as
      a basis for measurements.  As this data is sent in clear- text, this
      may create an opportunity for malicious actors to get information for
      subsequent attacks.  This document defines PDMv2 which has a
      lightweight handshake (registration procedure) and encryption to
      secure this data.  Additional performance metrics which may be of use
      are also defined.

  "Data Fields Encapsulation Model of In-situ OAM in SRv6 Network", Yuanxiang
  Qiu, Jinrong Ye, Hao Li, 2021-12-13,
  <draft-qiu-spring-srv6-ioam-encap-model-01.txt>

      OAM and PM information from the SR endpoints can be piggybacked in
      the data packet.  The OAM and PM information piggybacking in the
      data packets is also known as In-situ OAM (IOAM). IOAM records
      OAM information within the packet while the packet traverses a
      particular network domain.  The term "in-situ" refers to the fact
      that the IOAM data fields are added to the data packets rather than
      being sent within probe packets specifically dedicated to OAM.
      This document defines the data fields encapsulation model of IOAM
      TLV in SRv6 network.

  "RADIUS Extensions for Encrypted DNS", Mohamed Boucadair, Tirumaleswar
  Reddy.K, 2021-12-13, <draft-boucadair-opsawg-add-encrypted-dns-04.txt>

      This document specifies new Remote Authentication Dial-In User
      Service (RADIUS) attributes that carry an authentication domain name,
      a list of IP addresses, and a set of service parameters of encrypted
      DNS resolvers.

  "Expanding the IPv6 Lab Use Space", Ed Horley, Tom Coffeen, Scott Hogg,
  Nick Buraglio, Chris Cummings, Kevin Myers, Russ White, 2022-01-26,
  <draft-horley-v6ops-lab-02.txt>

      To reduce the likelihood of addressing conflicts and confusion
      between lab deployments and non-lab (i.e., production) deployments,
      an IPv6 unicast address prefix is reserved for use in lab, proof-of-
      concept, and validation networks as well as for any similar use case.
      This document describes the use of the IPv6 address prefix 0200::/7
      as a prefix reserved for this purpose (repurposing the deprecated OSI
      NSAP-mapped prefix).

  "Deterministic Networking (DetNet): OAM Functions for The Service
  Sub-Layer", Balazs Varga, Janos Farkas, Greg Mirsky, 2022-01-19,
  <draft-varga-detnet-service-sub-layer-oam-02.txt>

      Operation, Administration, and Maintenance (OAM) tools are essential
      for a deterministic network.  The DetNet architecture [RFC8655] has
      defined two sub-layers: (1) DetNet service sub-layer and (2) DetNet
      forwarding sub-layer.  OAM mechanisms exist for the DetNet forwarding
      sub-layer.  Nonetheless, OAM for the service sub-layer might require
      new extensions to the existing OAM protocols.  This draft presents an
      analysis of OAM procedures for the DetNet service sub-layer
      functions.

  "IPv6 Options for DetNet", Pascal Thubert, Fan Yang, 2022-02-22,
  <draft-pthubert-detnet-ipv6-hbh-07.txt>

      RFC 8938, the Deterministic Networking Data Plane Framework relies on
      the 6-tuple to identify an IPv6 flow.  But the full DetNet operations
      require also the capabilities to signal meta-information such as a
      sequence within that flow, and to transport different types of
      packets along the same path with the same treatment, e.g.,
      Operations, Administration, and Maintenance packets and/or multiple
      flows with fate and resource sharing.  This document introduces new
      IPv6 options that signal that path and redundancy information to the
      intermediate DetNet relay and forwarding nodes.

  "Deterministic Networking (DetNet): DetNet PREOF via MPLS over UDP/IP",
  Balazs Varga, Janos Farkas, Andrew Malis, 2022-02-01,
  <draft-varga-detnet-ip-preof-02.txt>

      This document describes how DetNet IP data plane can support the
      Packet Replication, Elimination, and Ordering Functions (PREOF) built
      on the existing MPLS PREOF solution [RFC8939] and the mechanisms
      defined in [RFC9025].

  "Reinforcement Learning-Based Virtual Network Embedding: Problem
  Statement", Ihsan Ullah, Youn-Hee Han, TaeYeon Kim, 2021-10-19,
  <draft-ihsan-nmrg-rl-vne-ps-01.txt>

      In Network virtualization (NV) technology, Virtual Network Embedding
      (VNE) is an algorithm used to map a virtual network to the substrate
      network.  VNE is the core orientation of NV which has a great impact
      on the performance of virtual network and resource utilization of the
      substrate network.  An efficient embedding algorithm can maximize the
      acceptance ratio of virtual networks to increase the revenue for
      Internet service provider.  Several works have been appeared on the
      design of VNE solutions, however, it has becomes a challenging issues
      for researchers.  To solved the VNE problem, we believe that
      reinforcement learning (RL) can play a vital role to make the VNE
      algorithm more intelligent and efficient.  Moreover, RL has been
      merged with deep learning techniques to develop adaptive models with
      effective strategies for various complex problems.  In RL, agents can
      learn desired behaviors (e.g, optimal VNE strategies), and after
      learning and completing training, it can embed the virtual network to
      the subtract network very quickly and efficiently.  RL can reduce the
      complexity of the VNE algorithm, however, it is too difficult to
      apply RL techniques directly to VNE problems and need more research
      study.  In this document, we presenting a problem statement to
      motivate the researchers toward the VNE problem using deep
      reinforcement learning.

  "Deterministic Nonce-less Hybrid Public Key Encryption", Dan Harkins,
  2022-02-25, <draft-harkins-cfrg-dnhpke-01.txt>

      This document describes three enhancements to the Hybrid Public Key
      Encryption standard published by CFRG.  These include use of "compact
      representation" of relevant public keys and two ways to address the
      use of HPKE on lossy networks: a determinstic, nonce-less AEAD
      scheme, and use of a rolling sequence number with existing AEAD
      schemes.

  "Fast Transition for Opportunistic Wireless Ecnryption (FT-OWE)", Jerome
  Henry, Stephen Orr, 2021-12-13, <draft-henry-ft-owe-01.txt>

      Opportunistic Wireless Encryption, defined in RFC 8110, specifies an
      extension to the IEEE Std 802.11 to provide for opportunistic
      (unauthenticated) encryption to a specific wireless access point
      (AP).  This memo extends the method to allow the establishment of OWE
      keying material to other APs before connection establishment to these
      APs, thus enabling a fast transition mode for OWE.

  "Interface Stack Table Definition and Example for Point-to-Point (P2P)
  Interface over LAN", Daiying Liu, Joel Halpern, Congjie Zhang, 2022-02-11,
  <draft-liu-lsr-p2poverlan-07.txt>

      RFC 5309 defines the Point-to-Point (P2P) circuit type, one of the
      two circuit types used in the link state routing protocols, and
      highlights that it is important to identify the correct circuit type
      when forming adjacencies, flooding link state database packets, and
      monitoring the link state.
      
      The P2P interface over LAN ifType value 303, has been assigned by
      IANA Expert Review, and this document requests IANA to add this
      document as a reference to ifType 303.  This document provides advice
      about the ifStack for the P2P interface over LAN ifType to facilitate
      operational control, maintenance and statistics.

  "The Additional Section and Glue in DNS Responses", Paul Hoffman, Peter van
  Dijk, 2021-12-13, <draft-pp-additional-contents-01.txt>

      Implementers have recently expressed different views on what can
      appear in the Additional section in DNS responses.  Proposals for
      adding functionality to the DNS protocol that rely on non-glue
      records in the Additional section rely on having a common
      understanding of the semantics of the Additional section.
      
      This document restates what has been said in other DNS standards, and
      does not update any of them.

  "A Use Case of Packets' Significance Difference with Media Scalability",
  Lijun Dong, Kiran Makhijani, Richard Li, 2021-10-20,
  <draft-dong-usecase-packet-significance-diff-01.txt>

      This document introduces a use case of packets' significance
      difference embedded with media scalability.  With the dominance of
      video traffic on the Internet, selectively dropping packets or parts
      of packets from competing media streams becomes a complementary
      mechanism when dealing with network congestion.
      
      The document describes the characteristics of media scalability, some
      limitations of existing end-to-end congestion control mechanisms
      through rate control and adaptation, explains why current ways of
      entire packet dropping at the traffic class level using in-network
      active queue management are not most appropriate to meet end users'
      Quality of Service expectations.  The document identifies that there
      exists "significance difference" among packets or even among parts of
      the packets within a flow, and brings out a new set of requirements
      for application and network to support packet significance difference
      to improve the Quality of Experience of end users.

  "Sliding Window Selective Linear Code (SLC) Forward Error Correction (FEC)
  Scheme for FECFRAME", Ray Wang, Liang Si, Bifeng He, 2021-12-13,
  <draft-wang-tsvwg-sw-slc-fec-scheme-01.txt>

      RFC8680 describes a framework for using Sliding Window Forward Error
      Correction(FEC) codes to protection against packet loss, the
      framework significantly improves FEC efficiency and reduces FEC-
      related added latency compared to block FEC codes defined in RFC
      6363.  RFC8681 further describes two fully specified FEC schemes for
      Sliding Window Random Linear Codes(RLC), the schemes rely on an
      encoding window that slides over a continuous set of source symbols,
      generating new repair symbols whenever needed.  This document
      describes a fully specified FEC scheme for Sliding Window Selective
      Linear Code(SLC) over the Galois Field GF (2^^8) , compared to
      RFC8681, this framework use a discrete encoding window which can
      protect arbitrary media streams selectively, and has better recovery
      performance in scenarios such as layered video coding or mixed
      streams for video streaming applications.

  "Problem Statement and Use Cases of Trustworthiness-based Routing", Tao
  Lin, Hao Li, Xingang Shi, Xia Yin, Wenlong Chen, 2021-12-13,
  <draft-lin-opsec-trustroute-problem-statement-01.txt>

      Currently, network operators are trying to provide fine-granularity
      Service Level Agreement (SLA) guarantee to achieve better Quality of
      Experience (QoE) for end users and engage customers, such as ultra-
      low latency and high reliability service.  However, with increasing
      security threats, differentiated QoE services are insufficient, the
      demands for more differentiated security service are emerging.
      
      This document explores the requirements for differentiated security
      services and identifies the scenarios for network operators.  To
      provide differentiated security services, possible trustworthiness-
      based routing solution is discussed.

  "An EDNS0 Option for Sharing Pref64::/n", Mohamed Boucadair, 2022-01-05,
  <draft-boucadair-dnsop-prefix64-02.txt>

      This document specifies an Extension Mechanisms for DNS (EDNS0)
      option to convey the IPv6 prefix used to build IPv4-converted IPv6
      addresses.  When conveyed in a DNS query, the option communicates the
      IPv6 prefix used in the network from which the query was originated.
      Such a network is assumed to enable a Network Address and Protocol
      Translation from IPv6 clients to IPv4 servers (NAT64) function.
      DNS64-capable servers will use that prefix to build synthesized AAAA
      records, rather than relying on a preconfigured prefix.  When
      conveyed in a DNS reply, the option conveys the IPv6 prefix that is
      used by a DNS64-capable server to synthesized AAAA records.  Such
      information helps to automatically detect mismatches between the
      local NAT64 configuration and the one enforced at the DNS64 server.
      Also, security-aware and validating hosts may use the new EDNS0
      option to signal the presence of a NAT64 function.  That signal is
      used by the DNS server to fill the additional section of the AAAA
      reply in order to supply A RRs of the target.  Dual queries and
      delays are thus avoided.
      
      This document updates RFC 6147.

  "IAB Charter Update for RFC Editor Model", Brian Carpenter, 2022-03-15,
  <draft-carpenter-rfced-iab-charter-08.txt>

      This document updates the IAB Charter (RFC 2850) to be consistent
      with version 3 of the RFC Editor Model (draft-iab-rfcefdp-rfced-
      model).

  "NTP Over PTP", Miroslav Lichvar, 2021-10-20,
  <draft-mlichvar-ntp-over-ptp-01.txt>

      This document specifies a transport for the Network Time Protocol
      (NTP) client-server mode using the Precision Time Protocol (PTP) to
      enable hardware timestamping on hardware that can timestamp PTP
      messages but not NTP messages.

  "SRv6-based BGP Service Capability", Liu Yao, Zheng Zhang, Eduard Metz,
  2022-01-07, <draft-lz-bess-srv6-service-capability-02.txt>

      This draft describes the problems that may be encountered during the
      deployment of SRv6-based BGP services and the possible solutions.

  "Multi Distribution master", haisheng yu, Zhen Li, Daobiao Gong, Yang Song,
  Yan Liu, 2021-12-23, <draft-yu-dnsops-disdm-02.txt>

      DM (Distribution Master) is used to transfer zone file data between
      the registry and the authoritative server.  The centralized DM system
      has the risk of a single point of failure.  The distributed DM
      architecture allows nodes to join and exit at any time to solve the
      single point of failure problem.

  "Separation Protocol of Locator and Identifier Towards IPv6", haisheng yu,
  Hanzhuo Zhang, 2021-12-23, <draft-yu-v6ops-split6-02.txt>

      In the current TCP/IP architecture, the IPv6 address has a dual
      meaning in semantics.  It not only represents the topological
      location of the network node, but also the identity of the node,
      which is usually referred to as the semantic overload problem of the
      IP address.  The semantically overloaded IP address represents the
      topological position of the network, and the topological position of
      the network generally does not move, so the device entering the new
      network environment needs to replace the new identity IP to adapt to
      the change of the topological position.  The semantic overload of IP
      addresses is not conducive to supporting mobility and user identity
      authentication, resulting in tight storage space for routing
      equipment, lack of unified communication identification for network
      equipment, and difficulties in network traceability and management.
      In order to solve the problem of IP address semantic overload, this
      draft focuses on the separation technology SPLIT6 (Separation
      Protocol of Locator and Identifier Towards IPv6) of IP address
      identity and location.

  "Autonomic IP Address To Access Control Group ID Mapping", Yizhou Li, Li
  Shen, Yujing Zhou, 2021-11-15,
  <draft-yizhou-anima-ip-to-access-control-groups-02.txt>

      This document defines the autonomic technical Objectives for IP
      address/prefix to access control group IDs mapping information.  The
      Objectives defined can be used in Generic Autonomic Signaling
      Protocol (GRASP) to make the policy enforcement point receive IP
      address and its tied access control groups information directly from
      the access authentication points and facilitate the group based
      policy enforcement.

  "Complaint Feedback Loop Address Header", Jan-Philipp Benecke, 2022-03-04,
  <draft-benecke-cfbl-address-header-06.txt>

      This document describes a method that allows an email sender to
      specify a complaint feedback loop (FBL) address as an email header.
      Also it defines the rules for processing and forwarding such a
      complaint.  The motivation for this arises out of the absence of a
      standardized and automated way to provide mailbox providers with an
      address for a complaint feedback loop.  Currently, providing and
      maintaining such an address is a manual and time-consuming process
      for email senders and providers.
      
      It is unclear, at the time of publication, whether the function
      provided by this document has widespread demand, and whether the
      mechanism offered will be adopted and found to be useful.  Therefore,
      this is being published as an Experiment, looking for a constituency
      of implementers and deployers, and for feedback on the operational
      utility.  The document is produced through the Independent RFC stream
      and was not subject to the IETF's approval process.

  "Automatic DNSSEC Bootstrapping using Authenticated Signals from the Zone's
  Operator", Peter Thomassen, Nils Wisiol, 2021-11-29,
  <draft-thomassen-dnsop-dnssec-bootstrapping-03.txt>

      This document introduces an in-band method for DNS operators to
      publish arbitrary information about the zones they are authoritative
      for, in an authenticated fashion and on a per-zone basis.  The
      mechanism allows managed DNS operators to securely announce DNSSEC
      key parameters for zones under their management, including for zones
      that are not currently securely delegated.
      
      Whenever DS records are absent for a zone's delegation, this signal
      enables the parent's registry or registrar to cryptographically
      validate the CDS/CDNSKEY records found at the child's apex.  The
      parent can then provision DS records for the delegation without
      resorting to out-of-band validation or weaker types of cross-checks
      such as "Accept after Delay" ([RFC8078]).
      
      This document updates [RFC8078] and replaces its Section 3 with
      Section 3.2 of this document.
      
      [ Ed note: Text inside square brackets ([]) is additional background
      information, answers to frequently asked questions, general musings,
      etc.  They will be removed before publication.  This document is
      being collaborated on at https://github.com/desec-io/draft-thomassen-
      dnsop-dnssec-bootstrapping/ (https://github.com/desec-io/draft-
      thomassen-dnsop-dnssec-bootstrapping/).  The most recent version of
      the document, open issues, etc. should all be available there.  The
      authors gratefully accept pull requests. ]

  "CDNI Metadata Model Extensions", Glenn Goldstein, Will Power, Guillaume
  Bichot, Alfonso Siloniz, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-goldstein-cdni-metadata-model-extensions-02.txt>

      The Content Delivery Network Interconnection (CDNI) Metadata
      interface enables interconnected Content Delivery Networks (CDNs) to
      exchange content distribution metadata in order to enable content
      acquisition and delivery.  To facilitate a wider set of use cases
      such as Open Caching, this document describes extensions to the CDNI
      Metadata object model and its associated Capabilities model as
      documented in "CDNI Metadata" RFC8006 and "CDNI Request Routing:
      Footprint and Capabilities Semantics" RFC8008 .
      
      This document is a reflection of the content in the Streaming Video
      Alliance specification titled "SVA Configuration Interface: Part 2
      Extensions to CDNI Metadata Object Model".

  "Problems and Requirements of Satellite Constellation for Internet", Lin
  Han, Richard Li, Alvaro Retana, chenmeiling, Li Su, Ning Wang, 2022-02-13,
  <draft-lhan-problems-requirements-satellite-net-02.txt>

      This document presents the detailed analysis about the problems and
      requirements of satellite constellation used for Internet.  It starts
      from the satellite orbit basics, coverage calculation, then it
      estimates the time constraints for the communications between
      satellite and ground-station, also between satellites.  How to use
      satellite constellation for Internet is discussed in detail including
      the satellite relay and satellite networking.  The problems and
      requirements of using traditional network technology for satellite
      network integrating with Internet are finally outlined.

  "IS-IS and OSPF Extension for Event Notification", Peter Psenak, Les
  Ginsberg, Ketan Talaulikar, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-ppsenak-lsr-igp-event-notification-01.txt>

      Link-state protocols like IS-IS and OSPF have been designed to
      distribute state information - state of the local adjacencies, state
      of the local prefix reachability, etc.  Each state can have
      additional attributes associated with it, but all the attributes are
      only meaningful while the state exists.
      
      This document extends link-state IGPs to distribute event
      notifications.  An event notification has a very limited lifetime.
      It is rapidly propagated across the network and leaves no state after
      its lifetime.

  "CDNI Capacity Capability Advertisment Extensions", Andrew Ryan, Ben
  Rosenblum, Nir Sopher, 2022-03-03,
  <draft-ryan-cdni-capacity-insights-extensions-02.txt>

      Open Caching architecture is a use case of Content Delivery Networks
      Interconnection (CDNI) in which the commercial Content Delivery
      Network (CDN) is the upstream CDN (uCDN) and the ISP caching layer
      serves as the downstream CDN (dCDN).  This document supplements to
      the CDNI Capability Objects defined in RFC 8008 the defined
      capability objects structure and interface for advertisments and
      managment of a downstream CDN capacity.

  "One-way Delay Measurement Based on Deterministic Networking", Yang Li,
  Hongwei Yang, Tao Sun, 2022-02-09,
  <draft-li-ippm-deterministic-owd-measurement-01.txt>

      One-way delay is a key indicator to measure network quality.  Some
      applications are one-way transmission in the network, such as some
      high-definition video services, and are very sensitive to one-way
      delay.  Excessive delay will affect user experience greatly.  To some
      extent, the network can't even be used, so it is very important to
      accurately measure the network transmission delay.  The current one-
      way delay measurement method has problems such as high complexity and
      low measurement accuracy.  In order to solve the problem of high-
      precision one-way delay measurement, a one-way delay measurement
      method based on deterministic networking is proposed in this
      document.  The method takes advantage of the delay characteristics of
      the deterministic networking and does not depend on precise time
      synchronization.The method realizes the one-way delay measurement of
      any service flow between any network elements.  Its technical
      advantages are: the network does not need to send measurement
      packets, can test all traffic types, does not change network status,
      does not change the format of traffic packets, and does not require
      network elements to support time synchronization protocols.

  "RSVP for TSN Networks", Dirk Trossen, Juergen Schmitt, 2022-01-11,
  <draft-trossen-detnet-rsvp-tsn-01.txt>

      This document provides a solution for control plane signaling by
      virtue of proposing changes to RSVP signaling with deterministic
      services at the underlying TSN enabled layer. The solution covers
      distributed, centralized, and hybrid signaling scenarios in the TSN
      and SDN domain. The proposed changes to RSVP IntServ, called RSVP TSN
      in the remainder of this document, provide a better integration with
      Layer 2 technologies for resource reservation, for which we outline
      example API specifications for the realization of RSVP TSN.

  "Secure EVPN MAC Signaling", Pascal Thubert, Tony Przygienda, Jeff
  Tantsura, 2022-01-31, <draft-thubert-bess-secure-evpn-mac-signaling-03.txt>

      This specification adds attributes to EVPN to carry IPv6 address
      metadata learned from RFC 8505 and RFC 8928 so as to maintain a
      synchronized copy of the 6LoWPAN ND registrar at each EVPN router and
      perform locally a unicast IPv6 ND service for address lookup and
      duplicate address detection.

  "Generic Metric for the AIGP attribute", Srihari Sangli, Shraddha Hegde,
  Reshma Das, Bruno Decraene, 2022-01-23,
  <draft-ssangli-idr-bgp-generic-metric-aigp-02.txt>

      This document defines extensions to the AIGP attribute to carry
      Generic Metric sub-types.  This is applicable when multiple domains
      exchange BGP routing information.  The extension will aid in intent-
      based end-to-end path selection.

  "IGMP/MLD Extension for Multicast Source Management", Huanan Li, Aijun
  Wang, Stig Venaas, 2021-11-08,
  <draft-li-pim-igmp-mld-extension-source-management-02.txt>

      This document describes extensions to Internet Group Management
      Protocol (IGMP) and Multicast Listener Discover (MLD) protocols for
      supporting interaction between multicast sources and routers,
      accomplishing multicast source management.

  "Problem Statement and Requirement for Inband Flow Learning", Liuyan Han,
  Minxue Wang, Fan Yang, Jinming Huang, 2021-10-25,
  <draft-hwyh-ippm-ps-inband-flow-learning-01.txt>

      Alternate-Marking (coloring) provides a method to perform packet
      loss, delay, and jitter measurements on live traffic.  At the same
      time, on-path telemetry techniques are used to enable the collection
      and correlation of performance information to further support
      autonomous network operations.  However, network operators still face
      the challenge of inband flow identification in large scale
      deployment.  This document addresses the problems by introducing the
      real network scenarios, and proposes the requirements of supporting
      inband flow learning of flow information telemetry.

  "YANG Data Model for FlexE Management", Minxue Wang, Liuyan Han, Fan Yang,
  Luis Contreras, Xufeng Liu, 2022-03-04,
  <draft-wang-ccamp-flexe-yang-cm-02.txt>

      This document defines a service provider targeted YANG data model for
      the configuration and management of a Flex Ethernet (FlexE) network,
      including FlexE groups.  It also supports the configuration of each
      FlexE client as an interface.  The YANG module in this document
      conforms to the Network Management Datastore Architecture (NMDA).

  "An Efficient Data collection method for Digital Twin Network", Yanhong
  Zhu, Danyang Chen, Cheng Zhou, Pedro Martinez-Julia, 2021-10-25,
  <draft-zhu-nmrg-digitaltwin-data-collection-01.txt>

      Digital Twin Network is a network system with Physical Network and
      Twin Network, which can be mapped interactively in real time.  The
      construction of Digital Twin Network requires real-time data of
      Physical Network to update the state of Twin Network.  However the
      existing method collects the full amount of data from the Physical
      Network for modeling, and does not consider the problems such as
      time-lag, insufficient storage resources, low computational
      efficiency and waste of bandwidth resources.  This document
      introduces an efficient data collection, aggregation and correlation
      method in which the Twin Network sends instructions to the Physical
      Network to collect data on demand, and then the Physical Network
      completes instructions such as knowledge representation, Telemetry
      Streaming Element of Physical Network completes data aggregation and
      correlation.  Finally Telemetry Streaming Element sends the processed
      data to the Twin Network.

  "Structured Data for Filtered DNS", Dan Wing, Tirumaleswar Reddy.K, Neil
  Cook, Mohamed Boucadair, 2022-03-03,
  <draft-wing-dnsop-structured-dns-error-page-02.txt>

      DNS filtering is widely deployed for network security but filtered
      DNS responses lack information for the end user to understand the
      reason for the filtering.  Existing mechanisms to provide detail to
      end users cause harm especially if the blocked DNS response is to an
      HTTPS website.
      
      This document defines a mechanism to explain the reason for the DNS
      filtering and provides HTTPS URIs to get more detail.  This
      information can be parsed by the client and displayed, logged, or
      used for other purposes.  This document updates RFC8914 to contain
      I-JSON in its EXTRA-TEXT field.

  "Deprecating Obsolete Key Exchange Methods in TLS", Carrick Bartle, Nimrod
  Aviram, 2022-02-25, <draft-aviram-tls-deprecate-obsolete-kex-01.txt>

      This document makes several prescriptions regarding the following key
      exchange methods in TLS, most of which have been superseded by better
      options:

  "Find Code Related to an Internet-Draft or RFC", Charles Eckel, 2022-01-19,
  <draft-eckel-edm-find-code-01.txt>

      Code related to existing IETF standards and ongoing standardization
      efforts may exist and be publicly accessible in many places.  This
      document provides a set of practices to make it easier to identify
      and to find such code.

  "SRv6 inter-domain mapping SIDs", Salih A, Shraddha Hegde, Rejesh Shetty,
  Ron Bonica, Haibo Wang, Shaofu Peng, 2022-03-02,
  <draft-salih-spring-srv6-inter-domain-sids-02.txt>

      This document describes three new SRv6 end-point behaviors, called
      END.REPLACE, END.REPLACEB6 and END.DB6.  These behaviors are used in
      distributed inter-domain solutions and are normally executed on
      border routers.  They also can be used to provide multiple intent-
      based paths across these domains.

  "Transmission of SCHC-compressed packets over IEEE 802.15.4 networks",
  Carles Gomez, Ana Minaburo, 2022-03-04, <draft-gomez-6lo-schc-15dot4-02.txt>

      A framework called Static Context Header Compression and
      fragmentation (SCHC) has been designed with the primary goal of
      supporting IPv6 over Low Power Wide Area Network (LPWAN) technologies
      [RFC8724].  One of the SCHC components is a header compression
      mechanism.  If used properly, SCHC header compression allows a
      greater compression ratio than that achievable with traditional
      6LoWPAN header compression [RFC6282].  For this reason, it may make
      sense to use SCHC header compression in some 6LoWPAN environments,
      including IEEE 802.15.4 networks.  This document specifies how a
      SCHC-compressed packet can be carried over IEEE 802.15.4 networks.

  "Computing Delivery in Routing Network", Bin Tan, Peng Liu, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-huang-computing-delivery-in-routing-network-01.txt>

      This document drafts a proposal of the architecture of Computing
      Delivery in Routing Network which incorporates both computing and
      networking metrics into the routing polices and enables the network
      sensing and scheduling computing services based upon traditional
      networking services.  A mechanism of two-class computing status
      granularity and two segment routing is illustrated for end-to-end
      networking and computing service in the cloud sites, while major
      networking and computing actors is defined in terms of functionality.
      An example work flow is demonstrated, and both control plane and data
      plane solution consideration is proposed..

  "Security for the NFSv4 Protocols", David Noveck, 2021-12-24,
  <draft-dnoveck-nfsv4-security-04.txt>

      This document describes the core security features of the NFSv4
      family of protocols, applying to all minor versions.  The discussion
      includes the use of security features provided by RPC on a per-
      connection basis.
      
      This preliminary version of the document, is intended, in large part,
      to result in working group discussion regarding existing NFSv4
      security issues and to provide a framework for addressing these
      issues and obtaining working group consensus regarding necessary
      changes.
      
      When a successor document is eventually published as an RFC, it will
      supersede the description of security appearing in existing minor
      version specification documents such as RFC 7530 and RFC 8881.

  "Computing-aware Networking Use case of ALTO", Peng Liu, Yuexia Fu,
  2022-01-19, <draft-liu-alto-can-usecase-01.txt>

      The ever-emerging new services are imposing more and more highly
      demanding requirements on the network.  In order to meet these
      requirements, some new technology trends of network emerge as the
      times require.  On the one hand, for the selection of service node
      and forwarding path, in addition to considering the network topology
      and link state, more factors are also considered, such as the
      computing properties of service node; On the other hand, network and
      application present the trend of mutual perception, including
      application to perceive the state of network path, or network to
      perceive the demand of application.
      
      This draft describes a new network scenario and architecture
      considering computational properties, and assumes that Alto could be
      used as an important node to realize the deployment of services, and
      to assist in the selection of service nodes.

  "BGP for BIER-TE Path", Huaimo Chen, Mike McBride, Ran Chen, Gyan Mishra,
  Aijun Wang, Yisong Liu, Yanhe Fan, Boris Khasanov, Lei Liu, Xufeng Liu,
  2021-12-19, <draft-chen-idr-bier-te-path-03.txt>

      This document describes extensions to Border Gateway Protocol (BGP)
      for distributing a Bit Index Explicit Replication Traffic/Tree
      Engineering (BIER-TE) path.  A new Tunnel Type for BIER-TE path is
      defined to encode the information about a BIER-TE path.

  "PCE for BIER-TE Ingress Protection", Huaimo Chen, Mike McBride, Gyan
  Mishra, Yisong Liu, Aijun Wang, Lei Liu, Xufeng Liu, 2022-01-10,
  <draft-chen-pce-bier-te-ingress-protect-01.txt>

      This document describes extensions to Path Computation Element (PCE)
      communication Protocol (PCEP) for protecting the ingress of a BIER-TE
      path.

  "Encoding Network Slice Identification for SRv6", Weiqiang Cheng, Changwang
  Lin, Liyan Gong, 2021-10-25,
  <draft-cheng-spring-srv6-encoding-network-sliceid-02.txt>

      This document describe a method to encode network slicing identifier
      within SRv6 domain.

  "YANG Data Model for Topology Filter", Vishnu Beeram, Tarek Saad, Rakesh
  Gandhi, Xufeng Liu, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-bestbar-teas-yang-topology-filter-03.txt>

      This document defines a YANG data model for the management of
      topology filters/filter-sets on network elements and controllers.

  "Services Deployment Guideline in DetNet Network", Joanna Dang, Zongpeng
  Du, Yizhou Li, 2021-10-09, <draft-dang-detnet-deployment-01.txt>

      Deterministic Networking (DetNet) defined in [RFC8655] provides a
      capability for the delivery of data flows with extremely low packet
      loss rates and bounded end-to-end delivery latency.  DetNet network
      administrators worldwide can deploy DetNet services into their
      networks.  This document aims to provide a guideline for DetNet
      network administrators.

  "OSCORE-capable Proxies", Marco Tiloca, Rikard Hoeglund, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-tiloca-core-oscore-capable-proxies-02.txt>

      Object Security for Constrained RESTful Environments (OSCORE) can be
      used to protect CoAP messages end-to-end between two endpoints at the
      application layer, also in the presence of intermediaries such as
      proxies.  This document defines how to use OSCORE for protecting CoAP
      messages also between an origin application endpoint and an
      intermediary, or between two intermediaries.  Also, it defines how to
      secure a CoAP message by applying multiple, nested OSCORE
      protections, e.g., both end-to-end between origin application
      endpoints, as well as between an application endpoint and an
      intermediary or between two intermediaries.  Thus, this document
      updates RFC 8613.  The same approach can be seamlessly used with
      Group OSCORE, for protecting CoAP messages when group communication
      with intermediaries is used.

  "Design Consideration of IPv6 Multicast Source Routing (MSR6)", Weiqiang
  Cheng, Gyan Mishra, Zhenbin Li, Aijun Wang, Zhuangzhuang Qin, Chi Fan,
  2021-10-25, <draft-cheng-spring-ipv6-msr-design-consideration-01.txt>

      This document discusses the design consideration of IPv6 source
      routing multicast solution.

  "Gap Analysis in Internet Addressing", Yihao Jia, Dirk Trossen, Luigi
  Iannone, Paulo Mendes, Nirmala Shenoy, Laurent Toutain, Abraham Chen, Dino
  Farinacci, 2022-03-06,
  <draft-jia-intarea-internet-addressing-gap-analysis-02.txt>

      There exist many extensions to Internet addressing, as it is defined
      in [RFC0791] for IPv4 and [RFC8200] for IPv6, respectively.  Those
      extensions have been developed to fill gaps in capabilities beyond
      the basic properties of Internet addressing.  This document outlines
      those properties as a baseline against which the extensions are
      categorized in terms of methodology used to fill the gap together
      with examples of solutions doing so.
      
      While introducing such extensions, we outline the issues we see with
      those extensions.  This ultimately leads to consider whether or not a
      more consistent approach to tackling the identified gaps, beyond
      point-wise extensions as done so far, would be beneficial.  The
      benefits are the ones detailed in the companion document
      [I-D.jia-intarea-scenarios-problems-addressing], where, leveraging on
      the gaps identified in this memo and scenarios provided in
      [I-D.jia-intarea-scenarios-problems-addressing], a clear problem
      statement is provided.

  "RTP over QUIC", Joerg Ott, Mathis Engelbart, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-engelbart-rtp-over-quic-02.txt>

      This document specifies a minimal mapping for encapsulating RTP and
      RTCP packets within QUIC.  It also discusses how to leverage state
      from the QUIC implementation in the endpoints to reduce the exchange
      of RTCP packets.
      
      Discussion Venues
      
      This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.
      
      Discussion of this document takes place on the mailing list (), which
      is archived at .
      
      Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
      https://github.com/mengelbart/rtp-over-quic-draft.

  "Service Function Chaining (SFC) Parallelism and Diversions", Donald
  Eastlake, 2022-01-23, <draft-eastlake-sfc-parallel-02.txt>

      Service Function Chaining (SFC) is the processing of packets through
      a sequence of Service Functions (SFs) within an SFC domain by the
      addition of path information and metadata on entry to that domain,
      the use and modification of that path information and metadata to
      step the packet through a sequence of SFs, and the removal of that
      path information and metadata on exit from that domain. The IETF has
      standardized a method for SFC using the Network Service Header
      specified in RFC 8300.
      
      There are requirements for SFC to process packets through parallel
      sequences of service functions and to easily splice in additional
      service functions or splice service functions out of a service chain.
      This document provides use cases for these requirements and
      extensions to SFC to support them.

  "IKEv2 support for per-queue Child SAs", Antony Antony, Tobias Brunner,
  Steffen Klassert, Paul Wouters, 2021-10-13,
  <draft-pwouters-ipsecme-multi-sa-performance-02.txt>

      This document defines three Notify Message Type Payloads for the
      Internet Key Exchange Protocol Version 2 (IKEv2) indicating support
      for the negotiation of multiple identical Child SAs to optimize
      performance.
      
      The CPU_QUEUES notification indicates support for multiple queues or
      CPUs.  The CPU_QUEUE_INFO notification is used to confirm and
      optionally convey information about the specific queue.  The
      TS_MAX_QUEUE notify conveys that the peer is unwilling to create more
      additional Child SAs for this particular Traffic Selector set.
      
      Using multiple identical Child SAs has the benefit that each stream
      has its own Sequence Number Counter, ensuring that CPUs don't have to
      synchronize their crypto state or disable their packet replay
      protection.

  "A Yang Data Model for OAM and Management of ALTO Protocol", Jingxuan
  Zhang, Dhruv Dhody, Kai Gao, Roland Schott, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-zhang-alto-oam-yang-02.txt>

      This document defines a YANG data model for Operations,
      Administration, and Maintenance (OAM) & Management of Application-
      Layer Traffic Optimization (ALTO) Protocol.  The operator can use the
      data model to create and update ALTO information resources, manage
      the access control, configure server-to-server communication and
      server discovery, and collect statistical data.

  "Neighbor Discovery Protocol Deployment Guidelines", XiPeng Xiao, Eduard
  Metz, Gyan Mishra, 2022-02-16,
  <draft-xiao-v6ops-nd-deployment-guidelines-01.txt>

      Neighbor Discovery (ND) is an integral part of IPv6 first-hop. Due
      to limitation of certain L2 media's support to ND, a number of
      issues can happen in certain scenarios. Solutions for these issues
      have been designed. These issues and solutions are summarized in
      RFC3756, RFC6583, RFC9099.  However, there is no guideline on how to
      prevent the issues or how to select the proper solutions.
      
      This document analyzes the existing solutions and summarizes their
      wisdoms into an insight: isolating hosts into different L2 links or
      different L3 subnets can be effective in preventing ND issues. In
      deployment scenarios where the ND issues can occur, this prevention
      approach can be more effective than deploying the corresponding
      solutions to solve the issues. Based on this insight, a set of
      guidelines is proposed for future ND deployments. These guidelines
      describe where to isolate hosts in L2 or in subnet to prevent ND
      issues, and how to select suitable solutions for the remaining
      issues. This will likely simplify ND deployment. The impact of such
      isolation to other components of IPv6 first-hop is also analyzed.
      The impact appears small. Therefore, the guidelines will likely
      simplify the overall IPv6 first-hop deployment.

  "EAP Usability", Alan DeKok, 2022-03-05,
  <draft-dekok-emu-eap-usability-01.txt>

      This document defines methods which enable simpler deployment of TLS-
      based EAP methods.  It defines new certificate fields, and uses
      existing certificate fields in order describe new methods for
      bootstrapping security.  The methods defined here change TLS-based
      EAP supplicant configuration from a complex and insecure process to
      one that is automated, and is essentially trivial.  These methods are
      still, however, compatible with existing standards and practices.

  "IGP Extension for 5G Edge Computing Service", Linda Dunbar, Huaimo Chen,
  Aijun Wang, 2022-01-25, <draft-dunbar-lsr-5g-edge-compute-07.txt>

      This draft describes using additional site capacity and
      preference related metrics to influence the SPF and using
      Flexible Algorithms to indicate the topologies those
      metrics are applied. The purpose is to differentiate
      multiple paths with similar routing distance to one
      destination in 5G Local Data Network (LDN)to achieve
      optimal performance.

  "IP Address Privacy Considerations", Matthew Finkel, Bradford Lassey, Luigi
  Iannone, Brad Chen, 2022-01-10,
  <draft-ip-address-privacy-considerations-03.txt>

      This document provides an overview of privacy considerations related
      to user IP addresses.  It includes an analysis of some current use
      cases for tracking of user IP addresses, mainly in the context of
      anti-abuse.  It discusses the privacy issues associated with such
      tracking and provides input on mechanisms to improve the privacy of
      this existing model.  It then captures requirements for proposed
      'replacement signals' for IP addresses from this analysis.  In
      addition, existing and under-development techniques are evaluated for
      fulfilling these requirements.

  "RUSH - Reliable (unreliable) streaming protocol", Kirill Pugin, Alan
  Frindell, Jordi Cenzano, Jake Weissman, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-kpugin-rush-01.txt>

      RUSH is an application-level protocol for ingesting live video.  This
      document describes the protocol and how it maps onto QUIC.
      
      Discussion Venues
      
      This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.
      
      Discussion of this document takes place on the mailing list (), which
      is archived at .
      
      Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
      https://github.com/afrind/draft-rush.

  "Encapsulation of Simple TWAMP (STAMP) for Pseudowires in MPLS Networks",
  Rakesh Gandhi, Patrice Brissette, Eddie Leyton, 2022-01-14,
  <draft-gandhi-mpls-stamp-pw-01.txt>

      Pseudowires (PWs) are used in MPLS networks for various services
      including carrying layer 2 and layer 3 data packets.  This document
      describes the procedure for encapsulation of the Simple Two-Way
      Active Measurement Protocol (STAMP) defined in RFC 8762 and its
      optional extensions defined in RFC 8972 for PWs in MPLS networks.
      The procedure uses PW Generic Associated Channel (G-ACh) to
      encapsulate the STAMP test packets with or without an IP/UDP header.

  "Functional Addressing (FA) for internets with Independent Network Address
  Spaces (IINAS)", Toerless Eckert, Nirmala Shenoy, 2021-10-25,
  <draft-eckert-intarea-functional-addr-internets-01.txt>

      Recent work has raised interest in exploring network layer addressing
      that is more flexible than fixed-length addressing as used in IPv4
      (32 bit) and IPv6 (128 bit).
      
      The reasons for the interest include both support for multiple and
      potentially novel address semantics, but also optimizations of
      addressing for existing semantics such as unicast tailored not for
      the global Internet but to better support private networks / limited
      domains.
      
      This memo explores in the view of the author yet little explored
      reasons for more flexible addresses namely the problems and
      opportunities for Internetworking with Independent Network Address
      Spaces (IINAS).
      
      To better enable such internetworks, this memo proposes a framework
      for a Functional Addressing model.  This model also intends to
      support several other addressing goals including programmability and
      multiple semantics.

  "Mapping between YANG and SDF", Jana Kiesewalter, Carsten Bormann,
  2021-11-06, <draft-kiesewalter-asdf-yang-sdf-01.txt>

      YANG and SDF are two languages for modelling the interaction with and
      the data interchanged with devices in the network.  As their areas of
      application (network management, IoT, resp.) overlap, it is useful to
      be able to translate between the two.
      
      The present specification provides information about how models in
      one of the two languages can be translated into the other.  This
      specification is not intended to be normative, but to help with
      creating translators.

  "Concise Reference Integrity Manifest", Henk Birkholz, Thomas Fossati,
  Yogesh Deshpande, Ned Smith, Wei Pan, 2022-01-26,
  <draft-birkholz-rats-corim-02.txt>

      Remote Attestation Procedures (RATS) enable Relying Parties to put
      trust in the trustworthiness of a remote Attester and therefore to
      decide if to engage in secure interactions with it - or not.
      Evidence about trustworthiness can be rather complex, voluminous or
      Attester-specific.  As it is deemed unrealistic that every Relying
      Party is capable of the appraisal of Evidence, that burden is taken
      on by a Verifier.  In order to conduct Evidence appraisal procedures,
      a Verifier requires not only fresh Evidence from an Attester, but
      also trusted Endorsements and Reference Values from Endorsers, such
      as manufacturers, distributors, or owners.  This document specifies
      Concise Reference Integrity Manifests (CoRIM) that represent
      Endorsements and Reference Values in CBOR format.  Composite devices
      or systems are represented by a collection of Concise Module
      Identifiers (CoMID) and Concise Software Identifiers (CoSWID) bundled
      in a CoRIM document.

  "Security and Privacy Considerations for Multicast Transports", Kyle Rose,
  Jake Holland, 2022-01-31, <draft-krose-multicast-security-02.txt>

      Interdomain multicast has unique potential to solve delivery
      scalability for popular content, but it carries a set of security and
      privacy issues that differ from those in unicast delivery.  This
      document analyzes the security threats unique to multicast-based
      delivery for Internet and Web traffic under the Internet and Web
      threat models.

  "Composite Public and Private Keys For Use In Internet PKI", Mike
  Ounsworth, Massimiliano Pala, 2022-02-14,
  <draft-ounsworth-pq-composite-keys-01.txt>

      With the widespread adoption of post-quantum cryptography will come
      the need for an entity to possess multiple public keys on different
      cryptographic algorithms.  Since the trustworthiness of individual
      post-quantum algorithms is at question, a multi-key cryptographic
      operation will need to be performed in such a way that breaking it
      requires breaking each of the component algorithms individually.
      This requires defining new structures for holding composite keys, for
      use with composite signature and encryption data.
      
      This document defines the structures CompositePublicKey,
      CompositePrivateKey, which are sequences of the respective structure
      for each component algorithm.  This document makes no assumptions
      about what the component algorithms are, provided that they have
      defined algorithm identifiers.  The only requirement imposed by this
      document is that all algorithms be of the same key usage; i.e. all
      signature or all encryption.  This document is intended to be coupled
      with corresponding documents that define the structure and semantics
      of composite signatures and encryption.

  "Explicit Pairwise Composite Keys For Use In Internet PKI", Mike Ounsworth,
  Serge Mister, John Gray, 2022-02-14,
  <draft-ounsworth-pq-explicit-composite-keys-01.txt>

      With the widespread adoption of post-quantum cryptography will come
      the need for an entity to possess multiple public keys on different
      cryptographic algorithms.  Since the trustworthiness of individual
      post-quantum algorithms is at question, a multi-key cryptographic
      operation will need to be performed in such a way that breaking it
      requires breaking each of the component algorithms individually.
      This requires defining new structures for holding composite public
      keys and composite signature data.  This draft defines a structure
      generic enough to be useful beyond the post-quantum transition for
      any situation where a widely-supported but untrusted algorithm is
      being migrated to newer cryptography.
      
      This document defines structures for binding an explicit pair of
      cryptographic algorithms together into a single object identifier,
      and it provides ASN.1 structures for encoding these pairwise
      composite public keys, private keys in wire protocols, as well as
      using them in conjunction with composite signatures, encryption and
      key transport mechanisms.

  "Composite Encryption For Use In Internet PKI", Mike Ounsworth, John Gray,
  Serge Mister, 2022-02-14, <draft-ounsworth-pq-composite-encryption-01.txt>

      With the widespread adoption of post-quantum cryptography will come
      the need for an entity to possess multiple public keys on different
      cryptographic algorithms.  Since the trustworthiness of individual
      post-quantum algorithms is at question, a multi-key cryptographic
      operation will need to be performed in such a way that breaking it
      requires breaking each of the component algorithms individually.
      This requires defining new structures for holding composite
      encryption data.
      
      This document defines a content encryption process following the
      hybrid model as described in the NIST Post-Quantum Crypto FAQ.  This
      draft defines three composite encryption modes.  First, Composite Key
      Transport using Encryption primitives which encrypts a message
      (typically a content encryption key) for a recipient with a composite
      public key composed entirely of encryption keys by encrypting it with
      multiple one-time-pad keys, each encrypted under a different
      recipient public key.  Second, Composite Key Transport using
      Encryption and KEM primitives is the generalization of the previous
      mode to support a mixture of encryption and KEM algorithms.  Third,
      Composite Key Exchange is the most general and supports establishing
      a shared secret using any combination of encryption, KEM, and key
      exchange primitives where a master shared secret is generated using
      NIST SP 800-56Cr2.

  "Interconnecting Limited Domains Based on Declared Communication
  Requirements", Carsten Bormann, 2022-01-11,
  <draft-bormann-t2trg-interconnect-declared-01.txt>

      "Limited Domains" are parts of an internet that may have notable
      differences or are just convenient to separate from the general
      Internet and can be delimited from that and from other Limited
      Domains by a defined boundary (the "border").
      
      This memo focuses on the case where the nodes inside the Limited
      Domain want to interact with nodes on (or reachable via) the general
      Internet, but need some assistance at the border that is cognizant
      about the specific properties of the nodes in the Limited Domain.
      
      Self-Descriptions can provide the information needed for this
      assistance.

  "Building blocks for Network Slice Realization in Segment Routing Network",
  Zafar Ali, Clarence Filsfils, Pablo Camarillo, Dan Voyer, Satoru
  Matsushima, Reza Rokui, Amit Dhamija, Praveen Maheshwari, 2022-02-04,
  <draft-ali-teas-spring-ns-building-blocks-02.txt>

      This document describes how to realize the IETF network slice using the
      Segment Routing based technology. It explains how the
      building blocks specified for the Segment Routing can be used for
      this purpose.

  "ALTO Transport using HTTP/2", Y. Yang, 2021-10-25,
  <draft-yang-alto-http2-transport-01.txt>

      The ALTO base protocol [RFC7285] uses HTTP/1.x as the transport
      protocol and hence ALTO transport includes the limitations of
      HTTP/1.x.  ALTO/SSE [RFC8895] addresses some of the limitations, but
      is still based on HTTP/1.x.  This document introduces ALTO/H2, which
      provides the transport of ALTO information resources on top of
      HTTP/2.

  "Autoconfiguration of infrastructure services in ACP networks via DNS-SD
  over GRASP", Toerless Eckert, Mohamed Boucadair, Christian Jacquenet,
  Michael Behringer, 2022-03-04,
  <draft-eckert-anima-services-dns-autoconfig-01.txt>

      This document defines standards that enable autoconfiguration of
      fundamental centralized or decentralized network infrastructure
      services on ACP network nodes via GRASP.  These are primarily the
      services required for initial bootstrapping of a network but will
      persist through the lifecycles of the network.  These services
      include secure remote access to zero-touch bootstrapped ANI devices
      via SSH/Netconf with Radius/Diameter authentication and authorization
      and provides lifecycle autoconfiguration for other crucial services
      such as syslog, NTP (clock synchronization) and DNS for operational
      purposes.

  "Transient Hiding of Hop-by-Hop Options", Donald Eastlake, 2021-10-18,
  <draft-eastlake-6man-hide-options-01.txt>

      There are increasing requests for a variety IPv6 hop-by-hop options
      but such IPv6 options and all IPv4 options, are poorly handled,
      particularly by high-speed routers in the core Internet where packets
      having options are commonly discarded. This document proposes a
      simple method of transiently hiding such options for part of a
      packet's path to protect the packet from discard.

  "BGP Peer Auto-Configuration", Jeyananth Jeganathan, Venkata Avula,
  2022-01-21, <draft-minto-idr-bgp-autodiscovery-01.txt>

      This document describes a layer 3 protocol (Service advertisement) to
      help bgp to advertise service availability and local configurations .
      This enables bgp speakers to discover bgp peers transport endpoints
      and peer's configuration within link.  With Service advertisement,
      receivers could successfully bring up bgp protocol session without
      mundane configurations.

  "KEM-based Authentication for TLS 1.3", Sofia Celi, Peter Schwabe, Douglas
  Stebila, Nick Sullivan, Thom Wiggers, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-celi-wiggers-tls-authkem-01.txt>

      This document gives a construction for a Key Encapsulation Mechanism
      (KEM)-based authentication mechanism in TLS 1.3.  This proposal
      authenticates peers via a key exchange protocol, using their long-
      term (KEM) public keys.
      
      Discussion Venues
      
      This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.
      
      Discussion of this document takes place on the mailing list (), which
      is archived at .
      
      Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
      https://github.com/claucece/draft-celi-wiggers-tls-authkem.

  "MPLS Data Plane Encapsulation for In-situ OAM Data", Rakesh Gandhi, Zafar
  Ali, Frank Brockners, Bin Wen, Bruno Decraene, Voitek Kozak, 2022-03-02,
  <draft-gandhi-mpls-ioam-04.txt>

      In-situ Operations, Administration, and Maintenance (IOAM) is used
      for recording and collecting operational and telemetry information
      while the packet traverses a path between two points in the network.
      This document defines how IOAM data fields are transported with MPLS
      data plane encapsulation using new Generic Associated Channel (G-ACh)
      and updates the RFC 5586.

  "Automatic Replication of DNS-SD Service Registration Protocol Zones", Ted
  Lemon, 2021-11-07, <draft-lemon-srp-replication-01.txt>

      This document describes a protocol that can be used for ad-hoc
      replication of a DNS zone by multiple servers where a single primary
      DNS authoritative server is not available and the use of stable
      storage is not desirable.

  "YANG Data Model for Bidirectional Forwarding Detection (BFD) Hardware
  Offloaded Session", VELUCHAMY Rajaguru, 2022-02-22,
  <draft-rvelucha-bfd-offload-yang-02.txt>

      This document defines a extension YANG data model that can be used to
      manage Hardware Offloaded Bidirectional Forwarding Detection (BFD).
      
      This document specially talks about BFD sessions that are offloaded
      to hardware.
      
      The YANG modules in this document conform to the Network Management
      Datastore Architecture (NMDA).

  "Advertisement of Stub Link Attributes", Aijun Wang, Zhibo Hu, Gyan Mishra,
  Acee Lindem, Jinsong Sun, 2022-01-11,
  <draft-wang-lsr-stub-link-attributes-03.txt>

      This document describes the mechanism that can be used to
      differentiate the stub links from the normal interfaces within ISIS
      or OSPF domain.

  "Dream-Pipe or Pipe-Dream: What Do Users Want (and how can we assure it)?",
  Alfred Morton, 2021-09-06, <draft-morton-ippm-pipe-dream-01.txt>

      This memo addresses the problem of defining relevant properties and
      metrics with the goal of improving Internet access for all users.
      Where the fundamental metrics are well-defined, a framework to
      standardize new metrics exists and been used with success.  Users
      consider reliability to be important, as well as latency and
      capacity; it really depends who you ask and their current
      experiences.

  "MTU propagation over EVPN Overlays", DIKSHIT Saumya, Vinayak Joshi, A
  Nayak, 2022-02-03,
  <draft-saum-nvo3-mtu-propagation-over-evpn-overlays-01.txt>

      Path MTU Discovery between end-host-devices/Virtual-Machines/servers/
      workloads connected over an EVPN-Overlay Network in
      Datacenter/Campus/enterprise deployment, is a problem, yet to be
      resolved in the standards forums.  It needs a converged solution to
      ensure optimal usage of network and computational resources of the
      networking elements, including underlay routers/switches,
      constituting the overlay network.  This documents takes leads from
      the guidelines presented in [RFC4459].
      
      The overlay connectivity can pan across various sites (geographically
      seperated or collocated) for realizing a Datacenter Interconnect or
      intersite VPNs between campus sites (buildings, branch offices etc).
      
      This literature intends to solve problem of icmp error propagation
      from an underlay routing/switching device to an end-host (hooked to
      EVPN overlay), thus facilitating "accurate MTU" learnings.
      
      This document also leverages the icmp multipart message extension,
      mentioned in [RFC4884] to carry the original packet in the icmp PDU.

  "Knowledge Transmission Using Distributed Denial-of-Service Open Threat
  Signaling (DOTS) Data Channel", Kun Li, Hua-chun Zhou, Zhe Tu, Feiyang Liu,
  Weilin Wang, 2022-02-25, <draft-li-dots-knowledge-trans-02.txt>

      The document specifies new DOTS data channel configuration parameters
      that customize the DDoS knowledge transmission configuration between
      distributed knowledge bases. These options enable assist the
      distributed knowledge base to share attack knowledge in different
      fields and actively adapt to dynamically changing DDoS attacks.

  "License Activation Protocol", Maximilian Lorlacks, 2021-09-13,
  <draft-lorlacks-license-activation-protocol-04.txt>

      This document defines an experimental method for uniform license
      activation mechanism for use in digital rights management (DRM).

  "LISP Support for Dynamic Anycast Routing", Sun Kj, Younghan Kim,
  2021-10-25, <draft-kjsun-lisp-dyncast-01.txt>

      Dynamic Anycast (Dyncast) is a new routing approach to support
      equivalent services running in distributed geolocations and connect
      to them by considering both network-related metric and service-
      related metric.  In LISP, it is possible to support anycast EIDs and/
      or anycast RLOCs without any modification, so it is suitable for
      providing dyncast routing.  In this document, it describes the LISP-
      based dyncast architecture and related standard works to meet dyncast
      requirements.

  "DS Algorithms for Securing NS and Glue", Brian Dickson, 2021-09-19,
  <draft-dickson-dnsop-ds-hack-02.txt>

      This Internet Draft proposes a mechanism to encode relevant data for
      NS records on the parental side of a zone cut by encoding them in DS
      records based on a new DNSKEY algorithm.
      
      Since DS records are signed by the parent, this creates a method for
      validation of the otherwise unsigned delegation records.
      
      Notably, support for updating DS records in a parent zone is already
      present (by necessity) in the Registry-Registrar-Registrant (RRR)
      provisioning system, EPP.  Thus, no changes to the EPP protocol are
      needed, and no changes to registry database or publication systems
      upstream of the DNS zones published by top level domains (TLDs).
      
      This NS validation mechanism is beneficial if the name server _names_
      need to be validated prior to use.

  "DNS Queries over CoAP (DoC)", Martine Lenders, Christian Amsuess, Cenk
  Gundogan, Thomas Schmidt, Matthias Waehlisch, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-lenders-dns-over-coap-03.txt>

      This document defines a protocol for sending DNS messages over the
      Constrained Application Protocol (CoAP).  These CoAP messages are
      protected by DTLS-Secured CoAP (CoAPS) or Object Security for
      Constrained RESTful Environments (OSCORE) to provide encrypted DNS
      message exchange for constrained devices in the Internet of Things
      (IoT).

  "The Delivered-To Message Header Field", Viktor Dukhovni, John Levine,
  2022-02-06, <draft-duklev-deliveredto-01.txt>

      This document describes the existing usage of the Delivered-To header
      field in e-mail messages.

  "TLS ALPN usage in the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)", Olle Johansson,
  2022-02-21, <draft-johansson-sip-alpn-03.txt>

      Many SIP specifications use other protocols in addition to the core
      SIP protocol, like HTTP and MSRP.  In order to be able to use
      multiple protocols on the same port with TLS, a TLS Application
      Protocol Negotiation Extension (ALPN) protocol ID is needed (RFC 7301
      [RFC7301]).  This document registers "sip/2" as the ALPN protocol ID
      for the SIP protocol version 2.0.

  "Unified representation method of heterogeneous data in industrial
  Internet", Yaqian Zhang, Shengsheng He, Chen Yp, Wang Zm, H Xia,
  2022-02-10, <draft-zhang-ietf-heterogeneous-data-representation-01.txt>

      With the advent of 5G era, sensing devices and mobile Internet
      devices in smart factories are everywhere, and a variety of
      industrial data from different spatial devices becomes widely
      available and interwoven. These data are usually generated by
      streaming, with huge differences in data sources and structures,
      massive scale, strong correlation and complicated relationship. The
      great richness of data makes the problem of how to quickly,
      accurately and deeply dig the hidden value behind the data more
      complicated than ever. The data generated in different fields are
      distributed in a variety of business systems, and these data have
      different structures and forms, so it is difficult to use an
      efficient form of unified analysis. Based on the data characteristics
      of heterogeneous data, the multi-source heterogeneous data fusion
      method is studied based on tensor.

  "Segment-Routing over Forwarding Adjacency Links", Tarek Saad, Vishnu
  Beeram, Colby Barth, Siva Sivabalan, 2022-02-22,
  <draft-saad-spring-srfa-link-01.txt>

      Label Switched Paths (LSPs) set up in Multiprotocol Label Switching
      (MPLS) networks can be used to form Forwarding Adjacency (FA) links
      that carry traffic in those networks.  An FA link can be assigned
      Traffic Engineering (TE) parameters that allow other LSR(s) to
      include it in their constrained path computation.  FA link(s) can be
      also assigned Segment-Routing (SR) segments that enable the steering
      of traffic on to the associated FA link(s).  The TE and SR attributes
      of an FA link can be advertised using known protocols that carry link
      state information.  This document elaborates on the usage of FA
      link(s) and their attributes in SR enabled networks.

  "The Application Specific Link Attribute (ASLA) Any Application Bit",
  Shraddha Hegde, Ron Bonica, Chris Bowers, Robert Raszuk, Zhenbin Li, Dan
  Voyer, 2022-02-07, <draft-hegde-lsr-asla-any-app-01.txt>

      RFC 8919 and RFC 8920 define Application Specific Link Attributes
      (ASLA).  Each ASLA includes an Application Identifier Bit Mask.  The
      Application Identifier Bit Mask includes a Standard Application Bit
      Mask (SABM) and a User Defined Application Bit Mask (UDABM).  The
      SABM and UDABM determine which applications can use the ASLA as an
      input.
      
      This document introduces a new bit to the Standard Application
      Identifier Bit Mask.  This bit is called the Any Application Bit
      (i.e., the A-bit).  If the A-bit is set, the link attribute can be
      used by any application.  This includes currently defined
      applications as well as applications to be defined in the future.

  "EVPN Mac Dampening Back-off", DIKSHIT Saumya, Vinayak Joshi, Swathi
  Shankar, 2021-09-16, <draft-saum-bess-dampening-backoff-01.txt>

      MAC move handling in EVPN deployments is discussed in detail in
      [RFC7432].  There are few optimizations which can be done in existing
      way of handling the mac duplication.  This document describes few of
      the potential techniques to do so.

  "Data Model for Lifecycle Management and Operations", Marisol Palmero,
  Frank Brockners, Sudhendu Kumar, Shwetha Bhandari, Camilo Cardona, Diego
  Lopez, 2022-03-07, <draft-palmero-opsawg-dmlmo-03.txt>

      This document motivates and specifies a data model for lifecycle
      management and operations.  It describes the motivation and
      requirements to collect asset-centric metrics including but not
      limited to asset adoption and usability, licensing, supported
      features and capabilities, enabled features and capabilities, etc.;
      with the primary objective to measure and improve the overall user
      experience along the lifecycle journey, from technical requirements
      and technology selection through advocacy and renewal, including the
      end of life of an asset.

  "Enhanced Performance Measurement Using Simple TWAMP in Segment Routing
  Networks", Rakesh Gandhi, Clarence Filsfils, Navin Vaghamshi, Moses
  Nagarajah, Richard Foote, Mach Chen, Amit Dhamija, 2022-02-15,
  <draft-gandhi-spring-enhanced-srpm-01.txt>

      Segment Routing (SR) leverages the source routing paradigm.  SR is
      applicable to both Multiprotocol Label Switching (SR-MPLS) and IPv6
      (SRv6) data planes.  This document defines procedure for Enhanced
      Performance Measurement of end-to-end SR paths including SR Policies
      for both SR-MPLS and SRv6 data planes using Simple Two-Way Active
      Measurement Protocol (STAMP) defined in RFC 8762.  The procedure
      reduces the deployment and operational complexities in a network.

  "I2NSF Application Interface YANG Data Model", Patrick Lingga, Jaehoon
  Jeong, Yunchul Choi, 2022-02-22,
  <draft-lingga-i2nsf-application-interface-dm-02.txt>

      This document describes an information model and a YANG data model
      for the Application Interface between an Interface to Network
      Security Functions (I2NSF) Analyzer and Security Controller in an
      I2NSF system in a Network Functions Virtualization (NFV) environment.
      The YANG data model described in this document is based on the I2NSF
      NSF-Facing Interface [I-D.ietf-i2nsf-nsf-facing-interface-dm] and the
      I2NSF Monitoring Interface [I-D.ietf-i2nsf-nsf-monitoring-data-model]
      for enabling feedback delivery based on the information received from
      the Network Security Function (NSF).

  "Stream Control Transmission Protocol (SCTP) Network Address Translation
  Support", Claudio Porfiri, 2021-11-16,
  <draft-porfiri-tsvwg-sctp-natsupp-01.txt>

      The Stream Control Transmission Protocol (SCTP) provides a reliable
      communications channel between two end-hosts in many ways similar to
      the Transmission Control Protocol (TCP).  With the widespread
      deployment of Network Address Translators (NAT), specialized code has
      been added to NAT functions for TCP that allows multiple hosts to
      reside behind a NAT function and yet share a single IPv4 address,
      even when two hosts (behind a NAT function) choose the same port
      numbers for their connection.  This additional code is sometimes
      classified as Network Address and Port Translation (NAPT).
      
      This document describes the protocol extensions needed for the SCTP
      endpoints and the mechanisms for NAT functions necessary to provide
      similar features of NAPT in the single point and multipoint traversal
      scenario.

  "Antitrust Guidelines for IETF Particiants", Joel Halpern, Brad Biddle, Jay
  Daley, 2021-12-07, <draft-halpern-gendispatch-antitrust-02.txt>

      This document specifies policy for IETF participants on compliance
      with antitrust laws and how to reduce antitrust risks in connection
      with IETF activities.

  "hashlookup format", Alexandre Dulaunoy, Jean-Louis Huynen, 2021-11-21,
  <draft-dulaunoy-hashlookup-format-02.txt>

      This document describes the hashlookup output format used to express
      meta information of hash values seen in databases of known files.
      The output description includes a common semantic.  The hashlookup
      format is used by public and private digital forensics investigations
      services.

  "All PEs as DF", DIKSHIT Saumya, Vinayak Joshi, 2022-03-06,
  <draft-saumvinayak-bess-all-df-bum-02.txt>

      The Designated forwarder concept is leveraged to prevent looping of
      BUM traffic into tenant network sourced across NVO fabric for
      multihoming deployments.  [RFC7432] defines a prelimn approach to
      select the DF for an ES,VLAN or ES,Vlan Group panning across multiple
      NVE's.  [RFC8584] makes the election logic more robust and fine
      grained inculcating fair election of DF handling most of the
      prevalent use-cases.  This document presents a deployment problem and
      a corresponding solution which cannot be easily resolve by rules
      mentioned in [RFC7432] and [RFC8584].

  "Entities Involved in the IETF Standards Process", Rich Salz, 2022-03-14,
  <draft-rsalz-2028bis-07.txt>

      This document describes the individuals and organizations involved in
      the IETF standards process, as described in IETF BCP 9.  It includes
      brief descriptions of the entities involved, and the role they play
      in the standards process.
      
      The IETF and its structure have undergone many changes since 1996,
      when RFC 2028 was published.  This document reflects the changed
      organizational structure of the IETF and obsoletes RFC 2028.

  "Protocol extension and mechanism for fused service function chain", Jinyou
  Dai, Xueshun Wang, Dongping Deng, Xiaoyun Zhang, 2021-09-08,
  <draft-dai-sfc-fused-protocol-and-mechanism-00.txt>

      This document discusses the protocol extension and procedure that are
      used to implement the fused service function chain. Fused service
      function chain means that two or more service function chains are fused
      to become a single service function chain from the view of data plane
      and control plane. Fused service function chain is a extension for
      service function chain.

  "Deterministic Networking (DetNet) Data Plane - MPLS TC Tagging for Cyclic
  Queuing and Forwarding (MPLS-TC TCQF)", Toerless Eckert, Stewart Bryant,
  Andrew Malis, 2021-10-25, <draft-eckert-detnet-mpls-tc-tcqf-01.txt>

      This memo defines the use of the MPLS TC field of MPLS Label Stack
      Entries (LSE) to support cycle tagging of packets for Multiple Buffer
      Cyclic Queuing and Forwarding (TCQF).  TCQF is a mechanism to support
      bounded latency forwarding in DetNet network.
      
      Target benefits of TCQF include low end-to-end jitter, ease of high-
      speed hardware implementation, optional ability to support large
      number of flow in large networks via DiffServ style aggregation by
      applying TCQF to the DetNet aggregate instead of each DetNet flow
      individually, and support of wide-area DetNet networks with arbitrary
      link latencies and latency variations.

  "Updates to Algorithm Related Adjacency SID Advertisement in RF9085",
  Shaofu Peng, Peter Psenak, 2021-09-10,
  <draft-chen-idr-bgp-ls-algo-related-adjacency-sid-00.txt>

      This draft updates [RFC9085] to defines extensions to the Border
      Gateway Protocol-Link State (BGP-LS) address family in order to carry
      algorithm Related Adjacency SID.

  "Updates to Algorithm Related Adjacency SID Advertisement in RF9085", Ran
  Chen, Shaofu Peng, Peter Psenak, 2021-09-10,
  <draft-chen-idr-bgp-ls-algorithm-related-adj-sid-00.txt>

      This draft updates [RFC9085] to defines extensions to the Border
      Gateway Protocol-Link State (BGP-LS) address family in order to carry
      algorithm Related Adjacency SID.

  "DetNet Bounded Packet-Delay-Variation", Ehsan Mohammadpour, Jean-Yves Le
  Boudec, 2021-09-10,
  <draft-mohammadpour-detnet-bounded-delay-variation-00.txt>

      Some DetNet use-cases (applications) require guaranteed bounds on
      packet delay-variation, not just on latency.  This document gives a
      methodology to derive guaranteed packet delay-variation bounds in
      DetNet and apply it to a number of proposed mechanisms.  When the
      required packet delay-variations is very low, clock non-idealities
      affect the bounds, even in a synchronized DetNet networks.  This
      document also gives a methodology to account for such an effect.

  "Updates to Anycast Property advertisement for OSPF", Ran Chen, Detao Zhao,
  Peter Psenak, Ketan Talaulikar, 2021-11-07,
  <draft-chen-lsr-anycast-flag-01.txt>

      Each prefix is advertised along with an 8-bit field of
      capabilities,by using the Prefix Options[RFC8362] and the flag flield
      in the OSPFv2 Extended Prefix TLV [RFC7684], but the definition of
      anycast flag to identify the prefix as anycast has not yet been
      defined.  However, Almost all bits of the Flag field has been
      assigned already.  Thus, it is also required to extend the flag field
      for future use.
      
      This document updates [RFC7684] and [RFC8362], by defining a new
      variable length Prefix attributes Sub-TLVs for OSPFv2 and OSPFv3 and
      a new flag in the Prefix attributes Sub-TLV to advertise the anycast
      property.

  "MVPN Inter/Intra-region Tunnel Segmentation", Zhaohui Zhang, 2021-10-25,
  <draft-zzhang-bess-mvpn-regional-segmentation-01.txt>

      RFC7524 specifies procedures for Inter-Area Point-to-Multipoint
      Segmented Label Switched Paths (aka MVPN tunnel segmentation).  This
      document updates RFC7524 by extending the inter-area segmentation
      concept to inter-region and intra-region segmentation where a region
      is no longer tied to an IGP area.

  "Authenticated DNS over TLS to Authoritative Servers", Brian Dickson,
  2021-11-09, <draft-dickson-dprive-adot-auth-06.txt>

      This Internet Draft proposes a mechanism for DNS resolvers to
      discover support for TLS transport to authoritative DNS servers, to
      validate this indication of support, and to authenticate the TLS
      certificates involved.
      
      This requires that the name server _names_ are in a DNSSEC signed
      zone.
      
      This also requires that the delegation of the zone served is
      protected by [I-D.dickson-dnsop-ds-hack], since the NS names are the
      keys used for discovery of TLS transport support.
      
      Additional recommendations relate to use of various techniques for
      efficiency and scalability, and new EDNS options to minimize round
      trips and for signaling between clients and resolvers.

  "Operating a Glueless DNS Authority Server", Brian Dickson, 2021-09-22,
  <draft-dickson-dnsop-glueless-02.txt>

      This Internet Draft proposes a method for protecting authority
      servers against MITM and poisoning attacks, using a domain naming
      strategy to not require glue A/AAAA records and use of DNSSEC.
      
      This technique assumes the use of validating resolvers.
      
      MITM and poisoning attacks should only be effective/possible against
      unsigned domains.
      
      However, until all domains are signed, this guidance is relevant, in
      that it can limit the attack surface of unsigned domains.
      
      This guidance should be combined with [I-D.dickson-dnsop-ds-hack]

  "Framework for QUIC Throughput Testing", Kevin Corre, 2021-09-17,
  <draft-corre-quic-throughput-testing-00.txt>

      This document adapts the [RFC6349] Framework for TCP Throughput
      Testing to the [RFC9000] QUIC protocol.  The adapted framework
      describes a practical methodology for measuring end-to-end QUIC
      Throughput in a managed IP network.  The goal of the methodology is
      to provide a better indication in regard to user experience.  In this
      framework, QUIC, UDP, and IP parameters are specified to optimize
      QUIC Throughput.

  "Discovery of Designated Resolvers in the Presence of Legacy Forwarders",
  Benjamin Schwartz, Chris Box, 2021-10-22,
  <draft-schwartz-add-ddr-forwarders-01.txt>

      This draft describes how the Discovery of Designated Resolvers (DDR)
      standard interacts with legacy DNS forwarders, including potential
      incompatibilities and relevant mitigations.
      
      Discussion Venues
      
      This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.
      
      Discussion of this document takes place on the mailing list
      (add@ietf.org), which is archived at
      https://mailarchive.ietf.org/arch/browse/add/.
      
      Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
      https://github.com/bemasc/ddr-forwarders.

  "Network policy to use Network-designated DNS Resolvers", Tirumaleswar
  Reddy.K, Dan Wing, Kevin Smith, 2022-03-02,
  <draft-reddy-add-enterprise-policy-01.txt>

      This document specifies a mechanism to inform endpoints about any
      network policy mandating the use of network-designated DNS resolvers.

  "HTTP Datagram PING", Benjamin Schwartz, 2021-10-04,
  <draft-schwartz-masque-h3-datagram-ping-01.txt>

      This draft defines an HTTP Datagram Format Type for measuring the
      functionality of a Datagram path.
      
      Discussion Venues
      
      This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.
      
      Discussion of this document takes place on the mailing list
      (masque@ietf.org), which is archived at
      https://mailarchive.ietf.org/arch/browse/masque/.
      
      Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
      https://github.com/bemasc/h3-datagram-ping.

  "GRASP Configuration Management Objective", Brian Carpenter, 2021-09-21,
  <draft-carpenter-anima-grasp-config-00.txt>

      This document specifies a technical objective for dynamic
      configuration of the GeneRic Autonomic Signaling Protocol (GRASP)
      defined by RFC 8990.

  "Automated Certificate Management Environment (ACME) Renewal Information
  (ARI) Extension", Aaron Gable, 2021-11-08, <draft-aaron-acme-ari-01.txt>

      This document specifies how an ACME server may provide hints to ACME
      clients as to when they should attempt to renew their certificates.
      This allows servers to mitigate load spikes, and ensures clients do
      not make false assumptions about appropriate certificate renewal
      periods.
      
      Current Implementations
      
      Draft note: this section will be removed by the editor before final
      publication.
      
      Let's Encrypt's Staging environment (available at [lestaging], source
      at [boulder]) implements this draft specification.

  "Extending ICMP for IP-related Information Validation", Liu Yao,
  2021-09-22, <draft-liu-6man-icmp-verification-00.txt>

      This document introduces the mechanism to verify the data plane
      against the control plane in IP/SRv6 networks by extending ICMP
      messages.

  "Encapsulation and Processing of Network Slice Selector in IPv6 Data
  Plane", Weiqiang Cheng, Jiang Wenying, Changwang Lin, 2021-09-29,
  <draft-cheng-teas-ipv6-network-slice-selector-00.txt>

      Packets belong to a network slice need to be forwarded using the
      specific network resources.  A network slice selector is carried in
      each packet to identify the network slice that it belongs to.
      
      This document proposes a new Network Slice Selector Option, and
      describes the encapsulation and processing of network slice selector
      in IPv6 data plane using the proposed option.

  "SDP Offer/Answer for RTP using QUIC as Transport - Design Questions",
  Spencer Dawkins, 2021-10-25, <draft-dawkins-sdp-rtp-quic-questions-01.txt>

      This document is a companion document to "SDP Offer/Answer for RTP
      using QUIC as Transport".  That document focuses on the description
      and registration of SDP "proto" attribute parameters with IANA, to
      allow applications that rely on SDP Offer/Answer to negotiate the
      QUIC protocol as an encapsulation for RTP.
      
      In writing that document, it became obvious that decisions about an
      appropriate SDP description would depend on decisions about the way
      RTP would be encapsulated in QUIC, and different proposals for those
      encapsulations had made different assumptions.  Given that none of
      these proposals have been adopted by an IETF working group yet, it's
      not appropriate to try to base a general-purpose set of "QUIC/RTP"
      IANA registrations on any one of them, so this document includes the
      questions that have come up, and (as discussions progress) suggested
      answers for those questions.

  "BIER with Network Slicing and Flow Differentiation", Zhaohui Zhang, Tony
  Przygienda, 2021-09-29,
  <draft-zzhang-bier-slicing-and-differentiation-00.txt>

      This document specifies how BIER works in the context of IETF Network
      slicing, with or without fined-grained traffic differentiation.

  "In Situ OAM Profile for the Linux Kernel Implementation", Tal Mizrahi,
  Justin Iurman, Frank Brockners, 2022-01-13,
  <draft-mizrahi-ippm-ioam-linux-profile-02.txt>

      In Situ Operations, Administration and Maintenance (IOAM) is used for
      monitoring network performance and for detecting traffic bottlenecks
      and anomalies.  This document defines an IOAM profile that is used in
      the Linux kernel implementation, starting from the Linux 5.15 kernel.

  "Segment Routing in Two Dimensional IP Routing", Mingwei Xu, Bo Wang,
  Tingfeng Wang, Shu Yang, Jianping Wu, 2022-02-24,
  <draft-xu-spring-segment-twod-ip-routing-01.txt>

      Segment Routing (SR) allows a headend node to steer traffic into a
      Segment Routing Policy (SR Policy), which represents the routing path
      by matching the destination address and the corresponding Binding
      Segment Identifier (BSID).  However, determining the target SR Policy
      only based on destination aspect is incapable for demands for higher
      dimensional routing.  Two Dimensional IP (TwoD-IP) routing is an
      Internet routing architecture that makes forwarding decisions based
      on source and destination addresses.  TwoD-IP routing can easily
      express a routing policy between host to host, or network to network,
      and have much lower storage and calculation consumption compared to
      the higher dimensional routing.
      
      In this document, we extend SR to support TwoD-IP routing, illustrate
      some typical scenarios of SR with TwoD-IP routing to express the
      advantage of extending SR to support TwoD-IP routing, and describe
      the mechanism of how TwoD IP routing protocol cooperates with SR.

  "Circuit Style Segment Routing Policies", Christian Schmutzer, Clarence
  Filsfils, Zafar Ali, Francois Clad, Praveen Maheshwari, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-schmutzer-pce-cs-sr-policy-01.txt>

      This document describes how Segment Routing (SR) policies can be used
      to satisfy the requirements for strict bandwidth guarantees, end-to-
      end recovery and persistent paths within a segment routing network.
      SR policies satisfying these requirements are called "circuit-style"
      SR policies (CS-SR policies).

  "The Geohash HTTP Client Hint", Tommy Pauly, David Schinazi, 2021-09-30,
  <draft-pauly-httpbis-geohash-hint-00.txt>

      This documents defines an HTTP Client Hint for sharing a client's
      rough location using the Geohash format.
      
      Discussion Venues
      
      This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.
      
      Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
      https://github.com/tfpauly/privacy-proxy.

  "Secure Vector Routing (SVR)", Abilash Menon, Michael Baj, Patrick Timmons,
  Hadriel Kaplan, 2021-10-01, <draft-menon-svr-00.txt>

      This document describes Secure Vector Routing (SVR).  Secure Vectors
      contain application layer metadata used for authentication and
      communicating network intent between data routers.  The metadata is
      extensible, and could be used to transmit information, network
      routes, security policies, and quality policies securely across
      network boundaries.  Boundaries include those formed by private
      network RFC1918 networks with the IPv4 public internet, and the IPv6
      public internet.

  "DMARC Compliant Mailing Lists", Douglas Foster, 2021-10-03,
  <draft-fosterd-dmarc-compliant-mailing-lists-00.txt>

      Mailing Lists often make changes to a message before it is
      retransmitted.  This invalidates DKIM signatures, causing a DMARC
      test on the RFC5322.From addres to fail.  A DMARC-compliant mailing
      list is one which uses member alias addresses to identify the
      document as sent by a specific author via the mechanism of the list.
      An appropriate aliasing mechanism will not only prevent DMARC FAIL,
      but will also allow messages between members, will look natural to
      senders and recipients, and will allow list organization domains to
      advance to p=reject.  This document describes an aliasing approach
      which meets these goals.

  "Distributed HTTP Origins: Solution Space Exploration", Mike Bishop,
  2021-10-04, <draft-bishop-httpbis-distributed-origin-00.txt>

      Certain content libraries are logically a single origin, but too
      large to be practically served by a single origin server.  This
      document discusses existing solutions and explores possible
      directions for future protocol development.

  "Additional block types for PCAP Next Generation (pcapng) Capture File
  Format", Michael Tuexen, Fulvio Risso, Jasper Bongertz, Gerald Combs, Guy
  Harris, Eelco Chaudron, Michael Richardson, 2021-10-04,
  <draft-richardson-opsawg-pcapng-extras-00.txt>

      This document contains a number of extensions to the PCAPng file
      format which are outside of the IETF networking mandate.

  "Procedures for Standards Track Documents to Refer Normatively to Documents
  at a Lower Level", Murray Kucherawy, 2021-10-17,
  <draft-kucherawy-bcp97bis-01.txt>

      IETF procedures generally require that a standards track RFC may not
      have a normative reference to another standards track document at a
      lower maturity level or to a non standards track specification (other
      than specifications from other standards bodies).  For example, a
      standards track document may not have a normative reference to an
      informational RFC.  Exceptions to this rule are sometimes needed as
      the IETF uses informational RFCs to describe non-IETF standards or
      IETF-specific modes of use of such standards.  This document defines
      the procedure used in these circumstances.
      
      This document merges and updates, and thus obsoletes, RFC 3967, RFC
      4897, and RFC 8067.

  "Host behavior to short prefix length", Akimichi Ogawa, Kaname Nishizuka,
  Yoshifumi Atarashi, Akira Kanai, 2021-10-05,
  <draft-akimichi-6man-ra-prefixlen-00.txt>

      The Prefix Information Option in the IPv6 Neighbor Discovery Router
      Advertisement message defines an 8-bit prefix length field.  Prefix
      List entries are created using the prefix length in the Prefix
      Information Option.  The Conceptual Model of a Host described in RFC
      4861[RFC4861] does not clarify behavior of a host, when a short
      prefix length is received.  This document updates RFC 4861(if
      approved), and clarifies that hosts SHOULD NOT accept prefix length
      shorter than /64.

  "Application-Oriented Literals in CBOR Extended Diagnostic Notation",
  Carsten Bormann, 2021-10-06, <draft-bormann-cbor-edn-literals-00.txt>

      The Concise Binary Object Representation, CBOR (RFC 8949) defines a
      "diagnostic notation" in order to be able to converse about CBOR data
      items without having to resort to binary data.
      
      This document specifies how to add application-oriented extensions to
      the diagnostic notation.  It then defines two such extensions for the
      use of CBOR diagnostic notation with CoRAL and Constrained Resource
      Identifiers (draft-ietf-core-coral, draft-ietf-core-href).

  "Retrofit Structured Fields for HTTP", Mark Nottingham, 2022-01-06,
  <draft-nottingham-http-structure-retrofit-02.txt>

      This specification defines how a selection of existing HTTP fields
      can be handled as Structured Fields.
      
      About This Document
      
      This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.
      
      Status information for this document may be found at
      https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-nottingham-http-structure-
      retrofit/.
      
      information can be found at https://mnot.github.io/I-D/.
      
      Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
      https://github.com/mnot/I-D/labels/http-structure-retrofit.

  "TURN Cluster: Scale out TURN cluster by routable transaction id", William
  Zeng, 2021-11-13, <draft-zeng-turn-cluster-02.txt>

      The TURN protocol is designed to solve the connectivity problem of
      Peer-to-Peer Communication when NAT devices exist, by allowing each
      peer to establish a data channel on TURN servers.  Since there are
      some specific requirements in the use of TURN, such as RTP/RTCP
      connection pairs must be sent to the same TURN server, it is not easy
      to scale a single TURN server into a TURN cluster.  In addition, a
      TURN service cluster also needs to consider how to achieve good load
      balancing and how to protect internal information security.  Based on
      these demands, this specification provides several standard means to
      implement a functional and secure TURN cluster, and this
      specification also provides an overview and rationale of the cluster
      architecture.

  "PCEP Extensions for Topology Filter", Quan Xiong, Shaofu Peng, Vishnu
  Beeram, Tarek Saad, Mike Koldychev, 2021-10-08,
  <draft-xpbs-pce-topology-filter-01.txt>

      This document proposes a set of extensions for PCEP to support the
      topology filter during path computation.

  "YANG model for Data Export over IP Flow Information Export (IPFIX)
  Protocol", Anand Arokiaraj, Marta Seda, 2021-10-08,
  <draft-arokiarajseda-ipfix-data-export-yang-model-00.txt>

      This document defines a flexible, modular YANG model for data export
      via the IPFIX protocol.  The YANG models in this document conform to
      the Network Management Datastore Architecture (NMDA) defined in RFC
      8342.

  "A Formal Language to Describe State Machines", Marc Petit-Huguenin,
  2021-10-11, <draft-petithuguenin-formal-fsm-00.txt>

      This document describes a meta-language for finite state machines.

  "Brand Indicators for Message Identification (BIMI)", Seth Blank, Peter
  Goldstein, Thede Loder, Terry Zink, Marc Bradshaw, Alex Brotman,
  2021-10-11, <draft-brand-indicators-for-message-identification-00.txt>

      Brand Indicators for Message Identification (BIMI) permits Domain
      Owners to coordinate with Mail User Agents (MUAs) to display brand-
      specific Indicators next to properly authenticated messages.  There
      are two aspects of BIMI coordination: a scalable mechanism for Domain
      Owners to publish their desired Indicators, and a mechanism for Mail
      Transfer Agents (MTAs) to verify the authenticity of the Indicator.
      This document specifies how Domain Owners communicate their desired
      Indicators through the BIMI Assertion Record in DNS and how that
      record is to be interpreted by MTAs and MUAs.  MUAs and mail-
      receiving organizations are free to define their own policies for
      making use of BIMI data and for Indicator display as they see fit.

  "RADIUS attributes for Randomized and Changing MAC addresses", Jerome
  Henry, Nancy Cam-Winget, 2021-10-11,
  <draft-henry-radext-stable-mac-identifier-00.txt>

      This document describes the means by which a Stable MAC address
      identifier can be signaled to a Authentication Authorization and
      Accounting (AAA) server.

  "Self-Addressing IDentifier (SAID)", Samuel Smith, 2021-11-28,
  <draft-ssmith-said-01.txt>

      A SAID (Self-Addressing IDentifier) is a special type of content
      addressable identifier based on encoded cryptographic digest that is
      self-referential.  The SAID derivation protocol defined herein
      enables verification that a given SAID is uniquely cryptographically
      bound to a serialization that includes the SAID as a field in that
      serialization.  Embedding a SAID as a field in the associated
      serialization indicates a preferred content addressable identifier
      for that serialization that facilitates greater interoperability,
      reduced ambiguity, and enhanced security when reasoning about the
      serialization.  Moreover given sufficient cryptographic strength, a
      cryptographic commitment such as a signature, digest, or another
      SAID, to a given SAID is essentially equivalent to a commitment to
      its associated serialization.  Any change to the serialization
      invalidates its SAID thereby ensuring secure immutability evident
      reasoning with SAIDs about serializations or equivalently their
      SAIDs.  Thus SAIDs better facilitate immutably referenced data
      serializations for applications such as Verifiable Credentials or
      Ricardian Contracts.
      
      SAIDs are encoded with CESR (Composable Event Streaming
      Representation) [CESR] which includes a pre-pended derivation code
      that encodes the cryptographic suite or algorithm used to generate
      the digest.  A CESR primitive's primary expression (alone or in
      combination ) is textual using Base64 URL Safe characters.  CESR
      primitives may be round-tripped (alone or in combination) to a
      compact binary representation without loss.  The CESR derivation code
      enables cryptographic digest algorithm agility in systems that use
      SAIDs as content addresses.  Each serialization may use a different
      cryptographic digest algorithm as indicated by its derivation code.
      This provides interoperable future proofing.  CESR was developed for
      the [KERI] protocol.

  "Requirements for Large-Scale Deterministic Networks", Peng Liu, Yizhou Li,
  Toerless Eckert, Quan Xiong, Jeong-dong Ryoo, 2022-02-10,
  <draft-liu-detnet-large-scale-requirements-01.txt>

      Aiming at the large-scale deterministic network, this document
      specifies the technical and operational requirements when the
      different deterministic levels of applications co-exist and are
      transported over a wide area.

  "UDP-based Generic Multi-Access (GMA) Control Protocol", Jing Zhu, Menglei
  Zhang, 2021-10-13, <draft-zhu-intarea-gma-control-00.txt>

      A device can be simultaneously connected to multiple networks,
      e.g., Wi-Fi, LTE, 5G, and DSL. It is desirable to seamlessly
      combine the connectivity over these networks below the transport
      layer (L4) to improve quality of experience for applications that
      do not have built in multi-path capabilities. This document
      presents a new control protocol to manage traffic steering,
      splitting, and duplicating across multiple connections. The
      solution has been developed by the authors based on their
      experiences in multiple standards bodies including the IETF and
      3GPP, is not an Internet Standard and does not represent the
      consensus opinion of the IETF. This document will enable other
      developers to build interoperable implementations in order to
      experiment with the protocol.

  "Bundle Protocol Version 7 Administrative Record Types Registry", Brian
  Sipos, 2022-03-02, <draft-sipos-dtn-bpv7-admin-iana-01.txt>

      This document clarifies that a Bundle Protocol Version 7 agent is
      intended to use an IANA sub-registry for Administrative Record types.
      It also makes a code point reservation for private or experimental
      use.

  "Requirements for MPLS Label Stack Indicators and Ancillary Data", Matthew
  Bocci, Stewart Bryant, 2022-03-03,
  <draft-bocci-mpls-miad-adi-requirements-02.txt>

      This draft specifies requirements for indicators in the MPLS label
      stack to support ancillary data in the packet and high level
      requirements on that ancillary data.  This work is the product of the
      IETF MPLS Open Design Team.  Requirements are derived from a number
      of new proposals for additions to the MPLS label stack to allow
      forwarding or other processing decisions to be made, either by a
      transit or terminating LSR (i.e. the LER), based on application data
      that may be in or below the bottom of the label stack.

  "Distributed Bump-in-the-wire Use Case", Yubao Wang, Qibo Niu, 2021-10-24,
  <draft-wang-bess-evpn-distributed-bump-in-the-wire-01.txt>

      The Bump-in-the-wire use-case of Section 4.3 of [RFC9136] is a
      centerlized inter-subnet forwarding solution.  The centerlized inter-
      subnet forwarding burdens the DGWs with the L3 traffics among
      different subnets inside the same DC.
      
      This draft extends the Bump-in-the-wire use-case of Section 4.3 of
      [RFC9136] in order to achieve a distributed inter-subnet forwarding
      solution.

  "VPN Prefix Outbound Route Filter (VPN Prefix ORF) for BGP-4", Wei Wang,
  Aijun Wang, Haibo Wang, Gyan Mishra, Shunwan Zhuang, Jie Dong, 2022-03-02,
  <draft-wang-idr-vpn-prefix-orf-02.txt>

      This draft defines a new Outbound Route Filter (ORF) type, called the
      VPN Prefix ORF.  The described VPN Prefix ORF mechanism is applicable
      when the VPN routes from different VRFs are exchanged via one shared
      BGP session (e.g., routers in a single-domain connect via Route
      Reflector).

  "Illustrations for Compressed SRv6 Segment List Encoding in SRH", Francois
  Clad, Darren Dukes, 2021-10-15,
  <draft-clad-spring-srv6-srh-compression-illus-00.txt>

      This document provides illustrations for compressed SRv6 Segment List
      Encoding in the Segment Routing Header (SRH).

  "Scalability of IPv6 Transition Technologies for IPv4aaS", Gabor Lencse,
  2022-03-07, <draft-lencse-v6ops-transition-scalability-02.txt>

      Several IPv6 transition technologies have been developed to provide
      customers with IPv4-as-a-Service (IPv4aaS) for ISPs with an IPv6-only
      access and/or core network.  All these technologies have their
      advantages and disadvantages, and depending on existing topology,
      skills, strategy and other preferences, one of these technologies may
      be the most appropriate solution for a network operator.
      
      This document examines the scalability of the five most prominent
      IPv4aaS technologies (464XLAT, Dual Stack Lite, Lightweight 4over6,
      MAP-E, MAP-T) considering two aspects: (1) how their performance
      scales up with the number of CPU cores, (2) how their performance
      degrades, when the number of concurrent sessions is increased until
      hardware limit is reached.

  "Performance Analysis of IPv6 Transition Technologies for IPv4aaS", Gabor
  Lencse, 2021-10-16, <draft-lencse-v6ops-transition-benchmarking-00.txt>

      Several IPv6 transition technologies have been developed to provide
      customers with IPv4-as-a-Service (IPv4aaS) for ISPs with an IPv6-only
      access and/or core network.  All these technologies have their
      advantages and disadvantages, and depending on existing topology,
      skills, strategy and other preferences, one of these technologies may
      be the most appropriate solution for a network operator.
      
      This document examines and compares the performance of some free
      software implementations of the five most prominent IPv4aaS
      technologies (464XLAT, Dual Stack Lite, Lightweight 4over6, MAP-E,
      MAP-T).

  "Extensions to the Access Control Lists (ACLs) YANG Model", Oscar de Dios,
  samier barguil, Mohamed Boucadair, 2021-10-18, <draft-dbb-netmod-acl-00.txt>

      RFC 8519 defines a YANG data model for Access Control Lists (ACLs).
      This document discusses a set of extensions that fix many of the
      limitations of the ACL model as initially defined in RFC 8519.

  "Native Short Addressing for Low power and Lossy Networks Expansion",
  Guangpeng Li, Zhe Lou, Luigi Iannone, Peng Liu, Rong Long, 2022-03-04,
  <draft-li-6lo-native-short-address-02.txt>

      This document specifies a topological addressing scheme, Native Short
      Address (NSA) that enables IP packet transmission over links where
      the transmission of a full length address may not be desirable.  This
      document focuses on carrying IP packets across an LLN (Low power and
      Lossy Network), in which the topology is relatively static where
      nodes' location is fixed and the connection between nodes is rather
      stable.  The changes in the logical topology are only caused by non-
      frequent disconnection in the link.  The specifications details the
      NSA architecture, address allocation, forwarding mechanism, header
      format design, including length-variable fields, and IPv6
      interconnection support.

  "A registry/registrar blockchain architecture for domain name registration
  data access protocol", Yu Zeng, Man Zhang, Wei Wang, 2021-10-18,
  <draft-zeng-dinrg-blockchain-based-rdap-00.txt>

      This document defines a registry/registrar blockchain architecture
      for domain name registration data access protocol.

  "Internet Protocol version 16 (IPv16)", Bosubabu Sambana, 2022-02-09,
  <draft-sambana-irtf-internet-protocol-sixteen-01.txt>

      The present invention Internet Protocol Version 16 (IPv16)
      service for allowing relates to the creation of an extended new
      version of Internet Protocol version 16 and its supports to current
      technologies and future technologies too without any interrupt.
      I propose New Internet Protocol version for technology upgradation
      and limitless end user connectivity and create new classes F and
      Class H, and Class I for extended to present classes and its
      performed Public, private, protected environment access with UWW
      for at the User Level, it is performed to operate both I and H
      Classes for Unlimited and Infinity High Security with multicast and
      Virtual IP address each block connectivity for an universal users
      and interstellar and expand universe users allocations.
      
      IP Address is run single IP address inherited desired
      Sub-IP address and extended upto X power n with Virtual IP and
      IP subsequences upto 2 power of x-n,proposed new series of
      1024.1024.1024.1024 and VirtualIP works similar current way,and
      introduce Universal Wide Web (UWW) also Communicate Interstellar
      objects and Galaxies using Radio Signals are integrated with the
      proposed architecture, and Virtual IP - IPv16 to expand the internal
      space communications very quickly with secured allocated channels.
      Secured allocated individualrecognized block channels are connected
      with Internet and resolve tointerrupt signals and message transfer
      delayed problem, transfer data with secure way along with working
      mechanism the same existing technologies and IPv16 will adapt
      identifiedand undefined problems of IPv6 computer technology
      and network transmission problems to resolve the gaps between
      IPv6 to IPv16 and supports upcoming future technologies
      and versions too.

  "Relax the AS Loop Detection for Aggregates in BGP", Enke Chen, Stefan
  Olofsson, 2021-10-18, <draft-chen-idr-asloop-aggr-00.txt>

      Currently an BGP aggregate may be denied or excluded by the AS loop
      detection mechanism when a more specific, contributing route contains
      the local AS number.  To help enhance network robustness and simplify
      network operations, in this document we propose that the AS loop
      detection be relaxed for aggregates with an AS_SET path segment.

  "The Need for New Authentication Methods for Internet of Things", Dirk
  Hugo, Behcet Sarikaya, 2022-01-26, <draft-hsothers-iotsens-ps-01.txt>

      The document attempts to establish the need for new authentication
      methods in the Internet of Things (IoT) as a future networking area
      beyond 5G going into 6G for standardization.  Several scenarios are
      described where the current authentication protocols do not work or
      are insufficient.  Next we discuss a few new approaches such as
      Wireless LAN/6G sensing and LED light based which can be further
      explored.

  "Requirement and a Reference Model of L2 ACP based ANI", Yizhou Li, Yujing
  Zhou, Li Shen, 2021-10-19, <draft-yizhou-anima-l2-acp-based-ani-00.txt>

      This document discusses the scenarios, requirements and a reference
      model of ANI (Autonomic Networking Infrastructure) to be constructed
      in a layer 2 network using L2 Autonomic Control Plane (ACP) and the
      related functions.  It expands the applicability of ANI to L2 network
      and maintains the same infrastructure.

  "IGP Extensions for Path MTU", Zhibo Hu, Shuping Peng, Xing Xi, 2021-10-19,
  <draft-hu-lsr-igp-path-mtu-00.txt>

      Segment routing (SR) leverages the source routing mechanism.  It
      allows for a flexible definition of end-to-end paths within IGP
      topologies by encoding paths as sequences of topological sub-paths
      which are called segments.  These segments are advertised by the
      link-state routing protocols (IS-IS and OSPF).  Unlike the MPLS, SR
      does not have the specific path construction signaling so that it
      cannot support the Path MTU.  This draft provides the necessary IS-IS
      and OSPF extensions about the Path MTU that need to be used on SR.
      Here, the term "OSPF" means both OSPFv2 and OSPFv3.

  "Advertising S-BFD Discriminators in BGP", Haibo Wang, Yang Huang, Jie
  Dong, 2022-01-03, <draft-wang-bess-sbfd-discriminator-01.txt>

      This document defines the method of transmitting S-BFD discriminators
      through BGP attributes.  This method makes it easier for operators to
      create S-BFD for services.

  "Updated Rules for PCEP Object Ordering", Dhruv Dhody, 2022-03-05,
  <draft-dhody-pce-pcep-object-order-01.txt>

      The Path Computation Element Communication Protocol (PCEP) defines
      the mechanisms for the communication between a Path Computation
      Client (PCC) and a Path Computation Element (PCE), or among PCEs.
      Such interactions include include path computation requests and path
      computation replies defined in RFC 5440.  As per RFC 5440, these
      message are required to follow strict object ordering.
      
      This document updates RFC 5440 by relaxing the strict object ordering
      requirement in the PCEP messages.

  "RFC Series Responsibility Change", Brian Rosen, 2022-03-10,
  <draft-rosen-rfcefdp-update-2026-02.txt>

      In [I-D.iab-rfcefdp-rfced-model], responsibility for the RFC series
      moved to the RFC Series Working Group and the RFC Series Approval
      Board.  It is no longer the responsibility of the RFC Editor and the
      role of the IAB in the RFC Series is altered.  Accordingly, in
      RFC2026 Section 2.1, the sentence "RFC publication is the direct
      responsibility of the RFC Editor, under the general direction of the
      IAB" is deleted.

  "YANG-CBOR: Allocating SID ranges for PEN holders", Carsten Bormann,
  2021-11-18, <draft-bormann-core-yang-sid-pen-01.txt>

      YANG-CBOR, RFC XXXX (draft-ietf-core-yang-cbor) defines YANG Schema
      Item iDentifiers (YANG SID), globally unique 63-bit unsigned integers
      used to identify YANG items.  RFC YYYY (draft-ietf-core-sid) defines
      ways to allocate these SIDs on the basis of IANA registries.
      
      The present specification uses these SID allocation mechanisms to
      allocate 100 000 SIDs for each of the first 1 000 000 holders of
      IANA-registered Private Enterprise Numbers (PENs).

  "Use of Streams in BGP over QUIC", Alvaro Retana, Yingzhen Qu, Jeff
  Tantsura, 2021-11-08, <draft-retana-idr-bgp-quic-stream-01.txt>

      This document specifies the use of QUIC Streams to support multiple
      BGP sessions over one connection in order to achieve high resiliency.

  "Advertising WebSocket support in the HTTPS resource record", Dragana
  Damjanovic, 2021-10-19, <draft-damjanovic-websockets-https-rr-00.txt>

      This specification introduces a way to advertise the support for the
      extended CONNECT feature that is used for running the WebSocket
      protocol over a single stream of an HTTP/2 and HTTP/3 connection
      using HTTPS resource records [HTTPSRR].

  "Satellite Semantic Addressing for Satellite Constellation", Lin Han,
  Richard Li, Alvaro Retana, chenmeiling, Ning Wang, 2022-03-06,
  <draft-lhan-satellite-semantic-addressing-01.txt>

      This document presents a semantic addressing method for satellites in
      satellite constellation connecting with Internet.  The satellite
      semantic address can indicate the relative position of satellites in
      a constellation.  The address can be used with traditional IP address
      or MAC address or used independently for IP routing and switching.

  "Unicast Use of the Formerly Reserved 240/4", Seth Schoen, John Gilmore,
  David Taht, 2022-03-07, <draft-schoen-intarea-unicast-240-02.txt>

      This document redesignates 240/4, the region of the IPv4 address
      space historically known as "Experimental," "Future Use," or "Class
      E" address space, so that this space is no longer reserved.  It asks
      implementers to make addresses in this range fully usable for unicast
      use on the Internet.

  "Artificial Intelligence Framework for Network Management", Pedro
  Martinez-Julia, Shunsuke Homma, Diego Lopez, 2021-10-19,
  <draft-pedro-nmrg-ai-framework-00.txt>

      The adoption of artificial intelligence (AI) in network management
      (NM) solutions is becoming a reality.  It is mainly supported by the
      need to resolve complex problems arisen from the acceptance of SDN/
      NFV technologies as well as network slicing.  Thus, the AINEMA
      framework, as discussed in this document, is required to keep focus
      and organize the efforts on applying AI to NM.  This is enlarged by
      the inclusion of external events in NM operations as well as the
      consideration of a full intelligence process instead of simple AI-
      based guesses.  Such process will be highly based in reasoning and
      formal and target-based intelligence analysis and decision.  This
      will allow computer and network system infrastructures to grow in
      complexity.  The same applies to user demands.  The construction and
      maintenance of AINEMA requires a comprehensive inclusion of several
      mechanisms.  For instance, although there has been a lot of effort to
      make Machine Learning (ML) solutions reliable and acceptable, other
      mechanisms have been forgotten.  It is the particular case of
      reasoning, which is the key within AINEMA.  It will provide enormous
      benefits to NM solutions by, for example, inferring new knowledge and
      applying different kind of rules (e.g. logical) to choose from
      several actions.  While ML solutions work with data, so their only
      requirement from the network infrastructure is data retrieval, AINEMA
      will work in collaboration to the network it is managing.  This makes
      the challenges arisen from intelligent reasoning essential for the
      evolution of NM.  They will be addressed within the context of
      AINEMA.

  "Innovation in Internet Routing and Addressing", Luigi Iannone, 2021-10-20,
  <draft-iannone-routing-and-addressing-manifesto-00.txt>

      This document arguments that despite the ongoing research in routing
      and addressing and the Internet innovation, researchers and engineers
      lack a dedicated forum where they can interact.

  "Term limits for IETF Leadership Positions", Rich Salz, 2021-10-20,
  <draft-rsalz-termlimits-00.txt>

      This document says that nobody can be picked by NomCom for a position
      more than two consecutive terms.
      
      It obsoletes some other documents, which ones are TBD.
      
      Discussion Venues
      
      This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.
      
      Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
      https://github.com/richsalz/draft-rsalz-termlimits.

  "Unicast Use of the Lowest Address in an IPv4 Subnet", Seth Schoen, John
  Gilmore, David Taht, Michael Karels, 2021-11-22,
  <draft-schoen-intarea-unicast-lowest-address-01.txt>

      With ever-increasing pressure to conserve IP address space on the
      Internet, it makes sense to consider where relatively minor changes
      can be made to fielded practice to improve numbering efficiency.  One
      such change, proposed by this document, is to increase the number of
      unicast addresses in each existing subnet, by redefining the use of
      the lowest-numbered (zeroth) host address in each IPv4 subnet as an
      ordinary unicast host identifier, instead of as a duplicate segment-
      directed broadcast address.

  "Secure Credential Transfer", Dmitry Vinokurov, Matt Byington, Matthias
  Lerch, Alex Pelletier, Nick Sha, 2022-01-07,
  <draft-secure-credential-transfer-03.txt>

      This document describes a mechanism to transfer digital credentials
      securely between two devices.  Secure credentials may represent a
      digital key to a hotel room, a digital key to a door lock in a house
      or a digital key to a car.  Devices that share credentials may belong
      to the same or two different platforms (e.g. iOS and Android).
      Secure transfer may include one or more write and read operations.
      Credential transfer needs to be performed securely due to the
      sensitive nature of the information.

  "BGP-LS Extensions for IS-IS Flood Reflectors", Jordan Head, Tony
  Przygienda, 2021-10-21, <draft-head-idr-bgp-ls-isis-fr-00.txt>

      This document defines new BGP-LS (BGP Link-State) TLVs in order to
      carry IS-IS Flood Reflection information.

  "Guidance to the IETF Nominating Committee About Term Limits", Barry Leiba,
  2021-10-21, <draft-leiba-term-limit-guidance-00.txt>

      In order to encourage more turnover in the IETF management bodies,
      this document provides strong guidance to the IETF Nominating
      Committee with regard to limiting the number of consecutive terms a
      given participant should be selected to serve in NomCom-appointed
      positions.

  "YANG Data Models for requesting Path Computation in Optical Networks",
  Italo Busi, Aihua Guo, Sergio Belotti, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-gbb-ccamp-optical-path-computation-yang-01.txt>

      This document describes YANG data models for Remote Procedure Calls
      (RPCs) to request Path Computation in Optical Networks (OTN, WSON and
      Flexi-grid).
      
      The YANG data models defined in this document conforms to the Network
      Management Datastore Architecture (NMDA).

  "Clarification of RFC7030 CSR Attributes definition", Michael Richardson,
  Owen Friel, David von Oheimb, Dan Harkins, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-richardson-lamps-rfc7030-csrattrs-02.txt>

      Enrollment over Secure Transport (EST) is ambiguous in specification
      of the CSR Attributes Response.  This has resulted in implementation
      challenges and implementor confusion.  This document updates EST and
      clarifies how the CSR Attributes Response can be used by an EST
      server to specify both CSR attribute OIDs and also CSR attribute
      values that the server expects the client to include in its CSR
      request.

  "IMAP Paged SEARCH & FETCH Extension", Alexey Melnikov, Arun Achuthan,
  Vikram Nagulakonda, Luis Alves, 2022-02-07,
  <draft-melnikov-imap-partial-04.txt>

      The PARTIAL extension of the Internet Message Access Protocol (RFC
      3501/RFC 9051) allows clients to limit the number of search results
      returned, as well as to perform incremental (paged) searches.  This
      also helps servers to optimize resource usage when performing
      searches.
      
      This document extends PARTIAL SEARCH return option originally
      specified in RFC 5267.  It also clarifies some interactions between
      RFC 5267 and RFC 4731/RFC 9051.
      
      This document also describes the MESSAGELIMIT extension for
      announcing a limit on the number of messages that can be processed in
      a single FETCH/SEARCH/STORE/COPY/MOVE command.

  "Constrained Application Protocol (CoAP) Performance Measurement Option",
  Giuseppe Fioccola, Tianran Zhou, Mauro Cociglio, Fabio Bulgarella, Massimo
  Nilo, 2022-02-09, <draft-fz-core-coap-pm-01.txt>

      This document specifies a method for the Performance Measurement of
      the Constrained Application Protocol (CoAP).  A new CoAP option is
      defined in order to enable network telemetry both end-to-end and on-
      path.

  "An Architecture for DNS-Bound Client and Sender Identities", Ash Wilson,
  Shumon Huque, Olle Johansson, 2021-11-09,
  <draft-wilson-dance-architecture-01.txt>

      This architecture document defines terminology, interaction, and
      authentication patterns, related to the use of DANE DNS records for
      TLS client and messaging peer identity, within the context of
      existing object security and TLS-based protocols.

  "SCIM Verified Domains Extension", Danny Zollner, 2021-10-22,
  <draft-zollner-scim-domain-extension-00.txt>

      The System for Cross-domain Identity Management (SCIM) protocol
      supports creation and management of identity resources such as users
      between a client and a service provider.  In some instances, a SCIM
      service provider may maintain a list of DNS domains that an
      organization using that service has registered for their exclusive
      use with the service.  This registration of domains is frequently
      tied to some form of ownership verification for each domain.  This
      document defines an extension to the SCIM protocol introducing a new
      'VerifiedDomains' resource type in order to allow a SCIM client to
      confirm what domains have had ownership verified by the SCIM service
      provider, as well as some information about whether the User
      resource's userName and emails attributes require domain verification
      in order for a value to possess that domain suffix.

  "SCIM Roles and Entitlements Extension", Danny Zollner, 2021-10-22,
  <draft-zollner-scim-roles-entitlements-extension-00.txt>

      The System for Cross-domain Identity Management (SCIM) protocol's
      schema RFC RFC7643 (https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7643)
      defines the complex core schema attributes "roles" and
      "entitlements".  For both of these concepts, frequently only a
      predetermined set of values are accepted by a SCIM service provider.
      The values that are accepted may vary per customer or tenant based on
      customizable configuration in the service provider's application or
      based on other criteria such as what services have been purchased.
      This document defines an extension to the SCIM 2.0 standard to allow
      SCIM service providers to represent available data pertaining to
      roles and entitlements so that SCIM clients can consume this
      information and provide easier management of role and entitlement
      assignments.

  "BIER-TE for Broadcast Link", Huaimo Chen, Mike McBride, Aijun Wang, Gyan
  Mishra, Lei Liu, Xufeng Liu, 2022-02-24, <draft-chen-bier-te-lan-03.txt>

      This document describes extensions to "Bit Index Explicit Replication
      Traffic Engineering" (BIER-TE) for supporting LANs (i.e., broadcast
      links).  For a multicast packet with an explicit point-to-multipoint
      (P2MP) path traversing LANs, the packet is replicated and forwarded
      statelessly along the path.

  "BGP-SPF Flooding Reduction", Huaimo Chen, Gyan Mishra, Aijun Wang, Yisong
  Liu, Haibo Wang, Yanhe Fan, 2021-11-13,
  <draft-chen-lsvr-flood-reduction-01.txt>

      This document describes extensions to Border Gateway Protocol (BGP)
      for flooding the link states on a topology that is a subgraph of the
      complete topology of a BGP-SPF domain, so that the amount of flooding
      traffic in the domain is greatly reduced.  This would reduce
      convergence time with a more stable and optimized routing
      environment.

  "A 'Time Since Registration' Resource Record for Multicast DNS", Ted Lemon,
  Liang Qin, 2021-10-22, <draft-tllq-tsr-00.txt>

      This document defines a new DNS Resource Record (RR) to be used with
      multicast DNS.  The new RR is used to communicate the time at which
      the set of RRsets on a domain name were first registered.

  "BGP MVPN in IPv6 Infrastructure Networks: Problems and Solution
  Approaches", Fanghong Duan, Jingrong Xie, 2021-10-23,
  <draft-duan-bess-mvpn-ipv6-infras-00.txt>

      MVPN deployment faces some problems while used in provider's IPv6
      infrastructure networks.  This document describes these problems, and
      the solutions to solve these problems.

  "Multicast VPN Upstream Designated Forwarder Selection", Heng Wang,
  Fanghong Duan, 2021-10-23,
  <draft-wang-bess-mvpn-upstream-df-selection-00.txt>

      This document defines Multicast Virtual Private Network (VPN)
      extensions and procedures that allow fast failover for upstream
      failures by allowing upstream Provider Edges (PEs) to determine a
      single forwarder for a VPN multicast flow, without the downstream
      PEs' duplication prevention.  The fast failover is accomplished by
      using Virtual Router Redundancy Protocol (VRRP) [RFC5798] or similar
      technologies for the upstream PEs to determine a single desinated
      fowarder.  Also, this document introduces a new BGP Extended
      Community called "Upstream Forwarder Selection", carried by BGP VPN
      route so that the upstream PEs can inform downstream PEs the election
      behavior.  The downstream PEs, accordingly, send C-multicast routes
      to both the primary and standby upstream PEs and forward the
      multicast flow comming from both sides to the CEs.

  "BIER Deployment and Operation: Challenges and Solution Approaches",
  Jingrong Xie, Fanghong Duan, 2021-10-23,
  <draft-xie-mboned-bier-deploy-00.txt>

      As a new multicast architecture, BIER [RFC8279] has been an IETF
      standard for years.  It has been evaluated in some networks for some
      scenarios.  Some challenges related to its deployment, operation,
      maintenance, and extensibility are raised.  This document reviews and
      describes the challenges related to its deployment, and try to figure
      out the potential solution approches.

  "Support for Virtual Transport Network (VTN) in the Path Computation
  Element Communication Protocol (PCEP)", Jie Dong, Sheng Fang, Liuyan Han,
  Minxue Wang, 2021-10-23, <draft-dong-pce-pcep-vtn-00.txt>

      With the introduction and evolvement of 5G and other network
      scenarios, some existing or new customers may require connectivity
      services with advanced characteristics comparing to traditional
      Virtual Private Networks (VPNs).  Such kind of network service is
      called enhanced VPNs (VPN+).  The typical application of VPN+ is to
      provide network slice services.
      
      A Virtual Transport Network (VTN) is a virtual underlay network which
      consists of a set of dedicated or shared network resources allocated
      from the physical underlay network, and is associated with a
      customized logical network topology.  VPN+ services can be delivered
      by mapping one or a group of overlay VPNs to the appropriate VTNs as
      the virtual underlay.  Then traffic flows of the VPN+ service can be
      steered onto the TE paths within the VTN.
      
      The Path Computation Element (PCE) provides path computation
      functions in support of traffic engineering in Multiprotocol Label
      Switching (MPLS), Generalized MPLS (GMPLS) and Segment Routing (SR)
      networks.
      
      This document specifies the extensions to PCE communication Protocol
      (PCEP) to carry VTN information in the PCEP messages.  The extensions
      in this document can be used in the basic PCE computation, the
      stateful PCE and the PCE-initiated LSP mechanisms to indicate path
      computation, path status report and path initialization within a
      specific VTN.

  "SCIM Protocol: Multi-Value Filtering Extension", Phillip Hunt, 2021-10-23,
  <draft-hunt-scim-mv-filtering-00.txt>

      The System for Cross-Domain Identity Management (SCIM) specifications
      define a profile of HTTP protocol and a schema that enable managing
      identities in cross-domain scenarios.  This specification extends
      SCIM protocol resource retrieval and query functions to enable paging
      and filtering of multi-valued attributes in a SCIM service provider
      resource.

  "A Compute Resources Oriented Scheduling Mechanism based on Dataplane
  Programmability", Zhiqiang Li, Kehan Yao, Yang Li, 2021-10-23,
  <draft-li-coinrg-compute-resource-scheduling-00.txt>

      With massive data growing in the internet, how to effectively use the
      compute resources has become a quite hot topic.  In order to cool
      down the pressure in today's large data centers, some compute
      resources have been moved towards the edge, gradually forming a
      distributed Compute Force Network.  Force is a physical cause which
      can change the state of a motion or an object.  We refer the
      definition from physics and extend its philosophy to network that in
      future, the network can be a compute force which can facilitate the
      integration of different kinds of compute resources, no matter
      hardware or software, making the computation fast and effective.  In
      this draft, we present a compute resources oriented scheduling
      mechanism based on dataplane programmability, which can effectively
      schedule and manage compute resources in the network.

  "Evolution of Cooperating Layered SDN Architecture including Compute and
  Data Awareness", Luis Contreras, 2021-10-24,
  <draft-contreras-nmrg-clas-evolution-00.txt>

      This document proposes the extension of the Cooperating Layered
      Architecture for Software-Defined Networking (SDN) framework by
      including Compute and Data Awareness.

  "Revised Error Handling for BGP Messages", Haibo Wang, Ming Shen, Jie Dong,
  2021-10-24, <draft-wang-idr-bgp-error-enhance-00.txt>

      This document supplements and revises RFC7606.  According to RFC
      7606, when an UPDATE packet received from a neighbor contains an
      attribute of incorrect format, the BGP session cannot be reset
      directly.  Instead, the BGP session must be reset based on the
      specific problem.  Error packets must minimize the impact on routes
      and do not affect the correctness of the protocol.  Different error
      handling methods are used.  The error handling methods include
      discarding attributes, withdrawing routes, disabling the address
      family, and resetting sessions.
      
      RFC 7606 specifies the error handling methods of some existing
      attributes and provides guidance for error handling of new
      attributes.
      
      This document supplements the error handling methods for common
      attributes that are not specified in RFC7606, and provides
      suggestions for revising the error handling methods for some
      attributes.  The general principle remains unchanged: Maintain
      established BGP sessions and keep valid routes updated.  However,
      discard or delete incorrect attributes or packets to minimize the
      impact on the current session.

  "Traffic Mapping YANG model for Traffic Engineering (TE)", Dhruv Dhody,
  2022-03-07, <draft-dhody-teas-te-traffic-yang-01.txt>

      This document provides a YANG data model to map traffic to Traffic
      Engineering (TE) paths.  This model providers operator a seamless
      control and management of which traffic to send on the underlying TE
      resources.

  "Source Address Validation: Use Cases and Gap Analysis", Dan Li, Jianping
  Wu, Mingqing Huang, Lancheng Qin, Nan Geng, 2022-01-10,
  <draft-li-sav-gap-analysis-01.txt>

      This document identifies the importance and use cases of source
      address validation (SAV) at both intra-domain level and inter-domain
      level (see [RFC5210]).  Existing intra-domain and inter-domain SAV
      mechanisms, either Ingress ACL filtering [RFC2827], unicast Reverse
      Path Forwarding (uRPF) [RFC3704], or Enhanced Feasible-Path uRPF
      (EFP-uRPF) [RFC8704] has limitations in scalability or accuracy.
      This document provides gap analysis of the existing SAV mechanisms.

  "IETF Network Slice Deployment Status and Considerations", Yusong Ma, Rui
  Luo, Alex Chan, Ben Suen, Jie Dong, 2021-10-24,
  <draft-ma-teas-ietf-network-slice-deployment-00.txt>

      Network Slicing is considered as an important approach to provide
      different services and customers with the required network
      connectivity, network resources and performance characteristics over
      a shared network.  Operators have started the deployment of network
      slices in their networks for different purposes.  This document
      introduces several deployment cases of IETF network slices in
      operator networks.  Some considerations collected from these IETF
      network slice deployments are also provided.

  "Control Plane of Inter-Domain Source Address Validation Architecture", Ke
  Xu, Xiaoliang Wang, Yangfei Guo, 2021-10-24,
  <draft-guo-intarea-savax-control-00.txt>

      Because the Internet forwards packets according to the IP destination
      address, packet forwarding typically takes place without inspection
      of the source address and malicious attacks have been launched using
      spoofed source addresses.  The inter-domain source address validation
      architecture is an effort to enhance the Internet by using state
      machine to generate consistent tags.  When communicating between two
      end hosts at different ADs of IPv6 network, tags will be added to the
      packets to identify the authenticity of the IPv6 source address.
      
      This memo focus on the control plane of the SAVA-X mechanism.

  "Communication Protocol Between the AD Control Server and the AD Edge
  Router of Inter-Domain Source Address Validation Architecture", Ke Xu,
  Xiaoliang Wang, Yangfei Guo, 2021-10-24,
  <draft-guo-intarea-savax-protocol-00.txt>

      Because the Internet forwards packets according to the IP destination
      address, packet forwarding typically takes place without inspection
      of the source address and malicious attacks have been launched using
      spoofed source addresses.  The inter-domain source address validation
      architecture is an effort to enhance the Internet by using state
      machine to generate consistent tags.  When communicating between two
      end hosts at different ADs of IPv6 network, tags will be added to the
      packets to identify the authenticity of the IPv6 source address.
      
      This memo focus on the data plane of the SAVA-X mechanism.

  "Data Plane of Inter-Domain Source Address Validation Architecture", Ke Xu,
  Xiaoliang Wang, Yangfei Guo, 2021-10-24,
  <draft-guo-intarea-savax-data-00.txt>

      Because the Internet forwards packets according to the IP destination
      address, packet forwarding typically takes place without inspection
      of the source address and malicious attacks have been launched using
      spoofed source addresses.  The inter-domain source address validation
      architecture is an effort to enhance the Internet by using state
      machine to generate consistent tags.  When communicating between two
      end hosts at different ADs of IPv6 network, tags will be added to the
      packets to identify the authenticity of the IPv6 source address.
      
      This memo focus on the data plane of the SAVA-X mechanism.

  "Application-aware Networking (APN) Header", Zhenbin Li, Shuping Peng,
  Shuai Zhang, 2022-03-06, <draft-li-apn-header-01.txt>

      This document defines the application-aware networking (APN) header
      which can be used in a variety of data planes.

  "ICMPv6 Echo Request/Reply for Enabled In-situ OAM Capabilities", Xiao Min,
  Greg Mirsky, 2021-10-24, <draft-xiao-6man-icmpv6-ioam-conf-state-00.txt>

      This document describes the ICMPv6 IOAM Echo functionality, which
      uses the ICMPv6 IOAM Echo Request/Reply messages, allowing the IOAM
      encapsulating node to discover the enabled IOAM capabilities of each
      IOAM transit node and IOAM decapsulating node.

  "IOAM Linkage Solution for the Protection Cases of 5G Bearer Network",
  Zhenwen Li, 2021-10-24, <draft-li-ioam-path-protection-00.txt>

      In-situ operation and maintenance management (IOAM, In-situ OAM), as
      a network performance monitoring technology, is based on the
      principle of path-associated detection to perform specific field
      marking/coloring and identification on actual service flows, and
      perform packet loss and delay measurement.  It can quickly perceive
      network performance-related faults, and accurately delimit boundaries
      and do troubleshooting.  However, the current IOAM solution has
      shortcomings too.  For example, after the service traffic path
      switching, the IOAM cannot continue working.  This paper proposes a
      scheme to achieve automatic performance monitoring through service
      path switching and linkage with IOAM, which enhances the feasibility
      of the IOAM scheme in large-scale deployment and the completeness of
      IOAM technology.

  "Self-Contained Alternate-Marking Mechanism for Performance Monitoring in
  High-Quality Network", Zongpeng Du, Peng Liu, 2021-10-24,
  <draft-du-ippm-self-contained-alt-mark-00.txt>

      This document introduces a self-contained method that can involve the
      client in based on some extensions to the alternate-marking
      (coloring) technique.

  "Application-aware IPv6 Networking (APN6) Encapsulation", Zhenbin Li,
  Shuping Peng, Chongfeng Xie, 2022-03-07, <draft-li-apn-ipv6-encap-01.txt>

      Application-aware IPv6 Networking (APN6) makes use of IPv6
      encapsulation to convey the APN Attribute along with data packets and
      make the network aware about data flow requirements at different
      granularity levels.  The APN attribute can be encapsulated in the APN
      header.  This document defines the encapsulation of the APN header in
      the IPv6 data plane.

  "Resource Record for Signaling Transport for DNS to Authority Servers",
  Brian Dickson, 2021-10-24, <draft-dickson-dprive-dnst-00.txt>

      This Internet Draft proposes an RRTYPE to signal explicit support for
      transport types for DNS service.  This new RRTYPE is "DNST".  The
      available transports to signal are TCP and UDP on port 53 (DNS), and
      DoT (DNS over TLS) transport using TCP port 853.

  "Comparing One-way Delays in Multipath", Jiao Kang, liangqiandeng, Peng
  Liu, 2021-10-24, <draft-kang-quic-oneway-delays-in-multipath-00.txt>

      This document provides a solution for comparing one-way delays in
      multipath quic.  In this solution, through message interaction
      between data receiver and data sender, the data sender can obtain
      delay rankings of multiple specified uniflows, providing reference
      for sending data packets.

  "Signal Degrade Indication in BFD", Liuyan Han, Minxue Wang, Fan Yang,
  2021-10-25, <draft-hwy-bfd-sdi-00.txt>

      To satisfy the requirements of signal degrade indication described in
      [I-D.yang-mpls-ps-sdi-sr], this document illustrates the extension of
      BFD protocol to support signal degrade indication.

  "Marking Methods for Performance Measurement", Tal Mizrahi, Giuseppe
  Fioccola, Mauro Cociglio, Mach Chen, Greg Mirsky, 2021-10-25,
  <draft-mizrahi-ippm-marking-00.txt>

      This memo presents a summary of marking methods for performance
      measurements, and discusses the tradeoffs among them.  These marking
      methods enable to measure various performance metrics such as packet
      loss and delay, and require a low overhead in the header of data
      packets, as low as one or two bits per packet, or in some cases even
      zero bits per packet.  The target audience of this document is
      network protocol designers; this document is intended to help
      protocol designers choose the best marking method(s) based on the
      protocol's constraints and requirements.

  "cloud-network integration", Minxue Wang, Qian Cai, Liuyan Han, Ran Chen,
  2021-10-25, <draft-wang-rtgwg-cloud-network-integration-00.txt>

      This document describes cloud-network integration scenario and
      networking technologies.

  "Routing Header Based BIER Information Encapsulation", Wei Wang, Aijun
  Wang, Huaimo Chen, Gyan Mishra, 2022-03-06, <draft-wang-bier-rh-bier-04.txt>

      This draft proposes one new encapsulation schema of Bit Index
      Explicit Replication (BIER) information to transfer the multicast
      packets within the IPv6 network.  By using a new type of IPv6 Routing
      Header to forward the packet, the original source address and
      destination address of the multicast packet is kept unchanged along
      the forwarding path.  Such encapsulation schema can make full use of
      the existing IPv6 quality assurance solutions to provide high-quality
      multicast service.

  "Native Minimal Protocols with Flexibility at Edge Networks", Sheng Jiang,
  2021-10-25, <draft-jiang-intarea-nmp-edge-00.txt>

      This document introduces a flexible native minimal protocol for fast
      short packet transmission in edge networks, and can communicate with
      IPv6 nodes through gateways.

  "A YANG Model for Application-aware Networking (APN)", Shuping Peng,
  Zhenbin Li, 2021-10-25, <draft-peng-apn-yang-00.txt>

      Application-aware Networking (APN) is a framework, where APN data
      packets convey APN attribute (incl.  APN ID and/or APN Parameters) to
      enable fine grained service provisioning.  This document defines a
      YANG module for APN.
      
      The YANG modules in this document conform to the Network Management
      Datastore Architecture (NMDA).

  "Considerations about Hierarchical IETF Network Slices", Jie Dong, Zhenbin
  Li, 2022-03-06, <draft-dong-teas-hierarchical-ietf-network-slice-01.txt>

      Network slicing is targeted at existing or emerging customers or
      services which may request for network connectivity services with a
      specific set of Service Level Objectives (SLOs) and Service Level
      Expectations (SLEs).  In some network scenarios, there can be
      requirements for the deployment of hierarchical network slices.The
      general framework of IETF network slice supports hierarchical network
      slicing, while the technologies for realizing hierarchical IETF
      network slice need to be considered.
      
      This document describes the typical scenarios of hierarchical IETF
      network slices, and provides the considerations and requirements on
      the technologies in different network planes to realize hierarchical
      IETF network slices.

  "System-defined Configuration", Qiufang Ma, Kent Watsen, Qin WU, Chong
  Feng, Jan Lindblad, 2022-02-14, <draft-ma-netmod-with-system-02.txt>

      This document updates NMDA [RFC8342] to define a read-only
      conventional configuration datastore called "system" to hold system-
      defined configurations.  To avoid clients' explicit copy/paste of
      referenced system-defined configuration, a "resolve-system" parameter
      has been defined to allow the server acting as a "system client" to
      populate referenced system-defined nodes automatically.  The solution
      enables clients to reference nodes defined in <system>, overwrite
      values of configurations defined in <system>, and configure
      descendant nodes of system-defined nodes.

  "RGB (Replication through Global Bitstring) Segment for Multicast Source
  Routing over IPv6", Yisong Liu, Jingrong Xie, Xuesong Geng, 2021-10-25,
  <draft-lx-msr6-rgb-segment-00.txt>

      This document introduces the RGB (Replication through Global
      Bitstring) Segment for Multicast Source Routing over IPv6.

  "Source Segment for Multicast Source Routing over IPv6", Jingrong Xie,
  Xuesong Geng, Yisong Liu, 2021-10-25, <draft-xl-msr6-source-segment-00.txt>

      This document defines the general concept of source segment which is
      used as the IPv6 source address in an IPv6 packet.  Source segment
      for multicast service is introduced in this document.

  "IPv6 Multicast Source Routing Traffic Engineering", Xuesong Geng, Zhenbin
  Li, Jingrong Xie, 2022-03-07, <draft-geng-msr6-traffic-engineering-01.txt>

      This document defines 2 new types of segment: End.RL and End.RL.X ,
      and the corresponding packet processing procedures over the IPv6 data
      plane for the MSR6(Multicast Source Routing over IPv6) TE solutions.

  "Flow Measurement in IPv6 Network", Haojie Wang, Yisong Liu, Changwang Lin,
  Xiao Min, 2022-03-03, <draft-wang-ippm-ipv6-flow-measurement-01.txt>

      In-situ Operations, Administration, and Maintenance (OAM) need
      carrying the necessary measurement information into a packet while
      the packet transverses a path between two points in the network.
      This document describes how to deploy in-situ flow performance
      measurement based on Alternate-Marking method in IPv6 domain.

  "A Data Manifest for Contextualized Telemetry Data", Benoit Claise, Jean
  Quilbeuf, Diego Lopez, Ignacio Martinez-Casanueva, Thomas Graf, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-claise-opsawg-collected-data-manifest-01.txt>

      Most network equipment feature telemetry as a mean to monitoring
      their status.  Several protocols exist to this end, for example, the
      model-driven telemetry governed by YANG models.  Some of these
      protocols provide the data itself, without any contextual information
      about the collection method.  This can render the data unusable if
      that context is lost, for instance when the data is stored without
      the relevant information.  This document proposes a YANG data model
      to store that contextual information along with the collected data in
      order to keep the collected data exploitable in the future.

  "Multipath-QUIC Use Cases", Dapeng Liu, Xiaobo Yu, 2021-10-25,
  <draft-liu-quic-mpquic-usecase-00.txt>

      This draft introduces the use cases of multipath QUIC.

  "List Pagination for YANG-driven Protocols", Kent Watsen, Qin WU, Olof
  Hagsand, Hongwei Li, Per Andersson, 2021-10-25,
  <draft-wwlh-netconf-list-pagination-00.txt>

      In some circumstances, instances of YANG modeled "list" and "leaf-
      list" nodes may contain numerous entries.  Retrieval of all the
      entries can lead to inefficiencies in the server, the client, and the
      network in between.
      
      This document defines a model for list pagination that can be
      implemented by YANG-driven management protocols such as NETCONF and
      RESTCONF.  The model supports paging over optionally filtered and/or
      sorted entries.  The solution additionally enables servers to
      constrain query expressions on some "config false" lists or leaf-
      lists.

  "Opportunities of Flexible Addressing and Protocols in Digital Twin
  Network", Guangpeng Li, Cheng Zhou, 2021-10-25,
  <draft-li-nmrg-dtn-addressing-protocols-00.txt>

      To build digital twin networks based on the digital twin network
      architecture in [DTNConcept], modeling of digital twins and virtual-
      physical mapping are critical.  There are many ways to construct
      network twins, and they have different ways to realize virtual-
      physical mapping and information exchange between twins.
      Constructing a twin of network element that has communication
      requirement and function like a physical entity is a kind of network
      modeling.  In this scenario, when implementing virtual-physical
      mapping and information exchange between twins based on network layer
      communication, It faces problems such as large addressing space
      consumption and low addressing efficiency.
      
      This document describes an idea to using flexible addressing and
      protocol techniques in digital twin network architecture that can
      help reduce the complexity of digital twin network implementations
      and improve digital twin network efficiency and security.

  "Media Over QUIC - Use Cases and Considerations for Media Transport
  Protocol Design", James Gruessing, Spencer Dawkins, 2022-03-06,
  <draft-gruessing-moq-requirements-01.txt>

      This document describes use cases that have been discussed in the
      IETF community under the banner of "Media Over QUIC", provides
      analysis about those use cases, recommends a subset of use cases that
      cover live media ingest, syndication, and streaming for further
      exploration, and describes considerations that should guide the
      design of protocols to satisfy these use cases.

  "Dissemination of Flow Specification Rules for APN", Shuping Peng, Zhenbin
  Li, Sheng Fang, Yong Cui, 2021-10-25, <draft-peng-apn-bgp-flowspec-00.txt>

      A Flow Specification is an n-tuple consisting of several matching
      criteria that can be applied to IP traffic.  Application-aware
      Networking (APN) is a framework, where APN data packets convey APN
      attribute (incl.  APN ID and/or APN Parameters).  The dynamic Flow
      Spec mechanism for APN is designed for the new applications of
      traffic filtering in an APN domain as well as the traffic control and
      actions on the policy enforcement points in this domain.  These
      applications require coordination among the ASes within a service
      provider.
      
      This document specifies a new BGP Flow Spec Component Type in order
      to support APN traffic filtering.  The match field is the APN ID.  It
      also specifies traffic filtering actions to enable the creation of
      the APN ID in the outer tunnel encapsulation when matched to the
      corresponding Flow Spec rules.

  "A YANG Data Model for WDM management in Front-Haul NBI", Yang Zhao, Jiang
  Sun, Chaode Yu, 2021-10-25, <draft-zhaosun-ccamp-front-haul-wdm-yang-01.txt>

      This document introduces an architecture of semi-active fronthaul WDM
      system and explains how the semi-active devices can be managed by a
      transmission controller.  This document also specifies a YANG data
      model for the WDM devices in front-haul scenario, which is defined in
      G.owdm.  The model is expected to be used in the Northbound of
      controller.

  "SOAR(Security Orchestration Automation and Response)-based Native Network
  Management to Optimize an Adaptive B5G Network", Hwan-kuk Kim, Min-Suk Kim,
  2021-10-25, <draft-kim-nmrg-nnmb5g-00.txt>

      This document is derived from the intelligent artificial intelligent
      (AI) network and autonomous security, network management intend-based
      technology to ensure constant security quality in B5G.  SOAR
      (Security Orchestration Automation and Response) is needed by
      autonomous security and network management to optimize an adaptive
      B5G network.  The purpose of this document is to confirm whether the
      requirements are reflected to future users and to develop and
      identify user provided by useful decision how to develop the system.
      This document also covers the user requirements for autonomous
      security and intend-based network management to ensure constant
      security quality on B5G.

  "Extension of Link Bandwidth Extended Community", Wenyan Li, Haibo Wang,
  Jie Dong, 2022-03-07, <draft-li-idr-link-bandwidth-ext-01.txt>

      [I-D.ietf-idr-link-bandwidth] defines a BGP link bandwidth extended
      community attribute, which can enable devices to implement unequal-
      cost load-balancing.  However, the bandwidth value encapsulated by
      the extended community attribute is of the floating-point type, which
      is inconvenient to use.  In this document, a set of new types of link
      bandwidth extended community are introduced to facilitate the
      configuration and calculation of link bandwidth.

  "Domain Path (D-PATH) for Ethernet VPN (EVPN) Interconnect Networks", Jorge
  Rabadan, Senthil Sathappan, Mallika Gautam, Patrice Brissette, Wen Lin,
  2022-03-07, <draft-sr-bess-evpn-dpath-01.txt>

      The BGP Domain PATH (D-PATH) attribute is defined for Inter-Subnet
      Forwarding (ISF) BGP Sub-Address Families that advertise IP prefixes.
      When used along with EVPN IP Prefix routes or IP-VPN routes, it
      identifies the domain(s) through which the routes have passed and
      that information can be used by the receiver BGP speakers to detect
      routing loops or influence the BGP best path selection.  This
      document extends the use of D-PATH so that it can also be used along
      with other EVPN route types.

  "Salted Challenge Response Authentication Mechanism (SCRAM) SASL and
  GSS-API Mechanisms", Alexey Melnikov, 2021-10-25,
  <draft-melnikov-scram-bis-00.txt>

      This document updates requirements on implementations of various
      Salted Challenge Response Authentication Mechanism (SCRAM) Simple
      Authentication and Security Layer (SASL) mechanisms based on more
      modern security practices.

  "Problems and Requirements of Addressing in Integrated Space-Terrestrial
  Network", Yuanjie Li, Hewu Li, Jiayi Liu, 2021-10-25,
  <draft-li-istn-addressing-requirement-00.txt>

      This document presents a detailed analysis of the problems and
      requirements of network addressing in "Internet in space" for
      terrestrial users.  It introduces the basics of satellite mega-
      constellations, terrestrial terminals/ground stations, and their
      inter-networking.  Then it explicitly analyzes how space-terrestrial
      mobility yeilds challenges for the logical topology, addressing, and
      their impact on routing.  The requirements of addressing in the
      space-terrestrial network are discussed in detail, including
      uniqueness, stability, locality, scalability, efficiency and backward
      compatibility with terrestrial Internet.  The problems and
      requirements of network addressing in space-terrestrial networks are
      finally outlined.

  "Problems and Requirements of Evaluation Methodology for Integrated Space
  and Terrestrial Networks", Zeqi Lai, Hewu Li, Yangtao Deng, Qian Wu, Jun
  Liu, 2021-10-25, <draft-lai-bmwg-istn-methodology-00.txt>

      With the rapid evolution of the aerospace industry, many "NewSpace"
      upstarts are actively deploying their mega-constellations in low
      Earth orbits (LEO) and building integrated space and terrestrial
      networks (ISTN), promising to provide pervasive, low-latency, and
      high-throughput Internet service globally.  Due to the high
      manufacturing, launching, and updating cost of LEO mega-
      constellations, it is expected that ISTNs can be well designed and
      evaluated before the launch of satellites.  However, the progress of
      designing, assessing, and understanding new network functionalities
      and protocols for futuristic ISTNs faces a substantial obstacle: lack
      of standardized evaluation methodology with acceptable realism,
      flexibility, and cost that can involve the unique dynamic behaviors
      of ISTNs.  This memo first reviews the unique characteristics of LEO
      mega-constellations.  Further, it analyzes the limitation of existing
      network evaluation and analysis methodologies under ISTN
      environments.  Finally, it outlines the key requirements of future
      evaluation methodology tailored for ISTNs.

  "Preferred Path Routing Framework", Stewart Bryant, Uma Chunduri, Alexander
  Clemm, 2021-10-25, <draft-chunduri-rtgwg-preferred-path-routing-01.txt>

      Capacity demands, Traffic Engineering (TE) and determinism are some
      of key requirements for various cellular, edge and industrial
      deployments.  These deployments span from many underlying data pane
      technologies including native IPv4, native IPv6 along with MPLS and
      Segment Routing (SR).
      
      This document provides a framework for Preferred Path Routing (PPR).
      PPR is a method of providing path based dynamic routing for a number
      of packet types including IPv4, IPv6 and MPLS.  This seamlessly works
      with a controller plane which holds both complete network view of
      operator policies, while distributed control plane providing self-
      healing benefits in a near-real time fashion.
      
      PPR builds on existing encapsulations at the edge nodes to add path
      identity to the packet.  This reduces the per packet overhead
      required for path steering and therefore has a smaller impact on both
      packet MTU, data plane processing and overall goodput for small
      payload packets, while extending path steering benefits to any
      existing data plane.
      A number of extensions that allow expansion of use beyond simple
      point-to-point-paths are also described in this memo.

  "Problems and Requirements of Source Address Spoofing in Integrated Space
  and Terrestrial Networks", Jun Liu, Hewu Li, Tianyu Zhang, Qian Wu,
  2021-10-25, <draft-jliu-istn-savi-requirement-00.txt>

      This document presents the detailed analysis about the problems and
      requirements of dealing with the threat of source address spoofing in
      Integrated Space and Terrestrial Networks (ISTN).  First,
      characteristics of ISTN that cause DDos are identified.  Secondly, it
      analyzes the major reasons why existing terrestrial source address
      validation mechanism does not fit well for ISTN.  Then, it outlines
      the major requirements for improvement on source address validation
      mechanism for ISTN.

  "Path Computation Element Protocol(PCEP) Extension for Color", Balaji
  Rajagopalan, Vishnu Beeram, Shaofu Peng, Quan Xiong, Mike Koldychev, Gyan
  Mishra, 2021-11-14, <draft-rajagopalan-pce-pcep-color-01.txt>

      Color is a 32-bit numerical attribute that is used to associate a
      Traffic Engineering (TE) tunnel or policy with an intent or objective
      (e.g. low latency).  This document specifies an extension to Path
      Computation Element Protocol (PCEP) to carry the color attribute.

  "Segment Routing IPv6 Mobile User Plane Architecture for Distributed
  Mobility Management", Satoru Matsushima, Katsuhiro Horiba, Ashiq Khan, Yuya
  Kawakami, Tetsuya Murakami, Keyur Patel, Miya Kohno, Teppei Kamata, Pablo
  Camarillo, Dan Voyer, Shay Zadok, Israel Meilik, Ashutosh Agrawal, Kumaresh
  Perumal, Jakub Horn, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-mhkk-dmm-srv6mup-architecture-02.txt>

      This document defines the Segment Routing IPv6 Mobile User Plane
      (SRv6 MUP) architecture for Distributed Mobility Management.  The
      requirements for Distributed Mobility Management described in
      [RFC7333] can be satisfied by routing fashion.
      
      Mobile services are deployed over several parts of IP networks.  A
      Segment Routing over IPv6 (SRv6) network can accommodate all, or part
      of those networks thanks to the large address space of IPv6 and the
      network programming capability described in [RFC8986].
      
      Segment Routing IPv6 Mobile User Plane Architecture can incorporate
      existing session based mobile networks.  By leveraging SRv6 network
      programmability, mobile user plane can be integrated into the SRv6
      data plane.  In that routing paradigm, session information between
      the entities of the mobile user plane is turned to routing
      information.

  "EVPN Fast Reroute", Luc Burdet, Patrice Brissette, Takuya Miyasaka, Jorge
  Rabadan, 2022-03-07, <draft-burdet-bess-evpn-fast-reroute-02.txt>

      This document summarises EVPN convergence mechanisms and specifies
      procedures for EVPN networks to achieve sub-second and
      scale-independant convergence.

  "Intent-based Routing", Zhenbin Li, Zhibo Hu, Jie Dong, 2021-10-25,
  <draft-li-teas-intent-based-routing-00.txt>

      This document defines the intent-based routing mechanism through
      which the packet can carry the intent information and the network
      node can enforce the policy according to the intent information
      (typically steering the packet into the SR policy or the underlay
      slice which can meet the intent).  The intent-based routing mechanism
      provides a simple and scalable solution to meet the different service
      requirements for the inter-domain routing.

  "Profile for Datagram Congestion Control Protocol (DCCP) Congestion Control
  ID 5", Nathalie Moreno, Juhoon Kim, Markus Amend, 2021-10-25,
  <draft-romo-iccrg-ccid5-00.txt>

      This document contains the profile for Congestion Control Identifier
      5 (CCID 5), BBR-like Congestion Control, in the Datagram Congestion
      Control Protocol (DCCP).  CCID 5 is meant to be used by senders who
      have a strong demand on low latency and require a steady throughput
      behavior.

  "TCPLS: Modern Transport Services with TCP and TLS", Maxime Piraux, Olivier
  Bonaventure, Florentin Rochet, 2022-03-07, <draft-piraux-tcpls-01.txt>

      This document specifies a protocol leveraging TCP and TLS to provide
      modern transport services such as multiplexing, connection migration
      and multipath in a secure manner.
      
      Discussion Venues
      
      This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.
      
      Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
      https://github.com/mpiraux/draft-piraux-tcpls.

  "Considering ALTO as IETF Network Exposure Function", Luis Contreras,
  2021-10-25, <draft-contreras-alto-ietf-nef-00.txt>

      This document proposes ALTO as the means for exposure of underlay
      network capabilities for multiple overlays on top of the network.

  "CDNI Metadata for Delegated Credentials", Frederic Fieau, Stephan Emile,
  Guillaume Bichot, Christoph Neumann, 2022-01-26,
  <draft-fieau-interfaces-https-delegation-subcerts-01.txt>

      The delivery of content over HTTPS involving multiple CDNs raises
      credential management issues.  This document defines metadata in CDNI
      Control and Metadata interface to setup HTTPS delegation using
      Delegated Credentials from an Upstream CDN (uCDN) to a Downstream CDN
      (dCDN).

  "Private Access Tokens", Scott Hendrickson, Jana Iyengar, Tommy Pauly,
  Steven Valdez, Christopher Wood, 2021-10-25,
  <draft-private-access-tokens-01.txt>

      This document defines a protocol for issuing and redeeming privacy-
      preserving access tokens.  These tokens can adhere to an issuance
      policy, allowing a service to limit access according to the policy
      without tracking client identity.
      
      Discussion Venues
      
      This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.
      
      Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
      https://github.com/tfpauly/privacy-proxy.

  "Privacy Preserving Measurement", Tim Geoghegan, Christopher Patton, Eric
  Rescorla, Christopher Wood, 2022-03-07, <draft-gpew-priv-ppm-01.txt>

      There are many situations in which it is desirable to take
      measurements of data which people consider sensitive.  In these
      cases, the entity taking the measurement is usually not interested in
      people's individual responses but rather in aggregated data.
      Conventional methods require collecting individual responses and then
      aggregating them, thus representing a threat to user privacy and
      rendering many such measurements difficult and impractical.  This
      document describes a multi-party privacy preserving measurement (PPM)
      protocol which can be used to collect aggregate data without
      revealing any individual user's data.

  "A Simplified Scalable ELAN Service Model with Segment Routing Underlay",
  Sami Boutros, Siva Sivabalan, Himanshu Shah, Jim Uttaro, Dan Voyer, Bin
  Wen, Luay Jalil, 2021-10-25,
  <draft-boutros-spring-elan-services-over-sr-00.txt>

      This document proposes a new approach for realizing Ethernet LAN
      (ELAN) services with an objective of leveraging Segment Routing
      Control plane to achieve high scalability, faster network
      convergence, and reduced operational complexity.  Furthermore, it
      naturally brings the benefits of All-Active multihoming as well as
      MAC learning in data-plane.

  "IPv6 Fragment Retransmission and Path MTU Discovery Soft Errors", Fred
  Templin, 2022-02-09, <draft-templin-6man-fragrep-06.txt>

      Internet Protocol version 6 (IPv6) provides a fragmentation and
      reassembly service for end systems allowing for the transmission of
      packets that exceed the path MTU.  However, loss of individual
      fragments requires retransmission of original packets in their
      entirety leading to cascading reassembly failures.  This document
      specifies an IPv6 fragment retransmission scheme that matches the
      loss unit to the retransmission unit.  The document further specifies
      an update to Path MTU Discovery that distinguishes hard link size
      restrictions from reassembly congestion events.

  "PIM Light", Hooman Bidgoli, Stig Venaas, Mankamana Mishra, Zhaohui Zhang,
  Mike McBride, 2021-11-12, <draft-hb-pim-light-01.txt>

      This document specifies a new Protocol Independent Multicast
      interface which does not need PIM Hello to accept PIM Join/Prunes or
      PIM Asserts.

  "IANA Registry for the First Nibble Following a Label Stack", Kireeti
  Kompella, Stewart Bryant, Matthew Bocci, Greg Mirsky, Loa Andersson,
  2021-10-25, <draft-kbbma-mpls-1stnibble-00.txt>

      The goal of this memo is to create a new IANA registry (called the
      MPLS First Nibble registry) for the first nibble (4-bit field)
      immediately following an MPLS label stack.  The memo offers a
      rationale for such a registry, describes how the registry should be
      managed, and provides some initial entries.  Furthermore, this memo
      sets out some documentation requirements for registering new values.
      Finally, it provides some recommendations that makes processing MPLS
      packets easier and more robust.
      
      There is an important caveat on the use of this registry versus the
      IP version number registry.
      
      This memo, if published, would update [RFC4928] and [RFC8469].

  "The Pseudorandom Extension for cTLS", Benjamin Schwartz, Christopher
  Patton, 2021-10-25, <draft-cpbs-pseudorandom-ctls-00.txt>

      This draft describes a cTLS extension that allows each party to emit
      a purely pseudorandom bitstream.
      
      Discussion Venues
      
      This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.
      
      Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
      https://github.com/bemasc/pseudorandom-ctls.

  "Data minimization", Jari Arkko, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-arkko-iab-data-minimization-principle-01.txt>

      Communications security has been at the center of many security
      improvements in the Internet.  The goal has been to ensure that
      communications are protected against outside observers and attackers.
      This document recommends that this is no longer alone sufficient to
      cater for the security and privacy issues seen on the Internet today.
      For instance, it is often also necessary to protect against endpoints
      that are compromised, malicious, or whose interests simply do not
      align with the interests of users.  While such protection is
      difficult, there are some measures that can be taken.  It is
      important to consider the role of data passed to various parties -
      including the primary protocol participants - and balance the
      information given to them considering their roles and possible
      compromise of the information.

  "TLS Compressed Elliptic Curve Code Points", Carl Mehner, 2021-10-25,
  <draft-cem-compressed-curves-01.txt>

      This document defines new Transport Layer Security (TLS) Supported
      Groups to allow negotiation in TLS for encoding certain elliptic
      curve public keys in a compressed form rather than the more verbose
      method specified in [RFC8446] and [RFC8422].

  "Carrier Grade Minimalist Multicast (CGM2) using Bit Index Explicit
  Replication (BIER) with Recursive BitString Structure (RBS) Addresses",
  Toerless Eckert, Bing Xu, 2022-02-09, <draft-eckert-bier-cgm2-rbs-01.txt>

      This memo introduces the architecture of a multicast architecture
      derived from BIER-TE, which this memo calls Carrier Grade Minimalist
      Multicast (CGM2).  It reduces limitations and complexities of BIER-TE
      by replacing the representation of the in-packet-header delivery tree
      of packets through a "flat" BitString of adjacencies with a
      hierarchical structure of BFR-local BitStrings called the Recursive
      BitString Structure (RBS) Address.
      
      Benefits of CGM2 with RBS addresses include smaller/fewer BIFT in
      BFR, less complexity for the network architect and in the CGM2
      controller (compared to a BIER-TE controller) and fewer packet copies
      to reach a larger set of BFER.
      
      The additional cost of forwarding with RBS addresses is a slightly
      more complex processing of the RBS address in BFR compared to a flat
      BitString and the novel per-hop rewrite of the RBS address as opposed
      to bit-reset rewrite in BIER/BIER-TE.
      
      CGM2 can support the traditional deployment model of BIER/BIER-TE
      with the BIER/BIER-TE domain terminating at service provider PE
      routers as BFIR/BFER, but it is also the intention of this document
      to expand CGM2 domains all the way into hosts, and therefore
      eliminating the need for an IP Multicast flow overlay, further
      reducing the complexity of Multicast services using CGM2.  Note that
      this is not fully detailed in this version of the document.
      
      This document does not specify an encapsulation for CGM2/RBS
      addresses.  It could use existing encapsulations such as [RFC8296],
      but also other encapsulations such as IPv6 extension headers.

  "Verifiable Distributed Aggregation Functions", Christopher Patton, Richard
  Barnes, Phillipp Schoppmann, 2022-03-04, <draft-patton-cfrg-vdaf-01.txt>

      This document describes Verifiable Distributed Aggregation Functions
      (VDAFs), a family of multi-party protocols for computing aggregate
      statistics over user measurements.  These protocols are designed to
      ensure that, as long as at least one aggregation server executes the
      protocol honestly, individual measurements are never seen by any
      server in the clear.  At the same time, VDAFs allow the servers to
      detect if a malicious or misconfigured client submitted an input that
      would result in an incorrect aggregate result.

  "ALTO Transport Analysis", Y. Yang, 2021-10-25,
  <draft-yang-alto-transport-analysis-00.txt>

      Exposing network information to applications can be a basic function
      of computer networking.  Such network information can be exposed to
      applications through either the data path or the control path.  This
      informational document conducts a survey and analysis of existing
      capabilities and performance of protocols transporting network
      information to applications.

  "QUIC Extension for Reporting Packet Receive Timestamps", Connor Smith, Ian
  Swett, 2021-10-25, <draft-smith-quic-receive-ts-00.txt>

      This document defines an extension to the QUIC transport protocol
      which supports reporting multiple packet receive timestamps using a
      new ACK_RECEIVE_TIMESTAMPS frame type.
      
      Discussion Venues
      
      This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.
      
      Discussion of this document takes place on the QUIC Working Group
      mailing list (quic@ietf.org), which is archived at
      https://mailarchive.ietf.org/arch/browse/quic/.
      
      Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
      https://github.com/wcsmith/draft-quic-receive-ts.

  "BGP SR Policy Extensions for template", KaZhang, Zhibo Hu, Jie Dong,
  2021-10-25, <draft-zhang-idr-sr-policy-template-00.txt>

      Segment Routing(SR) Policies can be advertised using BGP.  An SR
      Policy may has lots of constraints, and as the application and
      features evolve, the SR Policy may need have more and more attribute
      constraints.  To avoid modifying BGP when constraints are added to an
      SR Policy, we can define a template.  The identifier and content of
      the template are defined by the receiver of the SR Policy.  The
      advertiser of an SR policy only needs to know the ID of the template.
      When advertising SR policy, the advertiser carries the template ID in
      the tunnel encapsulation information of the SR policy.  After
      receiving the SR Policy information, the receiver obtains the
      corresponding template and content according to the template ID,
      thereby obtaining abundant constraint configuration information.

  "IS-IS Extensions for Link Bit Error Ratio", Chenxi Li, Guoqi Xu, Zhibo Hu,
  Tianran Zhou, 2021-10-26, <draft-li-lsr-isis-link-ber-00.txt>

      In certain networks, network-performance criteria (e.g., latency) are
      becoming as critical to data-path selection as other metrics.  This
      document describes extensions to IS-IS Traffic Engineering (TE)
      Metric Extensions (RFC 8570).  This draft provides the necessary IS-
      IS extensions about the link bit error ratio (LBER) that need to be
      used to describe network-performance.

  "Semantic Definition Format (SDF): Mapping files", Carsten Bormann, Jan
  Romann, 2021-11-06, <draft-bormann-asdf-sdf-mapping-00.txt>

      The Semantic Definition Format (SDF) is a format for domain experts
      to use in the creation and maintenance of data and interaction models
      in the Internet of Things.  It was created as a common language for
      use in the development of the One Data Model liaison organization
      (OneDM) definitions.  Tools convert this format to database formats
      and other serializations as needed.
      
      An SDF specification often needs to be augmented by additional
      information that is specific to its use in a particular ecosystem or
      application.  SDF mapping files provide a mechanism to represent this
      augmentation.

  "Using SM2 with JOSE and COSE", Fan Dang, 2021-11-06,
  <draft-dang-webauthn-sm2-00.txt>

      This specification defines algorithm encodings and representations
      enabling the ISO/IEC 14888-3:2018 elliptic curve "SM2" to be used for
      JSON Object Signing and Encryption (JOSE) and CBOR Object Signing and
      Encryption (COSE) messages.

  "PCEP Extension for NRP-ID", Quan Xiong, Shaofu Peng, Vishnu Beeram, Tarek
  Saad, 2021-11-06, <draft-xiong-pce-nrp-id-00.txt>

      This document proposes a set of extensions for PCEP to support the
      identifier of Network Resource Partition (NRP-ID) as the constraint
      of network slicing during path computation.

  "TLS for Secure Element Input Output (TLS-SE-IO)", Pascal Urien,
  2022-02-04, <draft-urien-core-tls-se-io-01.txt>

      The goal of TLS-SE-IO is to provide virtual IO pins for secure
      elements running TLS servers, in order to interact with sensors and
      actuators. TLS-SE device processes TLS packets in secure element. It
      may work like a black box (server mode) that exchanges fully
      encrypted packets. It may also export encrypted packet in clear
      form, in order to provide virtual output pin. Output messages may
      include cookies and/or cryptographic materials. Virtual input pin
      forwards input messages, triggered by previous output messages, and
      sent to TLS-SE device for further processing.

  "Distribution of Device Discovery Information in NVMe Over RoCEv2 Storage
  Network Using BGP", Changwang Lin, Mengxiao Chen, Hao Li, 2021-11-07,
  <draft-lin-idr-bgp-nof-nlri-00.txt>

      This document proposes a method of distributing device discovery
      information in NVMe over RoCEv2 storage network using the BGP routing
      protocol.  A new BGP Network Layer Reachability Information (NLRI)
      encoding format, named NoF NLRI, is defined.

  "Negative Caching of Looping NS records", Giovane Moura, Wes Hardaker, John
  Heidemann, Sebastian Castro, 2021-11-07,
  <draft-moura-dnsop-negative-cache-loop-00.txt>

      This document updates guidance about detecting DNS loops in recursive
      resolver algorithms with new requirements to require recursive
      resolvers to detect loops and to implement negative caches.

  "Unicast Use of the Formerly Reserved 0/8", Seth Schoen, John Gilmore,
  David Taht, 2022-03-07, <draft-schoen-intarea-unicast-0-01.txt>

      This document redesignates 0/8, the lowest block in the IPv4 address
      space, so that this space is no longer reserved.  It asks
      implementers to make addresses in this range fully usable for unicast
      use on the Internet.

  "Unicast Use of the Formerly Reserved 127/8", Seth Schoen, John Gilmore,
  David Taht, 2022-03-07, <draft-schoen-intarea-unicast-127-01.txt>

      This document redefines the IPv4 local loopback network as consisting
      only of the 65,536 addresses 127.0.0.0 to 127.0.255.255
      (127.0.0.0/16).  It asks implementers to make addresses in the prior
      loopback range 127.1.0.0 to 127.255.255.255 fully usable for unicast
      use on the Internet.

  "Arm's Platform Security Architecture (PSA) Attestation Verifier
  Endorsements", Thomas Fossati, Yogesh Deshpande, Henk Birkholz, 2021-11-08,
  <draft-fdb-rats-psa-endorsements-00.txt>

      PSA Endorsements include reference values, cryptographic key material
      and certification status information that a Verifier needs in order
      to appraise attestation Evidence produced by a PSA device.  This memo
      defines such PSA Endorsements as a profile of the CoRIM data model.

  "IAB workshop report: Measuring Network Quality for End-Users", Wes
  Hardaker, 2021-11-09, <draft-hardaker-iab-mnqeu-report-01.txt>

      The Measuring Network Quality for End-Users workshop was held
      virtually by the Internet Architecture Board (IAB) in September,
      2021.  This workshop summarizes the workshop, the topics discussed
      and some preliminary conclusions drawn at the end of the workshop.

  "An Introduction to Semantic Routing", Adrian Farrel, Daniel King,
  2022-01-22, <draft-farrel-irtf-introduction-to-semantic-routing-03.txt>

      Many proposals have been made to add semantics to IP packets by
      placing additional information in existing fields, by adding
      semantics to IP addresses themselves, or by adding fields.  The
      intent is to facilitate enhanced routing/forwarding decisions based
      on these additional semantics to provide differentiated forwarding
      paths for different packet flows distinct from simple shortest path
      first routing.  The process is defined as Semantic Routing.
      
      This document provides a brief introduction to Semantic Routing.

  "RTP Payload Format for Colibri Video", Luc Ploumhans, 2021-11-09,
  <draft-ploumhans-avtcore-rtp-colibri-00.txt>

      This memo describes an RTP Payload format for the Colibri Video
      "Standard".  This document describes the transport of Colibri video
      in RTP packets and has applications for low-complexity,
      high-bandwidth streaming of lossy compressed video.
      
      The Colibri Video is intended for low latency video compression
      (with latency potentially on the order of lines of video) at high
      to medium data rates (with compression ratios betwen 2:1 and 20:1).

  "Quantum Safe Cryptography Key Information", Christine van Vredendaal,
  Silvio Dragione, Basil Hess, Tamas Visgrady, Michael Osborne, Dieter Bong,
  Joppe Bos, 2021-11-09, <draft-uni-qsckeys-00.txt>

      This proposal addresses key identification, key serialization, and
      key compression for Quantum Safe Cryptographic (QSC) algorithms
      currently under evaluation in the NIST Post Quantum Cryptography
      (PQC) process.  The purpose of this proposal is to simplify the
      management of key material for algorithms as they evolve through
      standardization phases into production.  Early definition of key
      material standards will help expedite the adoption of new quantum
      safe algorithms at the same time as improving interoperability
      between implementations and minimizing divergence across standards.

  "Tree Hints for the Resource Public Key Infrastructure (RPKI)", Koen van
  Hove, 2021-12-13, <draft-kwvanhove-sidrops-rpki-tree-hints-01.txt>

      In the Resource Public Key Infrastructure (RPKI), holders of IP
      address space can become a Certification Authority (CA), optionally
      hosting their repository.  They can also delegate (part of) their
      resources to subordinate CAs, who in turn may do the same.  This CA
      hierarchy forms a tree structure.  Relying Party (RP) software walks
      this tree and determines the current valid objects.  An underlying
      assumption is that this tree is a reasonable size, and that the
      information can be processed within reasonable time.  This assumption
      is not guaranteed to hold.  This document describes two new
      extensions, "maxDescendants" and "maxVrps", that add constraints for
      use in RP processing that ensure this assumption holds.

  "RPKI-Based Policy Without Route Refresh", Randy Bush, Keyur Patel, Philip
  Smith, Mark Tinka, 2021-11-15, <draft-ymbk-sidrops-rov-no-rr-02.txt>

      A BGP Speaker performing RPKI-based policy should not issue Route
      Refresh to its neighbors when receiving new RPKI data.  A method for
      avoiding doing so is described.

  "Multiple SIP Reason Header Field Values", Robert Sparks, 2021-11-12,
  <draft-sparks-sipcore-multiple-reasons-00.txt>

      The SIP Reason Header Field as defined in RFC 3326 allows only one
      Reason value per protocol value.  Practice shows it is useful to
      allow multiple values with the same protocol value.  This update to
      RFC 3326 allows multiple values for an indicated registered protocol
      when that protocol defines what the presence of multiple values
      means.

  "Domain Name Registration Data (DNRD) .NAME Object Mapping", James Gould,
  2021-11-15, <draft-gould-dnrd-name-mapping-00.txt>

      This document defines the data escrow structure of depositing objects
      specific to the .NAME Top Level Domain (TLD) as an extension to the
      objects deposited with DNRD Objects Mapping.  The .NAME TLD-specific
      objects are Email Forwarding, Defensive Registration, and NameWatch.

  "IPv6 Packet Identification", Fred Templin, 2021-11-18,
  <draft-templin-6man-jumbofrag-01.txt>

      Unlike Internet Protocol, version 4 (IPv4), Internet Protocol,
      version 6 (IPv6) does not include an Identification field in the
      basic packet header.  Instead, IPv6 includes a 32-bit Identification
      field in a Fragment Header extension since the architecture assumed
      that the sole purpose for the Identification is to support the
      fragmentation and reassembly process.  This document asserts that
      per-packet Identifications may be useful for other purposes, e.g., to
      allow recipients to detect spurious packets that may have been
      injected into the network by an attacker.  But, rather than defining
      a new extension header, this document recommends employing the
      existing Fragment Header for per-packet identification even if the
      packet itself appears as an "atomic fragment".

  "NAT64/DNS64 detection via SRV Records", Martin Hunek, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-hunek-v6ops-nat64-srv-01.txt>

      This document specifies how to discover the NAT64 pools in use and
      DNS servers providing DNS64 service to the local clients.  The
      discovery made via SRV records allows the assignment of priorities to
      the NAT64 pools and DNS64 servers.  It also allows clients to have
      different DNS providers than NAT64 providers while providing a secure
      way via DNSSEC validation of provided SRV records.  This way, it
      provides DNS64 service regardless of DNS operator and DNS transport
      protocol.

  "Alternate-Marking Method", Giuseppe Fioccola, Mauro Cociglio, Greg Mirsky,
  Tal Mizrahi, Tianran Zhou, Xiao Min, 2022-02-23,
  <draft-fioccola-rfc8321bis-03.txt>

      This document describes the Alternate-Marking technique to perform
      packet loss, delay, and jitter measurements on live traffic.  This
      technology can be applied in various situations and for different
      protocols.  It could be considered Passive or Hybrid depending on the
      application.  This document obsoletes [RFC8321].

  "Multi-cluster Edge System Architecture and Network Function Requirements",
  Dae Kim, Joo-Sang Youn, 2021-11-19, <draft-dwon-t2trg-multiedge-arch-01.txt>

      Artificial intelligence based IoT applications demand more massive
      computing resource through networks for the process of AI tasks.  To
      support these applications, some new technologies based an edge
      computing and fog computing are emerging.  Especially, the
      computation-intensive and latency-sensitive IoT applications such as
      augmented reality, virtual reality and AI based inference application
      is deployed with an edge computing and fog computing which are
      connected with cloud computing.  Recently, cluster-based edge system
      is deployed to extend computation capacity of an edge server.  The
      cluster-based edge system has the advantage that can enhace the
      resource scalability and availability in edge computing and fog
      computing.  In this draft, we present cluster-based edge system
      architecture and multi-cluster edge network topology that consists of
      multi-cluster edge system and core cloud.  Also, we define the
      network functions and network node to configurate and operate multi-
      cluster edge network collaboratively.

  "Multipoint Alternate-Marking Method", Giuseppe Fioccola, Mauro Cociglio,
  Amedeo Sapio, Riccardo Sisto, Tianran Zhou, 2022-02-23,
  <draft-fioccola-rfc8889bis-03.txt>

      This document generalizes and expands Alternate-Marking methodology
      to measure any kind of unicast flow whose packets can follow several
      different paths in the network -- in wider terms, a multipoint-to-
      multipoint network.  For this reason, the technique here described is
      called "Multipoint Alternate Marking".  This document obsoletes
      [RFC8889].

  "Control Plane of Inter-Domain Source Address Validation Architecture", Ke
  Xu, Jianping Wu, Xiaoliang Wang, Yangfei Guo, 2021-11-19,
  <draft-xu-savax-control-01.txt>

      Because the Internet forwards packets according to the IP destination
      address, packet forwarding typically takes place without inspection
      of the source address and malicious attacks have been launched using
      spoofed source addresses.  The inter-domain source address validation
      architecture is an effort to enhance the Internet by using state
      machine to generate consistent tags.  When communicating between two
      end hosts at different ADs of IPv6 network, tags will be added to the
      packets to identify the authenticity of the IPv6 source address.
      
      This memo focus on the control plane of the SAVA-X mechanism.

  "Data Plane of Inter-Domain Source Address Validation Architecture", Ke Xu,
  Jianping Wu, Xiaoliang Wang, Yangfei Guo, 2021-11-19,
  <draft-xu-savax-data-01.txt>

      Because the Internet forwards packets according to the IP destination
      address, packet forwarding typically takes place without inspection
      of the source address and malicious attacks have been launched using
      spoofed source addresses.  The inter-domain source address validation
      architecture is an effort to enhance the Internet by using state
      machine to generate consistent tags.  When communicating between two
      end hosts at different ADs of IPv6 network, tags will be added to the
      packets to identify the authenticity of the IPv6 source address.
      
      This memo focus on the data plane of the SAVA-X mechanism.

  "Communication Protocol Between the AD Control Server and the AD Edge
  Router of Inter-Domain Source Address Validation Architecture", Ke Xu,
  Jianping Wu, Xiaoliang Wang, Yangfei Guo, 2021-11-19,
  <draft-xu-savax-protocol-01.txt>

      Because the Internet forwards packets according to the IP destination
      address, packet forwarding typically takes place without inspection
      of the source address and malicious attacks have been launched using
      spoofed source addresses.  The inter-domain source address validation
      architecture is an effort to enhance the Internet by using state
      machine to generate consistent tags.  When communicating between two
      end hosts at different ADs of IPv6 network, tags will be added to the
      packets to identify the authenticity of the IPv6 source address.
      
      This memo focus on the packet formats and processing flow of the
      SAVA-X mechanism.

  "Smooth Evolution of Existing EVPN IRB Network", Yubao Wang, 2021-11-20,
  <draft-wang-bess-evpn-irb-smooth-evolution-00.txt>

      EVPN IRB has been deployed following [RFC9135]'s early draft for a
      long time.  This draft discusses how can these existing deployments
      smoothly evolved into an IP-aliasing
      ([I-D.sajassi-bess-evpn-ip-aliasing]) enhanced EVPN symmetric IRB
      scenario, especially when two of an IP-VRF's BDs (whose IRB
      interfaces are attached to the same IP-VRF) have been attched to a
      common ES before that network evolution.  In such case, when these
      two BDs are evolved into IP-aliasing enhanced EVPN symmetric IRB as
      per [I-D.sajassi-bess-evpn-ip-aliasing] or distributed Bump-in-the-
      wire as per [I-D.wang-bess-evpn-distributed-bump-in-the-wire], the IP
      A-D per EVI routes of these two BDs may conflict with each other in
      the context of the IP-VRF instance.

  "IGMP and MLD Snooping Yang Module Extension for L2VPN", Hongji Zhao,
  Xufeng Liu, Yisong Liu, Mahesh Sivakumar, Anish Peter, 2021-11-21,
  <draft-zhao-pim-igmp-mld-snooping-yang-l2vpn-ext-00.txt>

      Internet Group Management Protocol (IGMP) and Multicast Listener
      Discovery (MLD) Snooping could be used in both BRIGDE service and L2VPN
      service. The old ietf-igmp-mld-snooping yang module just describes the
      BRIGDE service. In this document we extend the existing ietf-igmp-mld-
      snooping yang module and make it could be used in L2VPN service.

  "IKEv2 Rekey Priority Extension", Daiying Liu, Daniel Migault, Congjie
  Zhang, 2021-11-21, <draft-liu-ipsecme-ikev2-rekey-redundant-sas-00.txt>

      This document defines the Internet Key Exchange Version 2 (IKEv2)
      Rekeying Priority extension that enables to agree roles for the next
      rekey of the child SAs and as such optimize IKEv2 rekey negotiation.

  "Use of Post-Quantum KEM in the Cryptographic Message Syntax (CMS)",
  Ludovic Perret, Julien Prat, Mike Ounsworth, 2021-11-22,
  <draft-perret-prat-lamps-cms-pq-kem-00.txt>

      This document describes the conventions for using a Key Encapsulation
      Mechanism algorithm (KEM) within the Cryptographic Message Syntax
      (CMS).  The CMS specifies the enveloped-data content type, which
      consists of an encrypted content and encrypted content-encryption
      keys for one or more recipients.  The mechanism proposed here can
      rely on either post-quantum KEMs, hybrid KEMs or classical KEMs.

  "Intra-Network eXposure analyzer Utility Specification", Savyo Morais,
  Claudio de Farias, 2021-11-22, <draft-morais-iotops-inxu-00.txt>

      This document proposes the Intra-Network eXposure analyzer Utility
      (INXU) as a vulnerability management solution for IoT networks.  The
      goal of INXU is to extend the functions of the RFC 8520 and support a
      Security Experts Team on protecting multiple heterogeneous IoT
      networks, even when there is a few or none private information of the
      networks.
      
      INXU identifies and analyzes the capability of an IoT device being
      exploited by an well known malicious activity.  We also propose the
      Malicious Traffic Description (MTD), a data-model to describe traffic
      related to malicious activities.

  "Open Ethics Transparency Protocol", Nikita Lukianets, 2021-11-24,
  <draft-lukianets-open-ethics-transparency-protocol-00.txt>

      The Open Ethics Transparency Protocol (OETP) is an application-level
      protocol for publishing and accessing ethical Disclosures of IT
      Products and their Components.  The Protocol is based on HTTP
      exchange of information about the ethical "postures", provided in an
      open and standardized format.  The scope of the Protocol covers
      Disclosures for systems such as Software as a Service (SaaS)
      Applications, Software Applications, Software Components, Application
      Programming Interfaces (API), Automated Decision-Making (ADM)
      systems, and systems using Artificial Intelligence (AI).  OETP aims
      to bring more transparent, predictable, and safe environments for the
      end-users.  The OETP Disclosure Format is an extensible JSON-based
      format.

  "Composable Event Streaming Representation (CESR)", Samuel Smith,
  2021-12-01, <draft-ssmith-cesr-02.txt>

      The Composable Event Streaming Representation (CESR) is dual text-
      binary encoding format that has the unique property of text-binary
      concatenation composability.  This composability property enables the
      round trip conversion en-masse of concatenated primitives between the
      text domain and binary domain while maintaining separability of
      individual primtives.  This enables convenient usability in the text
      domain and compact transmission in the binary domain.  CESR
      primitives are self-framing.  CESR supports self-framing group codes
      that enable stream processing and pipelining in both the text and
      binary domains.  CESR supports composable text-binary encodings for
      general data types as well as suites of cryptographic material.
      Popular cryptographic material suites have compact encodings for
      efficiency while less compact encodings provide sufficient
      extensibility to support all foreseeable types.  CESR streams also
      support interleaved JSON, CBOR, and MGPK serializations.  CESR is a
      universal encoding that uniquely provides dual text and binary domain
      representations via composable conversion.

  "Scheduling Online Meetings", Mark Nottingham, 2022-01-20,
  <draft-nottingham-scheduling-online-meetings-01.txt>

      This document recommends best practices when scheduling online
      meetings.
      
      About This Document
      
      This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.
      
      Status information for this document may be found at
      https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-nottingham-scheduling-online-
      meetings/.
      
      information can be found at https://mnot.github.io/I-D/.
      
      Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
      https://github.com/mnot/I-D/labels/scheduling-online-meetings.

  "Pseudo-flavors for Remote Procedure Calls with Transport Layer Security",
  Chuck Lever, 2021-12-27, <draft-cel-nfsv4-rpc-tls-pseudoflavors-02.txt>

      Recent innovations in Remote Procedure Call (RPC) transport layer
      security enable broad deployment of encryption and mutual peer
      authentication when exchanging RPC messages.  These security
      mechanisms can protect peers who continue to use the AUTH_SYS RPC
      auth flavor, which is not cryptographically secure, on open networks.
      This document introduces RPC auth pseudo-flavors that an RPC service
      can use to indicate transport layer security requirements for
      accessing that service, and a mechanism the service can use to
      enforce those requirements.

  "Link-Local Next Hop Capability for BGP", Russ White, Donatas Abraitis,
  2021-12-07, <draft-white-linklocal-capability-00.txt>

      BGP, described in [RFC4271], was originally designed to provide
      reachability between domains and between the edges of a domain.  As
      such, BGP assumes the next hop towards any reachable destination may
      not reside on the advertising speaker, but rather may either be
      through a router connected to the same subnet as the speaker, or
      through a router only reachable by traversing multiple hops through
      the network.  Because of this, BGP does not recognize the use of IPv6
      link-local addresses, as described in [RFC4291], as a valid next hop
      for forwarding purposes.
      
      However, BGP speakers are now often deployed on point-to-point links
      in networks where multihop reachability of any kind is not assumed or
      desired (all next hops are assumed to be the speaker reachable
      through a directly connected point-to-point link).  This is common,
      for instance, in data center fabrics.  In these situations, a global
      IPv6 address is not required for the advertisement of reachability
      information; in fact, providing global IPv6 addresses in these kinds
      of networks can be detrimental to Zero Touch Provisioning (ZTP).
      
      This draft standardizes the operation of BGP over a point-to-point
      link using link-local IPv6 addressing only.

  "Centralization and Internet Standards", Mark Nottingham, 2022-02-09,
  <draft-nottingham-avoiding-internet-centralization-02.txt>

      Despite being designed and operated as a decentralized network-of-
      networks, the Internet is continuously subjected to forces that
      encourage centralization.
      
      This document offers a definition of centralization, explains why it
      is undesirable, identifies different types of centralization,
      catalogues limitations of common approaches to controlling it, and
      explores what Internet standards efforts can do to address it.

  "Using Service Bindings with DANE", Benjamin Schwartz, Robert Evans,
  2021-12-09, <draft-rebs-dnsop-svcb-dane-00.txt>

      Service Binding records introduce a new form of name indirection in
      DNS.  This document specifies DNS-Based Authentication of Named
      Entities (DANE) interaction with Service Bindings to secure endpoints
      including use of ports and transports discovered via Service
      Parameters.
      
      Discussion Venues
      
      This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.
      
      Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
      https://github.com/bemasc/svcb-dane.

  "Deprecating the Use of Router Alert in LSP Ping", Kireeti Kompella, Ron
  Bonica, 2021-12-09, <draft-kompella-mpls-lspping-norao-00.txt>

      LSP ping messages (RFC 8029) are encapsulated in IP headers that
      include a Router Alert Option (RAO).  The rationale for including an
      RAO is questionable.  Furthermore, RFC6398 identifies security
      vulnerabilities associated with the RAO.
      
      Therefore, this document removes the RAO from LSP ping message
      encapsulations.  It updates RFCs 7506 and 8029.

  "Updates to the Cipher Suites in Secure Syslog", Chris Lonvick, Sean
  Turner, Joseph Salowey, 2022-01-29,
  <draft-ciphersuites-in-sec-syslog-01.txt>

      This document updates the cipher suites in RFC 5425, Transport Layer
      Security (TLS) Transport Mapping for Syslog, and RFC 6012, Datagram
      Transport Layer Security (DTLS) Transport Mapping for Syslog.  It
      also updates the transport protocol in RFC 6012.

  "Distributed Source Address Validation (DSAV) Framework", Dan Li, Jianping
  Wu, Mingqing Huang, Lancheng Qin, Nan Geng, 2022-01-10,
  <draft-li-dsav-framework-01.txt>

      This document provides an overall framework of Distributed Source
      Address Validation (DSAV) including both intra-domain and inter-
      domain levels.  It also describes related considerations.

  "IPlir network layer security protocol", Davletshina Alexandra, Urivskiy
  Alexey, Rybkin Andrey, Tychina Leonid, Parshin Ilia, 2021-12-14,
  <draft-iplir-protocol-00.txt>

      This document specifies the IPlir network layer security protocol.
      It describes how to provide a set of security services for traffic
      over public and corporate networks using the TCP/IP stack.

  "Updated Use of the Expires Message Header Field", Benjamin BILLON, John
  Levine, 2022-02-28, <draft-billon-expires-01.txt>

      This document allows broader use of the Expires message header field
      for SMTP.  Senders can then indicate when a message sent becomes
      valueless and can safely be deleted, while recipients would use the
      information to delete these valueless messages.

  "AMM Resource Identifier", Edward Birrane, Emery Annis, 2021-12-16,
  <draft-birrane-dtn-ari-00.txt>

      This document defines the structure, format, and features of the
      naming scheme for the objects defined in the Delay-Tolerant
      Networking Autonomous Management Model (AMM), in support of
      challenged network management solutions described in the Delay-
      Tolerant Networking Autonomous Management Architecture (AMA).
      
      This document defines a new AMM Resource Identifier (ARI), based on
      the structure of a common URI, meeting the needs for a concise,
      typed, parameterized, and hierarchically organized set of data
      elements.

  "Scalability Considerations for Network Resource Partition", Jie Dong,
  Zhenbin Li, Liyan Gong, Guangming Yang, Jim Guichard, Gyan Mishra, Fengwei
  Qin, Tarek Saad, Vishnu Beeram, 2022-02-07,
  <draft-dong-teas-nrp-scalability-01.txt>

      The IETF Network Slice service aims to meet the connectivity demands
      of a network slice customer with specific Service Level Objectives
      (SLOs) and Service Level Expectations (SLEs) over a common underlay
      network.  A Network Resource Partition (NRP) is a set of network
      resources that are allocated from the underlay network to carry a
      specific set of network traffic and meet the required SLOs and SLEs.
      One or multiple IETF Network Slice services can be mapped to one NRP.
      
      As the demand for IETF Network Slice services increases, scalability
      would become an important factor for the large scale deployment of
      IETF Network Slices.  Although the scalability of IETF Network Slices
      can be improved by mapping a group of IETF Network Slices to one NRP,
      there are concerns about the scalability of NRPs.  This document
      describes the scalability considerations about NRPs in the network
      control plane and data plane, and some optimization mechanisms are
      proposed.

  "IP Parcels", Fred Templin, 2022-02-10,
  <draft-templin-intarea-parcels-09.txt>

      IP packets (both IPv4 and IPv6) are understood to contain a unit of
      data which becomes the retransmission unit in case of loss.  Upper
      layer protocols such as the Transmission Control Protocol (TCP)
      prepare data units known as "segments", with traditional arrangements
      including a single segment per packet.  This document presents a new
      construct known as the "IP Parcel" which permits a single packet to
      carry multiple segments, essentially creating a "packet-of-packets".
      IP parcels provide an essential building block for accommodating
      larger Maximum Transmission Units (MTUs) in the Internet as discussed
      in this document.

  "Object Search for the Extensible Provisioning Protocol (EPP)", Tobias
  Sattler, Jody Kolker, 2021-12-21,
  <draft-sattler-kolker-epp-object-search-00.txt>

      This document describes an Extensible Provisioning Protocol (EPP)
      extension called "Object Search", which EPP clients use to search and
      list EPP objects stored by EPP servers.

  "DHCPv6 Extension Practices and Considerations", Ren Gang, Lin He, Ying
  Liu, 2021-12-21, <draft-rhl-dhc-dhcpv6-extensions-00.txt>

      IP addresses assume an increasing number of attributes as
      communication identifiers to meet different requirements.  Privacy
      protection, accountability, security, and manageability of networks
      can be supported by extending the DHCPv6 protocol as required.  This
      document provides current extension practices and typical DHCPv6
      server software in terms of extensions, defines a general model of
      DHCPv6, discusses some extension points, and presents extension
      cases.

  "Emergency Registries", Brian Rosen, Brandon Abley, 2021-12-22,
  <draft-rosen-ecrit-emergency-registries-00.txt>

      Multiple emergency services standards organizations are developing
      standards based on IETF emergency call standards and other IETF
      protocols.  There is a desire among these organizations to use common
      registries not tied to a particular country or national SDO, in the
      long term pursuit of a single worldwide standard.  This document asks
      IANA to create a set of registries and provides processes for
      expanding the set and populating them.

  "Service Routing in Multi-access Edge Computing", Zongpeng Du, 2021-12-22,
  <draft-du-intarea-service-routing-in-mec-00.txt>

      This document introduces a service routing mechanism in the scenario
      of Multi-access Edge Computing.

  "PW for IP/UDP Payload without IP/UDP Headers", Zhaohui Zhang, Keyur Patel,
  2022-03-04, <draft-zzhang-pals-pw-for-ip-udp-payload-01.txt>

      This document describes a new flavor of PW to transport IP/UDP
      payload only, without transporting IP/UDP headers, which are removed
      by an ingress PE and re-added by an egress PE.

  "Service Information Updating in Computing and Network Convergence",
  Zongpeng Du, 2021-12-23,
  <draft-du-dyncast-service-info-updating-in-cnc-00.txt>

      This document introduces a service information updating method in the
      scenario of computing and network convergence.

  "The AEGIS family of authenticated encryption algorithms", Frank Denis,
  Fabio Scotoni, Samuel Lucas, 2022-03-06, <draft-denis-aegis-aead-03.txt>

      This document describes AEGIS-128L and AEGIS-256, two AES-based
      authenticated encryption algorithms designed for high-performance
      applications.
      
      Discussion Venues
      
      This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.
      
      Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
      https://github.com/jedisct1/draft-aegis-aead.

  "BGP Metric Credit Based Routing", Shaofu Peng, Bin Tan, 2021-12-28,
  <draft-peng-idr-bgp-metric-credit-00.txt>

      This document defines an optional metric related BGP path attribute
      that can be advertised with BGP intent routes, to provide more clear
      intent information used for the next-hop resolution.

  "RIFT Auto-FR", Jordan Head, Tony Przygienda, Colby Barth, 2021-12-29,
  <draft-head-rift-auto-fr-00.txt,.pdf>

      This document specifies procedures that allow IS-IS Flood Reflection
      topologies to be fully and automatically provisioned when using RIFT
      by leveraging RIFT's no-touch ZTP architecture.

  "New Attributes for Network File System Version 4, Minor Version 2", Rick
  Macklem, 2022-01-15, <draft-rmacklem-nfsv4-new-attributes-01.txt>

      This document proposes several new recommended attributes that extend
      the Network File System Version 4, Minor Version 2 protocol
      (NFSv4.2).  All of these new attributes would be read-only, per file
      system attributes.

  "Deprecation Of The IPv6 Router Alert Option", Ron Bonica, 2021-12-30,
  <draft-bonica-6man-deprecate-router-alert-00.txt>

      This document deprecates the IPv6 Router Alert Option.  Protocols
      that use the Router Alert Option may continue to do so.  However,
      protocols standardized in the future must not use the Router Alert
      Option.

  "A Label/SID Allocation Method for VPN Interworking", Liu Yao, Shaofu Peng,
  2022-01-02, <draft-lp-bess-vpn-interworking-00.txt>

      This document analyzes the SRv6-MPLS service interworking solution
      and offers an MPLS label or SRv6 SID allocation method for label/SID
      saving and better scalability purpose.

  "Deprecation of BGP OPEN Message Error subcodes 8, 9, and 10.", Job
  Snijders, 2022-01-03, <draft-spaghetti-idr-deprecate-8-9-10-00.txt>

      This document requests IANA to mark BGP OPEN Message Error subcodes
      8, 9, and 10 as "deprecated".

  "Everything But The User Is An Intermediary", Vittorio Bertola, 2022-01-04,
  <draft-bertola-everything-but-the-user-00.txt>

      This document provides the author's perspective on the shortcomings
      of the Internet threat model defined in RFC 3552 and currently in use
      at the IETF.  It then proposes the basic conceptual framework for an
      additional model, the "holistic threat model", describing how it
      could be used to broaden the analysis of non-technical protocol
      impacts in the design phase.

  "Use Cases for MPLS Function Indicators and Ancillary Data", Tarek Saad,
  Kiran Makhijani, Haoyu Song, Greg Mirsky, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-saad-mpls-miad-usecases-01.txt>

      This document presents a number of use cases that have a common need
      for encoding MPLS function indicators and ancillary data inside MPLS
      packets.  There has been significant recent interest in extending the
      MPLS data plane to carry such ancillary data to address a number of
      use cases described in this document.
      
      The use cases described are not an exhaustive set, but rather the
      ones that are actively discussed by members of the IETF MPLS, PALS
      and DETNET working groups participating in the MPLS Open Design Team.

  "Remote Procedure Call over QUIC Version 1", Benjamin Coddington, Scott
  Mayhew, Chuck Lever, 2022-01-07, <draft-cel-nfsv4-rpc-over-quicv1-00.txt>

      This document specifies a protocol for conveying Remote Procedure
      (RPC) messages on QUIC version 1 connections.  It requires no
      revision to application RPC protocols or the RPC protocol itself.

  "Deadline Based Deterministic Forwarding", Shaofu Peng, Bin Tan, Peng Liu,
  2022-03-01, <draft-peng-detnet-deadline-based-forwarding-01.txt>

      This document describes a deterministic forwarding mechanism based on
      deadline.  The mechanism enhances strict priority scheduling
      algorithm with dynamically adjusting the priority of the queue
      according to its deadline attribute.

  "Update to the IANA SSH Protocol Paremeters Registry Requirements", Peter
  Yee, 2022-01-10, <draft-yee-ssh-iana-requirements-00.txt>

      This specification updates the requirements for adding new entries to
      the IANA Secure Shell (SSH) Protocol Parameters registry.  Currently,
      the requirement is generally for "IETF Review", as defined in RFC
      8126, although a few portions of the registry require "Standards
      Action".  This specification will change that former requirement to
      "Expert Review".

  "Deadline Option", Shaofu Peng, Bin Tan, 2022-01-11,
  <draft-peng-6man-deadline-option-00.txt>

      This document introduces new IPv6 options for Hop-by-Hop Options
      header, to carry deadline related information for deterministic
      flows.

  "IGP Extensions for SR Network Resource Partition SIDs", Tarek Saad, Vishnu
  Beeram, Ran Chen, Shaofu Peng, Bin Wen, Daniele Ceccarelli, 2022-01-11,
  <draft-bestbar-lsr-spring-nrp-00.txt>

      Segment Routing (SR) defines a set of topological "segments" within
      an IGP topology to enable steering over a specific SR path.  These
      segments are advertised by the link-state routing protocols (IS-IS
      and OSPF).
      
      This document describes extensions to the IS-IS and OSPF required to
      support the signaling of Resource Partition (NRP) segments that
      operate over SR-MPLS and SRv6 dataplanes.  Multiple SR NRP segments
      can be associated with the same topological element to allow offering
      of different forwarding treatments (e.g. scheduling and drop policy)
      associated with each NRP.

  "IPv6-Only PE Design for IPv4-NLRI All SAFI over IPv6-NH", Gyan Mishra,
  Mankamana Mishra, Jeff Tantsura, Sudha Madhavi, Qing Yang, Adam Simpson,
  Shuanglong Chen, 2022-02-24,
  <draft-mishra-bess-ipv4nlri-all-safi-ipv6nh-01.txt>

      As Enterprises and Service Providers upgrade their brown field or
      green field MPLS/SR core to an IPv6 transport, Multiprotocol BGP (MP-
      BGP)now plays an important role in the transition of their Provider
      (P) core network as well as Provider Edge (PE) Inter-AS peering
      network from IPv4 to IPv6.  Operators must be able to continue to
      support IPv4 customers when both the Core and Edge networks are
      IPv6-Only.
      
      This document details an important External BGP (eBGP) PE-PE Inter-AS
      IPv6-Only peering design that leverages the MP-BGP capability
      exchange by using IPv6 peering as pure transport, allowing both IPv4
      Network Layer Reachability Information (NLRI) and IPv6 Network Layer
      Reachability Information (NLRI)to be carried over the same (Border
      Gateway Protocol) BGP TCP session for all Address Family Identifiers
      (AFI) and Subsequent Address Family Identifiers(SAFI).  The design
      change provides the same Dual Stacking functionality that exists
      today with separate IPv4 and IPv6 BGP sessions as we have today.
      With this design change from a control plane perspective a single
      IPv6-Only peer is required for both IPv4 and IPv6 routing updates and
      from a data plane forwarindg perspective an IPv6 address need only be
      configured on the PE to PE Inter-AS peering interface for both IPv4
      and IPv6 packet forwarding.  This document extends the IPv6-Only PE-
      CE peering architecture defined in
      [I-D.ietf-bess-ipv6-only-pe-design] to PE-PE inter-as peering
      architecture where the 4to6 softwire is now extended to Inter-AS L3
      VPN options Option-A, Option-AB and Option-C and now applies to all
      AFI/SAFI ubiquitously.  As service providers migrate to Segment
      Routing architecture SR-MPLS and SRv6, VPN overlay exsits as well,
      and thus Inter-AS options Option-A, Option-AB and Option-C are still
      applicable and thus this extension of IPv6-Only peering architecure
      extension to Inter-AS peering is very relevant to Segment Routing as
      well.

  "Clarifications for Ed25519, Ed448, X25519, and X448 Algorithm
  Identifiers", Sean Turner, Simon Josefsson, Daniel McCarney, Tadahiko Ito,
  2022-03-01, <draft-mtis-lamps-8410-ku-clarifications-01.txt>

      This document updates RFC 8410 to clarify existing and specify
      missing semantics for key usage bits when used in certificates that
      support the Ed25519, Ed448, X25519, and X448 Elliptic Curve
      Cryptography algorithms.

  "IGP Flexible Algorithm with Deterministic Routing", Shaofu Peng, Tony Li,
  2022-02-27, <draft-peng-lsr-flex-algo-deterministic-routing-02.txt>

      IGP Flex Algorithm proposes a solution that allows IGPs themselves to
      compute constraint based paths over the network, and it also
      specifies a way of using Segment Routing (SR) Prefix-SIDs and SRv6
      locators, or pure IP prefix to steer packets along the constraint-
      based paths.  This document describes how to compute deterministic
      delay paths within Flex-algo plane.

  "Negative Caching of DNS Resolution Failures", Duane Wessels, William
  Carroll, Matthew Thomas, 2022-01-13,
  <draft-dwmtwc-dnsop-caching-resolution-failures-00.txt>

      In the DNS, resolvers employ caching to reduce both latency for end
      users and load on authoritative name servers.  The process of
      resolution may result in one of three types of responses: (1) a
      response containing the requested data; (2) a response indicating the
      requested data does not exist; or (3) a non-response due to a
      resolution failure in which the resolver does not receive any useful
      information regarding the data's existence.  This document concerns
      itself only with the third type.
      
      RFC 2308 specifies requirements for DNS negative caching.  There,
      caching of type (1) and (2) responses is mandatory and caching of
      type (3) responses is optional.  This document updates RFC 2308 to
      require negative caching for DNS resolution failures.

  "SMTP Response for Detected Spam", Alex Brotman, 2022-01-14,
  <draft-brotman-srds-00.txt>

      Define a method by which an SMTP receiver can immediately notify a
      sender that their message is suspected to be spam, though is still
      being accepted.

  "Export of Segment Routing IPv6 Information in IP Flow Information Export
  (IPFIX)", Thomas Graf, Benoit Claise, 2022-03-05,
  <draft-tgraf-opsawg-ipfix-srv6-srh-02.txt>

      This document introduces new IP Flow Information Export (IPFIX)
      information elements to identify the SRv6 Segment Routing Header
      dimensions and SRv6 Control Plane Protocol that traffic is being
      forwarded with.

  "Virtualization of PLC in Industrial Networks - Problem Statement", Kiran
  Makhijani, Lijun Dong, 2022-03-05, <draft-km-iotops-iiot-frwk-02.txt>

      Conventional Programmable Logic Controllers (PLCs) impose several
      challenges on factory floors as their numbers and size on the factory
      floors/plants continues to grow.  Virtualized PLCs can help overcome
      many of those concerns.  They can improve the automation in Industry
      control networks by simplifying communication between higher-level
      applications and low-level factory floor machine operations.  Virtual
      PLCs provide an opportunity to integrate a diverse set of non-
      internet protocols supporting Industrial-IoT and IP connections to
      improve coordination between applications and field devices.  Besides
      automation, virtual PLCs also enhance programmability in industry
      process control systems by abstracting control functions from I/O
      modules.  However, to achieve desired outcome and benefits, both
      operational and application networks should evolve.
      
      This document introduces virtual PLC concept, describes the details
      and benefits of virtualized PLCs, then focuses on the problem
      statement and requirements.

  "Use Cases of Computing-aware Service Function Chaining (SFC)", Shuai
  Zhang, Xia Chen, 2022-01-18,
  <draft-zhang-computing-aware-sfc-usecase-00.txt>

      Multiple occurrences of the same service function(SF) can exist in
      the same administrative domain and each occurrence of SF is called SF
      instance.  A Service Function Path(SFP) is determined by composing
      selected SF instances and overlay links.  The SF instances are
      selected according to the computing power of SFs in addition to the
      network information and this is defined as the computing-aware SFC in
      this document.
      
      This document describes the use cases for computing-aware Service
      Function Chaining(SFC).

  "Node Liveness Protocol", Tony Li, 2022-02-03,
  <draft-li-lsr-liveness-02.txt>

      Prompt notification of the loss of node liveness or reachability is
      useful for restoring services in tunneled topologies.  IGP
      summarization precludes remote nodes from directly observing the
      status of remote nodes.  This document proposes a service that, in
      conjunction with the IGP, provides prompt notifications without
      impacting IGP summarization.

  "1.0", Joseph Ocen, katerega micheal, 2022-01-20,
  <draft-swl-103kprotocol-00.txt>

      The Internet Core needs to be expandable to allow it to be usable on
      low-end devices with poor connectivity to be able to access internet
      resources in a seamless way on the application layer. this concept
      suggests that one way of how that can happen is through the stacking
      and unstacking of bits on the physical and datalink layers.
      Bycntainerising the input bytes into a bundle of 103bits and
      unstaking them on the other end of the communication layer using a
      different way f arrangement and encoding that can be interpreted by
      another protocol on the network layer. this can run parallel to the
      existing internet protocols and frameworks on the physical ,datalink
      and network layers

  "RTP Payload Format for Visual Volumetric Video-based Coding (V3C)", Lauri
  Ilola, Lukasz Kondrad, 2022-01-20, <draft-ilola-avtcore-rtp-v3c-00.txt>

      This memo describes an RTP payload format for visual volumetric
      video-based coding (V3C) [ISO.IEC.23090-5].  A V3C bitstream is
      composed of V3C units that contain V3C video sub-bitstreams, V3C
      atlas sub-bitstreams, or a V3C parameter set.  The RTP payload format
      for V3C video sub-bitstreams is defined by appropriate Internet
      Standards for the applicable video codec.  The RTP payload format for
      V3C atlas sub-bitstreams is described by this memo.  The RTP payload
      format allows for packetization of one or more V3C Network
      Abstraction Layer (NAL) units in a RTP packet payload as well as
      fragmentation of a V3C NAL unit into multiple RTP packets.  The memo
      also describes the mechanisms for grouping RTP streams of V3C
      component sub-bitstreams, providing a complete solution for streaming
      V3C bitstream.

  "Multiple TLV Instances in IS-IS", Parag Kaneriya, Tony Li, Tony
  Przygienda, Shraddha Hegde, Chris Bowers, Les Ginsberg, 2022-01-21,
  <draft-pkaneria-lsr-multi-tlv-00.txt>

      Emerging technologies are adding information into IS-IS TLVs at a
      steady pace while deployment scales are simultaneously increasing.
      This causes the contents of many critical TLVs to exceed the
      currently supported limit of 255 octets.  Extensions such as
      [RFC7356] require significant IS-IS changes that could help address
      the problem, but a less drastic solution would be beneficial.  This
      document codifies the common mechanism of extending the TLV space
      through multiple TLV instances.

  "Event Streaming Open Network", Emiliano Spinella, 2022-01-26,
  <draft-spinella-event-streaming-open-network-02.txt>

      This document describes the vision, architecture and network protocol
      for an Event Streaming Open Network over the Internet.

  "Requirements for Domain-Issued Currency (Monee)", Rick van Rein,
  2022-01-27, <draft-vanrein-monee-reqs-00.txt>

      Monee allows people to operate a currency under a domain name, using
      a monetary system that expresses value added, not debt.  Currency is
      intentionally created where and when value is added, and destroyed
      where and when value is destroyed.  Inflation is possible, but
      revealed as a temporary blot on a currency.  New currencies are
      bootstrapped locally and may then expand in expanding circles.

  "RPKI-Based Policy Without Route Refresh", Randy Bush, Keyur Patel, Philip
  Smith, Mark Tinka, 2022-01-27, <draft-i-sidrops-rov-no-rr-00.txt>

      A BGP Speaker performing RPKI-based policy should not issue Route
      Refresh to its neighbors when receiving new RPKI data.  A method for
      avoiding doing so is described.

  "SDP Offer/Answer for RTP using QUIC as Transport", Spencer Dawkins,
  2022-01-28, <draft-dawkins-avtcore-sdp-rtp-quic-00.txt>

      This document describes these new SDP "proto" attribute values:
      "QUIC", "QUIC/RTP/SAVP", "QUIC/RTP/AVPF", and "QUIC/RTP/SAVPF", and
      describes how SDP Offer/Answer can be used to set up an RTP
      connection using QUIC as a transport protocol.
      
      These proto values are necessary to allow the use of QUIC as an
      underlying transport protocol for applications such as SIP and WebRTC
      that commonly use SDP as a session signaling protocol to set up RTP
      connections.

  "Requirements to Multi-domain IPv6-only Network", Chongfeng Xie, Chenhao
  Ma, Xing Li, Gyan Mishra, Mohamed Boucadair, 2022-03-06,
  <draft-xie-v6ops-reqirements-multi-domain-ipv6only-01.txt>

      Dual-stack deployments require both IPv4 and IPv6 transfer
      capabilities are deployed in parallel.  IPv6-only is considered as
      the ultimate stage where only IPv6 transfer capabilities are used
      while ensuring global reachability.  This document specifies
      requirements when deploying IPv6-only in multi-domain networks.

  "A YANG Data Model for Network Resource Partition (NRP)", Bo Wu, Dhruv
  Dhody, Ying Cheng, 2022-01-30, <draft-wd-teas-nrp-yang-00.txt>

      This document defines a YANG data model for managing Network Resource
      Partition (NRP) topologies and associated resource allocation.  The
      model can be used for the realization of IETF network slice services.

  "Deploying Publicly Trusted TLS Servers on IoT Devices Using SNI-based
  End-to-End TLS Forwarding (SNIF)", Jim Zubov, 2022-02-16,
  <draft-zubov-snif-04.txt>

      This document proposes a solution, referred as SNIF, that provides
      the means for any Internet connected device to:
      
      *  allocate a globally unique anonymous hostname;
      
      *  obtain and maintain a publicly trusted X.509 certificate issued
      for the allocated hostname;
      
      *  accept incoming TLS connections on specific TCP ports of the
      allocated hostname from any TLS clients that are capable of
      sending Server Name Indication.
      
      The private key associated with the X.509 certificate is securely
      stored on the TLS terminating device, and is never exposed to any
      other party at any step of the process.
      
      About This Document
      
      This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.
      
      Status information for this document may be found at
      https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-zubov-snif.
      
      Information can be found at https://snif.host.
      
      Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
      https://github.com/vesvault/snif-i-d.

  "On Higher Levels of Address Aggregation", Tony Li, 2022-01-31,
  <draft-li-int-aggregation-00.txt>

      Routing and addressing are inexorably tied, and the scalability of
      the routing system is wholly dependent on the abstraction and
      allocation of the address space.  The addressing architecture for the
      Internet was set forth in [RFC1518], [RFC4632], and [RFC4291].  These
      describe how address aggregation can be performed at the ISP and
      local level.
      
      Address allocation and assignment procedures by the Regional Internet
      Registries (RIRs) have created large address blocks.  This creates an
      opportunity for further aggregation above the ISP level without any
      change to existing allocations.
      
      This document discusses issues regarding address aggregation above
      the ISP level, for continents or regions, thereby providing
      additional address space aggregation and efficiency in the routing
      system.  Small changes to address allocation policies can help to
      ensure futher aggregations and improvements in routing efficiency.
      Some of these concepts were discussed as part of the Routing and
      Addressing meetings [RFC1380] and extended further here.
      
      This document is not advocating geographical assignment below the
      continental level.  That has been thoroughly discussed previously.

  "CESR Proof Signatures", Philip Feairheller, 2022-02-01,
  <draft-pfeairheller-cesr-proof-00.txt>

      CESR Proof Signatures are an extension to the Composable Event
      Streaming Representation [CESR] that provide transposable
      cryptographic signature attachments on self-addressing data (SAD)
      [SAID].  Any SAD, such as an Authentic Chained Data Container (ACDC)
      Verifiable Credential [ACDC] for example, may be signed with a CESR
      Proof Signature and streamed along with any other CESR content.  In
      addition, a signed SAD can be embedded inside another SAD and the
      CESR proof signature attachment can be transposed across envelope
      boundaries and streamed without losing any cryptographic integrity.

  "Considerations for the use of SDN in Semantic Routing Networks", Mohamed
  Boucadair, Dirk Trossen, Adrian Farrel, 2022-02-02,
  <draft-boucadair-irtf-sdn-and-semantic-routing-00.txt>

      Semantic Routing is the process of making routing and forwarding
      decisions based, not only on the destination IP address, but on other
      information carried in an IP packet.  The intent is to facilitate
      enhanced routing decisions based on this information in order to
      provide differentiated forwarding paths for specific packet flows.
      
      Software Defined Networking (SDN) places control of network elements
      (including all or some of their forwarding decisions) within external
      software components called controllers and orchestrators.  This
      approach differs from conventional approaches that solely rely upon
      distributed routing protocols for the delivery of advanced
      connectivity services.  By doing so, SDN aims to enable network
      elements to be simplified while still performing (some high level)
      forwarding function.
      
      This document examines the applicability of SDN techniques to
      Semantic Routing and provides considerations for the development of
      Semantic Routing solutions in the context of SDN.

  "Near Real Time Mirroring (NRTM) version 4", Sasha Romijn, Job Snijders,
  Edward Shryane, Stavros Konstantaras, 2022-02-03,
  <draft-spaghetti-grow-nrtm-v4-00.txt>

      This document specifies a one-way synchronization protocol for
      Internet Routing Registry (IRR) records.  The protocol allows
      instances of IRR database servers to mirror IRR records, specified in
      in the Routing Policy Specification Language (RPSL), between each
      other.

  "Privatization of service type in IPv4/IPv6 data flows", Kyle Unice,
  2022-02-07, <draft-unice-dispatch-enc-ports-00.txt>

      The internet and free flow of information has enabled the individual
      in society several advantages that have not been available in the
      past.  The free flow of information has enabled social and political
      changes, open education for students, and now the free-flow of money
      without the need for intermediate institutions.  This free flow of
      information etc. is continually under attack from institutions that
      are compromised by the Internet.  So these institutions have and
      continue to implement controls in an attempt to stop the empowerment
      of the individual.  These controls on information is what this RFC
      attempts to weaken.

  "Public Transaction Event Logs (PTEL)", Philip Feairheller, 2022-02-07,
  <draft-pfeairheller-ptel-00.txt>

      TODO Abstract
      
      Discussion Venues
      
      This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.
      
      Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
      https://github.com/WebOfTrust/ietf-ptel.

  "Continuing to Evolve Internet Routing Beyond 'Mere' Reachability", Dirk
  Trossen, Zhe Lou, Sheng Jiang, 2022-02-08,
  <draft-trossen-rtgwg-routing-beyond-reachability-00.txt>

      This document discusses the evolution of the Internet routing system
      beyond mere reachability.  We observe, through examples of past
      development, that such evolution has been taking place to improve on
      capabilities of the Internet, deal with more complicated network
      deployments and cater to changing requirements by end users as well
      as novel and emerging applications.
      
      For achieving a routing system that serves more than a singular
      reachability purpose, more information is taken into account when
      performing the purpose-specific functions.  Such extra information
      can be obtained by extending current routing protocols to exchange
      more information or by carrying that information within packets.
      
      This document is intended to seed discussions of how the observed
      evolution of the Internet's routing system can continue, what issues
      may occur when simply continuing the current approach for achieving
      routing beyond 'mere' reachability and what may be needed to address
      those issues.  Ultimately, however, this document recognizes the
      positive impact that moving beyond reachability has brought to the
      Internet and will continue to do so.

  "An Extension to DNS64 for Sender Policy Framework SPF Awareness", Klaus
  Frank, 2022-02-14, <draft-frank-dns64-spf-extension-03.txt>

      This document describes interoperability issues and resolutions
      between DNS64 and SPF records for mail transfer agents.  This
      document also aims to simplify the IPv6 migration for mail transfer
      agent operators.
      
      This document updates [RFC6147] and [RFC7208].

  "Using The Date Header Field In HTTP Requests", Martin Thomson, 2022-02-08,
  <draft-thomson-httpapi-date-requests-00.txt>

      HTTP clients rarely make use of the Date header field when making
      requests.  This document describes considerations for using the Date
      header field in requests.  A method is described for correcting
      erroneous in Date request header fields that might arise from
      differences in client and server clocks.  The risks of applying that
      correction technique are discussed.

  "JWT URI", David Chadwick, 2022-02-09, <draft-chadwick-oauth-jwk-uri-00.txt>

      This specification registers a kind of URI that represents a JSON
      Web Key (JWK) value. This enables JWKs to be used, for instance, as
      key identifiers in contexts requiring URIs.

  "BID Protocol Specification", Yuanchao Liu, Zhiping Li, Bo Zhang, Jian Guo,
  Jiagui Xie, 2022-02-09, <draft-liu-bid-protocol-specification-00.txt>

      This document provides an overview of the principles and
      specifications of the BID (Blockchain-based Identifier) and its
      relationship with BIF (National Collaborative & Innovative
      Infrastructure of Blockchain and Industrial Internet) services. BID
      serves not only as the data carrier of the BIF, but also as the
      native address of the BIF-core blockchain. BID is also a method
      added to the distributed identifier DID registry.

  "Warp - Segmented Live Video Transport", Luke Curley, 2022-02-09,
  <draft-lcurley-warp-00.txt>

      This document defines the core behavior for Warp, a segmented live
      video transport protocol.  Warp maps live media to QUIC streams based
      on the underlying media encoding.  Media is prioritized to minimize
      latency during congestion.

  "RLB (Replication through Local Bitstring) Segment for Multicast Source
  Routing over IPv6", Xuesong Geng, Zhenbin Li, Jingrong Xie, 2022-02-10,
  <draft-geng-msr6-rlb-segment-00.txt>

      This document defines 2 new types of segment: End.RLB.X and End.RLB,
      and the corresponding packet processing procedures over the IPv6 data
      plane for the MSR6(Multicast Source Routing over IPv6) TE solutions.

  "Immutable Metadata Annotation", Qiufang Ma, Qin WU, Hongwei Li,
  2022-02-10, <draft-ma-netmod-immutable-flag-00.txt>

      This document defines a metadata annotation [RFC7952] named
      "immutable" to indicate the immutability of a particular instantiated
      data node.  Any instantiated data node annotated with
      immutable="true" by the server is read-only to the clients of YANG-
      driven management protocols, such as NETCONF, RESTCONF and other
      management operations (e.g., SNMP and CLI requests).

  "Segment Identifiers in SRv6", Suresh Krishnan, 2022-02-10,
  <draft-krishnan-6man-sids-00.txt>

      The data plane for Segment Routing over IPv6 (SRv6) [RFC8754] is
      built using IPv6 as the underlying forwarding plane.  Due to this
      underlying use of IPv6, Segment Identifiers (SIDs) used by SRv6 can
      resemble IPv6 addresses and behave like them [RFC8754][RFC8986] while
      exhibiting slightly different behaviors in some situations.  This
      document intends to explore the characteristics of SRv6 SIDs and to
      clarify the relationship of SRv6 SIDs to the IPv6 Addressing
      Architecture [RFC4291].

  "Amplification Attacks Using the Constrained Application Protocol (CoAP)",
  John Mattsson, Goeran Selander, Christian Amsuess, 2022-02-11,
  <draft-mattsson-t2trg-amplification-attacks-00.txt>

      Protecting Internet of Things (IoT) devices against attacks is not
      enough.  IoT deployments need to make sure that they are not used for
      Distributed Denial-of-Service (DDoS) attacks.  DDoS attacks are
      typically done with compromised devices or with amplification attacks
      using a spoofed source address.  This document gives examples of
      different theoretical amplification attacks using the Constrained
      Application Protocol (CoAP).  The goal with this document is to raise
      awareness and to motivate generic and protocol-specific
      recommendations on the usage of CoAP.  Some of the discussed attacks
      can be mitigated by not using NoSec or by using the Echo option.

  "Practical Inter-Domain Source Address Validation", Ke Xu, Jianping Wu,
  Xiaoliang Wang, Yangfei Guo, 2022-02-11, <draft-xu-psav-00.txt>

      Because the Internet forwards packets according to the IP destination
      address, packet forwarding typically takes place without inspection
      of the source address and malicious attacks have been launched using
      spoofed source addresses.  The inter-domain source address validation
      architecture is an effort to enhance the Internet by using state
      machine to generate consistent tags.  When communicating between two
      end hosts at different ASes, tags will be added to the packets to
      identify the authenticity of the IP source address.
      
      This memo introduces PSAV, an Inter-AS source address validation
      mechanism.

  "Suppressing CA Certificates in TLS 1.3", Martin Thomson, Panos Kampanakis,
  Cameron Bytheway, Bas Westerbaan, 2022-03-04,
  <draft-kampanakis-tls-scas-latest-01.txt>

      A TLS client or server that has access to the complete set of
      published intermediate certificates can inform its peer to avoid
      sending certificate authority certificates, thus reducing the size of
      the TLS handshake.

  "SCIM Profile for Security Event Tokens", Phillip Hunt, 2022-03-03,
  <draft-hunt-scim-events-01.txt>

      This specification profiles the Security Event Token specification,
      to define a set of events for SCIM Protocol servers that can be used
      for asynchronous transaction confirmations, replication, cross-domain
      provisioning co-ordination, and security signals.

  "A Selection Process for Nomcom Chairs", Andrew Sullivan, 2022-03-02,
  <draft-sullivan-nomcom-chair-select-02.txt>

      The Internet Engineering Task Force Nominating Committee is required
      to have a Chair.  The Chair is selected by the President of the
      Internet Society.  This memo outlines a procedure for Chair
      selection.

  "Impact of DLTs on Provider Networks", Dirk Trossen, David Guzman, Mike
  McBride, Xinxin Fan, 2022-03-02, <draft-trossen-rtgwg-impact-of-dlts-01.txt>

      This document discusses the impact of distributed ledger technologies
      being realized over IP-based provider networks.  The focus here lies
      on the impact that the DLT communication patterns have on efficiency
      of resource usage in the underlying networks.  We provide initial
      insights into experimental results to quantify this impact in terms
      of inefficient and wasted communication, aligned along challenges
      that the DLT realization over IP networks faces.
      
      This document intends to outline this impact but also opportunities
      for network innovations to improve on the identified impact as well
      as the overall service quality.  While this document does not promote
      specific solutions that capture those opportunities, it invites the
      wider community working on DLT and network solutions alike to
      contribute to the insights in this document to aid future research
      and development into possible solution concepts and technologies.
      
      The findings presented here have first been reported within the
      similarly titled whitepaper released by the Industry IoT Consortium
      (IIC) [IIC_whitepaper].

  "More Secure IPv6 Routing Header Processing", Mark Smith, 2022-02-23,
  <draft-smith-6man-more-secure-rh-03.txt>

      The original IPv6 Type 0 Routing Header has been deprecated due to
      the security risk of a packet forwarding loop being formed, by
      specifying a large sequence of alternating IPv6 node addresses to
      visit.  This memo proposes a method to prevent these forwarding loops
      forming, allowing the IPv6 Type 0 Routing Header to be more securely
      and more safely used.  The method may also be applicable to other
      unicast source routing scenarios.

  "PRECIS Framework and Unicode 14.0.0", Takahiro Nemoto, 2022-02-15,
  <draft-nemoto-precis-unicode14-00.txt>

      This document describes the changes between Unicode 6.3.0 and Unicode
      14.0.0 in the context of PRECIS in the same way as draft-faltstrom-
      unicode12-07.  Note that this document is an updated version of
      draft-nemoto-precis-unicode13-00.  This document provides the
      information necessary to consider whether the PRECIS Framework can
      follow the Unicode standard's updates since Unicode 6.3.0.  This
      document also describes the differences between the Derived Property
      Values of IDNA2008 and PRECIS for each version of Unicode.

  "Signaling Flow-ID Label Capability and Flow-ID Readable Label Depth", Xiao
  Min, Zheng Zhang, Weiqiang Cheng, 2022-02-15,
  <draft-xzc-lsr-mpls-flc-frld-00.txt>

      Flow-ID Label (FL) is used for MPLS flow identification and flow-
      based performance measurement with alternate marking method.  The
      ability to process Flow-ID labels is called Flow-ID Label Capability
      (FLC), and the capability of reading the maximum label stack depth
      and performing FL-based performance measurement is called Flow-ID
      Readable Label Depth (FRLD).  This document defines a mechanism to
      signal the FLC and the FRLD using IGP and BGP-LS.

  "IMAP Extension for only using and returning UIDs", Alexey Melnikov, Arun
  Achuthan, Vikram Nagulakonda, Ashutosh Singh, Luis Alves, 2022-02-16,
  <draft-melnikov-imap-uidonly-00.txt>

      The UIDONLY extension of the Internet Message Access Protocol (RFC
      3501/RFC 9051) allows clients to request that all information about
      mailbox changes is returned only using UIDs.  Message numbers are not
      going to be returned and can't be used once this extension is
      enabled.  This helps both clients and servers to reduce resource
      usage required for maintenance of message number to UID map.

  "An Update to the OAM Behavior in the Network Service Header (NSH)",
  Mohamed Boucadair, 2022-02-24, <draft-boucadair-sfc-oam-packet-03.txt>

      This document clarifies an ambiguity in the Network Service Header
      (NSH) specification related to the handling of O bit.  In particular,
      this document clarifies the meaning of "OAM packet".
      
      This document updates RFC 8300.

  "L3ND Upper-Layer Protocol Configuration", Randy Bush, Keyur Patel,
  2022-03-07, <draft-ymbk-idr-l3nd-ulpc-03.txt>

      This document adds PDUs to the Layer-3 Neighbor Discovery protocol to
      communicate the parameters needed to exchange inter-device Upper
      Layer Protocol Configuration for upper-layer protocols such as the
      BGP family.

  "IoT Access Authentication Framework based on Radio Frequency Fingerprint
  and Fingerprint Expression Specification", Dawei Fang, Aiqun Hu, Hua FU, Yu
  Jiang, 2022-02-16, <draft-dawei-access-authentication-physical-layer-00.txt>

      This document specifies the uniform expression and format of
      different kinds of wireless radio frequency fingerprints.  It also
      specifies the structure and functions of wireless authentication
      framework on fingerprints, including the specification of the signal
      frames' structure.  This document is applicable to the construction
      and management of secure access at the edge of the Internet of
      things.  This document assumes that the reader is familiar with some
      concepts and details regarding physical layer security.

  "Attribution of Internet Probes", Eric Vyncke, Benoit Donnet, Justin
  Iurman, 2022-03-03, <draft-vyncke-opsec-probe-attribution-01.txt>

      Active measurements at Internet-scale can target either collaborating
      parties or non-collaborating ones.  This is similar scan and could be
      perceived as aggressive.  This document proposes a couple of simple
      techniques allowing any party or organization to understand what this
      unsolicited packet is, what is its purpose, and more importantly who
      to contact.

  "Layer-3 Neighbor Discovery", Randy Bush, Russ Housley, Rob Austein, Susan
  Hares, Keyur Patel, 2022-03-07, <draft-ymbk-idr-l3nd-02.txt>

      Data Centers where the topology is BGP-based need to discover
      neighbor IP addressing, IP Layer-3 BGP neighbors, etc.  This Layer-3
      Neighbor Discovery protocol identifies BGP neighbor candidates.

  "Standard PKC Test Keys", Peter Gutmann, 2022-02-20,
  <draft-gutmann-testkeys-00.txt>

      This document provides a set of standard PKC test keys that may be
      used wherever pre-generated keys and associated operations like
      digitial signatures are required.  Like the EICAR virus test file,
      these widely-known test keys can be detected and recognised by
      applications consuming them as being purely for testing purposes
      without assigning any security properties to them.

  "Realizing Forward Requests Return Multicast Semantic with BIER", Dirk
  Trossen, 2022-02-21, <draft-trossen-bier-frrm-00.txt>

      This document introduces a semantic for multicast that is based on
      initiating forward requests, resulting in dynamic return multicast to
      the set of initiating clients.  The key dynamic nature here is
      represented in the return multicast being possibly different for
      every transmission.
      
      We introduce this semantic more formally, present exemplifying use
      cases and then focus on realizing this semantic using BIER
      technology.
      
      Although this document formally introduces the FRRM semantic as a new
      communication semantic, it does not intend to show the realization of
      it through any other means besides BIER.  This is left for separate
      documents, if desired.

  "PCEP Extension for DetNet Bounded Latency", Quan Xiong, Peng Liu,
  2022-02-21, <draft-xiong-pce-detnet-bounded-latency-00.txt>

      In certain networks, such as Deterministic Networking (DetNet), it is
      required to consider the bounded latency for path selection.  This
      document describes the extensions to PCEP to carry bounded latency
      constraints and distribute deterministic paths for end-to-end path
      computation in DetNet service.

  "Enhanced Port Forwarding functions with CGNAT", Louis Chan, 2022-02-21,
  <draft-chan-tsvwg-eipf-cgnat-00.txt>

      There is a need for peer-to-peer (P2P) communication under the use of
      CGNAT in    service providers. With the combination of home gateway,
      this becomes
      NAT444. 
      In RFC5128, methods of using UDP hole punching
      solves the problem partially
      when    EIM (Endpoint-Independent Mapping)
      is supported in NAT device in the
      path, and    there exists a common
      rendezvous server.
      
      The success rate of UDP hole punching is high, but not TCP hole punching
      in    practical world. Also, the P2P solution requires a common server
      in
      the public    internet to exchange the IP and port information.
      
      In this draft, a method is described to achieve incoming TCP or UDP
      session
      without    a common rendezvous server in NAT444 situation.

  "Private Line Emulation over Packet Switched Networks", Steven Gringeri,
  Jeremy Whittaker, Nicolai Leymann, Christian Schmutzer, Luca Chiesa,
  Nagendra Nainar, Carlos Pignataro, Gerald Smallegange, Chris Brown, Faisal
  Dada, 2022-02-22, <draft-schmutzer-pals-ple-00.txt>

      This document describes a method for encapsulating high-speed bit-
      streams as virtual private wire services (VPWS) over packet switched
      networks (PSN) providing complete signal transport transparency.

  "IKEv2 MTU Detection Extension", Daiying Liu, Daniel Migault, Renwang Liu,
  Congjie Zhang, 2022-02-22, <draft-liu-ipsecme-ikev2-mtu-dect-00.txt>

      This document defines the Internet Key Exchange Version 2 (IKEv2)
      allowed Maximum Transmission Unit (MTU) extension that enables to
      automatically detect MTU allowed on forwarding path of each IKEv2
      session to prevent Encapsulating Security Payload (ESP) packets from
      being fragmented.

  "The 'notes' URI Scheme for viewing HCL Notes/Domino resources", Doug
  Conmy, 2022-03-05, <draft-dconmy-notes-uri-scheme-01.txt>

      This document describes the 'notes' URI scheme.  Specifically, it
      lays out the syntactic components and how those components are used
      by URI resolution to locate and view or edit a Notes resource,
      typically an application and/or document.

  "Update to OSPF Terminology", Mike Fox, Acee Lindem, Alvaro Retana,
  2022-03-03, <draft-fox-lsr-ospf-terminology-01.txt>

      This document updates some OSPF terminology to be in line with
      inclusive language used in the industry.
      
      This document updates RFC2328 and RFC5340.

  "NETCONF Extension for Datastore Differences", Daiying Liu, Renwang Liu,
  2022-02-23, <draft-liu-netconf-ext-obtain-ds-diff-00.txt>

      This document defines a "datastore-diff" RPC that returns the
      differences between two datastores in an XML-based format.

  "Using CDDL for CSVs", Carsten Bormann, 2022-02-24,
  <draft-bormann-cbor-cddl-csv-00.txt>

      The Concise Data Definition Language (CDDL), standardized in RFC
      8610, is defined to provide data models for data shaped like JSON or
      CBOR.
      
      Another representation format that is quote popular is the CSV file
      as defined by RFC 4180.
      
      The present document shows how to use CDDL to provide a data model
      for CSV files.

  "tus - Resumable Uploads Protocol", Marius Kleidl, Jiten Mehta, Guoye
  Zhang, Lucas Pardue, Stefan Matsson, 2022-02-24,
  <draft-tus-httpbis-resumable-uploads-protocol-00.txt>

      HTTP clients often encounter interrupted data transfers as a result
      of canceled requests or dropped connections.  Prior to interruption,
      part of a representation may have been exchanged.  To complete the
      data transfer of the entire representation, it is often desirable to
      issue subsequent requests that transfer only the remainder of the
      representation.  HTTP range requests support this concept of
      resumable downloads from server to client.  This document describes a
      mechanism that supports resumable uploads from client to server using
      HTTP.

  "Sieve Email Filtering: Extension for Processing iMIP Messages", Kenneth
  Murchison, Ricardo Signes, Matthew Horsfall, 2022-02-24,
  <draft-murchison-sieve-processimip-00.txt>

      This document describes the "processimip" extension to the Sieve
      email filtering language.  The "processimip" extension gives Sieve
      the ability to process messages using the iCalendar Message-Based
      Interoperability Protocol (iMIP).
      
      Open Issues

  "DetNet Enhancements for Large-Scale Deterministic Networks", Quan Xiong,
  Zongpeng Du, 2022-02-24,
  <draft-xiong-detnet-large-scale-enhancements-00.txt>

      This document describes enhancements to DetNet to achieve the
      differentiated DetNet QoS in large-scale deterministic networks
      including the overall requirements and solutions with deterministic
      resources, routes and services.

  "Extra Extended DNS Error codes for DNSSEC status bogus", Tom Carpay,
  Willem Toorop, 2022-02-25,
  <draft-carpay-extra-ede-codes-dnssec-bogus-00.txt>

      While implementing Extended DNS Errors (RFC8914) in our DNSSEC
      validating resolver software Unbound, we encountered this specific
      situations regarding the DNSSEC bogus status where no Extended DNS
      Error were yet defined. This draft serves as a reference for code
      points requests.

  "The New Webiquette", Kate, 2022-02-26,
  <draft-rfcxml-general-the-new-webiquette-00.txt>

      The inspiration for this document came from RFC 1855 ("Netiquette"),
      which is now partially obsolete and no longer maintained.  A lot has
      happened on the Internet since then (social media, video
      conferencing, deepfakes, ad networks), which should be applied in a
      netiquette.  Like in RFC 1855 this is only a minimal standard.

  "IPv6 Minimum Multipath MTU Detection", QIAN Guofeng, Tianran Zhou,
  2022-02-28, <draft-qian-6man-ipv6-multipath-mtu-detection-00.txt>

      I In current multipath load balancing network scenario, all path
      detection mechanisms have a defect.  A typical load balancing route
      selection mechanism cannot cover all forwarding paths, which will
      cause missing detection.This document describes how to extend a new
      path detection mechanism to instruct intermediate devices to send
      probe packets to all downstream paths.  This new mechanism is named
      load-sharing multipath replication forwarding (LMRF).

  "One-way Delay Measurement Based on Deterministic Networking", Hongwei
  Yang, Peng Liu, 2022-02-28,
  <draft-yang-detnet-deterministic-owd-measurement-00.txt>

      One-way delay is a key indicator to measure network quality.  Some
      applications are one-way transmission in the network, such as some
      high-definition video services, and are very sensitive to one-way
      delay.  Excessive delay will affect user experience greatly.  To some
      extent, the network can't even be used, so it is very important to
      accurately measure the network transmission delay.  The current one-
      way delay measurement method has problems such as high complexity and
      low measurement accuracy.  In order to solve the problem of high-
      precision one-way delay measurement, a one-way delay measurement
      method based on deterministic networking is proposed in this
      document.  The method takes advantage of the delay characteristics of
      the deterministic networking and does not depend on precise time
      synchronization.The method realizes the one-way delay measurement of
      any service flow between any network elements.  Its technical
      advantages are: the network does not need to send measurement
      packets, can test all traffic types, does not change network status,
      does not change the format of traffic packets, and does not require
      network elements to support time synchronization protocols.

  "One-way Delay Measurement Based on Reference Delay", Hongwei Yang, Kehan
  Yao, 2022-02-28, <draft-lyy-detnet-ref-delay-measurement-00.txt>

      The end-to-end network one-way delay is an important performance
      metric in the 5G network.  For realizing the accurate one-way delay
      measurement, existing methods requires the end-to-end deployment of
      accurate clock synchronization mechanism, such as PTP or GPS, which
      results in relatively high deployment cost.  Another method can
      derive the one-way delay from the round-trip delay.  In this case,
      since the delay of the downlink and uplink may be asymmetric, the
      measurement accuracy is relatively low.  Hence, this document
      introduces a method to measure the end-to-end network one-way delay
      based on a reference delay guaranteed by deterministic networking
      without clock synchronization.The advantage of this solution is that
      it has high measurement accuracy and can test any flow type.

  "Considerations for Protection of SRv6 Networks", Yisong Liu, Weiqiang
  Cheng, Changwang Lin, Xuesong Geng, Liu Yao, 2022-03-03,
  <draft-liu-rtgwg-srv6-protection-considerations-01.txt>

      This document describes the considerations for protection of SRv6
      network.

  "QUIC Connection ID Based Initial Routing", Nick Banks, 2022-03-01,
  <draft-banks-quic-cibir-01.txt>

      This document defines an extension to the QUIC transport protocol to
      consistently route all packets from a client to the appropriate
      server on a shared UDP port.

  "Barreto-Lynn-Scott Elliptic Curve Key Representations for JOSE and COSE",
  Tobias Looker, Michael Jones, 2022-03-01,
  <draft-looker-cose-bls-key-representations-00.txt>

      This specification defines how to represent cryptographic keys for
      the pairing-friendly elliptic curves known as Barreto-Lynn-Scott
      (BLS), for use with the key representation formats of JSON Web Key
      (JWK) and COSE (COSE_Key).
      
      Discussion Venues
      
      This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.
      
      Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
      https://github.com/tplooker/draft-looker-cose-bls-key-
      representations.

  "CBOR Web Token (CWT) Claims in COSE Headers", Tobias Looker, Michael
  Jones, 2022-03-01, <draft-looker-cose-cwt-claims-in-headers-00.txt>

      This document describes how to include CBOR Web Token (CWT) claims in
      the header parameters of any COSE structure.  This functionality
      helps to facilitate applications that wish to make use of CBOR Web
      Token (CWT) claims in encrypted COSE structures and/or COSE
      structures featuring detached signatures, while having some of those
      claims be available before decryption and/or without inspecting the
      detached payload.

  "MPLS MIAD Framework", Loa Andersson, Stewart Bryant, Matthew Bocci,
  2022-03-03, <draft-andersson-mpls-miad-fwk-01.txt>

      This document specifies an architectural framework for the
      application of the MPLS Indicator and Ancillary Data (MIAD)
      technologies.  MIAD techmologies are used to indicate actions (I) for
      LSPs and/or packets and to transfer data needed for these actions
      (AD).
      
      The document describes a common set of protocol functions and
      information elements - the MPLS Indicartor and Ancillary Data -
      supporting additional operational models and capabilities of MPLS
      netwroks that support these functions.  Some of these functions are
      defined in existing MPLS specifications, while others require
      extensions to existing specifications to meet the requirements in the
      MIAD requirement specification.
      
      This document is the result of work started in MPLS Open Desgign
      Team, with participation by the MPLS, PALS and DETNET working groups.

  "Extensible Provisioning Protocol (EPP) Transport over HTTP", Mario
  Loffredo, Lorenzo Trombacchi, Maurizio Martinelli, Jan Romanowski, Marcin
  Machnio, 2022-03-07, <draft-loffredo-regext-epp-over-http-01.txt>

      This document describes how the Extensible Provisioning Protocol
      (EPP) is mapped over the Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP).  This
      mapping requires the use of the Transport Layer Security (TLS)
      protocol to protect information exchanged between an EPP client and
      an EPP server.

  "S-BFD Path Consistency over SRv6", Changwang Lin, Weiqiang Cheng, Jiang
  Wenying, 2022-03-02, <draft-lin-sbfd-path-consistency-over-srv6-00.txt>

      Bidirectional Forwarding Detection (BFD) can be used to monitor
      paths between nodes. Seamless BFD (S-BFD) provides a simplified
      mechanism which is suitable for monitoring of paths that are setup
      dynamically and on a large scale network. In SRv6, when a headend
      use S-BFD to monitor the segment list/CPath of SRv6 Policy, the
      forward path of S-BFD packet is indicated by segment list, the
      reverse path of BFD packet is via the shortest path from the
      reflector back to the initiator (headend) as determined by routing.
      The forward path and reverse path of S-BFD packet are likely
      inconsistent going through different intermediate nodes or links.
      This document describes a method to keep the forward path and
      reverse path of S-BFD consistent when detecting SRv6 Policy.

  "Everything over CoAP", Christian Amsuess, 2022-03-02,
  <draft-amsuess-core-coap-kitchensink-00.txt>

      The Constrained Application Protocol (CoAP) has become the base of
      applications both inside of the constrained devices space it
      originally aimed for and outside.  This document gives an overview of
      applications that are, can, may, and would better not be implemented
      on top of CoAP.

  "Stateful Hash-based Signatures For DNSSEC", Andrew Fregly, Roland van
  Rijswijk-Deij, 2022-03-02,
  <draft-afrvrd-dnsop-stateful-hbs-for-dnssec-00.txt>

      This document describes how to use stateful hash-based signature
      schemes (SHBSS) with the DNS Security Extensions (DNSSEC).  The
      schemes include the Hierarchical Signature System (HSS) variant of
      Leighton-Micali Hash-Based Signatures (HSS/LMS), the eXtended Merkle
      Signature Scheme (XMSS), and XMSS Multi-Tree (XMSS^MT).  In addition,
      DNSKEY and RRSIG record formats for the signature algorithms are
      defined and new algorithm identifiers are described.

  "Benchmarking Methodology for MPLS Segment Routing", Giuseppe Fioccola,
  Eduard, Paolo Volpato, Luis Contreras, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-vfv-bmwg-srmpls-bench-meth-01.txt>

      This document defines a methodology for benchmarking Segment Routing
      (SR) performance for Segment Routing over MPLS (SR-MPLS).  It builds
      upon [RFC2544], [RFC5695] and [RFC8402].

  "Benchmarking Methodology for IPv6 Segment Routing", Giuseppe Fioccola,
  Eduard, Paolo Volpato, Luis Contreras, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-vfv-bmwg-srv6-bench-meth-01.txt>

      This document defines a methodology for benchmarking Segment Routing
      (SR) performance for Segment Routing over IPv6 (SRv6).  It builds
      upon [RFC2544], [RFC5180] and [RFC8402].

  "MPLS Extension Header Encodings", Jaganbabu Rajamanickam, Rakesh Gandhi,
  Jisu Bhattacharya, Bruno Decraene, Royi Zigler, Weiqiang Cheng, Luay Jalil,
  2022-03-02, <draft-jags-mpls-ext-hdr-00.txt>

      This document uses the Multiprotocol Label Switching (MPLS) Entropy
      Label (EL) extensions defined in draft-decraene-mpls-slid-encoded-
      entropy-label-id or a new Special Purpose Label to indicate the
      presence of MPLS Extension Header (MEH) in an MPLS label stack.  It
      defines different MPLS Extension Header encoding formats to carry
      additional data in the MPLS label stack that can influence forwarding
      decision and to carry additional data after the Bottom of the MPLS
      label stack.

  "SRPM Path Consistency over SRv6", Weiqiang Cheng, Changwang Lin,
  2022-03-02, <draft-weng-ippm-srpm-path-consistency-over-srv6-00.txt>

      Twamp can be used to measure the performance of end-to-end paths in
      networks. Stamp [rfc8762] and twamp light are more lightweight
      measurement methods. In the SRv6 network, it is also necessary to
      measure the performance of SRv6 policy. This document describes a
      method to measure srv6 policy through stamp and twamp light.

  "Computing Resource Representation in Computing Aware Networking", Zongpeng
  Du, Yuexia Fu, 2022-03-03,
  <draft-du-computing-resource-representation-00.txt>

      This document introduces the way of encoding service-specific
      information and the way of signaling it in the network.

  "IETF Network Slice Service Mapping YANG Model", Dhruv Dhody, Bo Wu,
  2022-03-03, <draft-dhody-teas-ietf-network-slice-mapping-00.txt>

      This document provides a YANG data model to map IETF network slice
      service to Traffic Engineering (TE) models (e.g., the Virtual Network
      (VN) model or the TE Tunnel etc).  It also supports mapping to the
      VPN Network models and Network Resource Partition (NRP) models.
      These models are referred to as IETF network slice service mapping
      model and are applicable generically for the seamless control and
      management of the IETF network slice service with underlying TE/VPN
      support.
      
      The models are principally used for monitoring and diagnostics of the
      management systems to show how the IETF network slice service
      requests are mapped onto underlying network resource and TE/VPN
      models.

  "Inband Flow Learning Framework", Liuyan Han, Minxue Wang, Fan Yang,
  2022-03-03, <draft-hwy-opsawg-ifl-framework-00.txt>

      To deploy the inband performance measurement and flow information
      telemetry on live traffic, this document proposes a framework of an
      inband and flow based flow information learning mechanism called
      Inband Flow Learning (IFL).  This document also provides different
      deployment approaches and considerations in practical network
      deployment.

  "A Framework for QoS-Enabled Semantic Routing in Industrial Networks",
  Paolo Bellavista, Luca Foschini, Lorenzo Patera, Mattia Fogli, Carlo
  Giannelli, Cesare Stefanelli, Zhe Lou, 2022-03-03,
  <draft-bellavista-semantic-sdn-mom-00.txt>

      Industrial networks pose unique challenges in realizing a
      communication substrate on the shop floor.  Such challenges are due
      to strict Quality of Service (QoS) requirements, a wide range of
      protocols for data exchange, and highly heterogeneous network
      infrastructures.  In this regard, this document proposes a framework
      for QoS-enabled semantic routing in industrial networks.  Such a
      framework aims at providing loosely-coupled, asynchronous
      communications, fine-grained traffic management (delivery semantics
      and flow priorities), and in-network traffic optimization.

  "pretty Easy privacy (pEp): Privacy by Default", Volker Birk, Hernani
  Marques, Bernie Hoeneisen, 2022-03-03, <draft-pep-general-00.txt>

      The pretty Easy privacy (pEp) model and protocols describe a set of
      conventions for the automation of operations traditionally seen as
      barriers to the use and deployment of secure, privacy-preserving end-
      to-end messaging.  These include, but are not limited to, key
      management, key discovery, and private key handling (including peer-
      to-peer synchronization of private keys and other user data across
      devices).  Human Rights-enabling principles like Data Minimization,
      End-to-End and Interoperability are explicit design goals.  For the
      goal of usable privacy, pEp introduces means to verify communication
      between peers and proposes a trust-rating system to denote secure
      types of communications and signal the privacy level available on a
      per-user and per-message level.  Significantly, the pEp protocols
      build on already available security formats and message transports
      (e.g., PGP/MIME with email), and are written with the intent to be
      interoperable with already widely-deployed systems in order to ease
      adoption and implementation.  This document outlines the general
      design choices and principles of pEp.

  "A YANG Model for SRv6 Mobile User Plane", Mahesh Jethanandani, Tetsuya
  Murakami, 2022-03-03, <draft-mahesh-spring-srv6-mobile-yang-00.txt>

      This document defines a YANG data model for configuration and
      management of SRv6 for the mobile network.

  "I2NSF Remote Attestation Interface YANG Data Model", Penglin Yang,
  chenmeiling, Li Su, Diego Lopez, Jaehoon Jeong, Linda Dunbar, 2022-03-03,
  <draft-yang-i2nsf-remote-attestation-interface-dm-00.txt>

      This document describes the architecture and interfaces of remote
      attestation in I2NSF.  The architectures defines remote attestation
      components which must comply with the original architectures of I2NSF
      and RATs.  The interfaces includes remote attestation interface of
      I2NSF and reference value interface of I2NSF.

  "BGP SR Policy Extensions for Network Resource Partition", Jie Dong, Zhibo
  Hu, Ran Pang, 2022-03-03, <draft-dong-idr-sr-policy-nrp-00.txt>

      Segment Routing (SR) Policy is a set of candidate paths, each
      consisting of one or more segment lists and the associated
      information.  The header of a packet steered in an SR Policy is
      augmented with an ordered list of segments associated with that SR
      Policy.  A Network Resource Partition (NRP) is a set of network
      resources allocated in the network which can be used to instantiate a
      virtual transport network (VTN) for one or a group service traffic.
      In scenarios where multiple Network Resource Partitions (NRPs) exist
      in the network, the NRP in which an SR policy is instantiated may
      also need to be specified, so that the header of the packet can be
      augmented with the information associated with the NRP.  An SR Policy
      candidate path can be distributed using BGP SR Policy.  This document
      defines extensions to BGP SR policy to specify the NRP in which the
      SR policy is instantiated.

  "User Ports for Experiments", Joseph Touch, 2022-03-03,
  <draft-touch-tsvwg-usr-exp-00.txt>

      This document defines user ports for experiments using transport
      protocols. It describes the use of experiment identifiers to enable
      shared use of these user ports, as well as updating the use of
      system ports for experiments [RFC4727] in the same manner.

  "architecture of confidential computing in computing aware network",
  Penglin Yang, chenmeiling, Li Su, 2022-03-03,
  <draft-yang-teep-ccican-00.txt>

      Confidential Computing is the protection of data in use by performing
      computation in a hardware-based Trusted Execution Environment.
      Especially in virtualization environments, confidential computing
      could protect data and applications from access or tampering by
      hypervisor or other privileged users.  In Computing-Aware network,
      computing resource is an essential element to provide computing
      services for network users' applications.  Introducing confidential
      computing in Computing-Aware network could mitigate the distrust of
      computing resource efficiently.  This document provides the
      architecture of confidential computing in Computing-Aware network
      management plane to provide confidentiality and integrity for
      applications.

  "Advertisement of Dedicated Metric for Flexible Algorithm in IGP",
  Changwang Lin, Mengxiao Chen, Weiqiang Cheng, Liyan Gong, 2022-03-03,
  <draft-lin-lsr-flex-algo-metric-00.txt>

      This document proposes a method to advertise dedicated metric for
      Flex-Algorithm in IGP.

  "Framework For Internet Basic Behavior Metrics", Wei Ding, 2022-03-04,
  <draft-ding-ibbm-framework-00.txt>

      This document provides a definition of Internet Basic Behavior
      Measurement(IBBM) based on the Internet architecture and describes in
      detail the specifications to be followed for the metrics and
      measurement activities under IBBM, which are given in the form of
      elements.  The main purpose of this document is to standardize the
      accurate meaning and expression of metrics obtained based on Internet
      behavioral measurement activities, to improve the worth of the
      measurement results.

  "A Cost Mode Registry for the Application-Layer Traffic Optimization (ALTO)
  Protocol", Mohamed Boucadair, Qin WU, 2022-03-04,
  <draft-bw-alto-cost-mode-01.txt>

      This document creates a new IANA registry for tracking cost modes
      supported by the Application-Layer Traffic Optimization (ALTO)
      protocol.  Also, this document relaxes a constraint that was imposed
      by the ALTO specification on allowed cost mode values.
      
      This document updates RFC 7285.

  "BGP SPF for Network Resource Partitions", Jie Dong, Zhenbin Li, Haibo
  Wang, 2022-03-04, <draft-dong-lsvr-bgp-spf-nrp-00.txt>

      A VTN is a virtual underlay network which has customized network
      topology and a set of dedicated or shared network resources.  Network
      Resource Partition (NRP) refers to a set of network resources that
      are available to carry traffic and meet the SLOs and SLEs.  Multiple
      NRPs can be created in a network to provide different Virtual
      Transport Networks (VTN) to meet the requirements of different
      services or different service groups.
      
      As the number of NRP increases, there can be scalability concerns
      about using Interial Gateway Protocols (IGP) to distribute the NRP
      information in the network.  In networks where BGP Shortest Path
      First (SPF) can used as the underlay routing mechanism to distribute
      the link-state information among network nodes, the information of
      NRPs needs to be distributed along with the basic network
      information.  This document specifies the BGP SPF mechanisms with
      necessary extensions to distribute the NRP information and perform
      NRP-specific path computation.

  "Distributed Flow Measurement in IPv6", Haojie Wang, sijun weng, Changwang
  Lin, 2022-03-04, <draft-wang-ippm-ipv6-distribted-flow-measurement-00.txt>

      Flow measurement based on Alternate-Marking method for IPv6 network
      requires the controller to collect statistical data, calculate and
      present the results. This document proposes a distributed method for
      in-situ flow measurement, which is indpendent of the controller.

  "OAuth 2.0 Step-up Authentication Challenge Protocol", Vittorio Bertocci,
  Brian Campbell, 2022-03-04,
  <draft-bertocci-oauth-step-up-authn-challenge-00.txt>

      It is not uncommon for resource servers to require different
      authentication strengths or freshness according to the
      characteristics of a request.  This document introduces a mechanism
      for a resource server to signal to a client that the authentication
      event associated with the access token of the current request doesn't
      meet its authentication requirements and specify how to meet them.
      This document also codifies a mechanism for a client to request that
      an authorization server achieve a specific authentication strength or
      freshness when processing an authorization request.

  "dry-run DNSSEC", Yorgos Thessalonikefs, Willem Toorop, Roy Arends,
  2022-03-04, <draft-yorgos-dnsop-dry-run-dnssec-00.txt>

      This document describes a method called "dry-run DNSSEC" that allows
      for testing DNSSEC deployments without affecting the DNS service in
      case of DNSSEC errors.  It accomplishes that by introducing a new DS
      Type Digest Algorithm that signals to validating resolvers that dry-
      run DNSSEC is used for the zone.  DNSSEC errors are then reported
      with DNS Error Reporting, but the bogus response is withheld.
      Instead resolvers fallback from dry-run DNSSEC and provide the
      response that would have been answered without the presence of a dry-
      run DS.  A further option is presented for clients to opt-in for dry-
      run DNSSEC errors and allow for end-to-end DNSSEC testing.

  "Path Tracing in SRv6 networks", Clarence Filsfils, Ahmed Abdelsalam, Pablo
  Camarillo, Mark Yufit, Thomas Graf, Yuanchao Su, Satoru Matsushima,
  2022-03-04, <draft-filsfils-spring-path-tracing-00.txt>

      Path Tracing provides a record of the packet path as a sequence of
      interface ids.  In addition, it provides a record of end-to-end
      delay, per-hop delay, and load on each egress interface along the
      packet delivery path.
      
      Path Tracing allows to trace 14 hops with only a 40-bytes IPv6 Hop-
      by-Hop extension header.
      
      Path Tracing supports fine grained timestamp.  It has been designed
      for linerate hardware implementation in the base pipeline.

  "Just Another Measurement of Extension header Survivability (JAMES)", Eric
  Vyncke, Raphael Leas, Justin Iurman, 2022-03-04,
  <draft-vyncke-v6ops-james-00.txt>

      In 2016, [RFC7872] has measured the drop of packets with IPv6
      extension headers.  This document presents a slightly different
      methodology with more recent results.  It is still work in progress.

  "Precision Availability Metrics for SLO-Governed End-to-End Services", Greg
  Mirsky, Joel Halpern, Xiao Min, Alexander Clemm, John Strassner, Jerome
  Francois, Liuyan Han, 2022-03-04, <draft-mhmcsfh-ippm-pam-00.txt>

      This document defines a set of metrics for networking services with
      performance requirements expressed as Service Level Objectives (SLO).
      These metrics, referred to as Precision Availability Metrics (PAM),
      can be used to assess the service levels that are being delivered.
      Specifically, PAM can be used to determine the degree of compliance
      with which service levels are being delivered relative to pre-defined
      SLOs.  PAM can be used to provide a service according to its SLO as
      part of accounting records, to account for the actual quality with
      which services were delivered and whether or not any SLO violations
      occurred.  Also, PAM can be used to continuously monitor the quality
      with which the service is delivered.

  "Game State over Real Time Protocol", Cullen Jennings, Rich Logan,
  2022-03-04, <draft-jennings-dispatch-game-state-over-rtp-00.txt>

      This specification defines an Real Time Protocol (RTP) payload to
      send game moves and the state of game objects over RTP.  This is
      useful for games as well collaboration systems that use augment or
      virtual reality.
      
      RTP provide a way to synchronize game state between players with
      robust technique for recovery from network packet loss while still
      having low latency.

  "An Alt-Svc Parameter for QUIC Versions", Martin Duke, Lucas Pardue,
  2022-03-04, <draft-duke-httpbis-quic-version-alt-svc-00.txt>

      HTTP Alternative Services (Alt-Svc) describes how one origin's
      resource can be accessed via a different protocol/host/port
      combination.  Alternatives are advertised by servers using the Alt-
      Svc header field or the ALTSVC frame.  This includes a protocol name,
      which reuses Application Layer Protocol Negotiation (ALPN)
      codepoints.  The "h3" codepoint indicates the availability of HTTP/3.
      A client that uses such an alternative first makes a QUIC connection.
      However, without a priori knowledge of which QUIC version to use,
      clients might incur a round-trip latency penalty to complete QUIC
      version negotiation, or forfeit desirable properties of a QUIC
      version.  This document specifies a new Alt-Svc parameter that
      specifies alternative supported QUIC versions, which substantially
      reduces the chance of this penalty.

  "BIER-TE Encapsulation with Multiple BitStrings", Huaimo Chen, Mike
  McBride, Ran Chen, Gyan Mishra, Aijun Wang, Yanhe Fan, Lei Liu, Xufeng Liu,
  2022-03-04, <draft-chen-bier-te-enc-00.txt>

      This document describes a "Bit Index Explicit Replication Traffic
      Engineering" (BIER-TE) header, two levels of Bit Index Forwarding
      Tables (BIFTs) and a forwarding procedure for efficiently processing
      BIER-TE packets with the header.  For a multicast packet with an
      explicit point-to-multipoint (P2MP) path, which has multiple
      BitStrings, the packet with the header containing the BitStrings is
      replicated and forwarded statelessly along the path.

  "QuicR - Media Delivery Protocol over QUIC", Cullen Jennings, Suhas
  Nandakumar, 2022-03-04, <draft-jennings-moq-quicr-arch-00.txt>

      This specification outlines the design for a media delivery protocol
      over QUIC.  It aims at supporting multiple application classes with
      varying latency requirements including ultra low latency applications
      such as interactive communication and gaming.  It is based on a
      publish/subscribe metaphor where entities publish and subscribe to
      data that is sent through, and received from, relays in the cloud.
      The information subscribed to is named such that this forms an
      overlay information centric network.  The relays allow for efficient
      large scale deployments.

  "QuicR - Media Delivery Protocol over QUIC", Cullen Jennings, Suhas
  Nandakumar, 2022-03-04, <draft-jennings-moq-quicr-proto-00.txt>

      Recently new usecases have emerged requiring higher scalability of
      delivery for interactive realtime applications and much lower latency
      for streaming applications and a combination thereof. draft-jennings-
      moq-quicr-arch specifies architectural aspects of QuicR, a media
      delivery protocol based on publish/subscribe metaphor and Relay based
      delivery tree, that enables a wide range of realtime applications
      with different resiliency and latency needs.
      
      This specification defines the protocol aspects of the QuicR
      architecture.

  "BGP SR Policy Extensions for metric", KaZhang, Jie Dong, 2022-03-05,
  <draft-zhang-idr-sr-policy-metric-00.txt>

      SR Policy candidate paths can be represented in BGP UPDATE messages.
      BGP can then be used to propagate the SR Policy candidate paths to
      the headend nodes in the network.  After SR Policy is installed on
      the ingress node, the packets can be steered into SR Policy through
      route selection.  Therefore, route selection may be performed on the
      ingress node of the SR Policy.  If there are multiple routes to the
      same destination, the route selection node can select routes based on
      the local policy.  The local policy may use the IGP metric of the
      selected path, which is the IGP Metric of the SR Policy.  Thus the
      BGP UPDATE message need carry the metric of each segment list of the
      SR Policy Candidate Path, which can be used in path selection of
      routing.

  "Problem Statement and Use Cases of Adaptive Traffic Data Collection",
  Xiaoming He, Dongfeng Mao, Qiufang Ma, Tianran Zhou, 2022-03-05,
  <draft-he-adaptive-collecting-problem-usecases-00.txt>

      IP carrier network needs to provide real-time traffic visibility to
      help network operators quickly and accurately locate network
      congestion and packet loss, and make timely path adjustment for
      deterministic services in order to avoid congestion.  It is essential
      to explore the adaptive traffic data collection mechanism so as to
      capture real-time network state at minimum resource consumption.
      
      This document summarizes the problems currently faced by network
      operators when attempting to provide timely traffic data collection
      to satisfy the various scenarios that require real-time network state
      and traffic visibility, and aggregates the requirements for adaptive
      traffic collecting mechanism from a variety of deployment scenarios.

  "JSON Encoding for Post Quantum Signatures", Michael Prorock, Orie Steele,
  Rafael Misoczki, Michael Osborne, Christine Cloostermans, 2022-03-05,
  <draft-prorock-cose-post-quantum-signatures-00.txt>

      This document describes JSON and CBOR serializations for several post
      quantum cryptography (PQC) based suites.
      
      This document does not define any new cryptography, only
      seralizations of existing cryptographic systems.
      
      This document registers key types for JOSE and COSE, specifically
      PQK, CRYDI, pset.
      
      This document registers signature algorithms types for JOSE and COSE,
      specifically CRYDI3 and others as required for various post quantum
      signature schemes.

  "Distribution of Oblivious Configurations via Service Binding Records",
  Tommy Pauly, Tirumaleswar Reddy.K, 2022-03-05,
  <draft-pauly-ohai-svcb-config-00.txt>

      This document defines a parameter that can be included in SVCB and
      HTTPS DNS resource records to denote that a service is accessible as
      an Oblivious HTTP target, along with one or more oblivious key
      configurations.

  "Multicast using Multicast Routing Header", Huaimo Chen, Mike McBride,
  Yanhe Fan, Zhenbin Li, Xuesong Geng, Mehmet Toy, Gyan Mishra, Yisong Liu,
  Aijun Wang, Lei Liu, Xufeng Liu, 2022-03-07, <draft-chen-pim-mrh6-01.txt>

      This document describes an efficient solution for multicast along an
      explicit P2MP Path/Tree using an IPv6 extension header called
      multicast routing header (MRH).  The MRH with the path encoded in
      link numbers is added into a packet to be multicast at the ingress.
      The packet is delivered to the egresses along the path.  There is no
      state stored in the core of the network.

  "Guidelines for the Definition of New Top Level Media Types", Martin
  Duerst, 2022-03-06, <draft-duerst-mediaman-toplevel-00.txt>

      The goal of this document is to identify best practices for defining
      new top-level media types.  It updates RFC 6838 [RFC6838], when
      approved.  Comments and discussion about this document should be
      directed to media-types@ietf.org, the mailing list of the Media Type
      Maintenance (mediaman) WG.

  "Carefully Resume QUIC Session", Nicolas Kuhn, Stephan Emile, Gorry
  Fairhurst, Tom Jones, Christian Huitema, 2022-03-06,
  <draft-kuhn-quic-careful-resume-00.txt>

      This document provides a method to allow a QUIC session to carefully
      resume using a previously utilised Internet path.
      
      The method uses a set of computed congestion control parameters that
      are based on the previously observed path characteristics, such as
      the bottleneck bandwidth, available capacity, or the RTT.  These
      parameters are stored and can then used to modify the congestion
      control behaviour of a subsequent connection.  The draft discusses
      assumptions around how a server ought to utilise the parameters to
      provide opportunities for a new flow to more quickly get up to speed
      (i.e. utilise available capacity).  It discusses how these changes
      impact the capacity at a shared network bottleneck and the response
      that is needed after any indication that the new rate is
      inappropriate.

  "BDP Frame Extension", Nicolas Kuhn, Stephan Emile, Gorry Fairhurst, Tom
  Jones, Christian Huitema, 2022-03-06,
  <draft-kuhn-quic-bdpframe-extension-00.txt>

      This draft describes the BDP Frame extension for QUIC.  It enables
      the exchange of information related to the path characteristics
      between the client and the server during a connection.  This
      information can later be exploited when a new connection is
      established.

  "Semantic Address Based Instructive Routing for Satellite Network", Lin
  Han, Alvaro Retana, Richard Li, 2022-03-06,
  <draft-lhan-satellite-instructive-routing-00.txt>

      This document presents a method to do IP routing over satellite
      network that consists of LEO (Low Earth Orbit) satellites and ground-
      stations.  The method uses the source routing mechanism.  The whole
      routing info is obtained by path calculation.  The routing path
      information is converted to be a list of instructions and embedded
      into user packet's IPv6 extension header.  At each hop or each
      satellite, the routing process engine will forward the packet based
      on the specified instruction for the satellite.  Until the packet
      reaches the edge of satellite network, or the last satellite, the
      packet will be sent to a ground station.

  "An IPv6 Segment Routing (SRv6) Domain Name System (DNS) Resource Record",
  Donald Eastlake, Haoyu Song, 2022-03-06,
  <draft-eastlake-dnsop-rrtype-srv6-00.txt>

      A Domain Name System (DNS) Resource Record (RR) Type is specified for
      storing IPv6 Segment Routing (SRv6) Information in the DNS.

  "5G Distributed UPFs", Zhaohui Zhang, Keyur Patel, Tianji Jiang,
  2022-03-06, <draft-zzhang-dmm-5g-distributed-upf-00.txt>

      This document describes evolution of mobile user plane in 5G,
      including distributed UPFs and alternative user plane implementations
      that some vendors/operators are pushing without changing 3GPP
      architecture/signaling.  This also sets the stage for discussions in
      a companion document about potentially integrating UPF and Acess Node
      (AN) in a future generation (xG) of mobile network.

  "Mobile User Plane Evolution", Zhaohui Zhang, Keyur Patel, 2022-03-06,
  <draft-zzhang-dmm-mup-evolution-00.txt>

      [I-D.zzhang-dmm-5g-distributed-upf] describes evolution of mobile
      user plane in 5G, including distributed UPFs and alternative user
      plane implementations that some vendors/operators are pushing without
      changing 3GPP architecture/signaling.  Building on top of that, this
      document further discusses potentially integrating UPF and Acess Node
      (AN) in a future generation (xG) of mobile network.
      
      This document is not an attempt to do 3GPP work in IETF.  Rather, it
      discusses potential integration of IETF/wireline and 3GPP/wireless
      technologies - first among parties who are familiar with both areas
      and friendly with IETF/wireline technologies.  If the ideas in this
      document are deemed reasonable, feasible and desired among these
      parties, they can then be brought to 3GPP for further discussions.

  "Use Cases for SR Policy Group", Jiang Wenying, Weiqiang Cheng, Changwang
  Lin, Yuanxiang Qiu, 2022-03-06,
  <draft-jiang-spring-sr-policy-group-use-cases-00.txt>

      Segment Routing is a source routing paradigm that explicitly
      indicates the forwarding path for packets at the ingress node.  An SR
      Policy is associated with one or more candidate paths, and each
      candidate path is either dynamic, explicit or composite.  This
      document illustrates some use cases for SR policy group composite
      candidate path in MPLS and IPv6 environment.

  "Improve logging credibility by adding synchronization time information",
  Fengsheng Wang, chenmeiling, Li Su, 2022-03-06,
  <draft-chen-syslog-syscinfo-credibility-00.txt>

      This document proposes a scheme to improve the credibility of log
      reporting time by adding time synchronization information.
      
      This document updates the "timeQuality" structured Data in RFC 5424
      [RFC5424], The Syslog Protocol.  By appending "SYNCINFO" information
      after the "isSynced" parameter, the log collector can judge the
      credibility of logs when correlating logs of different devices.

  "Use Cases for Computing-aware Software-Defined Wide Area Network(SD-WAN)",
  Shuai Zhang, Li Jianfei, Cheng Li, Xia Chen, 2022-03-06,
  <draft-zhang-dyncast-computing-aware-sdwan-usecase-00.txt>

      SD-WAN is aware of the computing power of applications deployed in
      the multiple sites of enterprise and can perform the routing policy
      according to such information.  This is defined as the computing-
      aware SD-WAN.This document describes the use cases for computing-
      aware Software-Defined Wide Area Network(SD-WAN).

  "MSR6(Multicast Source Routing over IPv6) Use Case", Yisong Liu, Feng Yang,
  Aijun Wang, XueruZhang, Xuesong Geng, Zhenbin Li, 2022-03-06,
  <draft-liu-msr6-use-cases-00.txt>

      This document introduces the use cases for MSR6, inclusing DCN and
      SD-WAN.

  "LSR for SR Proxy Forwarding", Zhibo Hu, Huaimo Chen, Junda Yao, Chris
  Bowers, Yongqing Zhu, Yisong Liu, 2022-03-06,
  <draft-hc-lsr-sr-proxy-fw-00.txt>

      This document describes extensions to OSPF and IS-IS to support SR
      proxy forwarding mechanism for fast protecting the failure of a node
      with segments on a SR-TE path.  The segments of the node include
      adjacency, node or binding segments.

  "IS-IS Traffic Engineering (TE) Metric LAN Extensions", Chenxi Li, Guoqi
  Xu, Zhibo Hu, 2022-03-06,
  <draft-li-lsr-isis-te-metric-lan-extensions-00.txt>

      In certain networks, network-performance criteria (e.g., latency) are
      becoming as critical to data-path selection as other metrics.  This
      document describes extensions to IS-IS Traffic Engineering (TE)
      Metric Extensions (RFC 8570) for LAN subnetworks.  These extensions
      provide a way to distribute and collect network-performance
      information in LAN subnetworks.

  "Intent-based Routing", Zhenbin Li, Zhibo Hu, Jie Dong, Shuai Zhang, Li
  Jianfei, 2022-03-06, <draft-li-apn-intent-based-routing-00.txt>

      This document defines the intent-based routing mechanism through
      which the packet can carry the intent information and the network
      node can enforce the policy according to the intent information
      (typically steering the packet into the SR policy or the underlay
      slice which can meet the intent).  The intent-based routing mechanism
      provides a simple and scalable solution to meet the different service
      requirements for the inter-domain routing.

  "Oblivious Proxy Feedback", Tirumaleswar Reddy.K, Dan Wing, Mohamed
  Boucadair, 2022-03-06, <draft-rdb-ohai-feedback-to-proxy-00.txt>

      To provide equitable service to clients, servers often rate-limit
      incoming requests, often based upon the source IP address.  However,
      oblivious HTTP removes the ability for the server to distinguish
      amongst clients so the server can only rate-limit traffic from the
      oblivious proxy.  This harms all clients behind that oblivious proxy.
      
      This specification provides feedback from a server to an oblivious
      proxy, enabling the oblivious proxy to rate-limit incoming requests
      from clients.  Cooperating oblivious proxies can thus provide more
      equitable service to their distinguishable clients without triggering
      rate-limiting on the request resource or the target resource that
      would impact all clients behind that Oblivious proxy.

  "Network Programming Interface for Provisioning of Underlay Services to
  Overlay Networks Using SRv6", Jingrong Xie, 2022-03-06,
  <draft-xie-spring-srv6-npi-for-overlay-00.txt>

      This document describes a framework and a detailed suite of network
      programming interface (NPI) examples for provisioning of underlay
      services to overlay networks.  It provides background by reviewing
      the growing pains that commonly faced today by enterprise for its
      flexiable WAN sites connection.  It assumes that WAN connection
      services are and will continue to be provided by multiple underlay
      networks operated by different administrative entities.  Based on the
      pains and the assumptions, this document propose to use SRv6 binding
      SIDs (BSIDs) on a transport network (TN) edge router as NPI for
      service provisioning to be accessed remotely and securely by a
      customer router that constitutes to a higher overlay network,
      including the requirements of such service, the illustration of how
      it may work, and the possible applicability of the solution.

  "Problem Statement and Requirements of Accessing Cloud via Optical
  Network", Sheng Liu, Haomian Zheng, Aihua Guo, Yang Zhao, 2022-03-06,
  <draft-liu-ccamp-optical2cloud-problem-statement-00.txt>

      This document describes the problem statement and requirements for
      accessing cloud via optical network.  The supported scenarios include
      the multi-cloud access, optical leased line and cloud VR.

  "Updated Common YANG Data Types for Traffic Engineering", Italo Busi, Aihua
  Guo, Xufeng Liu, Tarek Saad, Rakesh Gandhi, Vishnu Beeram, Igor Bryskin,
  2022-03-07, <draft-busi-teas-te-types-update-01.txt>

      This document defines few additional common data types and groupings
      in YANG data modeling language to be imported by modules that model
      Traffic Engineering (TE) configuration and state capabilities.
      
      This document updates RFC 8776 with a new revision of the module
      ietf-te-types.

  "Multicast Tree Setup via PCEP", Huanan Li, Aijun Wang, Zhaohui Zhang,
  Huaimo Chen, Ran Chen, 2022-03-07, <draft-li-pce-multicast-00.txt>

      Multicast forwarding requires per-tree state on certain nodes.  Even
      with BIER, per-tree state is needed on ingress/egress BIER routers
      (though not needed on transit BIER routers).  This documents
      specifies PCEP protocol to collect tree information (e.g. root, leaf,
      constraints) to allow a PCE to calculate a tree, and the procedures
      to set up per-tree forwarding state on relevant nodes for various
      multicast trees and various replication technologies.

  "BMP YANG Module", Camilo Cardona, Paolo Lucente, Thomas Graf, Benoit
  Claise, 2022-03-07, <draft-cptb-grow-bmp-yang-01.txt>

      This document proposes a YANG module for BMP (BGP Monitoring
      Protocol) configuration and monitoring.  A complementary RPC triggers
      a refresh of the session of a BMP station.

  "RBS(Recursive BitString Structure) for Multicast Source Routing over
  IPv6", Bing Xu, Xuesong Geng, 2022-03-07, <draft-xu-msr6-rbs-00.txt>

      This document defines a new type of segment: End.RBS, and the
      corresponding packet processing procedures over the IPv6 data plane
      for the MSR6(Multicast Source Routing over IPv6) TE solutions.

  "Observations about EAP-NOOB (RFC 9140)", Jan-Frederik Rieckers,
  2022-03-07, <draft-rieckers-emu-eap-noob-observations-00.txt>

      This memo is a random list of things the author noticed about EAP-
      NOOB when looking at the draft and running the implementation while
      capturing the packets (https://github.com/Vogeltak/hostap).
      
      Most of the statements were written down before the author started
      the implementation.  By the time of writing this draft, a mostly
      complete server implementation has been written.  The implementation-
      specific remarks are mostly thoughts the author had while planning
      their own implementation.

  "User-assisted Trust Establishment (EAP-UTE)", Jan-Frederik Rieckers,
  2022-03-07, <draft-rieckers-emu-eap-ute-00.txt>

      The Extensible Authentication Protocol (EAP) provides support for
      multiple authentication methods.  This document defines the EAP-UTE
      authentication method for a User-assisted Trust Establishment between
      the peer and the server.  The EAP method is intended for
      bootstrapping Internet-of-Things (IoT) devices without preconfigured
      authentication credentials.  The trust establishment is achieved by
      transmitting a one-directional out-of-band (OOB) message between the
      peer and the server to authenticate the in-band exchange.  The peer
      must have a secondary input or output interface, such as a display,
      camera, microphone, speaker, blinking light, or light sensor, so that
      dynamically generated messages with tens of bytes in length can be
      transmitted or received.

  "Application of FlexE Configuration Model", Minxue Wang, Liuyan Han,
  Xiaobing NIU, Qilei Wang, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-xiaobn-ccamp-application-flexe-cm-00.txt>

      This document gives some application of FlexE configuration model,
      including the configuration of the FlexE group and the FlexE client.
      It is useful for the deployment of FlexE configuration model in
      related network devices.

  "Considerations of deploying AI services in a distributed approach",
  Yong-Geun Hong, Oh Seokbeom, SooJeong Lee, Hyun-Kook Kahng, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-hong-nmrg-ai-deploy-00.txt>

      As the development of AI technology matured and AI technology began
      to be applied in various fields, AI technology is changed from
      running only on very high-performance servers with small hardware,
      including microcontrollers, low-performance CPUs and AI chipsets.  In
      this document, we consider how to configure the system in terms of AI
      inference service to provide AI service in a distributed approach.
      Also, we describe the points to be considered in the environment
      where a client connects to a cloud server and an edge device and
      requests an AI service.

  "OSPF Monitor Node", Alvaro Retana, Lin Han, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-retana-lsr-ospf-monitor-node-00.txt>

      This document specifies mechanisms that allow a node to monitor an
      OSPF network actively without influencing the topology or affecting
      its stability.

  "Integer value for the CBOR Object Signing and Encryption (COSE) key
  identifier", Goeran Selander, John Mattsson, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-selander-cose-kid-int-00.txt>

      This document extends the CBOR Object Signing and Encryption (COSE)
      parameter kid to CBOR integer values.

  "BGP Flowspec Redirect Load Balancing Group Community", Wu Zhiwen, Haibo
  Wang, Lili Wang, Zhen Tan, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-wu-idr-flowspec-redirect-group-00.txt>

      This document defines an extension to "BGP Community Container
      Attribute" [I-D.ietf-idr-wide-bgp-communities] , which allows
      flowspec redirection to multiple paths.  This extended community
      serves to redirect traffic to a load balancing group and supports
      both equal-cost multi-path(ECMP) and unequal-cost multi-path(UCMP)
      scenarios.

  "Anycast Affiliation Advertisement", Zhaohui Zhang, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-zzhang-lsr-anycast-affiliation-00.txt>

      This document specifies the advertisement of addresses affiliated
      with an anycast address in ISIS/OSPF/BGP, and describes one example
      use of such advertisement in VxLAN interconnect with EVPN.

  "HTTP Connection Reuse Based on TLS Encrypted ClientHello", Christopher
  Wood, 2022-03-07, <draft-wood-httpbis-ech-coalescing-00.txt>

      This document specifies new criteria under which HTTP/2 clients may
      reuse connections.  It updates [RFC7540].
      
      Discussion Venues
      
      This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.
      
      Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
      https://github.com/chris-wood/draft-wood-httpbis-ech-coalescing.

  "NVMe over Fabric Network Requirement", Liang Guo, Yi Feng, Jizhuang Zhao,
  Lily Zhao, Haibo Wang, 2022-03-07, <draft-nof-requirement-00.txt>

      NVMe over Fabrics defines a common architecture that supports a range
      of storage networking fabrics for NVMe block storage protocol over a
      storage networking fabric, such as Ethernet, Fibre Channel and
      InfiniBand.  For Ethernet-based network, RDMA or TCP technology can
      be used to transport NVMe, but the network management mechanism is
      simple, and fault detection is weak.
      
      This document describes the solution requirements for automatic
      device discovery to improve usability and quick switchover to improve
      reliability.

  "NVMe over Fabric Network Framework", Haibo Wang, Lily Zhao, Shuanglong
  Chen, 2022-03-07, <draft-nof-framework-00.txt>

      NVMe over Fabrics defines a common architecture that supports a range
      of storage networking fabrics for NVMe block storage protocol over a
      storage networking fabric, such as Ethernet, Fibre Channel and
      InfiniBand.  For Ethernet-based networks, RDMA or TCP technology can
      be used to transport NVMe, but the network management mechanism is
      simple, and fault detection is weak.
      
      This document defines the architecture of the Ethernet-based NVMe
      control optimization technology, including service processes between
      hosts, storage devices and network switches, and fast fault-aware
      switchover.

  "NVMe over Fabric Network Requirement", Liang Guo, Yi Feng, Jizhuang Zhao,
  Lily Zhao, Haibo Wang, 2022-03-07, <draft-guo-nof-requirement-00.txt>

      NVMe over Fabrics defines a common architecture that supports a range
      of storage networking fabrics for NVMe block storage protocol over a
      storage networking fabric, such as Ethernet, Fibre Channel and
      InfiniBand.  For Ethernet-based network, RDMA or TCP technology can
      be used to transport NVMe, but the network management mechanism is
      simple, and fault detection is weak.
      
      This document describes the solution requirements for automatic
      device discovery to improve usability and quick switchover to improve
      reliability.

  "NVMe over Fabric Network Framework", Haibo Wang, Lily Zhao, Shuanglong
  Chen, 2022-03-07, <draft-wang-nof-framework-00.txt>

      NVMe over Fabrics defines a common architecture that supports a range
      of storage networking fabrics for NVMe block storage protocol over a
      storage networking fabric, such as Ethernet, Fibre Channel and
      InfiniBand.  For Ethernet-based networks, RDMA or TCP technology can
      be used to transport NVMe, but the network management mechanism is
      simple, and fault detection is weak.
      
      This document defines the architecture of the Ethernet-based NVMe
      control optimization technology, including service processes between
      hosts, storage devices and network switches, and fast fault-aware
      switchover.

  "IPv4 routes with an IPv6 next hop", Juliusz Chroboczek, Warren Kumari,
  Toke Hoeiland-Joergensen, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-chroboczek-int-v4-via-v6-01.txt>

      We propose "v4-via-v6" routing, a technique that uses IPv6 next-hop
      addresses for routing IPv4 packets, thus making it possible to route
      IPv4 packets across a network where routers have not been assigned
      IPv4 addresses.  We describe the technique, and discuss its
      operational implications.

  "ASPA Verification in the Presence of Regionalized AS-Relationships", Chen
  Shen, Shicong Zhang, Zhenbin Li, Shunwan Zhuang, Shuanglong Chen, Haibo
  Wang, 2022-03-07, <draft-shen-sidrops-regionalized-as-relationships-00.txt>

      This document proposes a method for ASPA verification in the Presence
      of Regionalized AS-Relationships.

  "Registering Self-generated IPv6 Addresses using DHCPv6", Warren Kumari,
  Suresh Krishnan, Sheng Jiang, Rajiv Asati, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-wkumari-dhc-addr-notification-00.txt>

      This document defines a method to inform a DHCPv6 server that a
      device has a self-generated or statically configured address.

  "A YANG Data Model for Network Hardware Inventory", Chaode Yu, Italo Busi,
  Aihua Guo, Sergio Belotti, Jean-Francois Bouquier, Fabio Peruzzini, Oscar
  de Dios, Victor Lopez, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-yg3bp-ccamp-network-inventory-yang-00.txt>

      This document defines a YANG data model for network hardware
      inventory data information.
      
      The YANG data model presented in this document is intended to be used
      as the basis toward a generic YANG data model for network hardware
      inventory data information which can be augmented, when required,
      with technology-specific (e.g., optical) inventory data, to be
      defined either in a future version of this document or in another
      document.
      
      The YANG data model defined in this document conforms to the Network
      Management Datastore Architecture (NMDA).

  "PCEP extensions for Circuit Style Policies", Samuel Sidor, Zafar Ali,
  Praveen Maheshwari, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-sidor-pce-circuit-style-pcep-extensions-00.txt>

      This document proposes a set of extensions for Path Computation
      Element Communication Protocol (PCEP) for Circuit Style Policies -
      Segment-Routing Policy designed to satisfy requirements for
      connection-oriented transport services.  New TLV is introduced to
      control path recomputation triggers and new flag to add ability to
      request path with strict hops only.

  "Virtual Router Redundancy Protocol (VRRP) Version 3 for IPv4 and IPv6",
  Acee Lindem, Aditya Dogra, Stephen Nadas, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-addogra-rtgwg-vrrp-rfc5798bis-02.txt>

      This document defines the Virtual Router Redundancy Protocol (VRRP)
      for IPv4 and IPv6.  It is version three (3) of the protocol, and it
      is based on VRRP (version 2) for IPv4 that is defined in RFC 3768 and
      in "Virtual Router Redundancy Protocol for IPv6".  VRRP specifies an
      election protocol that dynamically assigns responsibility for a
      virtual router to one of the VRRP routers on a LAN.  The VRRP router
      controlling the IPv4 or IPv6 address(es) associated with a virtual
      router is called the Active router, and it forwards packets sent to
      these IPv4 or IPv6 addresses.  VRRP Active routers are configured
      with virtual IPv4 or IPv6 addresses, and VRRP Backup routers infer
      the address family of the virtual addresses being carried based on
      the transport protocol.  Within a VRRP router, the virtual routers in
      each of the IPv4 and IPv6 address families are a domain unto
      themselves and do not overlap.  The election process provides dynamic
      failover in the forwarding responsibility should the Active become
      unavailable.  For IPv4, the advantage gained from using VRRP is a
      higher-availability default path without requiring configuration of
      dynamic routing or router discovery protocols on every end-host.  For
      IPv6, the advantage gained from using VRRP for IPv6 is a quicker
      switchover to Backup routers than can be obtained with standard IPv6
      Neighbor Discovery mechanisms.
      
      The VRRP terminology has been updated be in line with inclusive
      language used in the industry.  This document obsoletes VRRP Version
      3 [RFC5798].

  "Expressing Quality of Service Requirements (QoS) in Domain Name System
  (DNS) Queries", Donald Eastlake, Haoyu Song, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-eastlake-dnsop-expressing-qos-requirements-00.txt>

      A method of encoding communication service quality requirements in a
      Domain Name System (DNS) query is specified through inclusion of the
      requirements in one or more label of the name being queried.  This
      enables DNS responses that are dependent on such requirements without
      changes in the format of DNS protocol messages or DNS application
      program interfaces (APIs).

  "The Architecture of Domain Name System (DNS) Based Application Aware
  Networking", Haoyu Song, Donald Eastlake, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-song-apn-dns-application-aware-networking-00.txt>

      A simple method of implementing Application Aware Networking using
      the Domain Name System (DNS) is discussed.  This enables DNS system
      responses that are dependent on communication service quality
      requirements without changes in the format of DNS protocol messages
      or application program interfaces (APIs).  Such responses can provide
      lightweight support to application aware networking.

  "IGP extensions for Advertising Offset for Flex-Algorithm", Louis Chan,
  Krzysztof Szarkowicz, 2022-03-07, <draft-chan-lsr-igp-adv-offset-00.txt>

      This document describes the IGP extensions to provide predictable
      Adjacency-SIDs
      per Flex-Algorithm [FLEXALGO] in segment routing.
      
      We propose some methods to allow the advertisement of additional TLV in
      IGP so that
      the Flex-Algorithm specific Adjacency-SIDs could be
      automatically derived.
      
      With the proposed method, the size of advertisement on per node per link
      basis is
      greatly reduced. Each participating router would derive the
      required labels
      automatically.
      
      Extensions for offset to derive Flex-Algorithm Prefix-SID is also
      included in the
      document.

  "RAW multidomain extensions", Carlos Bernardos, Alain Mourad, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-bernardos-raw-multidomain-00.txt>

      This document describes the multi-domain RAW problem and explores and
      proposes some extensions to enable RAW multi-domain operation.

  "5G Distributed UPFs for 5G Multicast and Broadcast Services (5MBS)",
  Tianji Jiang, 2022-03-07, <draft-tjiang-dmm-5g-dupf-5mbs-00.txt>

      The companion draft [I-D.zzhang-dmm-5g-distributed-upf] has described
      the 5G mobile user plane (MUP) via the refinement of distributed
      UPFs, along with various user plane implementations that some vendors
      and operators are exploring, with the requirement of not introducing
      changes to 3GPP architecture & signaling.  The document 3GPP TS
      23.247 [_3GPP-23.247] for 5G multicast and broadcast services, or
      5MBS, specifies the 5GS architecture to support MBS communication.
      Thanks to the addition of new 5GS network functions (NFs) and MB-
      interfaces on 5G CP & UP, this might post additional provisioning &
      implementation challenges to the underlay transport infrastructure.
      
      This document is not an attempt to do 3GPP SDO work in IETF.
      Instead, it discusses how to potentially integrate distributed UPFs
      with the delivery of 5MBS communication, as well as the benefits of
      using distributed UPFs to handle 5MBS traffic delivery.

  "STAR: Distributed Secret Sharing for Private Threshold Aggregation
  Reporting", Alex Davidson, Shivan Sahib, Peter Snyder, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-dss-star-00.txt>

      Servers often need to collect data from clients that can be privacy-
      sensitive if the server is able to associate the collected data with
      a particular user.  In this document we describe STAR, an efficient
      and secure threshold aggregation protocol for collecting measurements
      from clients by an untrusted aggregation server, while maintaining
      K-anonymity guarantees.

  "Supporting Bottleneck Structure Graphs in ALTO: Use Cases and
  Requirements", Jordi Ros-Giralt, Sruthi Yellamraju, Qin WU, Luis Contreras,
  Y. Yang, Kai Gao, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-giraltyellamraju-alto-bsg-requirements-00.txt>

      This document proposes an extension to the base Application-Layer
      Traffic Optimization (ALTO) protocol to support bottleneck structures
      as an efficient representation of the state of a network.  Bottleneck
      structures are efficient computational graphs that allow network
      operators and application service providers to optimize application
      performance in a variety of communication problems including routing,
      flow control, flow scheduling, bandwidth prediction, and network
      slicing, among others.  This document introduces a new abstraction
      called Bottleneck Structure Graph (BSG) and the necessary
      requirements to integrate it into the ALTO standard.

  "YANG Data Model for Network Resource Partition Policy", Tarek Saad, Vishnu
  Beeram, Bin Wen, Daniele Ceccarelli, Shaofu Peng, Ran Chen, Luis Contreras,
  Xufeng Liu, 2022-03-07, <draft-bestbar-teas-yang-nrp-policy-00.txt>

      A Network Resource Partition (NRP) is a collection of resources
      identified in the underlay network to support services (like IETF
      Network Slices) that need logical network structures with required
      characteristics to be created.  An NRP policy is a policy construct
      that enables instantiation of mechanisms in support of service
      specific control and data plane behaviors on select topological
      elements associated with the NRP.  This document defines a YANG data
      model for the management of NRP policies on NRP capable nodes and
      controllers in IP/MPLS networks.

  "Algorithm Identifiers for NIST's PQC Algorithms for Use in the Internet
  X.509 Public Key Infrastructure", Sean Turner, Panos Kampanakis, Jake
  Massimo, Bas Westerbaan, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-turner-lamps-nist-pqc-kem-certificates-01.txt>

      This document specifies algorithm identifiers and ASN.1 encoding
      format for the US NIST's PQC KEM (United States National Institute of
      Standards and Technology's Post Quantum Cryptography Key
      Encapsulation Mechanism) algorithms.  The algorithms covered are
      Candidate TBD1.  The encoding for public key and private key is also
      provided.
      
      [EDNOTE: This draft is not expected to be finalized before the NIST
      PQC Project has standardized PQ algorithms.  After NIST has
      standardized its first algorithms, this document will replace TBD,
      with the appropriate algorithms and parameters before proceeding to
      ratification.  The algorithm Candidate TBD1 has been added as an
      example in this draft, to provide a more detailed illustration of the
      content - it by no means indicates its inclusion in the final
      version.  This specification will use object identifiers for the new
      algorithms that are assigned by NIST, and will use placeholders until
      these are released.]

  "Inside MLS Message Interop (IMMI) instant message content", Rohan Mahy,
  2022-03-07, <draft-mahy-dispatch-immi-content-00.txt>

      This document defines a profile intended for instant messaging
      interoperability of messages end-to-end encrypted inside the MLS
      (Message Layer Security) Protocol.  It adapts prior work (CPIM) to
      work well in the MLS context.

  "Inside MLS Message Interop (IMMI) MIME type extensions", Rohan Mahy,
  2022-03-07, <draft-mahy-dispatch-immi-mls-mime-00.txt>

      This document defines two new extensions to the MLS (Messaging Layer
      Security) Protocol to allow for negotiation of MIME types exchanged
      among members of an MLS group.

  "Encrypted Client Hello Deployment Considerations", Andrew Campling, Paul
  Vixie, David Wright, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-campling-ech-deployment-considerations-01.txt>

      This document is intended to inform the development of the proposed
      Encrypted Client Hello (ECH) standard that encrypts Server Name
      Indication (SNI) and other data.  Data encapsulated by ECH (ie data
      included in the encrypted ClientHelloInner) is of legitimate interest
      to on-path security actors including anti-virus software, parental
      controls and consumer and enterprise firewalls.
      
      The document includes observations on current use cases for SNI data
      in a variety of contexts.  It highlights how the use of that data is
      important to the operators of private networks and shows how the loss
      of access to SNI data will cause difficulties in the provision of a
      range of services to many millions of end-users.

  "Ethernet VPN Virtual Private Wire Services Gateway Solution", Jorge
  Rabadan, Senthil Sathappan, Vinod Prabhu, Wen Lin, Patrice Brissette,
  2022-03-07, <draft-sr-bess-evpn-vpws-gateway-00.txt>

      Ethernet VPN Virtual Private Wire Services (EVPN VPWS) need to be
      deployed in high scale multi-domain networks, where each domain can
      use a different transport technology, such as MPLS, VXLAN or Segment
      Routing with MPLS or IPv6 Segment Identifiers (SIDs).  While the
      transport interworking solutions on border routers spare the border
      routers from having to process service routes, they do not always
      meet the multi-homing, redundancy, and operational requirements, or
      provide the isolation that each domain requires.  This document
      analyzes the scenarios in which an interconnect solution for EVPN
      VPWS using EVPN Domain Gateways is needed, and adds the required
      extensions to support it.

  "Regional Internet Blocking Considerations", Lenny Giuliano, Melchior
  Aelmans, Tony Li, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-giuliano-blocking-considerations-00.txt>

      Geopolitical conflicts can cause policy makers to question whether or
      not blocking the Internet connectivity for an opposing region is a
      constructive tactic.  This document provides an overview of the
      various technologies that can be used to implement regional blocking
      of Internet connectivity and discusses the implications of these
      options.  This document does not advocate any policy or given
      blocking mechanism, but does attempt to articulate the implications
      of these blocking technologies for policy makers.  The document also
      intends to help inform policy makers from countries who could be
      exposed to such blocking techniques on the implications of these
      methods.

  "BGP Signaling for Mobile User Plane", Zhaohui Zhang, Keyur Patel, Satoru
  Matsushima, 2022-03-07, <draft-zpm-dmm-mup-bgp-signaling-00.txt>

      This document specifies BGP signaling for router-based 5G User Plane
      using Mobile User Plane SAFI and some of its route types as specified
      in [draft-mpmz-idr-mup-safi].

  "Resource Public Key Infrastructure (RPKI) object profile for Discard
  Origin Authorizations (DOA)", Job Snijders, Mikael Abrahamsson, Ben
  Maddison, 2022-03-07, <draft-spaghetti-sidrops-rpki-doa-00.txt>

      This document defines a Cryptographic Message Syntax (CMS) profile
      for Discard Origin Authorizations (DOAs), for use with the Resource
      Public Key Infrastructure (RPKI).  A DOA is a digitally signed object
      that provides a means of verifying that an IP address block holder
      has authorized an Autonomous System (AS) to originate routes to one
      or more prefixes within the address block tagged with a specific set
      of Border Gateway Protocol (BGP) Communities, to signal a request to
      discard IP traffic destined towards the tagged IP prefix.

  "BGP Extensions for the Mobile User Plane (MUP) SAFI", Tetsuya Murakami,
  Keyur Patel, Satoru Matsushima, Zhaohui Zhang, Swadesh Agrawal, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-mpmz-bess-mup-safi-00.txt>

      This document defines a new SAFI known as a BGP Mobile User Plane
      (BGP-MUP) SAFI to support MUP Extensions and a extended community for
      BGP.  This document also provides BGP signaling and procedures for
      the new SAFI to convert mobile session information into appropriate
      IP forwarding information.  These extensions can be used by operators
      between MUP PE, MUP GW and MUP Controller for integrating mobile user
      plane into BGP MUP network using the IP based routing.

  "IGP Prefix Reachability Loss Anouncement", Peter Psenak, Les Ginsberg, Dan
  Voyer, 2022-03-07, <draft-ppsenak-lsr-igp-pfx-reach-loss-00.txt>

      In the presence of summarization, there is a need to signal loss of
      reachability to an individual prefix covered by the summary in order
      to enable fast convergence away from paths to the node which owns the
      prefix which is no longer reachable.  This document describes how to
      use existing protocol mechanisms in IS-IS and OSPF to advertise such
      prefix reachability loss.

  "Connecting 3GPP slices through IETF Network Slice services", Luis
  Contreras, Ivan Bykov, Jose Ordonez-Lucena, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-contreras-teas-3gpp-ietf-slice-mapping-00.txt>

      3GPP is introducing the concept of slicing as a primary way of
      service delivery.  Slicing at 3GPP implies the differentiation of
      services in terms of performance expectations as well as the
      connection of different network entities also potentially
      differentiated per slice.  With that aim, 3GPP is defining a number
      of logical constructs with the intent of being served with specific
      characteristics, determined by different QoS profiles.  This document
      describes the connectivity of 3GPP slices through IETF Network Slice
      services taking into account that specific service level objectives,
      and identifies gaps existing nowadays on both 3GPP and IETF
      specifications for an straightforward mapping of parameters between
      both environments.

  "A YANG Data Model for Open Source Path First (OSPF) Topology", Oscar de
  Dios, samier barguil, Victor Lopez, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-ogondio-opsawg-ospf-topology-00.txt>

      This document defines a YANG data model for representing an abstract
      view of the provider network topology that contains Open Source Path
      First (OSPF) information.  This document augments the 'ietf-network'
      data model by adding OSPF concepts.
      
      The YANG data model defined in this document conforms to the Network
      Management Datastore Architecture (NMDA).

  "Routing and Addressing Challenges Introduced by New Satellite
  Constellations", Daniel King, Ning Wang, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-kw-rtgwg-satellite-rtg-add-challanges-00.txt>

      Future networks, including the Internet, will utilize an increasing
      amount of space-based transport infrastructure. Control and
      transport between Earth-based and space-based networks present
      several problems - high dynamicity, spatial connectivity, continual
      movement tracking and prediction, ocular obstruction, integration
      with existing Internet infrastructure, all of which challenge
      existing architectures, routing mechanisms and addressing schemes.
      
      This document summerises near-to-mid-term space-networking problems;
      it outlines the key components, challenges, and requirements for
      integrating future space-based network infrastructure with existing
      networks and mechanisms. Furthermore, this document highlights the
      network control and transport interconnection, and identify the
      resources and functions required for successful interconnection of
      space-based and Earth-based Internet infrastructure.

  "Countersigning COSE Envelopes in Transparency Services", Henk Birkholz,
  Maik Riechert, Antoine Delignat-Lavaud, Cedric Fournet, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-birkholz-scitt-receipts-00.txt>

      A transparent and authentic ledger service in support of a supply
      chain's integrity, transparency, and trust requires all peers that
      contribute to the ledgers operations to be trustworthy and authentic.
      In this document, a countersigning variant is specified that enables
      trust assertions on merkle-tree based operations for global supply
      chain ledgers.  A generic procedure how to produce payloads for
      signing and validation is defined and leverages solutions and
      principles from the Concise Signing and Encryption (COSE) space.

  "Key Blinding for Signature Schemes", Frank Denis, Edward Eaton,
  Christopher Wood, 2022-03-07, <draft-dew-cfrg-signature-key-blinding-01.txt>

      This document describes extensions to existing signature schemes for
      key blinding.  This functionality guarantees that a blinded public
      key and all signatures produced using the blinded key pair are
      unlinkable to the unblinded key pair.  Moreover, signatures produced
      using blinded key pairs are indistinguishable from signatures
      produced using unblinded key pairs.

  "ALTO New Transport using HTTP/2", Roland Schott, Y. Yang, Kai Gao,
  Jingxuan Zhang, 2022-03-07, <draft-schott-alto-new-transport-00.txt>

      The ALTO base protocol [RFC7285] uses HTTP/1.x as the transport
      protocol and hence ALTO transport includes the limitations of
      HTTP/1.x.  ALTO/SSE [RFC8895] addresses some of the limitations, but
      is still based on HTTP/1.x.  This document introduces ALTO new
      transport, which provides the transport functions of ALTO/SSE on top
      of HTTP/2, for more efficient ALTO transport.

  "Rate-Limited Token Issuance Protocol", Scott Hendrickson, Jana Iyengar,
  Tommy Pauly, Steven Valdez, Christopher Wood, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-privacypass-rate-limit-tokens-00.txt>

      This document specifies a variant of the Privacy Pass issuance
      protocol that allows for tokens to be rate-limited on a per-origin
      basis.  This enables origins to use tokens for use cases that need to
      restrict access from anonymous clients.
      
      Discussion Venues
      
      This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.
      
      Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
      https://github.com/tfpauly/privacy-proxy.

  "HPCC++: Enhanced High Precision Congestion Control", Rui Miao, Hongqiang
  Liu, Rong Pan, Jeongkeun Lee, Changhoon Kim, Barak Gafni, Yuval Shpigelman,
  Jeff Tantsura, 2022-03-07, <draft-miao-rtgwg-hpccplus-00.txt>

      Congestion control (CC) is the key to achieving ultra-low latency,
      high bandwidth and network stability in high-speed networks.
      However, the existing high-speed CC schemes have inherent limitations
      for reaching these goals.
      
      In this document, we describe HPCC++ (High Precision Congestion
      Control), a new high-speed CC mechanism which achieves the three
      goals simultaneously.  HPCC++ leverages inband telemetry to obtain
      precise link load information and controls traffic precisely.  By
      addressing challenges such as delayed signaling during congestion and
      overreaction to the congestion signaling using inband and granular
      telemetry, HPCC++ can quickly converge to utilize all the available
      bandwidth while avoiding congestion, and can maintain near-zero in-
      network queues for ultra-low latency.  HPCC++ is also fair and easy
      to deploy in hardware, implementable with commodity NICs and
      switches.

  "An Architecture for Trustworthy and Transparent Digital Supply Chains",
  Henk Birkholz, Antoine Delignat-Lavaud, Cedric Fournet, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-birkholz-scitt-architecture-00.txt>

      Traceability of physical and digital artifacts in supply chains is a
      long-standing, but increasingly serious security concern.  The rise
      in popularity of verifiable data structures as a mechanism to make
      actors more accountable for breaching their compliance promises has
      found some successful applications to specific use cases (such as the
      supply chain for digital certificates), but lacks a generic and
      scalable architecture that can address a wider range of use cases.
      
      This memo defines a generic and scalable architecture to enable
      transparency across any supply chain with minimum adoption barriers
      for producers (who can register their claims on any TS, with the
      guarantee that all consumers will be able to verify them) and enough
      flexibility to allow different implementations of Transparency
      Services with various auditing and compliance requirements.

  "IETF Will Continue Maintaining IPv4", Seth Schoen, John Gilmore, David
  Taht, 2022-03-07, <draft-schoen-intarea-ietf-maintaining-ipv4-00.txt>

      This document confirms the consensus of the IETF that IETF and its
      affiliated working groups will continue to maintain the IPv4 protocol
      family.

  "IPv6-Only PE Design All SAFI", Gyan Mishra, Mankamana Mishra, Jeff
  Tantsura, Sudha Madhavi, Qing Yang, Adam Simpson, Shuanglong Chen,
  2022-03-07, <draft-mishra-bess-ipv6-all-pe-design-any-safi-00.txt>

      As Enterprises and Service Providers upgrade their brown field or
      green field MPLS/SR core to an IPv6 transport, Multiprotocol BGP (MP-
      BGP)now plays an important role in the transition of their Provider
      (P) core network as well as Provider Edge (PE) Inter-AS peering
      network from IPv4 to IPv6.  Operators must be able to continue to
      support IPv4 customers when both the Core and Edge networks are
      IPv6-Only.
      
      This document details an important External BGP (eBGP) PE-PE Inter-AS
      IPv6-Only peering design that leverages the MP-BGP capability
      exchange by using IPv6 peering as pure transport, allowing both IPv4
      Network Layer Reachability Information (NLRI) and IPv6 Network Layer
      Reachability Information (NLRI)to be carried over the same (Border
      Gateway Protocol) BGP TCP session for all Address Family Identifiers
      (AFI) and Subsequent Address Family Identifiers(SAFI).  The design
      change provides the same Dual Stacking functionality that exists
      today with separate IPv4 and IPv6 BGP sessions as we have today.
      With this IPv6-Only PE Design, IPv4 address MUST not be configured on
      the the Provider Edge (PE) - Customer Edge (CE), or Inter-AS ASBR
      (Autonomous System Boundary Router) to ASBR (Autonomous System
      Boundary Router) PE-PE Provider Edge (PE) - Provider Edge (PE).  From
      a control plane perspective a single IPv6-Only peer is required for
      both IPv4 and IPv6 routing updates and from a data plane forwarindg
      perspective an IPv6 address need only be configured on the PE to PE
      Inter-AS peering interface for both IPv4 and IPv6 packet forwarding.
      This document defines the IPv6-Only PE Design as a new PE-CE and PE-
      PE BGP peering Standard which is described in the POC testing
      document [I-D.ietf-bess-ipv6-only-pe-design] to all AFI/SAFI
      ubiquitously.  As service providers migrate to Segment Routing
      architecture SR-MPLS and SRv6, VPN overlay exsits as well, and thus
      Inter-AS options Option-A, Option-AB and Option-C are still
      applicable and thus this extension of IPv6-Only peering architecure
      extension to Inter-AS peering is very relevant to Segment Routing as
      well.

Network Time Protocols (ntp)
----------------------------

  "Control Messages Protocol for Use with Network Time Protocol Version 4",
  Brian Haberman, 2022-02-15, <draft-ietf-ntp-mode-6-cmds-11.txt>

      This document describes the structure of the control messages that
      were historically used with the Network Time Protocol before the
      advent of more modern control and management approaches.  These
      control messages have been used to monitor and control the Network
      Time Protocol application running on any IP network attached
      computer.  The information in this document was originally described
      in Appendix B of RFC 1305.  The goal of this document is to provide
      an updated description of the control messages described in RFC 1305
      in order to conform with the updated Network Time Protocol
      specification documented in RFC 5905.
      
      The publication of this document is not meant to encourage the
      development and deployment of these control messages.  This document
      is only providing a current reference for these control messages
      given the current status of RFC 1305.

  "A YANG Data Model for NTP", Nan Wu, Dhruv Dhody, Ankit Sinha, N Anil, Yi
  Zhao, 2022-02-10, <draft-ietf-ntp-yang-data-model-16.txt>

      This document defines a YANG data model for Network Time Protocol
      (NTP) version 4 implementations.  It can also be used to configure
      version 3.  The data model includes configuration data and state
      data.

  "NTP Interleaved Modes", Miroslav Lichvar, Aanchal Malhotra, 2021-10-18,
  <draft-ietf-ntp-interleaved-modes-07.txt>

      This document extends the specification of Network Time Protocol
      (NTP) version 4 in RFC 5905 with special modes called the NTP
      interleaved modes, that enable NTP servers to provide their clients
      and peers with more accurate transmit timestamps that are available
      only after transmitting NTP packets.  More specifically, this
      document describes three modes: interleaved client/server,
      interleaved symmetric, and interleaved broadcast.

  "A Secure Selection and Filtering Mechanism for the Network Time Protocol
  with Chronos", Neta Schiff, Danny Dolev, Tal Mizrahi, Michael Schapira,
  2022-01-11, <draft-ietf-ntp-chronos-04.txt>

      The Network Time Protocol version 4 (NTPv4), as defined in RFC 5905,
      is the mechanism used by NTP clients to synchronize with NTP servers
      across the Internet.  This document specifies an extension to the
      NTPv4 client, named Chronos, which is used as a "watchdog" alongside
      NTPv4, and provides improved security against time shifting attacks.
      Chronos involves changes to the NTP client's system process only and
      is backwards compatible with NTPv4 servers.  Chronos is also
      applicable to the emerging NTPv5, since it does not affect the wire
      protocol.

  "Alternative NTP port", Miroslav Lichvar, 2021-10-18,
  <draft-ietf-ntp-alternative-port-02.txt>

      This document updates RFC 5905 to specify an alternative port for the
      Network Time Protocol (NTP) which is restricted to NTP messages that
      do not allow traffic amplification.

  "Roughtime Ecosystem", Watson Ladd, Marcus Dansarie, 2021-09-14,
  <draft-ietf-ntp-roughtime-ecosystem-01.txt>

      This document specifies the roles of Roughtime validators, clients,
      and servers in providing a ecosystem for secure time.

  "Updating the NTP Registries", Rich Salz, 2021-10-15,
  <draft-ietf-ntp-update-registries-03.txt>

      The Network Time Protocol (NTP) and Network Time Security (NTS)
      documents define a number of assigned number registries, collectively
      called the NTP registries.  Some registries have wrong values, some
      registries do not follow current common practice, and some are just
      right.  For the sake of completeness, this document reviews all NTP
      and NTS registries.
      
      This document updates RFC 5905, RFC 5906, RFC 8573, RFC 7822, and RFC
      7821.

Network Virtualization Overlays (nvo3)
--------------------------------------

  "Generic Protocol Extension for VXLAN (VXLAN-GPE)", Fabio Maino, Larry
  Kreeger, Uri Elzur, 2021-09-22, <draft-ietf-nvo3-vxlan-gpe-12.txt>

      This document describes extending Virtual eXtensible Local Area
      Network (VXLAN), via changes to the VXLAN header, with four new
      capabilities: support for multi-protocol encapsulation, support for
      operations, administration and maintenance (OAM) signaling, support
      for ingress-replicated BUM Traffic (i.e.  Broadcast, Unknown unicast,
      or Multicast), and explicit versioning.  New protocol capabilities
      can be introduced via shim headers.

  "Applicability of EVPN to NVO3 Networks", Jorge Rabadan, Matthew Bocci,
  Sami Boutros, Ali Sajassi, 2020-11-02,
  <draft-ietf-nvo3-evpn-applicability-03.txt>

      In NVO3 networks, Network Virtualization Edge (NVE) devices sit at
      the edge of the underlay network and provide Layer-2 and Layer-3
      connectivity among Tenant Systems (TSes) of the same tenant.  The
      NVEs need to build and maintain mapping tables so that they can
      deliver encapsulated packets to their intended destination NVE(s).
      While there are different options to create and disseminate the
      mapping table entries, NVEs may exchange that information directly
      among themselves via a control-plane protocol, such as EVPN.  EVPN
      provides an efficient, flexible and unified control-plane option that
      can be used for Layer-2 and Layer-3 Virtual Network (VN) service
      connectivity.  This document describes the applicability of EVPN to
      NVO3 networks and how EVPN solves the challenges in those networks.

  "Base YANG Data Model for NVO3 Protocols", Bing Liu, Ran Chen, Fengwei Qin,
  Reshad Rahman, 2021-09-06, <draft-ietf-nvo3-yang-cfg-05.txt>

      This document describes the base YANG data model that can be used by
      operators to configure and manage Network Virtualization Overlay
      protocols.  The model is focused on the common configuration
      requirement of various encapsulation options, such as VXLAN, NVGRE,
      GENEVE and VXLAN-GPE.  Using this model as a starting point,
      incremental work can be done to satisfy the requirement of a specific
      encapsulation.

  "OAM for use in GENEVE", Greg Mirsky, Sami Boutros, David Black, Santosh
  Pallagatti, 2021-11-08, <draft-ietf-nvo3-geneve-oam-03.txt>

      This document lists a set of general requirements for active OAM
      protocols in the Geneve overlay network.  Based on the requirements,
      IP encapsulation for active Operations, Administration, and
      Maintenance protocols in Geneve protocol is defined.  Considerations
      for using ICMP and UDP-based protocols are discussed.

  "BFD for Geneve", Xiao Min, Greg Mirsky, Santosh Pallagatti, Jeff Tantsura,
  Sam Aldrin, 2021-11-11, <draft-ietf-nvo3-bfd-geneve-05.txt>

      This document describes the use of the Bidirectional Forwarding
      Detection (BFD) protocol in point-to-point Generic Network
      Virtualization Encapsulation (Geneve) tunnels used to make up an
      overlay network.

Coding for efficient NetWork Communications Research Group (nwcrg)
------------------------------------------------------------------

  "Network Coding for Content-Centric Networking / Named Data Networking:
  Considerations and Challenges", Kazuhisa Matsuzono, Hitoshi Asaeda, Cedric
  Westphal, 2022-02-27, <draft-irtf-nwcrg-nwc-ccn-reqs-09.txt>

      This document describes the current research outcomes in Network
      Coding (NC) for Content-Centric Networking (CCNx) / Named Data
      Networking (NDN), and clarifies the technical considerations and
      potential challenges for applying NC in CCNx/NDN.  This document is
      the product of the Coding for Efficient Network Communications
      Research Group (NWCRG) and the Information-Centric Networking
      Research Group (ICNRG).

  "Coding and congestion control in transport", Nicolas Kuhn, Emmanuel
  Lochin, Francois Michel, Michael Welzl, 2022-02-22,
  <draft-irtf-nwcrg-coding-and-congestion-12.txt>

      Forward Erasure Correction (FEC) is a reliability mechanism that is
      distinct and separate from the retransmission logic in reliable
      transfer protocols such as TCP.  FEC coding can help deal with losses
      at the end of transfers or with networks having non-congestion
      losses.  However, FEC coding mechanisms should not hide congestion
      signals.  This memo offers a discussion of how FEC coding and
      congestion control can coexist.  Another objective is to encourage
      the research community to also consider congestion control aspects
      when proposing and comparing FEC coding solutions in communication
      systems.
      
      This document is the product of the Coding for Efficient Network
      Communications Research Group (NWCRG).  The scope of the document is
      end-to-end communications: FEC coding for tunnels is out-of-the scope
      of the document.

  "BATS Coding Scheme for Multi-hop Data Transport", Shenghao Yang, Xuan
  Huang, Raymond Yeung, John Zao, 2021-12-09, <draft-irtf-nwcrg-bats-03.txt>

      BATS code is a class of efficient linear network coding scheme with a
      matrix generalization of fountain codes as the outer code, and batch-
      based linear network coding as the inner code.  This document
      describes a baseline BATS coding scheme for communication through
      multi-hop networks, and discusses the related research issues towards
      a more sophisticated BATS coding scheme.  This document is a product
      of the Coding for Efficient Network Communications Research Group
      (NWCRG).

  "Tetrys, an On-the-Fly Network Coding Protocol", Jonathan Detchart,
  Emmanuel Lochin, Jerome Lacan, Vincent Roca, 2022-02-09,
  <draft-irtf-nwcrg-tetrys-01.txt>

      This document describes Tetrys, an On-The-Fly Network Coding (NC)
      protocol that MAY be used to transport delay and loss-sensitive data
      over a lossy network.  Tetrys MAY recover from erasures within an
      RTT-independent delay, thanks to the transmission of coded packets.
      This document is a record of the experience gained by the authors
      while developing and testing in real conditions the Tetrys protocol.
      
      This document is a product of the Coding for Efficient Network
      Communications Research Group (NWCRG).  It conforms to the NWCRG
      taxonomy[RFC8406].

Web Authorization Protocol (oauth)
----------------------------------

  "OAuth 2.0 Security Best Current Practice", Torsten Lodderstedt, John
  Bradley, Andrey Labunets, Daniel Fett, 2021-12-16,
  <draft-ietf-oauth-security-topics-19.txt>

      This document describes best current security practice for OAuth 2.0.
      It updates and extends the OAuth 2.0 Security Threat Model to
      incorporate practical experiences gathered since OAuth 2.0 was
      published and covers new threats relevant due to the broader
      application of OAuth 2.0.

  "JWT Response for OAuth Token Introspection", Torsten Lodderstedt, Vladimir
  Dzhuvinov, 2021-09-04, <draft-ietf-oauth-jwt-introspection-response-12.txt>

      This specification proposes an additional JSON Web Token (JWT)
      secured response for OAuth 2.0 Token Introspection.

  "OAuth 2.0 for Browser-Based Apps", Aaron Parecki, David Waite, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-ietf-oauth-browser-based-apps-09.txt>

      This specification details the security considerations and best
      practices that must be taken into account when developing browser-
      based applications that use OAuth 2.0.

  "OAuth 2.0 Rich Authorization Requests", Torsten Lodderstedt, Justin
  Richer, Brian Campbell, 2022-01-26, <draft-ietf-oauth-rar-10.txt>

      This document specifies a new parameter authorization_details that is
      used to carry fine-grained authorization data in OAuth messages.

  "OAuth 2.0 Demonstrating Proof-of-Possession at the Application Layer
  (DPoP)", Daniel Fett, Brian Campbell, John Bradley, Torsten Lodderstedt,
  Michael Jones, David Waite, 2022-03-01, <draft-ietf-oauth-dpop-06.txt>

      This document describes a mechanism for sender-constraining OAuth 2.0
      tokens via a proof-of-possession mechanism on the application level.
      This mechanism allows for the detection of replay attacks with access
      and refresh tokens.

  "The OAuth 2.1 Authorization Framework", Dick Hardt, Aaron Parecki, Torsten
  Lodderstedt, 2022-03-07, <draft-ietf-oauth-v2-1-05.txt>

      The OAuth 2.1 authorization framework enables a third-party
      application to obtain limited access to a protected resource, either
      on behalf of a resource owner by orchestrating an approval
      interaction between the resource owner and an authorization service,
      or by allowing the third-party application to obtain access on its
      own behalf.  This specification replaces and obsoletes the OAuth 2.0
      Authorization Framework described in RFC 6749.

  "JWK Thumbprint URI", Michael Jones, Kristina Yasuda, 2022-02-14,
  <draft-ietf-oauth-jwk-thumbprint-uri-01.txt>

      This specification registers a kind of URI that represents a JSON Web
      Key (JWK) Thumbprint value.  JWK Thumbprints are defined in RFC 7638.
      This enables JWK Thumbprints to be used, for instance, as key
      identifiers in contexts requiring URIs.

Oblivious HTTP Application Intermediation (ohai)
------------------------------------------------

  "Oblivious HTTP", Martin Thomson, Christopher Wood, 2021-10-25,
  <draft-thomson-ohai-ohttp-00.txt>

      This document describes a system for the forwarding of encrypted HTTP
      messages.  This allows a client to make multiple requests of a server
      without the server being able to link those requests to the client or
      to identify the requests as having come from the same client.
      
      Discussion Venues
      
      This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.
      
      Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
      https://github.com/unicorn-wg/oblivious-http.

  "Oblivious HTTP", Martin Thomson, Christopher Wood, 2022-02-15,
  <draft-ietf-ohai-ohttp-01.txt>

      This document describes a system for the forwarding of encrypted HTTP
      messages.  This allows a client to make multiple requests of a server
      without the server being able to link those requests to the client or
      to identify the requests as having come from the same client.

Open Specification for Pretty Good Privacy (openpgp)
----------------------------------------------------

  "OpenPGP Message Format", Werner Koch, Paul Wouters, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-ietf-openpgp-crypto-refresh-05.txt>

      This document specifies the message formats used in OpenPGP.  OpenPGP
      provides encryption with public-key or symmetric cryptographic
      algorithms, digital signatures, compression and key management.
      
      This document is maintained in order to publish all necessary
      information needed to develop interoperable applications based on the
      OpenPGP format.  It is not a step-by-step cookbook for writing an
      application.  It describes only the format and methods needed to
      read, check, generate, and write conforming packets crossing any
      network.  It does not deal with storage and implementation questions.
      It does, however, discuss implementation issues necessary to avoid
      security flaws.
      
      This document obsoletes: RFC 4880 (OpenPGP), RFC 5581 (Camellia in
      OpenPGP) and RFC 6637 (Elliptic Curves in OpenPGP).

Operations and Management Area Working Group (opsawg)
-----------------------------------------------------

  "Network Telemetry Framework", Haoyu Song, Fengwei Qin, Pedro
  Martinez-Julia, Laurent Ciavaglia, Aijun Wang, 2021-12-03,
  <draft-ietf-opsawg-ntf-13.txt>

      Network telemetry is a technology for gaining network insight and
      facilitating efficient and automated network management.  It
      encompasses various techniques for remote data generation,
      collection, correlation, and consumption.  This document describes an
      architectural framework for network telemetry, motivated by
      challenges that are encountered as part of the operation of networks
      and by the requirements that ensue.  This document clarifies the
      terminologies and classifies the modules and components of a network
      telemetry system from different perspectives.  The framework and
      taxonomy help to set a common ground for the collection of related
      work and provide guidance for related technique and standard
      developments.

  "A Layer 2 VPN Network YANG Model", samier barguil, Oscar de Dios, Mohamed
  Boucadair, Luis Munoz, 2021-11-22, <draft-ietf-opsawg-l2nm-12.txt>

      This document defines an L2VPN Network YANG Model (L2NM) that can be
      used to manage the provisioning of Layer 2 Virtual Private Network
      services within a network (e.g., service provider network).  The L2NM
      complements the Layer 2 Service Model (L2SM) by providing a network-
      centric view of the service that is internal to a service provider.
      The L2NM is particularly meant to be used by a network controller to
      derive the configuration information that will be sent to relevant
      network devices.
      
      Also, this document defines a YANG module to manage Ethernet segments
      and the initial versions of two IANA-maintained modules that defines
      a set of identities of BGP Layer 2 encapsulation types and pseudowire
      types.

  "Manufacturer Usage Description (MUD) (D)TLS Profiles for IoT Devices",
  Tirumaleswar Reddy.K, Dan Wing, Blake Anderson, 2022-03-05,
  <draft-ietf-opsawg-mud-tls-06.txt>

      This memo extends the Manufacturer Usage Description (MUD)
      specification to incorporate (D)TLS profile parameters.  This allows
      a network security service to identify unexpected (D)TLS usage, which
      can indicate the presence of unauthorized software or malware on an
      endpoint.

  "Discovering and Retrieving Software Transparency and Vulnerability
  Information", Eliot Lear, Scott Rose, 2022-03-06,
  <draft-ietf-opsawg-sbom-access-05.txt>

      To improve cybersecurity posture, automation is necessary to locate
      what software is running on a device, whether that software has known
      vulnerabilities, and what, if any recommendations suppliers may have.
      This memo specifies a model to provide access to this information.
      It may optionally be discovered through manufacturer usage
      descriptions.

  "Authorized update to MUD URLs", Michael Richardson, Wei Pan, Eliot Lear,
  2021-10-06, <draft-ietf-opsawg-mud-acceptable-urls-04.txt>

      This document provides a way for an RFC8520 Manufacturer Usage
      Description (MUD) definitions to declare what are acceptable
      replacement MUD URLs for a device.
      
      RFCEDITOR-please-remove: this document is being worked on at:
      https://github.com/mcr/iot-mud-acceptable-urls

  "Operational Considerations for use of DNS in IoT devices", Michael
  Richardson, Wei Pan, 2022-01-18,
  <draft-ietf-opsawg-mud-iot-dns-considerations-03.txt>

      This document details concerns about how Internet of Things devices
      use IP addresses and DNS names.  The issue becomes acute as network
      operators begin deploying RFC8520 Manufacturer Usage Description
      (MUD) definitions to control device access.
      
      This document makes recommendations on when and how to use DNS names
      in MUD files.

  "A YANG Model for Network and VPN Service Performance Monitoring", Bo Wu,
  Qin WU, Mohamed Boucadair, Oscar de Dios, Bin Wen, 2022-01-29,
  <draft-ietf-opsawg-yang-vpn-service-pm-03.txt>

      The data model for network topologies defined in RFC 8345 introduces
      vertical layering relationships between networks that can be
      augmented to cover network and service topologies.  This document
      defines a YANG module for performance monitoring (PM) of both
      networks and VPN services that can be used to monitor and manage
      network performance on the topology at higher layer or the service
      topology between VPN sites.

  "Service Assurance for Intent-based Networking Architecture", Benoit
  Claise, Jean Quilbeuf, Diego Lopez, Dan Voyer, Thangam Arumugam,
  2022-03-07, <draft-ietf-opsawg-service-assurance-architecture-03.txt>

      This document describes an architecture for Service Assurance for
      Intent-based Networking (SAIN).  This architecture aims at assuring
      that service instances are running as expected.  As services rely
      upon multiple sub-services provided by the underlying network devices
      and functions, getting the assurance of a healthy service is only
      possible with a holistic view of all involved elements.  This
      architecture not only helps to correlate the service degradation with
      the network root cause but also the impacted services when a network
      component fails or degrades.

  "YANG Modules for Service Assurance", Benoit Claise, Jean Quilbeuf, Paolo
  Lucente, Paolo Fasano, Thangam Arumugam, 2022-01-04,
  <draft-ietf-opsawg-service-assurance-yang-02.txt>

      This document proposes YANG modules for the Service Assurance for
      Intent-based Networking Architecture.

  "Ownership and licensing statements in YANG", Eliot Lear, Carsten Bormann,
  2021-10-20, <draft-ietf-opsawg-ol-00.txt>

      This memo provides for an extension to RFC 8520 that allows MUD file
      authors to specify ownership and licensing of MUD files themselves.
      This memo updates RFC 8520.  However, it can also be used for
      purposes outside of MUD, and the grouping is structured as such.

  "PCAP Capture File Format", Guy Harris, Michael Richardson, 2021-10-25,
  <draft-ietf-opsawg-pcap-00.txt>

      This document describes the format used by the libpcap library to
      record captured packets to a file.  Programs using the libpcap
      library to read and write those files, and thus reading and writing
      files in that format, include tcpdump.

  "Transport Layer Security Version 1.3 (TLS 1.3) Transport Model for the
  Simple Network Management Protocol Version 3 (SNMPv3)", Kenneth Vaughn,
  2022-03-05, <draft-ietf-opsawg-tlstm-update-01.txt>

      This document updates the TLS Transport Model (TLSTM), as defined in
      RFC 6353 to support Transport Layer Security Version 1.3 (TLS) and
      Datagram Transport Layer Security Version 1.3 (DTLS), which are
      jointly known as "(D)TLS".  This document may be applicable to future
      versions of SNMP and (D)TLS.
      
      This document updates the SNMP-TLS-TM-MIB as defined in RFC 6353.

  "A Network YANG Model for Service Attachment Points (SAPs)", Mohamed
  Boucadair, Oscar de Dios, samier barguil, Qin WU, Victor Lopez, 2022-02-22,
  <draft-ietf-opsawg-sap-02.txt>

      This document defines a YANG data model for representing an abstract
      view of the provider network topology that contains the points from
      which its services can be attached (e.g., basic connectivity, VPN,
      network slices).  Also, the model can be used to retrieve the points
      where the services are actually being delivered to customers
      (including peer networks).
      
      This document augments the 'ietf-network' data model by adding the
      concept of Service Attachment Points (SAPs).  The Service Attachment
      Points are the network reference points to which network services,
      such as Layer 3 Virtual Private Network (L3VPN) or Layer 2 Virtual
      Private Network (L2VPN), can be attached.  Both User-Network
      Interface (UNI) and Network-to-Network Interface (NNI) are supported
      in the SAP data model.

Operational Security Capabilities for IP Network Infrastructure (opsec)
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

  "Recommendations on the Filtering of IPv6 Packets Containing IPv6 Extension
  Headers at Transit Routers", Fernando Gont, Will LIU, 2021-06-03,
  <draft-ietf-opsec-ipv6-eh-filtering-08.txt>

      This document analyzes the security implications of IPv6 Extension
      Headers and associated IPv6 options.  Additionally, it discusses the
      operational and interoperability implications of discarding packets
      based on the IPv6 Extension Headers and IPv6 options they contain.
      Finally, it provides advice on the filtering of such IPv6 packets at
      transit routers for traffic *not* directed to them, for those cases
      where such filtering is deemed as necessary.

  "Indicators of Compromise (IoCs) and Their Role in Attack Defence", Kirsty
  Paine, Ollie Whitehouse, James Sellwood, Andrew S, 2022-01-21,
  <draft-ietf-opsec-indicators-of-compromise-00.txt>

      Cyber defenders frequently rely on Indicators of Compromise (IoCs) to
      identify, trace, and block malicious activity in networks or on
      endpoints.  This draft reviews the fundamentals, opportunities,
      operational limitations, and best practices of IoC use.  It
      highlights the need for IoCs to be detectable in implementations of
      Internet protocols, tools, and technologies - both for the IoCs'
      initial discovery and their use in detection - and provides a
      foundation for new approaches to operational challenges in network
      security.

Path Aware Networking RG (panrg)
--------------------------------

  "A Vocabulary of Path Properties", Theresa Enghardt, Cyrill Krahenbuhl,
  2022-03-07, <draft-irtf-panrg-path-properties-05.txt>

      Path properties express information about paths across a network and
      the services provided via such paths.  In a path-aware network, path
      properties may be fully or partially available to entities such as
      endpoints.  This document defines and categorizes path properties.
      Furthermore, the document specifies several path properties which
      might be useful to endpoints or other entities, e.g., for selecting
      between paths or for invoking some of the provided services.

Path Computation Element (pce)
------------------------------

  "Extensions to the Path Computation Element Communication Protocol for
  Enhanced Errors and Notifications", Helia Poullyau, Remi Theillaud, Julien
  Meuric, Haomian Zheng, Xian Zhang, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-ietf-pce-enhanced-errors-11.txt>

      This document defines new error and notification TLVs for the PCE
      Communication Protocol (PCEP) specified in RFC5440, and will update
      it.  It identifies the possible PCEP behaviors in case of error or
      notification.  Thus, this draft defines types of errors and how they
      are disclosed to other PCEs in order to support predefined PCEP
      behaviors.

  "Path Computation Element (PCE) Protocol Extensions for Stateful PCE Usage
  in GMPLS-controlled Networks", Young Lee, Haomian Zheng, Oscar de Dios,
  Victor Lopez, Zafar Ali, 2022-02-10,
  <draft-ietf-pce-pcep-stateful-pce-gmpls-17.txt>

      The Path Computation Element (PCE) facilitates Traffic Engineering
      (TE) based path calculation in large, multi-domain, multi-region, or
      multi-layer networks. The PCE communication Protocol (PCEP) has been
      extended to support stateful PCE functions where the PCE retains
      information about the paths already present in the network, but
      those extensions are technology-agnostic. This memo provides
      extensions required for PCEP so as to enable the usage of a stateful
      PCE capability in GMPLS-controlled networks.

  "A YANG Data Model for Path Computation Element Communications Protocol
  (PCEP)", Dhruv Dhody, Jonathan Hardwick, Vishnu Beeram, Jeff Tantsura,
  2022-01-25, <draft-ietf-pce-pcep-yang-18.txt>

      This document defines a YANG data model for the management of Path
      Computation Element communications Protocol (PCEP) for communications
      between a Path Computation Client (PCC) and a Path Computation
      Element (PCE), or between two PCEs.  The data model includes
      configuration and state data.

  "PCEP Extension for Native IP Network", Aijun Wang, Boris Khasanov, Sheng
  Fang, Ren Tan, Chun Zhu, 2022-02-06,
  <draft-ietf-pce-pcep-extension-native-ip-17.txt>

      This document defines the Path Computation Element Communication
      Protocol (PCEP) extension for Central Control Dynamic Routing (CCDR)
      based application in Native IP network.  The scenario and framework
      of CCDR in native IP is described in [RFC8735] and [RFC8821].  This
      draft describes the key information that is transferred between Path
      Computation Element (PCE) and Path Computation Clients (PCC) to
      accomplish the End to End (E2E) traffic assurance in Native IP
      network under central control mode.

  "PCEP Extension for Flexible Grid Networks", Young Lee, Haomian Zheng,
  Ramon Casellas, Ricard Vilalta, Daniele Ceccarelli, Francesco Lazzeri,
  2022-03-07, <draft-ietf-pce-flexible-grid-07.txt>

      This document provides the Path Computation Element Communication
      Protocol (PCEP) extensions for the support of Routing and Spectrum
      Assignment (RSA) in Flexible Grid networks.

  "PCEP Extensions for Segment Routing leveraging the IPv6 data plane", Cheng
  Li, Mahendra Negi, Siva Sivabalan, Mike Koldychev, Prejeeth Kaladharan,
  Yongqing Zhu, 2022-03-06, <draft-ietf-pce-segment-routing-ipv6-12.txt>

      The Source Packet Routing in Networking (SPRING) architecture
      describes how Segment Routing (SR) can be used to steer packets
      through an IPv6 or MPLS network using the source routing paradigm.
      SR enables any head-end node to select any path without relying on a
      hop-by-hop signaling technique (e.g., LDP or RSVP-TE).
      
      It depends only on "segments" that are advertised by Link-State IGPs.
      A Segment Routed Path can be derived from a variety of mechanisms,
      including an IGP Shortest Path Tree (SPT), explicit configuration, or
      a Path Computation Element (PCE).
      
      Since SR can be applied to both MPLS and IPv6 forwarding plane, a PCE
      should be able to compute SR-Path for both MPLS and IPv6 forwarding
      plane.  This document describes the extensions required for SR
      support for IPv6 data plane in Path Computation Element communication
      Protocol (PCEP).  The PCEP extension and mechanism to support SR-MPLS
      is described in RFC 8664.  This document extends it to support SRv6
      (SR over IPv6).

  "Path Computation Element communication Protocol (PCEP) extensions for
  Establishing Relationships between sets of LSPs and Virtual Networks",
  Young Lee, Haomian Zheng, Daniele Ceccarelli, 2021-10-15,
  <draft-ietf-pce-vn-association-05.txt>

      This document describes how to extend Path Computation Element (PCE)
      Communication Protocol (PCEP) association mechanism introduced by the
      PCEP Association Group specification, to further associate sets of
      LSPs with a higher-level structure such as a virtual network (VN)
      requested by clients or applications.  This extended association
      mechanism can be used to facilitate virtual network control using PCE
      architecture.

  "Carrying Binding Label/Segment Identifier (SID) in PCE-based Networks.",
  Siva Sivabalan, Clarence Filsfils, Jeff Tantsura, Stefano Previdi, Cheng
  Li, 2022-03-03, <draft-ietf-pce-binding-label-sid-14.txt>

      In order to provide greater scalability, network confidentiality, and
      service independence, Segment Routing (SR) utilizes a Binding Segment
      Identifier (SID) (called BSID) as described in RFC 8402.  It is
      possible to associate a BSID to an RSVP-TE-signaled Traffic
      Engineering Label Switched Path or an SR Traffic Engineering path.
      The BSID can be used by an upstream node for steering traffic into
      the appropriate TE path to enforce SR policies.  This document
      specifies the concept of binding value, which can be either an MPLS
      label or Segment Identifier.  It further specifies an extension to
      Path Computation Element (PCE) communication Protocol(PCEP) for
      reporting the binding value by a Path Computation Client (PCC) to the
      PCE to support PCE-based Traffic Engineering policies.

  "Path Computation Element Communication Protocol (PCEP) Extension for Path
  Segment in Segment Routing (SR)", Cheng Li, Mach Chen, Weiqiang Cheng,
  Rakesh Gandhi, Quan Xiong, 2022-02-13,
  <draft-ietf-pce-sr-path-segment-05.txt>

      The Path Computation Element (PCE) provides path computation
      functions in support of traffic engineering in Multiprotocol Label
      Switching (MPLS) and Generalized MPLS (GMPLS) networks.
      
      The Source Packet Routing in Networking (SPRING) architecture
      describes how Segment Routing (SR) can be used to steer packets
      through an IPv6 or MPLS network using the source routing paradigm.  A
      Segment Routed Path can be derived from a variety of mechanisms,
      including an IGP Shortest Path Tree (SPT), explicit configuration, or
      a Path Computation Element (PCE).
      
      Path identification is needed for several use cases such as
      performance measurement in Segment Routing (SR) network.  This
      document specifies extensions to the Path Computation Element
      Communication Protocol (PCEP) to support requesting, replying,
      reporting and updating the Path Segment ID (Path SID) between PCEP
      speakers.

  "Path Computation Element Communication Protocol (PCEP) Extensions for
  Associated Bidirectional Segment Routing (SR) Paths", Cheng Li, Mach Chen,
  Weiqiang Cheng, Rakesh Gandhi, Quan Xiong, 2022-03-06,
  <draft-ietf-pce-sr-bidir-path-09.txt>

      The Path Computation Element Communication Protocol (PCEP) provides
      mechanisms for Path Computation Elements (PCEs) to perform path
      computations in response to Path Computation Clients (PCCs) requests.
      Segment routing (SR) leverages the source routing and tunneling
      paradigms.  The Stateful PCEP extensions allow stateful control of
      Segment Routing Traffic Engineering (TE) Paths.  Furthermore, PCEP
      can be used for computing SR TE paths in the network.
      
      This document defines PCEP extensions for grouping two unidirectional
      SR Paths (one in each direction in the network) into a single
      associated bidirectional SR Path.  The mechanisms defined in this
      document can also be applied using a stateful PCE for both PCE-
      initiated and PCC-initiated LSPs or when using a stateless PCE.

  "PCEP extension to support Segment Routing Policy Candidate Paths", Mike
  Koldychev, Siva Sivabalan, Colby Barth, Shuping Peng, Hooman Bidgoli,
  2021-10-22, <draft-ietf-pce-segment-routing-policy-cp-06.txt>

      This document introduces a mechanism to specify a Segment Routing
      (SR) policy, as a collection of SR candidate paths.  An SR policy is
      identified by <headend, color, endpoint> tuple.  An SR policy can
      contain one or more candidate paths where each candidate path is
      identified in PCEP by its uniquely assigned PLSP-ID.  This document
      proposes extension to PCEP to support association among candidate
      paths of a given SR policy.  The mechanism proposed in this document
      is applicable to both MPLS and IPv6 data planes of SR.

  "Local Protection Enforcement in PCEP", Andrew Stone, Mustapha Aissaoui,
  Samuel Sidor, Siva Sivabalan, 2022-01-30,
  <draft-ietf-pce-local-protection-enforcement-04.txt>

      This document updates [RFC5440] to clarify usage of the local
      protection desired bit signalled in Path Computation Element Protocol
      (PCEP).  This document also introduces a new flag for signalling
      protection strictness in PCEP.

  "Path Computation Element Communication Protocol (PCEP) Procedures and
  Extensions for Using PCE as a Central Controller (PCECC) for Segment
  Routing (SR) MPLS Segment Identifier (SID) Allocation and Distribution.",
  Zhenbin Li, Shuping Peng, Mahendra Negi, Quintin Zhao, Chao Zhou,
  2022-03-06, <draft-ietf-pce-pcep-extension-pce-controller-sr-04.txt>

      The Path Computation Element (PCE) is a core component of Software-
      Defined Networking (SDN) systems.
      
      A PCE-based Central Controller (PCECC) can simplify the processing of
      a distributed control plane by blending it with elements of SDN and
      without necessarily completely replacing it.  Thus, the LSP can be
      calculated/set up/initiated and the label forwarding entries can also
      be downloaded through a centralized PCE server to each network device
      along the path while leveraging the existing PCE technologies as much
      as possible.
      
      This document specifies the procedures and PCEP extensions when a
      PCE-based controller is also responsible for configuring the
      forwarding actions on the routers, in addition to computing the paths
      for packet flows in a segment routing (SR) network and telling the
      edge routers what instructions to attach to packets as they enter the
      network.  PCECC as defined in RFC 9050 is further enhanced for SR-
      MPLS SID (Segment Identifier) allocation and distribution.

  "PCEP Extension for Stateful Inter-Domain Tunnels", Olivier Dugeon, Julien
  Meuric, Young Lee, Daniele Ceccarelli, 2022-03-04,
  <draft-ietf-pce-stateful-interdomain-03.txt>

      This document specifies how to use a Backward Recursive or
      Hierarchical method to derive inter-domain paths in the context of
      stateful Path Computation Element (PCE).  The mechanism relies on the
      PCInitiate message to set up independent paths per domain.  Combining
      these different paths together enables them to be operated as end-to-
      end inter-domain paths, without the need for a signaling session
      between inter-domain border routers.  For this purpose, this document
      defines a new Stitching Label, new Association Type, and a new PCEP
      communication Protocol (PCEP) Capability.

  "LSP Object Flag Extension of Stateful PCE", Quan Xiong, 2021-10-18,
  <draft-ietf-pce-lsp-extended-flags-01.txt>

      RFC 8231 describes a set of extensions to Path Computation Element
      Communication Protocol (PCEP) to enable stateful control of MPLS-TE
      and GMPLS Label Switched Paths(LSPs) via PCEP.  One of the extensions
      is the LSP object which includes a Flag field of the length of 12
      bits.  However, 11 bits of the Flag field have already been assigned
      in RFC 8231, RFC 8281 and RFC 8623.
      
      This document proposes to define a new LSP-EXTENDED-FLAG TLV for the
      LSP object for an extended flag field.

  "PCEP Extensions for Signaling Multipath Information", Mike Koldychev, Siva
  Sivabalan, Tarek Saad, Vishnu Beeram, Hooman Bidgoli, Bhupendra Yadav,
  Shuping Peng, Gyan Mishra, 2022-02-25, <draft-ietf-pce-multipath-04.txt>

      Path computation algorithms are not limited to return a single
      optimal path.  Multiple paths may exist that satisfy the given
      objectives and constraints.  This document defines a mechanism to
      encode multiple paths for a single set of objectives and constraints.
      This is a generic PCEP mechanism, not specific to any path setup type
      or dataplane.  The mechanism is applicable to both stateless and
      stateful PCEP.

  "Inter Stateful Path Computation Element (PCE) Communication Procedures.",
  Stephane Litkowski, Siva Sivabalan, Cheng Li, Haomian Zheng, 2021-10-20,
  <draft-ietf-pce-state-sync-01.txt>

      The Path Computation Element Communication Protocol (PCEP) provides
      mechanisms for Path Computation Elements (PCEs) to perform path
      computation in response to a Path Computation Client (PCC) request.
      The Stateful PCE extensions allow stateful control of Multi-Protocol
      Label Switching (MPLS) Traffic Engineering (TE) Label Switched Paths
      (LSPs) using PCEP.
      
      A Path Computation Client (PCC) can synchronize an LSP state
      information to a Stateful Path Computation Element (PCE).  A PCC can
      have multiple PCEP sessions towards multiple PCEs.  There are some
      use cases, where an inter-PCE stateful communication can bring
      additional resiliency in the design, for instance when some PCC-PCE
      session fails.
      
      This document describes the procedures to allow a stateful
      communication between PCEs for various use-cases and also the
      procedures to prevent computations loops.

  "Extension for Stateful PCE to allow Optional Processing of PCEP Objects",
  Cheng Li, Haomian Zheng, Stephane Litkowski, 2021-10-23,
  <draft-ietf-pce-stateful-pce-optional-02.txt>

      This document introduces a mechanism to mark some of the Path
      Computation Element (PCE) Communication Protocol (PCEP) objects as
      optional during PCEP messages exchange for the Stateful PCE model to
      allow relaxing some constraints.  This document introduces this
      relaxation and updates RFC 8231.

  "PCEP extensions for p2mp sr policy", Hooman Bidgoli, Dan Voyer, Saranya
  Rajarathinam, Ehsan Hemmati, Tarek Saad, Siva Sivabalan, 2021-12-08,
  <draft-ietf-pce-sr-p2mp-policy-00.txt>

      SR P2MP policies are set of policies that enable architecture for
      P2MP service delivery.  This document specifies extensions to the
      Path Computation Element Communication Protocol (PCEP) that allow a
      stateful PCE to compute and initiate P2MP paths from a Root to a set
      of Leaves.

  "PCEP Extension for L2 Flow Specification", Dhruv Dhody, Adrian Farrel,
  Zhenbin Li, 2022-03-06, <draft-ietf-pce-pcep-l2-flowspec-01.txt>

      The Path Computation Element (PCE) is a functional component capable
      of selecting paths through a traffic engineering (TE) network.  These
      paths may be supplied in response to requests for computation or may
      be unsolicited requests issued by the PCE to network elements.  Both
      approaches use the PCE Communication Protocol (PCEP) to convey the
      details of the computed path.
      
      Traffic flows may be categorized and described using "Flow
      Specifications".  RFC 8955 defines the Flow Specification and
      describes how Flow Specification components are used to describe
      traffic flows.  RFC 8955 also defines how Flow Specifications may be
      distributed in BGP to allow specific traffic flows to be associated
      with routes.
      
      RFC 9168 specifies a set of extensions to PCEP to support
      dissemination of Flow Specifications.  This allows a PCE to indicate
      what traffic should be placed on each path that it is aware of.
      
      The extensions defined in this document extends the support for
      Ethernet Layer 2 (L2) and Layer 2 Virtual Private Network (L2VPN)
      traffic filtering rules either by themselves or in conjunction with
      L3 flowspecs.

  "Carrying SID Algorithm information in PCE-based Networks.", Alexej Tokar,
  Samuel Sidor, Shaofu Peng, Siva Sivabalan, Tarek Saad, Shuping Peng,
  Mahendra Negi, 2022-02-22, <draft-ietf-pce-sid-algo-00.txt>

      The Algorithm associated with a prefix Segment-ID (SID) defines the
      path computation Algorithm used by Interior Gateway Protocols (IGPs).
      This information is available to controllers such as the Path
      Computation Element (PCE) via topology learning.  This document
      proposes an approach for informing headend routers regarding the
      Algorithm associated with each prefix SID used in PCE-computed paths,
      as well as signalling a specific SID algorithm as a constraint to the
      PCE.

Privacy Enhancements and Assessments Research Group (pearg)
-----------------------------------------------------------

  "Unfortunate History of Transient Numeric Identifiers", Fernando Gont, Ivan
  Arce, 2022-01-27, <draft-irtf-pearg-numeric-ids-history-09.txt>

      This document analyzes the timeline of the specification and
      implementation of different types of "transient numeric identifiers"
      used in IETF protocols, and how the security and privacy properties
      of such protocols have been affected as a result of it.  It provides
      empirical evidence that advice in this area is warranted.  This
      document is a product of the Privacy Enhancement and Assessment
      Research Group (PEARG) in the IRTF.

  "On the Generation of Transient Numeric Identifiers", Fernando Gont, Ivan
  Arce, 2022-01-31, <draft-irtf-pearg-numeric-ids-generation-08.txt>

      This document performs an analysis of the security and privacy
      implications of different types of "transient numeric identifiers"
      used in IETF protocols, and tries to categorize them based on their
      interoperability requirements and their associated failure severity
      when such requirements are not met.  Subsequently, it provides advice
      on possible algorithms that could be employed to satisfy the
      interoperability requirements of each identifier category, while
      minimizing the negative security and privacy implications, thus
      providing guidance to protocol designers and protocol implementers.
      Finally, it describes a number of algorithms that have been employed
      in real implementations to generate transient numeric identifiers,
      and analyzes their security and privacy properties.  This document is
      a product of the Privacy Enhancement and Assessment Research Group
      (PEARG) in the IRTF.

  "A Survey of Worldwide Censorship Techniques", Joseph Hall, Michael Aaron,
  Amelia Andersdotter, Ben Jones, Nick Feamster, Mallory Knodel, 2022-03-05,
  <draft-irtf-pearg-censorship-05.txt>

      This document describes technical mechanisms employed in network
      censorship that regimes around the world use for blocking or
      impairing Internet traffic.  It aims to make designers, implementers,
      and users of Internet protocols aware of the properties exploited and
      mechanisms used for censoring end-user access to information.  This
      document makes no suggestions on individual protocol considerations,
      and is purely informational, intended as a reference.

  "IP Address Privacy Considerations", Matthew Finkel, Bradford Lassey, Luigi
  Iannone, Brad Chen, 2022-01-26,
  <draft-irtf-pearg-ip-address-privacy-considerations-00.txt>

      This document provides an overview of privacy considerations related
      to user IP addresses.  It includes an analysis of some current use
      cases for tracking of user IP addresses, mainly in the context of
      anti-abuse.  It discusses the privacy issues associated with such
      tracking and provides input on mechanisms to improve the privacy of
      this existing model.  It then captures requirements for proposed
      'replacement signals' for IP addresses from this analysis.  In
      addition, existing and under-development techniques are evaluated for
      fulfilling these requirements.

Privacy Enhanced RTP Conferencing (perc)
----------------------------------------

  "DTLS Tunnel between a Media Distributor and Key Distributor to Facilitate
  Key Exchange", Paul Jones, Paul Ellenbogen, Nils Ohlmeier, 2021-11-12,
  <draft-ietf-perc-dtls-tunnel-12.txt>

      This document defines a protocol for tunneling DTLS traffic in
      multimedia conferences that enables a Media Distributor to facilitate
      key exchange between an endpoint in a conference and the Key
      Distributor.  The protocol is designed to ensure that the keying
      material used for hop-by-hop encryption and authentication is
      accessible to the Media Distributor, while the keying material used
      for end-to-end encryption and authentication is inaccessible to the
      Media Distributor.

Protocols for IP Multicast (pim)
--------------------------------

  "A YANG Data Model for Protocol Independent Multicast (PIM)", Xufeng Liu,
  Pete McAllister, Anish Peter, Mahesh Sivakumar, Yisong Liu, fangwei hu,
  2018-05-19, <draft-ietf-pim-yang-17.txt>

      This document defines a YANG data model that can be used to configure
      and manage devices supporting Protocol Independent Multicast (PIM).
      The model covers the PIM protocol configuration, operational state,
      and event notifications data.

  "Protocol Independent Multicast - Sparse Mode (PIM-SM) Designated Router
  (DR) Improvement", Zheng Zhang, fangwei hu, BenChong Xu, Mankamana Mishra,
  2022-03-07, <draft-ietf-pim-dr-improvement-13.txt>

      Protocol Independent Multicast - Sparse Mode (PIM-SM) is a widely
      deployed multicast protocol.  As deployment for the PIM protocol is
      growing day by day, a user expects lower packet loss and faster
      convergence regardless of the cause of the network failure.  This
      document defines an extension to the existing protocol, which
      improves the PIM's stability with respect to packet loss and
      convergence time when the PIM Designated Router (DR) role changes.

  "PIM Null-Register packing", Vikas Kamath, Ramakrishnan Sundaram, Raunak
  Banthia, Ananya Gopal, 2021-11-07,
  <draft-ietf-pim-null-register-packing-11.txt>

      In PIM-SM networks PIM Null-Register messages are sent by the
      Designated Router (DR) to the Rendezvous Point (RP) to signal the
      presence of Multicast sources in the network.  There are periodic PIM
      Null-Registers sent from the DR to the RP to keep the state alive at
      the RP as long as the source is active.  The PIM Null-Register
      message carries information about a single Multicast source and
      group.
      
      This document defines a standard to send multiple Multicast source
      and group information in a single PIM Packed Null-Register message.
      We will refer to the new packed formats as the PIM Packed Null-
      Register format and PIM Packed Register-Stop format throughout the
      document.  This document also discusses interoperability between the
      PIM routers which do not understand the PIM Packed Null-Register
      format and routers which do understand it.

  "A Yang Data Model for IGMP/MLD Proxy", Hongji Zhao, Xufeng Liu, Yisong
  Liu, Mani Panchanathan, Mahesh Sivakumar, 2021-08-30,
  <draft-ietf-pim-igmp-mld-proxy-yang-06.txt>

      This document defines a YANG data model that can be used to
      configure and manage Internet Group Management Protocol (IGMP) or
      Multicast Listener Discovery (MLD) proxy devices. The YANG module in
      this document conforms to Network Management Datastore Architecture
      (NMDA).

  "PIM Assert Message Packing", Yisong Liu, Mike McBride, Toerless Eckert,
  Zheng Zhang, 2021-11-22, <draft-ietf-pim-assert-packing-05.txt>

      In PIM-SM shared LAN networks, there is typically more than one
      upstream router. When duplicate data packets appear on the LAN from
      different routers, assert packets are sent from these routers to
      elect a single forwarder. The PIM assert packets are sent
      periodically to keep the assert state. The PIM assert packet carries
      information about a single multicast source and group, along with
      the metric-preference and metric of the route towards the source or
      RP. This document defines a standard to send and receive information
      for multiple multicast sources and groups in a single PIM assert
      message. This can be particularly helpful when there is   traffic
      for a large number of multicast groups.

  "Internet Group Management Protocol version 3 (IGMPv3) and Multicast
  Listener Discovery version 2 (MLDv2) Message Extension", Mahesh Sivakumar,
  Stig Venaas, Zheng Zhang, Hitoshi Asaeda, 2022-01-21,
  <draft-ietf-pim-igmp-mld-extension-06.txt>

      This document specifies a generic mechanism to extend IGMPv3 and
      MLDv2 by using a list of TLVs (Type, Length and Value).

  "Segment Routing Point-to-Multipoint Policy", Dan Voyer, Clarence Filsfils,
  Rishabh Parekh, Hooman Bidgoli, Zhaohui Zhang, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-ietf-pim-sr-p2mp-policy-04.txt>

      This document describes an architecture to construct a Point-to-
      Multipoint (P2MP) tree to deliver Multi-point services in a Segment
      Routing domain.  A SR P2MP tree is constructed by stitching a set of
      Replication segments together.  A SR Point-to-Multipoint (SR P2MP)
      Policy is used to define and instantiate a P2MP tree which is
      computed by a PCE.

  "PIM Backup Designated Router Procedure", Mankamana Mishra, Sridhar
  Santhanam, Aravind Paramasivam, Imed Romdhani, Gyan Mishra, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-ietf-pim-bdr-01.txt>

      On a multi-access network, one of the PIM routers is elected as a
      Designated Router (DR).  On the last hop LAN, the PIM DR is
      responsible for tracking local multicast listeners and forwarding
      traffic to these listeners if the group is operating in PIM-SM.  In
      this document, we propose a mechanism to elect backup DR on a shared
      LAN.  A backup DR on LAN would be useful for faster convergence.
      This draft introduces the concept of a Backup Designated Router (BDR)
      and the procedure to implement it.

  "Multicast Listener Discovery Version 2 (MLDv2) for IPv6", Brian Haberman,
  2021-10-25, <draft-ietf-pim-3810bis-01.txt>

      This document updates RFC 2710, and it specifies Version 2 of the
      Multicast Listener Discovery Protocol (MLDv2).  MLD is used by an
      IPv6 router to discover the presence of multicast listeners on
      directly attached links, and to discover which multicast addresses
      are of interest to those neighboring nodes.  MLDv2 is designed to be
      interoperable with MLDv1.  MLDv2 adds the ability for a node to
      report interest in listening to packets with a particular multicast
      address only from specific source addresses or from all sources
      except for specific source addresses.
      
      This document obsoletes RFC 3810.

  "Internet Group Management Protocol, Version 3", Brian Haberman,
  2021-10-25, <draft-ietf-pim-3376bis-01.txt>

      This document specifies a revised Version 3 of the Internet Group
      Management Protocol, IGMPv3.  IGMP is the protocol used by IPv4
      systems to report their IP multicast group memberships to neighboring
      multicast routers.  Version 3 of IGMP adds support for source
      filtering, that is, the ability for a system to report interest in
      receiving packets only from specific source addresses, or from all
      but specific source addresses, sent to a particular multicast
      address.  That information may be used by multicast routing protocols
      to avoid delivering multicast packets from specific sources to
      networks where there are no interested receivers.
      
      This document obsoletes RFC 3376.

  "PIM Join/ Prune Attributes for LISP Environments using Underlay
  Multicast", Vengada Govindan, Stig Venaas, 2021-10-22,
  <draft-ietf-pim-jp-extensions-lisp-00.txt>

      This document specifies an extension to PIM Receiver RLOC Join/ Prune
      attribute that supports the construction of multicast distribution
      trees where the root and receivers are located in different Locator/
      ID Separation Protocol (LISP) sites and are connected using underlay
      IP Multicast.  This attribute allows the receiver site to signal the
      underlay multicast group to the control plane of the root ITR
      (Ingress Tunnel Router).

  "P2MP Policy Ping", Hooman Bidgoli, Dan Voyer, Rishabh Parekh, Zhaohui
  Zhang, 2021-12-12, <draft-ietf-pim-p2mp-policy-ping-01.txt>

      SR P2MP policies are set of policies that enable architecture for
      P2MP service delivery.  A P2MP Policy consists of candidate paths
      that connects the Root of the Tree to a set of Leaves.  The P2MP
      policy is composed of replication segments.  A replication segment is
      a forwarding instruction for a candidate path which is downloaded to
      the Root, transit nodes and the leaves.
      
      This document describes a simple and efficient mechanism that can be
      used to detect data plane failures in P2MP Policy Candidate Paths
      (CPs) and Path Instances (PIs).

Privacy Pass (privacypass)
--------------------------

  "Privacy Pass Issuance Protocol", Sofia Celi, Alex Davidson, Armando
  Faz-Hernandez, Steven Valdez, Christopher Wood, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-ietf-privacypass-protocol-03.txt>

      This document specifies two variants of the the two-message issuance
      protocol for Privacy Pass tokens: one that produces tokens that are
      privately verifiable, and another that produces tokens that are
      publicly verifiable.  The privately verifiable issuance protocol
      optionally supports public metadata during the issuance flow.

  "Privacy Pass Architectural Framework", Alex Davidson, Jana Iyengar,
  Christopher Wood, 2022-03-07, <draft-ietf-privacypass-architecture-03.txt>

      This document specifies the architectural framework for constructing
      secure and anonymity-preserving instantiations of the Privacy Pass
      protocol.  It provides recommendations on how the protocol ecosystem
      should be constructed to ensure the privacy of clients, and the
      security of all participating entities.

  "The Privacy Pass HTTP Authentication Scheme", Tommy Pauly, Steven Valdez,
  Christopher Wood, 2022-03-03, <draft-ietf-privacypass-auth-scheme-00.txt>

      This document defines an HTTP authentication scheme that can be used
      by clients to redeem Privacy Pass tokens with an origin.  It can also
      be used by origins to challenge clients to present an acceptable
      Privacy Pass token.

Quantum Internet Research Group (qirg)
--------------------------------------

  "Architectural Principles for a Quantum Internet", Wojciech Kozlowski,
  Stephanie Wehner, Rodney Van Meter, Bruno Rijsman, Angela Cacciapuoti,
  Marcello Caleffi, Shota Nagayama, 2022-02-14,
  <draft-irtf-qirg-principles-10.txt>

      The vision of a quantum internet is to enhance existing Internet
      technology by enabling quantum communication between any two points
      on Earth.  To achieve this goal, a quantum network stack should be
      built from the ground up to account for the fundamentally new
      properties of quantum entanglement.  The first quantum entanglement
      networks have been realised [Pompili21.1], but there is no practical
      proposal for how to organise, utilise, and manage such networks.  In
      this draft, we attempt to lay down the framework and introduce some
      basic architectural principles for a quantum internet.  This is
      intended for general guidance and general interest, but also to
      provide a foundation for discussion between physicists and network
      specialists.  This document is a product of the Quantum Internet
      Research Group (QIRG).

  "Application Scenarios for the Quantum Internet", Chonggang Wang, Akbar
  Rahman, Ruidong Li, Melchior Aelmans, Kaushik Chakraborty, 2022-03-06,
  <draft-irtf-qirg-quantum-internet-use-cases-10.txt>

      The Quantum Internet has the potential to improve application
      functionality by incorporating quantum information technology into
      the infrastructure of the overall Internet.  This document provides
      an overview of some applications expected to be used on the Quantum
      Internet, and then categorizes them using various classification
      schemes.  Some general requirements for the Quantum Internet are also
      discussed.  The intent of this document is to describe a framework
      for applications, and describe a few selected application scenarios
      for the Quantum Internet.  This document is a product of the Quantum
      Internet Research Group (QIRG).

QUIC (quic)
-----------

  "Hypertext Transfer Protocol Version 3 (HTTP/3)", Mike Bishop, 2021-02-02,
  <draft-ietf-quic-http-34.txt>

      The QUIC transport protocol has several features that are desirable
      in a transport for HTTP, such as stream multiplexing, per-stream flow
      control, and low-latency connection establishment.  This document
      describes a mapping of HTTP semantics over QUIC.  This document also
      identifies HTTP/2 features that are subsumed by QUIC, and describes
      how HTTP/2 extensions can be ported to HTTP/3.
      
      DO NOT DEPLOY THIS VERSION OF HTTP
      
      DO NOT DEPLOY THIS VERSION OF HTTP/3 UNTIL IT IS IN AN RFC.  This
      version is still a work in progress.  For trial deployments, please
      use earlier versions.
      
      Note to Readers
      
      Discussion of this draft takes place on the QUIC working group
      mailing list (quic@ietf.org), which is archived at
      https://mailarchive.ietf.org/arch/search/?email_list=quic.
      
      Working Group information can be found at https://github.com/quicwg;
      source code and issues list for this draft can be found at
      https://github.com/quicwg/base-drafts/labels/-http.

  "Applicability of the QUIC Transport Protocol", Mirja Kuehlewind, Brian
  Trammell, 2022-03-07, <draft-ietf-quic-applicability-15.txt>

      This document discusses the applicability of the QUIC transport
      protocol, focusing on caveats impacting application protocol
      development and deployment over QUIC.  Its intended audience is
      designers of application protocol mappings to QUIC, and implementors
      of these application protocols.

  "Manageability of the QUIC Transport Protocol", Mirja Kuehlewind, Brian
  Trammell, 2022-03-07, <draft-ietf-quic-manageability-15.txt>

      This document discusses manageability of the QUIC transport protocol,
      focusing on the implications of QUIC's design and wire image on
      network operations involving QUIC traffic.  It is intended as a
      "user's manual" for the wire image, providing guidance for network
      operators and equipment vendors who rely on the use of transport-
      aware network functions.

  "QPACK: Header Compression for HTTP/3", Charles Krasic, Mike Bishop, Alan
  Frindell, 2021-02-02, <draft-ietf-quic-qpack-21.txt>

      This specification defines QPACK, a compression format for
      efficiently representing HTTP fields, to be used in HTTP/3.  This is
      a variation of HPACK compression that seeks to reduce head-of-line
      blocking.

  "QUIC-LB: Generating Routable QUIC Connection IDs", Martin Duke, Nick
  Banks, Christian Huitema, 2022-02-11,
  <draft-ietf-quic-load-balancers-12.txt>

      The QUIC protocol design is resistant to transparent packet
      inspection, injection, and modification by intermediaries.  However,
      the server can explicitly cooperate with network services by agreeing
      to certain conventions and/or sharing state with those services.
      This specification provides a standardized means of solving three
      problems: (1) maintaining routability to servers via a low-state load
      balancer even when the connection IDs in use change; (2) explicit
      encoding of the connection ID length in all packets to assist
      hardware accelerators; and (3) injection of QUIC Retry packets by an
      anti-Denial-of-Service agent on behalf of the server.

  "Compatible Version Negotiation for QUIC", David Schinazi, Eric Rescorla,
  2022-03-08, <draft-ietf-quic-version-negotiation-06.txt>

      QUIC does not provide a complete version negotiation mechanism but
      instead only provides a way for the server to indicate that the
      version the client offered is unacceptable.  This document describes
      a version negotiation mechanism that allows a client and server to
      select a mutually supported version.  Optionally, if the original and
      negotiated version share a compatible first flight format, the
      negotiation can take place without incurring an extra round trip.

  "An Unreliable Datagram Extension to QUIC", Tommy Pauly, Eric Kinnear,
  David Schinazi, 2022-02-04, <draft-ietf-quic-datagram-10.txt>

      This document defines an extension to the QUIC transport protocol to
      add support for sending and receiving unreliable datagrams over a
      QUIC connection.
      
      Discussion Venues
      
      This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.
      
      Discussion of this document takes place on the QUIC Working Group
      mailing list (mailto:quic@ietf.org), which is archived at
      https://mailarchive.ietf.org/arch/browse/quic/.
      
      Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
      https://github.com/quicwg/datagram.

  "Greasing the QUIC Bit", Martin Thomson, 2021-11-10,
  <draft-ietf-quic-bit-grease-02.txt>

      This document describes a method for negotiating the ability to send
      an arbitrary value for the second-to-most significant bit in QUIC
      packets.

  "Main logging schema for qlog", Robin Marx, Luca Niccolini, Marten Seemann,
  2022-03-07, <draft-ietf-quic-qlog-main-schema-02.txt>

      This document describes a high-level schema for a standardized
      logging format called qlog.  This format allows easy sharing of data
      and the creation of reusable visualization and debugging tools.  The
      high-level schema in this document is intended to be protocol-
      agnostic.  Separate documents specify how the format should be used
      for specific protocol data.  The schema is also format-agnostic, and
      can be represented in for example JSON, csv or protobuf.

  "QUIC event definitions for qlog", Robin Marx, Luca Niccolini, Marten
  Seemann, 2022-03-07, <draft-ietf-quic-qlog-quic-events-01.txt>

      This document describes concrete qlog event definitions and their
      metadata for QUIC events.  These events can then be embedded in the
      higher level schema defined in [QLOG-MAIN].

  "HTTP/3 and QPACK qlog event definitions", Robin Marx, Luca Niccolini,
  Marten Seemann, 2022-03-07, <draft-ietf-quic-qlog-h3-events-01.txt>

      This document describes concrete qlog event definitions and their
      metadata for HTTP/3 and QPACK-related events.  These events can then
      be embedded in the higher level schema defined in [QLOG-MAIN].

  "QUIC Acknowledgement Frequency", Jana Iyengar, Ian Swett, 2021-10-25,
  <draft-ietf-quic-ack-frequency-01.txt>

      This document describes a QUIC extension for an endpoint to control
      its peer's delaying of acknowledgements.
      
      Note to Readers
      
      Discussion of this draft takes place on the QUIC working group
      mailing list (quic@ietf.org), which is archived at
      https://mailarchive.ietf.org/arch/search/?email_list=quic.  Source
      code and issues list for this draft can be found at
      https://github.com/quicwg/ack-frequency.
      
      Working Group information can be found at https://github.com/quicwg.

  "QUIC Version 2", Martin Duke, 2022-01-21, <draft-ietf-quic-v2-01.txt>

      This document specifies QUIC version 2, which is identical to QUIC
      version 1 except for some trivial details.  Its purpose is to combat
      various ossification vectors and exercise the version negotiation
      framework.  It also serves as a template for the minimum changes in
      any future version of QUIC.
      
      Note that "version 2" is an informal name for this proposal that
      indicates it is the second standards-track QUIC version.  The
      protocol specified here will receive a version number other than 2
      from IANA.
      
      Discussion of this work is encouraged to happen on the QUIC IETF
      mailing list quic@ietf.org or on the GitHub repository which contains
      the draft: https://github.com/quicwg/quic-v2.

  "Multipath Extension for QUIC", Yanmei Liu, Yunfei Ma, Quentin De Coninck,
  Olivier Bonaventure, Christian Huitema, Mirja Kuehlewind, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-ietf-quic-multipath-01.txt>

      This document specifies a multipath extension for the QUIC protocol
      to enable the simultaneous usage of multiple paths for a single
      connection.
      
      Discussion Venues
      
      This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.
      
      Discussion of this document takes place on the QUIC Working Group
      mailing list (quic@ietf.org), which is archived at
      https://mailarchive.ietf.org/arch/browse/quic/.
      
      Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
      https://github.com/mirjak/draft-lmbdhk-quic-multipath.

Remote ATtestation ProcedureS (rats)
------------------------------------

  "The Entity Attestation Token (EAT)", Laurence Lundblade, Giridhar Mandyam,
  Jeremy O'Donoghue, 2022-02-24, <draft-ietf-rats-eat-12.txt,.pdf>

      An Entity Attestation Token (EAT) provides an attested claims set
      that describes state and characteristics of an entity, a device like
      a phone, IoT device, network equipment or such.  This claims set is
      used by a relying party, server or service to determine how much it
      wishes to trust the entity.
      
      An EAT is either a CBOR Web Token (CWT) or JSON Web Token (JWT) with
      attestation-oriented claims.  To a large degree, all this document
      does is extend CWT and JWT.

  "Remote Attestation Procedures Architecture", Henk Birkholz, Dave Thaler,
  Michael Richardson, Ned Smith, Wei Pan, 2022-02-08,
  <draft-ietf-rats-architecture-15.txt>

      In network protocol exchanges it is often useful for one end of a
      communication to know whether the other end is in an intended
      operating state.  This document provides an architectural overview of
      the entities involved that make such tests possible through the
      process of generating, conveying, and evaluating evidentiary claims.
      An attempt is made to provide for a model that is neutral toward
      processor architectures, the content of claims, and protocols.

  "A YANG Data Model for Challenge-Response-based Remote Attestation
  Procedures using TPMs", Henk Birkholz, Michael Eckel, Shwetha Bhandari,
  Eric Voit, Bill Sulzen, Liang Xia, Tom Laffey, Guy Fedorkow, 2022-03-16,
  <draft-ietf-rats-yang-tpm-charra-17.txt>

      This document defines YANG RPCs and a few configuration nodes
      required to retrieve attestation evidence about integrity
      measurements from a device, following the operational context defined
      in TPM-based Network Device Remote Integrity Verification.
      Complementary measurement logs are also provided by the YANG RPCs,
      originating from one or more roots of trust for measurement (RTMs).
      The module defined requires at least one TPM 1.2 or TPM 2.0 as well
      as a corresponding TPM Software Stack (TSS), or equivalent hardware
      implementations that include the protected capabilities as provided
      by TPMs as well as a corresponding software stack, included in the
      device components of the composite device the YANG server is running
      on.

  "TPM-based Network Device Remote Integrity Verification", Guy Fedorkow,
  Eric Voit, Jessica Fitzgerald-McKay, 2022-03-01,
  <draft-ietf-rats-tpm-based-network-device-attest-13.txt>

      This document describes a workflow for remote attestation of the
      integrity of firmware and software installed on network devices that
      contain Trusted Platform Modules [TPM1.2], [TPM2.0], as defined by
      the Trusted Computing Group (TCG)), or equivalent hardware
      implementations that include the protected capabilities, as provided
      by TPMs.

  "Reference Interaction Models for Remote Attestation Procedures", Henk
  Birkholz, Michael Eckel, Wei Pan, Eric Voit, 2022-01-26,
  <draft-ietf-rats-reference-interaction-models-05.txt>

      This document describes interaction models for remote attestation
      procedures (RATS).  Three conveying mechanisms -- Challenge/Response,
      Uni-Directional, and Streaming Remote Attestation -- are illustrated
      and defined.  Analogously, a general overview about the information
      elements typically used by corresponding conveyance protocols are
      highlighted.

  "A CBOR Tag for Unprotected CWT Claims Sets", Henk Birkholz, Jeremy
  O'Donoghue, Nancy Cam-Winget, Carsten Bormann, 2022-01-12,
  <draft-ietf-rats-uccs-02.txt>

      CBOR Web Token (CWT, RFC 8392) Claims Sets sometimes do not need the
      protection afforded by wrapping them into COSE, as is required for a
      true CWT.  This specification defines a CBOR tag for such unprotected
      CWT Claims Sets (UCCS) and discusses conditions for its proper use.
      
      
      // The present version (-01) has a few editorial improvements over
      // -00 and attempts to address points from Thomas Fossati's
      // 2021-03-16 review, for further discussion at IETF 111.

  "Attestation Event Stream Subscription", Henk Birkholz, Eric Voit, Wei Pan,
  2022-03-07, <draft-ietf-rats-network-device-subscription-01.txt>

      This memo defines how to subscribe to YANG Event Streams for Remote
      Attestation Procedures (RATS).  In RATS, Conceptional Messages, are
      defined.  Analogously, the YANG module defined in this memo augments
      the YANG module for TPM-based Challenge-Response based Remote
      Attestation (CHARRA) to allow for subscription to remote attestation
      Evidence.  Additionally, this memo provides the methods and means to
      define additional Event Streams for other Conceptual Message as
      illustrated in the RATS Architecture, e.g.  Attestation Results,
      Endorsements, or Event Logs.

  "Direct Anonymous Attestation for the Remote Attestation Procedures
  Architecture", Henk Birkholz, Christopher Newton, Liqun Chen, Dave Thaler,
  2021-12-02, <draft-ietf-rats-daa-00.txt>

      This document maps the concept of Direct Anonymous Attestation (DAA)
      to the Remote Attestation Procedures (RATS) Architecture.  The role
      DAA Issuer is introduced and its interactions with existing RATS
      roles is specified.

  "Attestation Results for Secure Interactions", Eric Voit, Henk Birkholz,
  Thomas Hardjono, Thomas Fossati, Vincent Scarlata, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-ietf-rats-ar4si-02.txt>

      This document defines reusable Attestation Result information
      elements.  When these elements are offered to Relying Parties as
      Evidence, different aspects of Attester trustworthiness can be
      evaluated.  Additionally, where the Relying Party is interfacing with
      a heterogeneous mix of Attesting Environment and Verifier types,
      consistent policies can be applied to subsequent information exchange
      between each Attester and the Relying Party.

Reliable and Available Wireless (raw)
-------------------------------------

  "Reliable and Available Wireless Technologies", Pascal Thubert, Dave
  Cavalcanti, Xavier Vilajosana, Corinna Schmitt, Janos Farkas, 2022-02-02,
  <draft-ietf-raw-technologies-05.txt>

      This document presents a series of recent technologies that are
      capable of time synchronization and scheduling of transmission,
      making them suitable to carry time-sensitive flows with high
      reliability and availability.

  "L-band Digital Aeronautical Communications System (LDACS)", Nils Maeurer,
  Thomas Graeupl, Corinna Schmitt, 2021-10-22, <draft-ietf-raw-ldacs-09.txt>

      This document gives an overview of the architecture of the L-band
      Digital Aeronautical Communications System (LDACS), which provides a
      secure, scalable and spectrum efficient terrestrial data link for
      civil aviation.  LDACS is a scheduled, reliable multi-application
      cellular broadband system with support for IPv6.  LDACS provides a
      data link for IPv6 network-based aircraft guidance.  High reliability
      and availability for IP connectivity over LDACS, as well as security,
      are therefore essential.

  "RAW use-cases", Carlos Bernardos, Georgios Papadopoulos, Pascal Thubert,
  Fabrice Theoleyre, 2022-02-23, <draft-ietf-raw-use-cases-05.txt>

      The wireless medium presents significant specific challenges to
      achieve properties similar to those of wired deterministic networks.
      At the same time, a number of use-cases cannot be solved with wires
      and justify the extra effort of going wireless.  This document
      presents wireless use-cases (such as aeronautical communications,
      amusement parks, industrial applications, pro audio and video,
      gaming, UAV and V2V control, edge robotics and emergency vehicles)
      demanding reliable and available behavior.

  "Operations, Administration and Maintenance (OAM) features for RAW",
  Fabrice Theoleyre, Georgios Papadopoulos, Greg Mirsky, Carlos Bernardos,
  2022-03-05, <draft-ietf-raw-oam-support-04.txt>

      Some critical applications may use a wireless infrastructure.
      However, wireless networks exhibit a bandwidth of several orders of
      magnitude lower than wired networks.  Besides, wireless transmissions
      are lossy by nature; the probability that a packet cannot be decoded
      correctly by the receiver may be quite high.  In these conditions,
      providing high reliability and a low delay is challenging.  This
      document lists the requirements of the Operation, Administration, and
      Maintenance (OAM) features are recommended to construct a predictable
      communication infrastructure on top of a collection of wireless
      segments.  This document describes the benefits, problems, and trade-
      offs for using OAM in wireless networks to achieve Service Level
      Objectives (SLO).

  "Reliable and Available Wireless Architecture", Pascal Thubert, Georgios
  Papadopoulos, 2022-03-04, <draft-ietf-raw-architecture-04.txt>

      Reliable and Available Wireless (RAW) provides for high reliability
      and availability for IP connectivity over a wireless medium.  The
      wireless medium presents significant challenges to achieve
      deterministic properties such as low packet error rate, bounded
      consecutive losses, and bounded latency.  This document defines the
      RAW Architecture following an OODA loop that involves OAM, PCE, PSE
      and PAREO functions.  It builds on the DetNet Architecture and
      discusses specific challenges and technology considerations needed to
      deliver DetNet service utilizing scheduled wireless segments and
      other media, e.g., frequency/time-sharing physical media resources
      with stochastic traffic.

  "Requirements for Reliable Wireless Industrial Services", Rute Sofia,
  Matthias Kovatsch, Paulo Mendes, 2021-12-10,
  <draft-ietf-raw-industrial-requirements-00.txt>

      This document provides an overview on communication requirements for
      handling reliable wireless services within the context of industrial
      environments.  The goal of the draft is to bring awareness to
      communication requirements of current and future wireless industrial
      services; how can they co-exist with wired infrastructures; key
      drivers for reliable wireless integration; relevant communication
      requirements to take into consideration; current and future
      challenges derived from the use of wireless.

  "Reliable and Available Wireless Framework", Pascal Thubert, Lou Berger,
  2021-12-13, <draft-ietf-raw-framework-00.txt>

      Reliable and Available Wireless (RAW) provides for high reliability
      and availability for IP connectivity over a wireless medium.  The
      wireless medium presents significant challenges to achieve
      deterministic properties such as low packet error rate, bounded
      consecutive losses, and bounded latency.  This document defines the
      RAW Architecture following an OODA loop that involves OAM, PCE, PSE
      and PAREO functions.  It builds on the DetNet Architecture and
      discusses specific challenges and technology considerations needed to
      deliver DetNet service utilizing scheduled wireless segments and
      other media, e.g., frequency/time-sharing physical media resources
      with stochastic traffic.

Registration Protocols Extensions (regext)
------------------------------------------

  "Federated Authentication for the Registration Data Access Protocol (RDAP)
  using OpenID Connect", Scott Hollenbeck, 2022-02-24,
  <draft-ietf-regext-rdap-openid-11.txt>

      The Registration Data Access Protocol (RDAP) provides "RESTful" web
      services to retrieve registration metadata from domain name and
      regional internet registries.  RDAP allows a server to make access
      control decisions based on client identity, and as such it includes
      support for client identification features provided by the Hypertext
      Transfer Protocol (HTTP).  Identification methods that require
      clients to obtain and manage credentials from every RDAP server
      operator present management challenges for both clients and servers,
      whereas a federated authentication system would make it easier to
      operate and use RDAP without the need to maintain server-specific
      client credentials.  This document describes a federated
      authentication system for RDAP based on OpenID Connect.

  "Registration Data Access Protocol (RDAP) Reverse search capabilities",
  Mario Loffredo, Maurizio Martinelli, 2022-02-10,
  <draft-ietf-regext-rdap-reverse-search-09.txt>

      The Registration Data Access Protocol (RDAP) does not include query
      capabilities to find the list of domains related to a set of entities
      matching a given search pattern.  In the RDAP context, an entity can
      be associated with any defined object class.  Moreover, other
      relationships between object classes exist and might be used for
      providing a reverse search capability.  Therefore, a reverse search
      can be applied to other use cases than the classic domain-entity
      scenario.  This document describes RDAP query extensions that allow
      servers to provide a reverse search feature based on the relationship
      defined in RDAP between an object class for search and any related
      object class.  The reverse search based on the domain-entity
      relationship is treated as a particular case but with a special focus
      on its privacy implications.

  "Simple Registration Reporting", Joseph Yee, James Galvin, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-ietf-regext-simple-registration-reporting-06.txt>

      Domain name registries (the producer) and registrars (the consumer)
      report to each other by sharing bulk information through files.  This
      document creates two IANA registries to establish a standard
      reporting mechanism between domain name registries and registrars.
      The first IANA registry lists standard data elements and their syntax
      for inclusion in the files.  The second IANA registry lists standard
      reports based on the standard data elements.  Each report is a file
      formatted as a CSV file.  The advantage of this reporting mechanism
      is that a report, each file, can be imported by recipients without
      any prior knowledge of their contents, although reporting is enhanced
      with a minimum of knowledge about the files.  The mechanism for the
      distribution of and access of the files is a matter of local policy.

  "Finding the Authoritative Registration Data (RDAP) Service", Marc
  Blanchet, 2022-01-28, <draft-ietf-regext-rfc7484bis-06.txt>

      This document specifies a method to find which Registration Data
      Access Protocol (RDAP) server is authoritative to answer queries for
      a requested scope, such as domain names, IP addresses, or Autonomous
      System numbers.  This document obsoletes RFC7484.

  "Using JSContact in Registration Data Access Protocol (RDAP) JSON
  Responses", Mario Loffredo, Gavin Brown, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-ietf-regext-rdap-jscontact-09.txt>

      This document describes an RDAP extension which represents entity
      contact information in JSON responses using JSContact.

  "Use of Internationalized Email Addresses in the Extensible Provisioning
  Protocol (EPP)", Dmitry Belyavsky, James Gould, 2022-01-21,
  <draft-ietf-regext-epp-eai-07.txt>

      This document describes an EPP extension that permits usage of
      Internationalized Email Addresses in the EPP protocol and specifies
      the terms when it can be used by EPP clients and servers.  The
      Extensible Provisioning Protocol (EPP), being developed before
      appearing the standards for Internationalized Email Addresses (EAI),
      does not support such email addresses.
      
      TO BE REMOVED on turning to RFC: The document is edited in the
      dedicated github repo (https://github.com/beldmit/eppeai).  Please
      send your submissions via GitHub.

  "Redacted Fields in the Registration Data Access Protocol (RDAP) Response",
  James Gould, David Smith, Jody Kolker, Roger Carney, 2022-03-03,
  <draft-ietf-regext-rdap-redacted-03.txt>

      This document describes an RDAP extension for explicitly identifying
      redacted RDAP response fields, using JSONPath as the default
      expression language.

  "Registration Data Dictionary", Heather Flanagan, Steve Crocker,
  2022-03-07, <draft-ietf-regext-datadictionary-01.txt>

      Multiple applications related to the registration of names and other
      identifiers are built around a list of data elements.  There is
      currently no unified public list of these data elements, nor is there
      an organized and independent change control process.  This document
      codifies the multiple similar but not quite identical lists of data
      elements into a neutral Data Dictionary to be maintained as an
      independent IANA Registry.  The Data Dictionary defines data elements
      but does not specify which ones are to be used in any particular
      application; the Data Dictionary is policy-neutral.

Routing In Fat Trees (rift)
---------------------------

  "RIFT: Routing in Fat Trees", Alankar Sharma, Pascal Thubert, Bruno
  Rijsman, Dmitry Afanasiev, Tony Przygienda, 2022-01-03,
  <draft-ietf-rift-rift-15.txt,.pdf>

      This document defines a specialized, dynamic routing protocol for
      Clos and fat-tree network topologies optimized towards minimization
      of control plane state as well as configuration and operational
      complexity.

  "A YANG Data Model for Routing in Fat Trees (RIFT)", Zheng Zhang, Yuehua
  Wei, Shaowen Ma, Xufeng Liu, Bruno Rijsman, 2021-10-18,
  <draft-ietf-rift-yang-05.txt>

      This document defines a YANG data model for the configuration and
      management of Routing in Fat Trees (RIFT) Protocol.

  "RIFT Applicability", Yuehua Wei, Zheng Zhang, Dmitry Afanasiev, Pascal
  Thubert, Tony Przygienda, 2021-12-16, <draft-ietf-rift-applicability-10.txt>

      This document discusses the properties, applicability and operational
      considerations of RIFT in different network scenarios.  It intends to
      provide a rough guide how RIFT can be deployed to simplify routing
      operations in Clos topologies and their variations.

  "RIFT Auto-EVPN", Jordan Head, Tony Przygienda, Wen Lin, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-ietf-rift-auto-evpn-02.txt>

      This document specifies procedures that allow an EVPN overlay to be
      fully and automatically provisioned when using RIFT as underlay by
      leveraging RIFT's no-touch ZTP architecture.

  "RIFT Keys Structure and Well-Known Registry in Key Value TIE", Jordan
  Head, Tony Przygienda, 2021-09-20, <draft-ietf-rift-kv-registry-00.txt>

      Routing in Fat-Trees RIFT [RIFT] allows for key/value pairs to be
      advertised within Key-Value Topology Information Elements (KV TIEs).
      The data contained within these KV TIEs can be used for any
      imaginable purpose.  This document defines the various Key Types
      (i.e.  Well-Known, OUI, and Experimental) and a method to structure
      corresponding values.

RTP Media Congestion Avoidance Techniques (rmcat)
-------------------------------------------------

  "Sending RTP Control Protocol (RTCP) Feedback for Congestion Control in
  Interactive Multimedia Conferences", Colin Perkins, 2021-12-28,
  <draft-ietf-rmcat-rtp-cc-feedback-08.txt>

      This memo discusses the types of congestion control feedback that it
      is possible to send using the RTP Control Protocol (RTCP), and their
      suitability of use in implementing congestion control for unicast
      multimedia applications.

Routing Over Low power and Lossy networks (roll)
------------------------------------------------

  "Root initiated routing state in RPL", Pascal Thubert, Rahul Jadhav,
  Michael Richardson, 2022-02-25, <draft-ietf-roll-dao-projection-24.txt>

      This document extends RFC 6550, RFC 6553, and RFC 8138 to enable a
      RPL Root to install and maintain Projected Routes within its DODAG,
      along a selected set of nodes that may or may not include self, for a
      chosen duration.  This potentially enables routes that are more
      optimized or resilient than those obtained with the classical
      distributed operation of RPL, either in terms of the size of a
      Routing Header or in terms of path length, which impacts both the
      latency and the packet delivery ratio.

  "Supporting Asymmetric Links in Low Power Networks: AODV-RPL", Charles
  Perkins, S.V.R Anand, Satish Anamalamudi, Bing Liu, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-ietf-roll-aodv-rpl-13.txt>

      Route discovery for symmetric and asymmetric Peer-to-Peer (P2P)
      traffic flows is a desirable feature in Low power and Lossy Networks
      (LLNs).  For that purpose, this document specifies a reactive P2P
      route discovery mechanism for both hop-by-hop routing and source
      routing: Ad Hoc On-demand Distance Vector Routing (AODV) based RPL
      protocol (AODV-RPL).  Paired Instances are used to construct
      directional paths, for cases where there are asymmetric links between
      source and target nodes.

  "RPL Observations", Rahul Jadhav, Rabi Sahoo, Yuefeng Wu, 2021-11-29,
  <draft-ietf-roll-rpl-observations-07.txt>

      This document describes RPL protocol design issues, various
      observations and possible consequences of the design and
      implementation choices.

  "Common Ancestor Objective Function and Parent Set DAG Metric Container
  Extension", Remous-Aris Koutsiamanis, Georgios Papadopoulos, Nicolas
  Montavont, Pascal Thubert, 2020-10-29,
  <draft-ietf-roll-nsa-extension-10.txt>

      Packet Replication and Elimination is a method in which several
      copies of a data packet are sent in the network in order to achieve
      high reliability and low jitter.  This document details how to apply
      Packet Replication and Elimination in RPL, especially how to exchange
      information within RPL control packets to let a node better select
      the different parents that will be used to forward the multiple
      copies of a packet.  This document also describes the Objective
      Function which takes advantage of this information to implement
      multi-path routing.

  "Controlling Secure Network Enrollment in RPL networks", Michael
  Richardson, Rahul Jadhav, Pascal Thubert, Huimin She, 2022-02-28,
  <draft-ietf-roll-enrollment-priority-06.txt>

      [RFC9032] defines a method by which a potential [RFC9031] enrollment
      proxy can announce itself as a available for new Pledges to enroll on
      a network.  The announcement includes a priority for enrollment.
      This document provides a mechanism by which a RPL DODAG root can
      disable enrollment announcements, or adjust the base priority for
      enrollment operation.

  "RPL Capabilities", Rahul Jadhav, Pascal Thubert, Michael Richardson, Rabi
  Sahoo, 2021-11-09, <draft-ietf-roll-capabilities-09.txt>

      This draft enables the discovery, advertisement and query of
      capabilities for RPL nodes.

  "Mode of Operation extension", Rahul Jadhav, Pascal Thubert, Michael
  Richardson, 2021-11-09, <draft-ietf-roll-mopex-04.txt>

      RPL allows different mode of operations which allows nodes to have a
      consensus on the basic primitives that must be supported to join the
      network.  The MOP field in [RFC6550] is of 3 bits and is fast
      depleting.  This document extends the MOP for future use.

  "RNFD: Fast border router crash detection in RPL", Konrad Iwanicki,
  2022-03-01, <draft-ietf-roll-rnfd-00.txt>

      By and large, a correct operation of a RPL network requires border
      routers to be up.  In many applications, it is beneficial for the
      nodes to detect a crash of a border router as soon as possible to
      trigger fallback actions.  This document describes RNFD, an extension
      to RPL that expedites border router failure detection, even by an
      order of magnitude, by having nodes collaboratively monitor the
      status of a given border router.  The extension introduces an
      additional state at each node, a new type of RPL Control Message
      Options for synchronizing this state among different nodes, and the
      coordination algorithm itself.

Real-Time Communication in WEB-browsers (rtcweb)
------------------------------------------------

  "JavaScript Session Establishment Protocol (JSEP)", Justin Uberti, Cullen
  Jennings, Eric Rescorla, 2022-03-03, <draft-uberti-rtcweb-rfc8829bis-02.txt>

      This document describes the mechanisms for allowing a JavaScript
      application to control the signaling plane of a multimedia session
      via the interface specified in the W3C RTCPeerConnection API and
      discusses how this relates to existing signaling protocols.
      
      This specification obsoletes RFC 8829.

Routing Area (rtg)
------------------

  "Ad Hoc On-demand Distance Vector Version 2 (AODVv2) Routing", Charles
  Perkins, Stan Ratliff, John Dowdell, Lotte Steenbrink, Victoria Pritchard,
  2019-02-28, <draft-perkins-manet-aodvv2-03.txt>

      The Ad Hoc On-demand Distance Vector Version 2 (AODVv2) routing
      protocol is intended for use by mobile routers in wireless, multihop
      networks.  AODVv2 determines unicast routes among AODVv2 routers
      within the network in an on-demand fashion.

Routing Area Working Group (rtgwg)
----------------------------------

  "BGP Prefix Independent Convergence", Ahmed Bashandy, Clarence Filsfils,
  Prodosh Mohapatra, 2021-10-12, <draft-ietf-rtgwg-bgp-pic-17.txt>

      In a network comprising thousands of BGP peers exchanging millions of
      routes, many routes are reachable via more than one next-hop. Given
      the large scaling targets, it is desirable to restore traffic after
      failure in a time period that does not depend on the number of BGP
      prefixes. In this document we proposed an architecture by which
      traffic can be re-routed to ECMP or pre-calculated backup paths in a
      timeframe that does not depend on the number of BGP prefixes. The
      objective is achieved through organizing the forwarding data
      structures in a hierarchical manner and sharing forwarding elements
      among the maximum possible number of routes. The proposed technique
      achieves prefix independent convergence while ensuring incremental
      deployment, complete automation, and zero management and provisioning
      effort. It is noteworthy to mention that the benefits of BGP Prefix
      Independent Convergence (BGP-PIC) are hinged on the existence of more
      than one path whether as ECMP or primary-backup.

  "A Simple BGP-based Mobile Routing System for the Aeronautical
  Telecommunications Network", Fred Templin, Greg Saccone, Gaurav Dawra, Acee
  Lindem, Victor Moreno, 2022-02-14, <draft-ietf-rtgwg-atn-bgp-14.txt>

      The International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) is investigating
      mobile routing solutions for a worldwide Aeronautical
      Telecommunications Network with Internet Protocol Services (ATN/IPS).
      The ATN/IPS will eventually replace existing communication services
      with an IP-based service supporting pervasive Air Traffic Management
      (ATM) for Air Traffic Controllers (ATC), Airline Operations
      Controllers (AOC), and all commercial aircraft worldwide.  This
      informational document describes a simple and extensible mobile
      routing service based on industry-standard BGP to address the ATN/IPS
      requirements.

  "Topology Independent Fast Reroute using Segment Routing", Stephane
  Litkowski, Ahmed Bashandy, Clarence Filsfils, Pierre Francois, Bruno
  Decraene, Dan Voyer, 2022-01-21,
  <draft-ietf-rtgwg-segment-routing-ti-lfa-08.txt>

      This document presents Topology Independent Loop-free Alternate Fast
      Re-route (TI-LFA), aimed at providing protection of node and
      adjacency segments within the Segment Routing (SR) framework.  This
      Fast Re-route (FRR) behavior builds on proven IP-FRR concepts being
      LFAs, remote LFAs (RLFA), and remote LFAs with directed forwarding
      (DLFA).  It extends these concepts to provide guaranteed coverage in
      any two connected network using a link-state IGP.  A key aspect of
      TI-LFA is the FRR path selection approach establishing protection
      over the expected post-convergence paths from the point of local
      repair, reducing the operational need to control the tie-breaks among
      various FRR options.

  "Dynamic Networks to Hybrid Cloud DCs Problem Statement", Linda Dunbar,
  Andrew Malis, Christian Jacquenet, Mehmet Toy, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-ietf-rtgwg-net2cloud-problem-statement-12.txt>

      This document describes the problems that enterprises face today
      when interconnecting their branch offices with dynamic workloads in
      third party data centers (a.k.a. Cloud DCs). There can be many
      problems associated with network connecting to or among Clouds, many
      of which probably are out of the IETF scope. The objective of this
      document is to identify some of the problems that need additional
      work in IETF Routing area. Other problems are out of the scope of
      this document.
      
      This document focuses on the network problems that many enterprises
      face when they have workloads & applications & data split among
      different data centers, especially for those enterprises with
      multiple sites that are already interconnected by VPNs (e.g., MPLS
      L2VPN/L3VPN).
      
      Current operational problems are examined to determine whether there
      is a need to improve existing protocols or whether a new protocol is
      necessary to solve them.

  "RIB Extension YANG Data Model", Acee Lindem, Yingzhen Qu, 2021-10-17,
  <draft-ietf-rtgwg-yang-rib-extend-09.txt>

      A Routing Information Base (RIB) is a list of routes and their
      corresponding administrative data and operational state.
      
      RFC 8349 defines the basic building blocks for RIB, and this model
      augments it to support multiple next-hops (aka, paths) for each route
      as well as additional attributes.

  "YANG Models for Quality of Service (QoS)", Aseem Choudhary, Mahesh
  Jethanandani, Ebben Aries, Ing-Wher Chen, 2022-03-06,
  <draft-ietf-rtgwg-qos-model-07.txt>

      This document describes a YANG model for configuration of Quality of
      Service (QoS) configuration in network devices.  This document
      doesn't describe QoS statistics counters.

  "SRv6 Path Egress Protection", Zhibo Hu, Huaimo Chen, China Telecom, Peng
  Wu, Mehmet Toy, Chang Cao, Tao He, Lei Liu, Xufeng Liu, 2021-10-17,
  <draft-ietf-rtgwg-srv6-egress-protection-04.txt>

      This document describes protocol extensions for protecting the egress
      node of a Segment Routing for IPv6 (SRv6) path or tunnel.

  "Applicability of Bidirectional Forwarding Detection (BFD) for Multi-point
  Networks in Virtual Router Redundancy Protocol (VRRP)", Greg Mirsky, Jeff
  Tantsura, Gyan Mishra, 2021-12-29, <draft-ietf-rtgwg-vrrp-p2mp-bfd-00.txt>

      This document discusses the applicability of Bidirectional Forwarding
      Detection (BFD) for multipoint networks to provide Virtual Router
      Redundancy Protocol (VRRP) with sub-second Master convergence and
      defines the extension to bootstrap point-to-multipoint BFD session.
      
      This draft updates RFC 5798.

Relay User Machine (rum)
------------------------

  "Interoperability Profile for Relay User Equipment", Brian Rosen,
  2022-02-17, <draft-ietf-rum-rue-11.txt>

      Video Relay Service (VRS) is a term used to describe a method by
      which a hearing person can communicate with a deaf, hard of hearing
      or hearing impaired user using an interpreter ("Communications
      Assistant") connected via a videophone to the deaf/hard of hearing/
      hearing impaired user and an audio telephone call to the hearing
      user.  The CA interprets using sign language on the videophone link
      and voice on the telephone link.  Often the interpreters may be
      employed by a company or agency termed a "provider" in this document.
      The provider also provides a video service that allows users to
      connect video devices to their service, and subsequently to CAs and
      other deaf/hard of hearing/hearing impaired users.  It is desirable
      that the videophones used by the deaf, hard of hearing or hearing
      impaired user conform to a standard so that any device may be used
      with any provider and that direct video calls between deaf, hard of
      hearing or hearing impaired users work.  This document describes the
      interface between a videophone and a provider.

Security Automation and Continuous Monitoring (sacm)
----------------------------------------------------

  "Concise Software Identification Tags", Henk Birkholz, Jessica
  Fitzgerald-McKay, Charles Schmidt, David Waltermire, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-ietf-sacm-coswid-21.txt>

      ISO/IEC 19770-2:2015 Software Identification (SWID) tags provide an
      extensible XML-based structure to identify and describe individual
      software components, patches, and installation bundles.  SWID tag
      representations can be too large for devices with network and storage
      constraints.  This document defines a concise representation of SWID
      tags: Concise SWID (CoSWID) tags.  CoSWID supports a similar set of
      semantics and features as SWID tags, as well as new semantics that
      allow CoSWIDs to describe additional types of information, all in a
      more memory efficient format.

Security Area (sec)
-------------------

  "Domain-based signing and encryption using S/MIME", William Ottaway, Alexey
  Melnikov, 2014-03-05, <draft-melnikov-smime-msa-to-mda-04.txt>

      The S/MIME protocols Message Specification (RFC 5751), Cryptographic
      Message Syntax (RFC 5652), S/MIME Certificate Handling (RFC 5750) and
      Enhanced Security Services for S/MIME (RFC 2634) specify a consistent
      way to securely send and receive MIME messages providing end to end
      integrity, authentication, non-repudiation and confidentiality.  This
      document identifies a number of interoperability, technical,
      procedural and policy related issues that may result in end-to-end
      security services not being achievable.  To resolve such issues, this
      document profiles domain-based signing and encryption using S/MIME,
      such as specifying how S/MIME signing and encryption can be applied
      between a Message Submission Agent (MSA) and a Message Delivery Agent
      (MDA) or between 2 Message Transfer Agents (MTA).
      
      This document is also registering 2 URI scheme: "smtp" and "submit"
      which are used for designating SMTP/SMTP Submission servers
      (respectively), as well as SMTP/Submission client accounts.

  "Security Considerations for Transient Numeric Identifiers Employed in
  Network Protocols", Fernando Gont, Ivan Arce, 2022-02-01,
  <draft-gont-numeric-ids-sec-considerations-07.txt>

      Poor selection of transient numerical identifiers in protocols such
      as the TCP/IP suite has historically led to a number of attacks on
      implementations, ranging from Denial of Service (DoS) to data
      injection and information leakage that can be exploited by pervasive
      monitoring.  To prevent such flaws in future protocols and
      implementations, this document updates RFC 3552, requiring future
      RFCs to contain a vulnerability assessment of their transient numeric
      identifiers.

  "A File Format to Aid in Security Vulnerability Disclosure", Edwin Foudil,
  Yakov Shafranovich, 2021-05-24, <draft-foudil-securitytxt-12.txt>

      When security vulnerabilities are discovered by researchers, proper
      reporting channels are often lacking.  As a result, vulnerabilities
      may be left unreported.  This document defines a machine-parsable
      format ("security.txt") to help organizations describe their
      vulnerability disclosure practices to make it easier for researchers
      to report vulnerabilities.

Security Events (secevent)
--------------------------

  "Subject Identifiers for Security Event Tokens", Annabelle Backman, Marius
  Scurtescu, Prachi Jain, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-ietf-secevent-subject-identifiers-10.txt>

      Security events communicated within Security Event Tokens may support
      a variety of identifiers to identify subjects related to the event.
      This specification formalizes the notion of subject identifiers as
      structured information that describe a subject, and named formats
      that define the syntax and semantics for encoding subject identifiers
      as JSON objects.  It also defines a registry for defining and
      allocating names for such formats, as well as the sub_id JSON Web
      Token (JWT) claim.

Serialising Extended Data About Times and Events (sedate)
---------------------------------------------------------

  "Date and Time on the Internet: Timestamps with additional information",
  Ujjwal Sharma, Carsten Bormann, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-ietf-sedate-datetime-extended-03.txt>

      This document defines an extension to the timestamp format defined in
      RFC3339 for representing additional information including a time
      zone.

Service Function Chaining (sfc)
-------------------------------

  "Network Service Header Metadata Type 2 Variable-Length Context Headers",
  Yuehua Wei, Uri Elzur, Sumandra Majee, Carlos Pignataro, Donald Eastlake,
  2022-01-26, <draft-ietf-sfc-nsh-tlv-13.txt>

      Service Function Chaining (SFC) uses the Network Service Header (NSH)
      (RFC 8300) to steer and provide context Metadata (MD) with each
      packet.  Such Metadata can be of various Types including MD Type 2
      variable length context headers.  This document specifies several
      such context headers that can be used within a service function path.

  "Network Service Header (NSH) Encapsulation for In-situ OAM (IOAM) Data",
  Frank Brockners, Shwetha Bhandari, 2022-01-31,
  <draft-ietf-sfc-ioam-nsh-07.txt>

      In-situ Operations, Administration, and Maintenance (IOAM) is used
      for recording and collecting operational and telemetry information
      while the packet traverses a path between two points in the network.
      This document outlines how IOAM data fields are encapsulated with the
      Network Service Header (NSH).

  "Active OAM for Service Function Chaining", Greg Mirsky, Wei Meng, Bhumip
  Khasnabish, Ting Ao, Kent Leung, Gyan Mishra, 2021-12-20,
  <draft-ietf-sfc-multi-layer-oam-18.txt>

      A set of requirements for active Operation, Administration, and
      Maintenance (OAM) of Service Function Chains (SFCs) in a network is
      presented in this document.  Based on these requirements, an
      encapsulation of active OAM messages in SFC and a mechanism to detect
      and localize defects are described.
      
      This document updates RFC 8300.  Particularly, it updates the
      definition of O (OAM) bit in the Network Service Header (NSH) (RFC
      8300) and defines how an active OAM message is identified in the NSH.

  "Explicit Congestion Notification (ECN) and Congestion Feedback Using the
  Network Service Header (NSH) and IPFIX", Donald Eastlake, Bob Briscoe,
  Yizhou Li, Andrew Malis, Xinpeng Wei, 2021-10-21,
  <draft-ietf-sfc-nsh-ecn-support-08.txt>

      Explicit congestion notification (ECN) allows a forwarding element to
      notify downstream devices of the onset of congestion without having
      to drop packets. Coupled with a means to feed information about
      congestion back to upstream nodes, this can improve network
      efficiency through better congestion control, frequently without
      packet drops. This document specifies ECN and congestion feedback
      support within a Service Function Chaining (SFC) domain through use
      of the Network Service Header (NSH, RFC 8300) and IP Flow Information
      Export (IPFIX, RFC 7011).

Stay Home Meet Only Online (shmoo)
----------------------------------

  "Open Participation Principle regarding Remote Registration Fee", Mirja
  Kuehlewind, Jonathan Reed, Rich Salz, 2021-10-25,
  <draft-ietf-shmoo-remote-fee-02.txt>

      This document outlines a principle for open participation that
      extends the open process principle defined in RFC3935 by stating that
      there must always be a free option for online participation to IETF
      meetings and, if possible, related IETF-hosted events over the
      Internet.

  "Running an IETF Hackathon", Charles Eckel, 2022-01-19,
  <draft-ietf-shmoo-hackathon-04.txt>

      IETF Hackathons encourage the IETF community to collaborate on
      running code related to existing and evolving Internet standards.
      This document provides a set of practices that have been used for
      running IETF Hackathons.  These practices apply to Hackathons in
      which both in-person and remote participation are possible with
      adaptations for Hackathons that are online only.

SIDR Operations (sidrops)
-------------------------

  "Use Cases for Localized Versions of the RPKI", Randy Bush, 2019-04-30,
  <draft-ietf-sidrops-lta-use-cases-06.txt>

      There are a number of critical circumstances where a localized
      routing domain needs to augment or modify its view of the Global
      RPKI.  This document attempts to outline a few of them.

  "RPKI Signed Object for Trust Anchor Key", Carlos Martinez, George
  Michaelson, Tom Harrison, Tim Bruijnzeels, Rob Austein, 2022-03-06,
  <draft-ietf-sidrops-signed-tal-09.txt>

      A Trust Anchor Locator (TAL) is used by Relying Parties (RPs) in the
      Resource Public Key Infrastructure (RPKI) to locate and validate a
      Trust Anchor (TA) Certification Authority (CA) certificate used in
      RPKI validation.  This document defines an RPKI signed object for a
      Trust Anchor Key (TAK), that can be used by a TA to signal the
      location(s) of the accompanying CA certificate for the current key to
      RPs, as well as the successor key and the location(s) of its CA
      certificate.  This object helps to support planned key rolls without
      impacting RPKI validation.

  "The Use of maxLength in the RPKI", Yossi Gilad, Sharon Goldberg,
  Kotikalapudi Sriram, Job Snijders, Ben Maddison, 2021-11-22,
  <draft-ietf-sidrops-rpkimaxlen-09.txt>

      This document recommends ways to reduce forged-origin hijack attack
      surface by prudently limiting the set of IP prefixes that are
      included in a Route Origin Authorization (ROA).  One recommendation
      is to avoid using the maxLength attribute in ROAs except in some
      specific cases.  The recommendations complement and extend those in
      RFC 7115.  The document also discusses creation of ROAs for
      facilitating the use of Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS)
      mitigation services.  Considerations related to ROAs and origin
      validation in the context of destination-based Remote Triggered Black
      Hole (RTBH) filtering are also highlighted.

  "A Profile for Autonomous System Provider Authorization", Alexander Azimov,
  Eugene Uskov, Randy Bush, Keyur Patel, Job Snijders, Russ Housley,
  2022-01-31, <draft-ietf-sidrops-aspa-profile-07.txt>

      This document defines a standard profile for Autonomous System
      Provider Authorization in the Resource Public Key Infrastructure.  An
      Autonomous System Provider Authorization is a digitally signed object
      that provides a means of validating that a Customer Autonomous System
      holder has authorized members of Provider set to be its upstream
      providers and for the Providers to send prefixes received from the
      Customer Autonomous System in all directions including providers and
      peers.

  "The Resource Public Key Infrastructure (RPKI) to Router Protocol, Version
  2", Randy Bush, Rob Austein, 2022-02-15, <draft-ietf-sidrops-8210bis-06.txt>

      In order to verifiably validate the origin Autonomous Systems and
      Autonomous System Paths of BGP announcements, routers need a simple
      but reliable mechanism to receive Resource Public Key Infrastructure
      (RFC 6480) prefix origin data and router keys from a trusted cache.
      This document describes a protocol to deliver them.
      
      This document describes version 2 of the RPKI-Router protocol.  RFC
      6810 describes version 0, and RFC 8210 describes version 1.  This
      document obsoletes and replaces RFC 8210.

  "Timing Parameters in the RPKI based Route Origin Validation Supply Chain",
  Randy Bush, Jay Borkenhagen, Tim Bruijnzeels, Job Snijders, 2022-02-07,
  <draft-ietf-sidrops-rpki-rov-timing-06.txt>

      This document explores, and makes recommendations for, timing of
      Resource Public Key Infrastructure publication of ROV data, their
      propagation, and their use in Relying Parties, caches, and routers.

  "Manifests for the Resource Public Key Infrastructure (RPKI)", Rob Austein,
  Geoff Huston, Stephen Kent, Matt Lepinski, 2021-12-21,
  <draft-ietf-sidrops-6486bis-09.txt>

      This document defines a "manifest" for use in the Resource Public Key
      Infrastructure (RPKI).  A manifest is a signed object (file) that
      contains a listing of all the signed objects (files) in the
      repository publication point (directory) associated with an authority
      responsible for publishing in the repository.  For each certificate,
      Certificate Revocation List (CRL), or other type of signed objects
      issued by the authority that are published at this repository
      publication point, the manifest contains both the name of the file
      containing the object and a hash of the file content.  Manifests are
      intended to enable a relying party (RP) to detect certain forms of
      attacks against a repository.  Specifically, if an RP checks a
      manifest's contents against the signed objects retrieved from a
      repository publication point, then the RP can detect "stale" (valid)
      data and deletion of signed objects.  This document obsoletes RFC
      6486.

  "Resource Public Key Infrastructure (RPKI) Repository Requirements", Tim
  Bruijnzeels, Randy Bush, George Michaelson, 2021-10-22,
  <draft-ietf-sidrops-prefer-rrdp-01.txt>

      This document formulates a plan of a phased transition to a state
      where RPKI repositories and Relying Party software performing RPKI
      Validation will use the RPKI Repository Delta Protocol (RRDP)
      [RFC8182] as the preferred access protocol, and require rsync as a
      fallback option only.
      
      In phase 0, today's deployment, RRDP is supported by most, but not
      all Repositories, and most but not all RP software.
      
      In the proposed phase 1 RRDP will become mandatory to implement for
      Repositories, in addition to rsync.  This phase can start as soon as
      this document is published.
      
      Phase 2 will start once the proposed updates are implemented by all
      compliant Repositories.  In this phase RRDP will become mandatory to
      implement for all compliant RP software, and rsync will be required
      as a fallback option only.
      
      It should be noted that although this document currently includes
      descriptions and updates to RFCs for each of these phases, we may
      find that it will be beneficial to have one or more separate
      documents for these phases, so that it might be more clear to all
      when the updates to RFCs take effect.

  "Resource Public Key Infrastructure (RPKI) object profile for Signed
  Checklist (RSC)", Job Snijders, Tom Harrison, Ben Maddison, 2022-02-12,
  <draft-ietf-sidrops-rpki-rsc-06.txt>

      This document defines a Cryptographic Message Syntax (CMS) profile
      for a general purpose listing of checksums (a 'checklist'), for use
      with the Resource Public Key Infrastructure (RPKI).  The objective is
      to allow an attestation, in the form of a listing of one or more
      checksums of arbitrary digital objects (files), to be signed "with
      resources", and for validation to provide a means to confirm a
      specific Internet Resource Holder produced the Signed Checklist.  The
      profile is intended to provide for the signing of an arbitrary
      checksum listing with a specific set of Internet Number Resources.

  "Problem Statement and Considerations for ROA containing Multiple
  Prefixes", Zhiwei Yan, Randy Bush, Guanggang Geng, Jiankang Yao,
  2021-10-26, <draft-ietf-sidrops-roa-considerations-01.txt>

      The address space holder needs to issue an ROA object when it
      authorizes one or more ASes to originate routes to IP prefix(es).
      During the process of ROA issuance, the address space holder may need
      to specify an origin AS for a list of IP prefixes.  Besides, the
      address space holder has a free choice to put multiple prefixes into
      a single ROA or issue separate ROAs for each prefix based on the
      current specification.  This memo analyzes and presents some
      operational problems which may be caused by the ROAs containing
      multiple IP prefixes.  Some suggestions and considerations also have
      been proposed.

  "The I in RPKI does not stand for Identity", Randy Bush, Russ Housley,
  2022-03-03, <draft-ietf-sidrops-rpki-has-no-identity-04.txt>

      There is a false notion that Internet Number Resources (INRs) in the
      RPKI can be associated with the real-world identity of the 'owner' of
      an INR.  This document attempts to put that notion to rest.

  "RPKI-Based Policy Without Route Refresh", Randy Bush, Keyur Patel, Philip
  Smith, Mark Tinka, 2022-01-27, <draft-ietf-sidrops-rov-no-rr-00.txt>

      A BGP Speaker performing RPKI-based policy should not issue Route
      Refresh to its neighbors when receiving new RPKI data.  A method for
      avoiding doing so is described.

Session Initiation Protocol Core (sipcore)
------------------------------------------

  "SIP Call-Info Parameters for Labeling Calls", Henning Schulzrinne,
  2019-08-30, <draft-ietf-sipcore-callinfo-spam-04.txt>

      Called parties often wish to decide whether to accept, reject or
      redirect calls based on the likely nature of the call.  For example,
      they may want to reject unwanted telemarketing or fraudulent calls,
      but accept emergency alerts from numbers not in their address book.
      This document describes SIP Call-Info parameters and a feature tag
      that allow originating, intermediate and terminating SIP entities to
      label calls as to their type, confidence and references to additional
      information.

  "Session Timers in the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)", Christer
  Holmberg, Steve Donovan, Jonathan Rosenberg, 2022-01-27,
  <draft-ietf-sipcore-rfc4028bis-06.txt>

      This document defines an extension to the Session Initiation Protocol
      (SIP).  This extension allows for a periodic refresh of SIP sessions
      through a re-INVITE or UPDATE request.  The refresh allows both user
      agents and proxies to determine whether the SIP session is still
      active.  The extension defines two new header fields: Session-
      Expires, which conveys the lifetime of the session, and Min-SE, which
      conveys the minimum allowed value for the session timer.

  "SIP Call-Info Parameters for Rich Call Data", Chris Wendt, Jon Peterson,
  2022-03-07, <draft-ietf-sipcore-callinfo-rcd-04.txt>

      This document describes a SIP Call-Info header field usage defined to
      include rich data associated with the identity of the calling party
      that can be rendered to a called party for providing more useful
      information about the caller or the specific reason for the call.
      This includes extended comprehensive information about the caller
      such as what a jCard object can represent for describing the calling
      party or other call specific information such as describing the
      reason or intent of the call.  The elements defined for this purpose
      are intended to be extensible to accommodate related information
      about calls that helps people decide whether to pick up the phone and
      additionally, with the use of jCard and other elements, to be
      compatible with the STIR/PASSporT Rich Call Data framework.

Source Packet Routing in Networking (spring)
--------------------------------------------

  "Segment Routing Policy Architecture", Clarence Filsfils, Ketan Talaulikar,
  Dan Voyer, Alex Bogdanov, Paul Mattes, 2022-03-06,
  <draft-ietf-spring-segment-routing-policy-20.txt>

      Segment Routing (SR) allows a node to steer a packet flow along any
      path.  Intermediate per-path states are eliminated thanks to source
      routing.  SR Policy is an ordered list of segments (i.e.,
      instructions) that represent a source-routed policy.  Packet flows
      are steered into a SR Policy on a node where it is instantiated
      called a headend node.  The packets steered into an SR Policy carry
      an ordered list of segments associated with that SR Policy.
      
      This document updates RFC8402 as it details the concepts of SR Policy
      and steering into an SR Policy.

  "Path Segment in MPLS Based Segment Routing Network", Weiqiang Cheng, Han
  Li, Mach Chen, Rakesh Gandhi, Royi Zigler, 2021-12-20,
  <draft-ietf-spring-mpls-path-segment-07.txt>

      A Segment Routing (SR) path is identified by an SR segment list.
      Only the complete segment list can identify the end-to-end SR path,
      and a sub-set of segments from the segment list cannot distinguish
      one SR path from another as they may be partially congruent.  SR path
      identification is a pre-requisite for various use-cases such as
      Performance Measurement (PM), bidirectional paths correlation, and
      end-to-end 1+1 path protection.
      
      In SR for MPLS data plane (SR-MPLS), the segment identifiers are
      stripped from the packet through label popping as the packet transits
      the network.  This means that when a packet reaches the egress of the
      SR path, it is not possible to determine on which SR path it
      traversed the network.
      
      This document defines a new type of segment that is referred to as
      Path Segment, which is used to identify an SR path in an SR-MPLS
      network.  When used, it is inserted by the ingress node of the SR
      path and immediately follows the last segment identifier in the
      segment list of the SR path.  The Path Segment is preserved until it
      reaches the egress node for SR path identification and correlation.

  "Integration of Network Service Header (NSH) and Segment Routing for
  Service Function Chaining (SFC)", Jim Guichard, Jeff Tantsura, 2021-12-13,
  <draft-ietf-spring-nsh-sr-10.txt>

      This document describes the integration of the Network Service Header
      (NSH) and Segment Routing (SR), as well as encapsulation details, to
      support Service Function Chaining (SFC) in an efficient manner while
      maintaining separation of the service and transport planes as
      originally intended by the SFC architecture.
      
      Combining these technologies allows SR to be used for steering
      packets between Service Function Forwarders (SFF) along a given
      Service Function Path (SFP) while NSH has the responsibility for
      maintaining the integrity of the service plane, the SFC instance
      context, and any associated metadata.
      
      This integration demonstrates that NSH and SR can work cooperatively
      and provide a network operator with the flexibility to use whichever
      transport technology makes sense in specific areas of their network
      infrastructure while still maintaining an end-to-end service plane
      using NSH.

  "Service Programming with Segment Routing", Francois Clad, Xiaohu Xu,
  Clarence Filsfils, Daniel Bernier, Cheng Li, Bruno Decraene, Shaowen Ma,
  Chaitanya Yadlapalli, Wim Henderickx, Stefano Salsano, 2021-09-10,
  <draft-ietf-spring-sr-service-programming-05.txt>

      This document defines data plane functionality required to implement
      service segments and achieve service programming in SR-enabled MPLS
      and IPv6 networks, as described in the Segment Routing architecture.

  "SR Replication Segment for Multi-point Service Delivery", Dan Voyer,
  Clarence Filsfils, Rishabh Parekh, Hooman Bidgoli, Zhaohui Zhang,
  2022-03-07, <draft-ietf-spring-sr-replication-segment-07.txt>

      This document describes the SR Replication segment for Multi-point
      service delivery.  A SR Replication segment allows a packet to be
      replicated from a Replication Node to downstream nodes.

  "Introducing Resource Awareness to SR Segments", Jie Dong, Stewart Bryant,
  Takuya Miyasaka, Yongqing Zhu, Fengwei Qin, Zhenqiang Li, Francois Clad,
  2022-03-05, <draft-ietf-spring-resource-aware-segments-04.txt>

      This document describes the mechanism to associate network resource
      attributes to Segment Routing Identifiers (SIDs).  Such SIDs are
      referred to as resource-aware SIDs in this document.  The resource-
      aware SIDs retain their original forwarding semantics, but with the
      additional semantics to identify the set of network resources
      available for the packet processing and forwarding action.  The
      resource-aware SIDs can therefore be used to build SR paths or
      virtual networks with a set of reserved network resources.  The
      proposed mechanism is applicable to both segment routing with MPLS
      data plane (SR-MPLS) and segment routing with IPv6 data plane (SRv6).

  "YANG Data Model for SRv6 Base and Static", Syed Raza, Sonal Agarwal,
  Xufeng Liu, Zhibo Hu, Iftekhar Hussain, Himanshu Shah, Dan Voyer, Satoru
  Matsushima, Katsuhiro Horiba, Jaganbabu Rajamanickam, Ahmed Abdelsalam,
  2022-01-14, <draft-ietf-spring-srv6-yang-01.txt>

      This document describes a YANG data model for Segment Routing IPv6
      (SRv6) base.  The model serves as a base framework for configuring
      and managing an SRv6 subsystem and expected to be augmented by other
      SRv6 technology models accordingly.  Additionally, this document also
      specifies the model for the SRv6 Static application.
      
      The YANG modules in this document conform to the Network Management
      Datastore Architecture (NMDA).

  "Bidirectional Forwarding Detection (BFD) in Segment Routing Networks Using
  MPLS Dataplane", Greg Mirsky, Jeff Tantsura, Ilya Varlashkin, Mach Chen,
  Jiang Wenying, 2021-09-23, <draft-ietf-spring-bfd-02.txt>

      Segment Routing (SR) architecture leverages the paradigm of source
      routing.  It can be realized in the Multiprotocol Label Switching
      (MPLS) network without any change to the data plane.  A segment is
      encoded as an MPLS label, and an ordered list of segments is encoded
      as a stack of labels.  Bidirectional Forwarding Detection (BFD) is
      expected to monitor any existing path between systems.  This document
      defines how to use Label Switched Path Ping to bootstrap a BFD
      session, control an SR Policy in the reverse direction of the SR-MPLS
      tunnel, and applicability of BFD Demand mode in the SR-MPLS domain.
      Also, the document describes the use of BFD Echo with BFD Control
      packet payload.

  "Segment Protection for SR-TE Paths", Shraddha Hegde, Chris Bowers,
  Stephane Litkowski, Xiaohu Xu, Feng Xu, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-ietf-spring-segment-protection-sr-te-paths-03.txt>

      Segment routing supports the creation of explicit paths using Adj-
      Segment-ID (SID), Node-SIDs, and BSIDs.  It is important to provide
      fast reroute (FRR) mechanisms to respond to failures of links and
      nodes in the Segment-Routed Traffic-Engineered(SR-TE) path.  A point
      of local repair (PLR) can provide FRR protection against the failure
      of a link in an SR-TE path by examining only the first (top) label in
      the SR label stack.  In order to protect against the failure of a
      node, a PLR may need to examine the second label in the stack as
      well, in order to determine SR-TE path beyond the failed node.  This
      document specifies how a PLR can use the first and second label in
      the SR-MPLS label stack describing an SR-TE path to provide
      protection against node failures.

  "Path Segment for SRv6 (Segment Routing in IPv6)", Cheng Li, Weiqiang
  Cheng, Mach Chen, Dhruv Dhody, Yongqing Zhu, 2021-11-27,
  <draft-ietf-spring-srv6-path-segment-03.txt>

      Segment Routing (SR) allows for a flexible definition of end-to-end
      paths by encoding an ordered list of instructions, called "segments".
      The SR architecture can be implemented over an MPLS data plane as
      well as an IPv6 data plane.
      
      Currently, Path Segment has been defined to identify an SR path in
      SR-MPLS networks, and is used for various use-cases such as end-to-
      end SR Path Protection and Performance Measurement (PM) of an SR
      path.  This document defines the Path Segment to identify an SRv6
      path in an IPv6 network.

  "Segment Routing based Virtual Transport Network (VTN) for Enhanced VPN",
  Jie Dong, Stewart Bryant, Takuya Miyasaka, Yongqing Zhu, Fengwei Qin,
  Zhenqiang Li, Francois Clad, 2022-03-05,
  <draft-ietf-spring-sr-for-enhanced-vpn-02.txt>

      Segment Routing (SR) leverages the source routing paradigm.  A node
      steers a packet through an ordered list of instructions, called
      "segments".  A segment can represent topological or service based
      instructions.  A segment can further be associated with a set of
      network resources used for executing the instruction.  Such a segment
      is called resource-aware segment.
      
      Resource-aware Segment Identifiers (SIDs) may be used to build SR
      paths with a set of reserved network resources.  In addition, a group
      of resource-aware SIDs may be used to build SR based virtual underlay
      networks, which have customized network topology and resource
      attributes required by one or a group of customers and/or services.
      Such virtual networks are the SR instantiations of Virtual Transport
      Networks (VTNs).
      
      This document describes a suggested use of resource-aware SIDs to
      build SR based VTNs.

  "Performance Measurement Using Simple TWAMP (STAMP) for Segment Routing
  Networks", Rakesh Gandhi, Clarence Filsfils, Dan Voyer, Mach Chen, Bart
  Janssens, Richard Foote, 2022-02-01, <draft-ietf-spring-stamp-srpm-03.txt>

      Segment Routing (SR) leverages the source routing paradigm.  SR is
      applicable to both Multiprotocol Label Switching (SR-MPLS) and IPv6
      (SRv6) data planes.  This document describes procedures for
      Performance Measurement in SR networks using the mechanisms defined
      in RFC 8762 (Simple Two-Way Active Measurement Protocol (STAMP)) and
      its optional extensions defined in RFC 8972 and further augmented in
      draft-ietf-ippm-stamp-srpm.  The procedure described is applicable to
      SR-MPLS and SRv6 data planes and is used for both links and end-to-
      end SR paths including SR Policies.

  "SRv6 for Redundancy Protection", Xuesong Geng, Mach Chen, Fan Yang, Pablo
  Camarillo, Gyan Mishra, 2022-02-15,
  <draft-ietf-spring-sr-redundancy-protection-01.txt>

      Redundancy Protection is a generalized protection mechanism to
      achieve the high reliability of service transmission in Segment
      Routing network.  The mechanism inherits the "Live-Live" methodology,
      targeting to enhance the functionalities of Segment Routing over
      IPv6.  Inspired by DetNet Packet Replication and Packet Elimination
      functions, two new Segments are introduced to provide replication and
      elimination functions on specific network nodes by leveraging SRv6
      Segment programming capabilities.

  "Compressed SRv6 SID List Requirements", Weiqiang Cheng, Chongfeng Xie, Ron
  Bonica, Darren Dukes, Cheng Li, Shaofu Peng, Wim Henderickx, 2021-09-27,
  <draft-ietf-spring-compression-requirement-00.txt>

      This document specifies requirements for solutions to compress SRv6
      SID lists.

  "Compressed SRv6 SID List Analysis", Ron Bonica, Weiqiang Cheng, Darren
  Dukes, Wim Henderickx, Cheng Li, Shaofu Peng, Chongfeng Xie, 2021-09-27,
  <draft-ietf-spring-compression-analysis-00.txt>

      Several mechanisms have been proposed to compress the SRv6 SID list.
      This document analyzes each mechanism with regard to the requirements
      stated in the companion requirements document.

  "Compressed SRv6 Segment List Encoding in SRH", Weiqiang Cheng, Clarence
  Filsfils, Zhenbin Li, Bruno Decraene, Dezhong Cai, Dan Voyer, Francois
  Clad, Shay Zadok, Jim Guichard, Aihua Liu, Robert Raszuk, Cheng Li,
  2022-02-11, <draft-ietf-spring-srv6-srh-compression-00.txt>

      This document defines a compressed SRv6 Segment List Encoding in the
      Segment Routing Header (SRH).  This solution does not require any SRH
      data plane change nor any SRv6 control plane change.  This solution
      leverages the SRv6 Network Programming model.

Secure Telephone Identity Revisited (stir)
------------------------------------------

  "PASSporT Extension for Rich Call Data", Chris Wendt, Jon Peterson,
  2022-03-07, <draft-ietf-stir-passport-rcd-15.txt>

      This document extends PASSporT, a token for conveying
      cryptographically-signed call information about personal
      communications, to include rich meta-data about a call and caller
      that can be signed and integrity protected, transmitted, and
      subsequently rendered to the called party.  This framework is
      intended to include and extend caller and call specific information
      beyond human-readable display name comparable to the "Caller ID"
      function common on the telephone network.  The JSON element defined
      for this purpose, Rich Call Data (RCD), is an extensible object
      defined to either be used as part of STIR or with SIP Call-Info to
      include related information about calls that helps people decide
      whether to answer an incoming set of communications from another
      party.  This signing of the RCD information is also enhanced with a
      integrity mechanism that is designed to protect the authoring and
      transport of this information between authoritative and non-
      authoritative parties generating and signing the Rich Call Data for
      support of different usage and content policies.

  "Messaging Use Cases and Extensions for STIR", Jon Peterson, Chris Wendt,
  2021-11-09, <draft-ietf-stir-messaging-01.txt>

      Secure Telephone Identity Revisited (STIR) provides a means of
      attesting the identity of a telephone caller via a signed token in
      order to prevent impersonation of a calling party number, which is a
      key enabler for illegal robocalling.  Similar impersonation is
      sometimes leveraged by bad actors in the text messaging space.  This
      document considers the applicability of STIR's Persona Assertion
      Token (PASSporT) and certificate issuance framework to text and
      multimedia messaging use cases, both for instant messages carried or
      negotiated by SIP.

  "Identity Header Error Handling", Chris Wendt, 2021-12-06,
  <draft-ietf-stir-identity-header-errors-handling-00.txt>

      This document extends STIR and the Authenticated Identity Management
      in the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) error handling procedures to
      include the mapping of verification failure reasons to STIR defined
      4xx codes so the failure reason of an Identity header field can be
      conveyed to the upstream authentication service when local policy
      dictates that the call should continue in the presence of a
      verification failure.  This document also defines procedures that
      enable enable a failure reason to be mapped to a specific Identity
      header for scenarios that use multiple Identity header fields where
      some may have errors and others may not and the handling of those
      situations is defined.

Software Updates for Internet of Things (suit)
----------------------------------------------

  "A Concise Binary Object Representation (CBOR)-based Serialization Format
  for the Software Updates for Internet of Things (SUIT) Manifest", Brendan
  Moran, Hannes Tschofenig, Henk Birkholz, Koen Zandberg, 2021-10-25,
  <draft-ietf-suit-manifest-16.txt>

      This specification describes the format of a manifest.  A manifest is
      a bundle of metadata about code/data obtained by a recipient (chiefly
      the firmware for an IoT device), where to find the that code/data,
      the devices to which it applies, and cryptographic information
      protecting the manifest.  Software updates and Trusted Invocation
      both tend to use sequences of common operations, so the manifest
      encodes those sequences of operations, rather than declaring the
      metadata.

  "Firmware Encryption with SUIT Manifests", Hannes Tschofenig, Russ Housley,
  Brendan Moran, 2022-03-07, <draft-ietf-suit-firmware-encryption-03.txt>

      This document specifies a firmware update mechanism where the
      firmware image is encrypted.  Firmware encryption uses the IETF SUIT
      manifest with key establishment provided by the hybrid public-key
      encryption (HPKE) scheme and the AES Key Wrap (AES-KW) with a pre-
      shared key-encryption key.  Encryption of the firmware image is
      encrypted using AES-GCM or AES-CCM.

  "Secure Reporting of Update Status", Brendan Moran, Henk Birkholz,
  2022-01-12, <draft-ietf-suit-report-01.txt>

      The Software Update for the Internet of Things (SUIT) manifest
      provides a way for many different update and boot workflows to be
      described by a common format.  However, this does not provide a
      feedback mechanism for developers in the event that an update or boot
      fails.
      
      This specification describes a lightweight feedback mechanism that
      allows a developer in possession of a manifest to reconstruct the
      decisions made and actions performed by a manifest processor.

  "Update Management Extensions for Software Updates for Internet of Things
  (SUIT) Manifests", Brendan Moran, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-ietf-suit-update-management-00.txt>

      This specification describes extensions to the SUIT manifest format
      defined in [I-D.ietf-suit-manifest].  These extensions allow an
      update author, update distributor or device operator to more
      precisely control the distribution and installation of updates to IoT
      devices.  These extensions also provide a mechanism to inform a
      management system of Software Identifier and Software Bill Of
      Materials information about an updated device.

  "SUIT Manifest Extensions for Multiple Trust Domains", Brendan Moran,
  2022-03-07, <draft-ietf-suit-trust-domains-00.txt>

      This specification describes extensions to the SUIT manifest format
      (as defined in [I-D.ietf-suit-manifest]) for use in deployments with
      multiple trust domains.  A device has more than one trust domain when
      it uses different trust anchors for different purposes or components
      in the context of firmware update.

Thing-to-Thing (t2trg)
----------------------

  "Guidance on RESTful Design for Internet of Things Systems", Ari Keranen,
  Frank Kovatsch, Klaus Hartke, 2022-02-26, <draft-irtf-t2trg-rest-iot-09.txt>

      This document gives guidance for designing Internet of Things (IoT)
      systems that follow the principles of the Representational State
      Transfer (REST) architectural style.  This document is a product of
      the IRTF Thing-to-Thing Research Group (T2TRG).

  "IoT Edge Challenges and Functions", Jungha Hong, Yong-Geun Hong, Xavier de
  Foy, Matthias Kovatsch, Eve Schooler, Dirk Kutscher, 2022-01-11,
  <draft-irtf-t2trg-iot-edge-04.txt>

      Many IoT applications have requirements that cannot be met by the
      traditional Cloud (aka cloud computing).  These include time
      sensitivity, data volume, connectivity cost, operation in the face of
      intermittent services, privacy, and security.  As a result, the IoT
      is driving the Internet toward Edge computing.  This document
      outlines the requirements of the emerging IoT Edge and its
      challenges.  It presents a general model, and major components of the
      IoT Edge, to provide a common base for future discussions in T2TRG
      and other IRTF and IETF groups.

  "Terminology and processes for initial security setup of IoT devices",
  Mohit Sethi, Behcet Sarikaya, Dan Garcia-Carrillo, 2021-10-23,
  <draft-irtf-t2trg-secure-bootstrapping-01.txt>

      This document provides an overview of terms that are commonly used
      when discussing the initial security setup of Internet of Things
      (IoT) devices.  This document also presents a brief but illustrative
      survey of protocols and standards available for initial security
      setup of IoT devices.  For each protocol, we identify the terminology
      used, the entities involved, the initial assumptions, the processes
      necessary for completetion, and the knowledge imparted to the IoT
      devices after the setup is complete.

Transport Services (taps)
-------------------------

  "An Architecture for Transport Services", Tommy Pauly, Brian Trammell, Anna
  Brunstrom, Gorry Fairhurst, Colin Perkins, 2022-01-03,
  <draft-ietf-taps-arch-12.txt>

      This document describes an architecture for exposing transport
      protocol features to applications for network communication, a
      Transport Services system.  The Transport Services Application
      Programming Interface (API) is based on an asynchronous, event-driven
      interaction pattern.  This API uses messages for representing data
      transfer to applications, and describes how implementations can use
      multiple IP addresses, multiple protocols, and multiple paths, and
      provide multiple application streams.  This document further defines
      common terminology and concepts to be used in definitions of a
      Transport Service API and a Transport Services implementation.

  "An Abstract Application Layer Interface to Transport Services", Brian
  Trammell, Michael Welzl, Theresa Enghardt, Gorry Fairhurst, Mirja
  Kuehlewind, Colin Perkins, Philipp Tiesel, Tommy Pauly, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-ietf-taps-interface-15.txt>

      This document describes an abstract application programming
      interface, API, to the transport layer that enables the selection of
      transport protocols and network paths dynamically at runtime.  This
      API enables faster deployment of new protocols and protocol features
      without requiring changes to the applications.  The specified API
      follows the Transport Services architecture by providing
      asynchronous, atomic transmission of messages.  It is intended to
      replace the BSD sockets API as the common interface to the transport
      layer, in an environment where endpoints could select from multiple
      interfaces and potential transport protocols.

  "Implementing Interfaces to Transport Services", Anna Brunstrom, Tommy
  Pauly, Theresa Enghardt, Philipp Tiesel, Michael Welzl, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-ietf-taps-impl-12.txt>

      The Transport Services system enables applications to use transport
      protocols flexibly for network communication and defines a protocol-
      independent Transport Services Application Programming Interface
      (API) that is based on an asynchronous, event-driven interaction
      pattern.  This document serves as a guide to implementation on how to
      build such a system.

TCP Maintenance and Minor Extensions (tcpm)
-------------------------------------------

  "TCP Extended Data Offset Option", Joseph Touch, Wesley Eddy, 2021-10-12,
  <draft-ietf-tcpm-tcp-edo-11.txt>

      TCP segments include a Data Offset field to indicate space for TCP
      options but the size of the field can limit the space available for
      complex options such as SACK and Multipath TCP and can limit the
      combination of such options supported in a single connection. This
      document updates RFC 793 with an optional TCP extension to that
      space to support the use of multiple large options. It also explains
      why the initial SYN of a connection cannot be extending a single
      segment.

  "Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) Specification", Wesley Eddy,
  2022-03-07, <draft-ietf-tcpm-rfc793bis-28.txt>

      This document specifies the Transmission Control Protocol (TCP).  TCP
      is an important transport layer protocol in the Internet protocol
      stack, and has continuously evolved over decades of use and growth of
      the Internet.  Over this time, a number of changes have been made to
      TCP as it was specified in RFC 793, though these have only been
      documented in a piecemeal fashion.  This document collects and brings
      those changes together with the protocol specification from RFC 793.
      This document obsoletes RFC 793, as well as RFCs 879, 2873, 6093,
      6429, 6528, and 6691 that updated parts of RFC 793.  It updates RFCs
      1011 and 1122, and should be considered as a replacement for the
      portions of those document dealing with TCP requirements.  It also
      updates RFC 5961 by adding a small clarification in reset handling
      while in the SYN-RECEIVED state.  The TCP header control bits from
      RFC 793 have also been updated based on RFC 3168.
      
      RFC EDITOR NOTE: If approved for publication as an RFC, this should
      be marked additionally as "STD: 7" and replace RFC 793 in that role.

  "More Accurate ECN Feedback in TCP", Bob Briscoe, Mirja Kuehlewind, Richard
  Scheffenegger, 2022-03-07, <draft-ietf-tcpm-accurate-ecn-17.txt>

      Explicit Congestion Notification (ECN) is a mechanism where network
      nodes can mark IP packets instead of dropping them to indicate
      incipient congestion to the end-points.  Receivers with an ECN-
      capable transport protocol feed back this information to the sender.
      ECN was originally specified for TCP in such a way that only one
      feedback signal can be transmitted per Round-Trip Time (RTT).  Recent
      new TCP mechanisms like Congestion Exposure (ConEx), Data Center TCP
      (DCTCP) or Low Latency Low Loss Scalable Throughput (L4S) need more
      accurate ECN feedback information whenever more than one marking is
      received in one RTT.  This document updates the original ECN
      specification to specify a scheme to provide more than one feedback
      signal per RTT in the TCP header.  Given TCP header space is scarce,
      it allocates a reserved header bit previously assigned to the ECN-
      Nonce.  It also overloads the two existing ECN flags in the TCP
      header.  The resulting extra space is exploited to feed back the IP-
      ECN field received during the 3-way handshake as well.  Supplementary
      feedback information can optionally be provided in a new TCP option,
      which is never used on the TCP SYN.  The document also specifies the
      treatment of this updated TCP wire protocol by middleboxes, updating
      BCP 69 with respect to ACK filtering.

  "ECN++: Adding Explicit Congestion Notification (ECN) to TCP Control
  Packets", Marcelo Bagnulo, Bob Briscoe, 2022-01-31,
  <draft-ietf-tcpm-generalized-ecn-09.txt>

      This document describes an experimental modification to ECN when used
      with TCP.  It allows the use of ECN on the following TCP packets:
      SYNs, pure ACKs, Window probes, FINs, RSTs and retransmissions.

  "HyStart++: Modified Slow Start for TCP", Praveen Balasubramanian, Yi
  Huang, Matt Olson, 2022-01-23, <draft-ietf-tcpm-hystartplusplus-04.txt>

      This doument describes HyStart++, a simple modification to the slow
      start phase of TCP congestion control algorithms.  Traditional slow
      start can overshoot the ideal send rate in many cases, causing high
      packet loss and poor performance.  HyStart++ uses a delay increase
      heuristic to find an exit point before possible overshoot.  It also
      adds a mitigation to prevent jitter from causing premature slow start
      exit.

  "A YANG Model for Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) Configuration",
  Michael Scharf, Mahesh Jethanandani, Vishal Murgai, 2022-02-03,
  <draft-ietf-tcpm-yang-tcp-06.txt>

      This document specifies a minimal YANG model for TCP on devices that
      are configured by network management protocols.  The YANG model
      defines a container for all TCP connections and groupings of
      authentication parameters that can be imported and used in TCP
      implementations or by other models that need to configure TCP
      parameters.  The model also includes basic TCP statistics.  The model
      is compliant with Network Management Datastore Architecture (NMDA)
      (RFC 8342).

  "CUBIC for Fast and Long-Distance Networks", Lisong Xu, Sangtae Ha, Injong
  Rhee, Vidhi Goel, Lars Eggert, 2022-03-04,
  <draft-ietf-tcpm-rfc8312bis-07.txt>

      CUBIC is a standard TCP congestion control algorithm that uses a
      cubic function instead of a linear congestion window increase
      function to improve scalability and stability over fast and long-
      distance networks.  CUBIC has been adopted as the default TCP
      congestion control algorithm by the Linux, Windows, and Apple stacks.
      
      This document updates the specification of CUBIC to include
      algorithmic improvements based on these implementations and recent
      academic work.  Based on the extensive deployment experience with
      CUBIC, it also moves the specification to the Standards Track,
      obsoleting RFC 8312.  This also requires updating RFC 5681, to allow
      for CUBIC's occasionally more aggressive sending behavior.

  "TCP-AO Test Vectors", Joseph Touch, Juhamatti Kuusisaari, 2022-03-03,
  <draft-ietf-tcpm-ao-test-vectors-09.txt>

      This document provides test vectors to validate implementations of
      the two mandatory authentication algorithms specified for the TCP
      Authentication Option over both IPv4 and IPv6. This includes
      validation of the key derivation function (KDF) based on a set of
      test connection parameters as well as validation of the message
      authentication code (MAC). Vectors are provided for both currently
      required pairs of KDF and MAC algorithms: KDF_HMAC_SHA1 and HMAC-
      SHA-1-96, and KDF_AES_128_CMAC and AES-128-CMAC-96. The vectors also
      validate both whole TCP segments as well as segments whose options
      are excluded for middlebox traversal.

Traffic Engineering Architecture and Signaling (teas)
-----------------------------------------------------

  "A YANG Data Model for Resource Reservation Protocol (RSVP)", Vishnu
  Beeram, Tarek Saad, Rakesh Gandhi, Xufeng Liu, Igor Bryskin, 2022-01-09,
  <draft-ietf-teas-yang-rsvp-17.txt>

      This document defines a YANG data model for the configuration and
      management of the RSVP protocol.  The YANG data model covers the
      building blocks that may be augmented by other RSVP extension data
      models such as RSVP Traffic-Engineering (RSVP-TE).  It is divided
      into two modules that cover the basic and extended RSVP features.

  "A YANG Data Model for Traffic Engineering Tunnels, Label Switched Paths
  and Interfaces", Tarek Saad, Rakesh Gandhi, Xufeng Liu, Vishnu Beeram, Igor
  Bryskin, Oscar de Dios, 2022-02-07, <draft-ietf-teas-yang-te-29.txt>

      This document defines a YANG data model for the provisioning and
      management of Traffic Engineering (TE) tunnels, Label Switched Paths
      (LSPs), and interfaces.  The model is divided into YANG modules that
      classify data into generic, device-specific, technology agnostic, and
      technology-specific elements.
      
      This model covers data for configuration, operational state, remote
      procedural calls, and event notifications.

  "The Use Cases for Path Computation Element (PCE) as a Central Controller
  (PCECC).", Zhenbin Li, Dhruv Dhody, Quintin Zhao, Zekung Ke, Boris
  Khasanov, 2022-03-07, <draft-ietf-teas-pcecc-use-cases-09.txt>

      The Path Computation Element (PCE) is a core component of a Software-
      Defined Networking (SDN) system.  It can compute optimal paths for
      traffic across a network and can also update the paths to reflect
      changes in the network or traffic demands.  PCE was developed to
      derive paths for MPLS Label Switched Paths (LSPs), which are supplied
      to the head end of the LSP using the Path Computation Element
      Communication Protocol (PCEP).
      
      SDN has a broader applicability than signaled MPLS traffic-engineered
      (TE) networks, and the PCE may be used to determine paths in a range
      of use cases including static LSPs, segment routing (SR), Service
      Function Chaining (SFC), and most forms of a routed or switched
      network.  It is, therefore, reasonable to consider PCEP as a control
      protocol for use in these environments to allow the PCE to be fully
      enabled as a central controller.
      
      A PCE as a Central Controller (PCECC) can simplify the processing of
      a distributed control plane by blending it with elements of SDN and
      without necessarily completely replacing it.  This document describes
      general considerations for PCECC deployment and examines its
      applicability and benefits, as well as its challenges and
      limitations, through a number of use cases.  PCEP extensions required
      for stateful PCE usage are covered in separate documents.

  "Applicability of YANG models for Abstraction and Control of Traffic
  Engineered Networks", Young Lee, Haomian Zheng, Daniele Ceccarelli,
  Bin-Yeong Yoon, Sergio Belotti, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-ietf-teas-actn-yang-09.txt>

      Abstraction and Control of TE Networks (ACTN) refers to the set of
      virtual network operations needed to orchestrate, control and manage
      large-scale multi-domain TE networks, so as to facilitate network
      programmability, automation, efficient resource sharing, and end-to-
      end virtual service aware connectivity and network function
      virtualization services.
      
      This document explains how the different types of YANG models
      defined in the Operations and Management Area and in the Routing
      Area are applicable to the ACTN framework. This document also shows
      how the ACTN architecture can be satisfied using classes of data
      model that have already been defined, and discusses the
      applicability of specific data models that are under development. It
      also highlights where new data models may need to be developed.

  "A YANG Data Model for requesting path computation", Italo Busi, Sergio
  Belotti, Oscar de Dios, Anurag Sharma, Yan Shi, Daniele Ceccarelli,
  2022-03-07, <draft-ietf-teas-yang-path-computation-17.txt>

      There are scenarios, typically in a hierarchical Software-Defined
      Networking (SDN) context, where the topology information provided by
      a Traffic Engineering (TE) network provider may be insufficient for
      its client to perform multi-domain path computation.  In these cases
      the client would need to request the TE network provider to compute
      some intra-domain paths.
      
      This document defines a YANG data model which contains Remote
      Procedure Calls (RPCs) to request path computation.  This model
      complements the solution, defined in RFC YYYY, to configure a TE
      tunnel path in "compute-only" mode.
      
      [RFC EDITOR NOTE: Please replace RFC YYYY with the RFC number of
      draft-ietf-teas-yang-te once it has been published.
      
      Moreover, this document describes some use cases where the path
      computation request, via YANG-based protocols (e.g., NETCONF or
      RESTCONF), can be needed.

  "YANG Data Model for SR and SR TE Topologies on MPLS Data Plane", Xufeng
  Liu, Igor Bryskin, Vishnu Beeram, Tarek Saad, Himanshu Shah, Stephane
  Litkowski, 2022-03-01, <draft-ietf-teas-yang-sr-te-topo-13.txt>

      This document defines a YANG data model for Segment Routing (SR)
      topology and Segment Routing (SR) traffic engineering (TE) topology,
      using MPLS data plane.

  "YANG Data Model for Layer 3 TE Topologies", Xufeng Liu, Igor Bryskin,
  Vishnu Beeram, Tarek Saad, Himanshu Shah, Oscar de Dios, 2021-10-24,
  <draft-ietf-teas-yang-l3-te-topo-12.txt>

      This document defines a YANG data model for layer 3 traffic
      engineering topologies.

  "A YANG Data Model for VN Operation", Young Lee, Dhruv Dhody, Daniele
  Ceccarelli, Igor Bryskin, Bin-Yeong Yoon, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-ietf-teas-actn-vn-yang-14.txt>

      This document provides a YANG data model generally applicable to any
      mode of Virtual Network (VN) operation.

  "SF Aware TE Topology YANG Model", Igor Bryskin, Xufeng Liu, Young Lee, Jim
  Guichard, Luis Contreras, Daniele Ceccarelli, Jeff Tantsura, Dmytro Shytyi,
  2022-02-27, <draft-ietf-teas-sf-aware-topo-model-09.txt,.pdf>

      This document describes a YANG data model for TE network topologies
      that are network service and function aware.

  "A Framework for Enhanced Virtual Private Network (VPN+) Services", Jie
  Dong, Stewart Bryant, Zhenqiang Li, Takuya Miyasaka, Young Lee, 2022-03-06,
  <draft-ietf-teas-enhanced-vpn-10.txt>

      This document describes the framework for Enhanced Virtual Private
      Network (VPN+) services.  The purpose of enhanced VPNs is to support
      the needs of new applications, particularly applications that are
      associated with 5G services, by utilizing an approach that is based
      on the VPN and Traffic Engineering (TE) technologies and adds
      characteristics that specific services require over those provided by
      traditional VPNs.
      
      Typically, VPN+ will be used to underpin network slicing, but could
      also be of use in its own right providing enhanced connectivity
      services between customer sites.
      
      It is envisaged that enhanced VPNs will be delivered using a
      combination of existing, modified, and new networking technologies.
      This document provides an overview of relevant technologies and
      identifies some areas for potential new work.

  "GMPLS Signaling Extensions for Shared Mesh Protection", He Jia, Italo
  Busi, Jeong-dong Ryoo, Bin-Yeong Yoon, Peter Park, 2022-02-24,
  <draft-ietf-teas-gmpls-signaling-smp-11.txt>

      ITU-T Recommendation G.808.3 defines the generic aspects of a Shared
      Mesh Protection (SMP) mechanism, where the difference between SMP and
      Shared Mesh Restoration (SMR) is also identified.  ITU-T
      Recommendation G.873.3 defines the protection switching operation and
      associated protocol for SMP at the Optical Data Unit (ODU) layer.
      RFC 7412 provides requirements for any mechanism that would be used
      to implement SMP in a Multi-Protocol Label Switching - Transport
      Profile (MPLS-TP) network.
      
      This document updates RFC 4872 and RFC 4873 to provide the extensions
      to the Generalized Multi-Protocol Label Switching (GMPLS) signaling
      to support the control of the SMP.

  "Traffic Engineering (TE) and Service Mapping YANG Model", Young Lee, Dhruv
  Dhody, Giuseppe Fioccola, Qin WU, Daniele Ceccarelli, Jeff Tantsura,
  2022-03-07, <draft-ietf-teas-te-service-mapping-yang-10.txt>

      This document provides a YANG data model to map customer service
      models (e.g., the L3VPN Service Model (L3SM)) to Traffic Engineering
      (TE) models (e.g., the TE Tunnel or the Virtual Network (VN) model).
      These models are referred to as TE Service Mapping Model and are
      applicable generically to the operator's need for seamless control
      and management of their VPN services with underlying TE support.
      
      The models are principally used for monitoring and diagnostics of the
      management systems to show how the service requests are mapped onto
      underlying network resource and TE models.

  "Interworking of GMPLS Control and Centralized Controller System", Haomian
  Zheng, Xianlong Luo, Yi Lin, Yang Zhao, Yunbin Xu, Sergio Belotti, Dieter
  Beller, 2022-03-07, <draft-ietf-teas-gmpls-controller-inter-work-08.txt>

      Generalized Multi-Protocol Label Switching (GMPLS) control allows
      each network element (NE) to perform local resource discovery,
      routing and signaling in a distributed manner.
      
      On the other hand, with the development of software-defined
      transport networking technology, a set of NEs can be controlled via
      centralized controller hierarchies to address the issue from multi-
      domain, multi-vendor and multi-technology. An example of such
      centralized architecture is ACTN controller hierarchy described in
      RFC 8453.
      
      Instead of competing with each other, both the distributed and the
      centralized control plane have their own advantages, and should be
      complementary in the system. This document describes how the GMPLS
      distributed control plane can interwork with a centralized
      controller system in a transport network.

  "YANG models for Virtual Network (VN)/TE Performance Monitoring Telemetry
  and Scaling Intent Autonomics", Young Lee, Dhruv Dhody, Satish Karunanithi,
  Ricard Vilalta, Daniel King, Daniele Ceccarelli, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-ietf-teas-actn-pm-telemetry-autonomics-08.txt>

      This document provides YANG data models that describe performance
      monitoring telemetry and scaling intent mechanisms for TE-tunnels and
      Virtual Networks (VNs).
      
      The models presented in this document allow customers to subscribe to
      and monitor the key performance data of the TE-tunnel or the VN.  The
      models also provide customers with the ability to program autonomic
      scaling intent mechanisms on the level of TE-tunnel as well as VN.

  "Overview and Principles of Internet Traffic Engineering", Adrian Farrel,
  2022-02-24, <draft-ietf-teas-rfc3272bis-15.txt>

      This document describes the principles of traffic engineering (TE) in
      the Internet.  The document is intended to promote better
      understanding of the issues surrounding traffic engineering in IP
      networks and the networks that support IP networking, and to provide
      a common basis for the development of traffic engineering
      capabilities for the Internet.  The principles, architectures, and
      methodologies for performance evaluation and performance optimization
      of operational networks are also discussed.
      
      This work was first published as RFC 3272 in May 2002.  This document
      obsoletes RFC 3272 by making a complete update to bring the text in
      line with best current practices for Internet traffic engineering and
      to include references to the latest relevant work in the IETF.

  "Applicability of Abstraction and Control of Traffic Engineered Networks
  (ACTN) to Packet Optical Integration (POI)", Fabio Peruzzini, Jean-Francois
  Bouquier, Italo Busi, Daniel King, Daniele Ceccarelli, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-ietf-teas-actn-poi-applicability-06.txt>

      This document considers the applicability of Abstraction and Control
      of TE Networks (ACTN) architecture to Packet Optical Integration
      (POI)in the context of IP/MPLS and optical internetworking. It
      identifies the YANG data models being defined by the IETF to support
      this deployment architecture and specific scenarios relevant for
      Service Providers.
      
      Existing IETF protocols and data models are identified for each
      multi-layer (packet over optical) scenario with a specific focus on
      the MPI (Multi-Domain Service Coordinator to Provisioning Network
      Controllers Interface)in the ACTN architecture.

  "Framework for IETF Network Slices", Adrian Farrel, John Drake, Reza Rokui,
  Shunsuke Homma, Kiran Makhijani, Luis Contreras, Jeff Tantsura, 2022-03-06,
  <draft-ietf-teas-ietf-network-slices-08.txt>

      This document describes network slicing in the context of networks
      built from IETF technologies.  It defines the term "IETF Network
      Slice" and establishes the general principles of network slicing in
      the IETF context.
      
      The document discusses the general framework for requesting and
      operating IETF Network Slices, the characteristics of an IETF Network
      Slice, the necessary system components and interfaces, and how
      abstract requests can be mapped to more specific technologies.  The
      document also discusses related considerations with monitoring and
      security.
      
      This document also provides definitions of related terms to enable
      consistent usage in other IETF documents that describe or use aspects
      of IETF Network Slices.

  "Applicability of Abstraction and Control of Traffic Engineered Networks
  (ACTN) to Network Slicing", Daniel King, John Drake, Haomian Zheng, Adrian
  Farrel, 2022-03-07, <draft-ietf-teas-applicability-actn-slicing-01.txt>

      Network abstraction is a technique that can be applied to a network
      domain to obtain a view of potential connectivity across the network
      by utilizing a set of policies to select network resources.
      
      Network slicing is an approach to network operations that builds on
      the concept of network abstraction to provide programmability,
      flexibility, and modularity.  It may use techniques such as Software
      Defined Networking (SDN) and Network Function Virtualization (NFV) to
      create multiple logical or virtual networks, each tailored for a set
      of services that share the same set of requirements.
      
      Abstraction and Control of Traffic Engineered Networks (ACTN) is
      described in RFC 8453.  It defines an SDN-based architecture that
      relies on the concept of network and service abstraction to detach
      network and service control from the underlying data plane.
      
      This document outlines the applicability of ACTN to network slicing
      in a Traffic Engineering (TE) network that utilizes IETF technology.
      It also identifies the features of network slicing not currently
      within the scope of ACTN, and indicates where ACTN might be extended.

  "IETF Network Slice Service YANG Model", Bo Wu, Dhruv Dhody, Reza Rokui,
  Tarek Saad, Liuyan Han, 2022-03-04,
  <draft-ietf-teas-ietf-network-slice-nbi-yang-01.txt>

      This document defines a YANG model for the IETF Network Slice service
      model.  The model can be used by a IETF Network Slice customer to
      manage IETF Network Slice from an IETF Network Slice Controller
      (NSC).

Trusted Execution Environment Provisioning (teep)
-------------------------------------------------

  "Trusted Execution Environment Provisioning (TEEP) Architecture", Mingliang
  Pei, Hannes Tschofenig, Dave Thaler, David Wheeler, 2022-02-28,
  <draft-ietf-teep-architecture-16.txt>

      A Trusted Execution Environment (TEE) is an environment that enforces
      that any code within that environment cannot be tampered with, and
      that any data used by such code cannot be read or tampered with by
      any code outside that environment.  This architecture document
      motivates the design and standardization of a protocol for managing
      the lifecycle of trusted applications running inside such a TEE.

  "HTTP Transport for Trusted Execution Environment Provisioning: Agent
  Initiated Communication", Dave Thaler, 2022-02-28,
  <draft-ietf-teep-otrp-over-http-13.txt>

      The Trusted Execution Environment Provisioning (TEEP) Protocol is
      used to manage code and configuration data in a Trusted Execution
      Environment (TEE).  This document specifies the HTTP transport for
      TEEP communication where a Trusted Application Manager (TAM) service
      is used to manage code and data in TEEs on devices that can initiate
      communication to the TAM.  An implementation of this document can (if
      desired) run outside of any TEE, but interacts with a TEEP
      implementation that runs inside a TEE.

  "Trusted Execution Environment Provisioning (TEEP) Protocol", Hannes
  Tschofenig, Mingliang Pei, David Wheeler, Dave Thaler, Akira Tsukamoto,
  2022-03-07, <draft-ietf-teep-protocol-08.txt>

      This document specifies a protocol that installs, updates, and
      deletes Trusted Components in a device with a Trusted Execution
      Environment (TEE).  This specification defines an interoperable
      protocol for managing the lifecycle of Trusted Components.

Transport Layer Security (tls)
------------------------------

  "The Datagram Transport Layer Security (DTLS) Protocol Version 1.3", Eric
  Rescorla, Hannes Tschofenig, Nagendra Modadugu, 2021-04-30,
  <draft-ietf-tls-dtls13-43.txt>

      This document specifies Version 1.3 of the Datagram Transport Layer
      Security (DTLS) protocol.  DTLS 1.3 allows client/server applications
      to communicate over the Internet in a way that is designed to prevent
      eavesdropping, tampering, and message forgery.
      
      The DTLS 1.3 protocol is intentionally based on the Transport Layer
      Security (TLS) 1.3 protocol and provides equivalent security
      guarantees with the exception of order protection/non-replayability.
      Datagram semantics of the underlying transport are preserved by the
      DTLS protocol.
      
      This document obsoletes RFC 6347.

  "Exported Authenticators in TLS", Nick Sullivan, 2022-03-04,
  <draft-ietf-tls-exported-authenticator-15.txt>

      This document describes a mechanism that builds on Transport Layer
      Security (TLS) or Datagram Transport Layer Security (DTLS) and
      enables peers to provide a proof of ownership of an identity, such as
      an X.509 certificate.  This proof can be exported by one peer,
      transmitted out-of-band to the other peer, and verified by the
      receiving peer.

  "Delegated Credentials for (D)TLS", Richard Barnes, Subodh Iyengar, Nick
  Sullivan, Eric Rescorla, 2022-03-07, <draft-ietf-tls-subcerts-12.txt>

      The organizational separation between the operator of a (D)TLS
      endpoint and the certification authority can create limitations.  For
      example, the lifetime of certificates, how they may be used, and the
      algorithms they support are ultimately determined by the
      certification authority.  This document describes a mechanism to to
      overcome some of these limitations by enabling operators to delegate
      their own credentials for use in (D)TLS without breaking
      compatibility with peers that do not support this specification.

  "TLS Encrypted Client Hello", Eric Rescorla, Kazuho Oku, Nick Sullivan,
  Christopher Wood, 2022-02-13, <draft-ietf-tls-esni-14.txt>

      This document describes a mechanism in Transport Layer Security (TLS)
      for encrypting a ClientHello message under a server public key.
      
      Discussion Venues
      
      This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.
      
      Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
      https://github.com/tlswg/draft-ietf-tls-esni
      (https://github.com/tlswg/draft-ietf-tls-esni).

  "TLS Ticket Requests", Tommy Pauly, David Schinazi, Christopher Wood,
  2020-12-03, <draft-ietf-tls-ticketrequests-07.txt>

      TLS session tickets enable stateless connection resumption for
      clients without server-side, per-client, state.  Servers vend an
      arbitrary number of session tickets to clients, at their discretion,
      upon connection establishment.  Clients store and use tickets when
      resuming future connections.  This document describes a mechanism by
      which clients can specify the desired number of tickets needed for
      future connections.  This extension aims to provide a means for
      servers to determine the number of tickets to generate in order to
      reduce ticket waste, while simultaneously priming clients for future
      connection attempts.

  "Importing External PSKs for TLS", David Benjamin, Christopher Wood,
  2022-03-07, <draft-ietf-tls-external-psk-importer-07.txt>

      This document describes an interface for importing external Pre-
      Shared Keys (PSKs) into TLS 1.3.
      
      Discussion Venues
      
      This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.
      
      Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
      https://github.com/tlswg/draft-ietf-tls-external-psk-importer.

  "A Flags Extension for TLS 1.3", Yoav Nir, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-ietf-tls-tlsflags-09.txt>

      A number of extensions are proposed in the TLS working group that
      carry no interesting information except the 1-bit indication that a
      certain optional feature is supported.  Such extensions take 4 octets
      each.  This document defines a flags extension that can provide such
      indications at an average marginal cost of 1 bit each.  More
      precisely, it provides as many flag extensions as needed at 4 + the
      order of the last set bit divided by 8.

  "Hybrid key exchange in TLS 1.3", Douglas Stebila, Scott Fluhrer, Shay
  Gueron, 2022-01-11, <draft-ietf-tls-hybrid-design-04.txt>

      Hybrid key exchange refers to using multiple key exchange algorithms
      simultaneously and combining the result with the goal of providing
      security even if all but one of the component algorithms is broken.
      It is motivated by transition to post-quantum cryptography.  This
      document provides a construction for hybrid key exchange in the
      Transport Layer Security (TLS) protocol version 1.3.
      
      Discussion of this work is encouraged to happen on the TLS IETF
      mailing list tls@ietf.org or on the GitHub repository which contains
      the draft: https://github.com/dstebila/draft-ietf-tls-hybrid-design.

  "Compact TLS 1.3", Eric Rescorla, Richard Barnes, Hannes Tschofenig,
  2022-03-07, <draft-ietf-tls-ctls-05.txt>

      This document specifies a "compact" version of TLS 1.3.  It is
      isomorphic to TLS 1.3 but saves space by trimming obsolete material,
      tighter encoding, a template-based specialization technique, and
      alternative cryptographic techniques. cTLS is not directly
      interoperable with TLS 1.3, but it should eventually be possible for
      a cTLS/TLS 1.3 server to exist and successfully interoperate.

  "Guidance for External PSK Usage in TLS", Russ Housley, Jonathan Hoyland,
  Mohit Sethi, Christopher Wood, 2022-02-04,
  <draft-ietf-tls-external-psk-guidance-06.txt>

      This document provides usage guidance for external Pre-Shared Keys
      (PSKs) in Transport Layer Security (TLS) 1.3 as defined in RFC 8446.
      It lists TLS security properties provided by PSKs under certain
      assumptions, and then demonstrates how violations of these
      assumptions lead to attacks.  Advice for applications to help meet
      these assumptions is provided.  This document also discusses PSK use
      cases and provisioning processes.  Finally, it lists the privacy and
      security properties that are not provided by TLS 1.3 when external
      PSKs are used.

  "The Transport Layer Security (TLS) Protocol Version 1.3", Eric Rescorla,
  2022-03-07, <draft-ietf-tls-rfc8446bis-04.txt>

      This document specifies version 1.3 of the Transport Layer Security
      (TLS) protocol.  TLS allows client/server applications to communicate
      over the Internet in a way that is designed to prevent eavesdropping,
      tampering, and message forgery.
      
      This document updates RFCs 5705, 6066, 7627, and 8422 and obsoletes
      RFCs 5077, 5246, 6961, and 8446.  This document also specifies new
      requirements for TLS 1.2 implementations.

  "Transport Layer Security (TLS) Resumption across Server Names", Victor
  Vasiliev, 2021-12-05, <draft-ietf-tls-cross-sni-resumption-02.txt>

      This document specifies a way for the parties in the Transport Layer
      Security (TLS) protocol to indicate that an individual session ticket
      can be used to perform resumption even if the Server Name of the new
      connection does not match the Server Name of the original.

  "Return Routability Check for DTLS 1.2 and DTLS 1.3", Hannes Tschofenig,
  Thomas Fossati, 2022-03-07, <draft-ietf-tls-dtls-rrc-05.txt>

      This document specifies a return routability check for use in context
      of the Connection ID (CID) construct for the Datagram Transport Layer
      Security (DTLS) protocol versions 1.2 and 1.3.
      
      Discussion Venues
      
      This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.
      
      Discussion of this document takes place on the Transport Layer
      Security Working Group mailing list (tls@ietf.org), which is archived
      at https://mailarchive.ietf.org/arch/browse/tls/.
      
      Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
      https://github.com/tlswg/dtls-rrc.

  "IANA Registry Updates for TLS and DTLS", Joseph Salowey, Sean Turner,
  2021-12-02, <draft-salowey-tls-rfc8447bis-01.txt>

      This document describes a number of changes to TLS and DTLS IANA
      registries that range from adding notes to the registry all the way
      to changing the registration policy.  These changes were mostly
      motivated by WG review of the TLS- and DTLS-related registries
      undertaken as part of the TLS 1.3 development process.
      
      This document obsoletes RFC8447 and updates the following RFCs: 3749,
      5077, 4680, 5246, 5705, 5878, 6520, 7301.

  "Secure Negotiation of Incompatible Protocols in TLS", Martin Thomson,
  2022-02-15, <draft-ietf-tls-snip-01.txt>

      An extension is defined for TLS that allows a client and server to
      detect an attempt to force the use of less-preferred application
      protocol even where protocol options are incompatible.  This
      supplements application-layer protocol negotiation (ALPN), which
      allows choices between compatible protocols to be authenticated.

Transparent Interconnection of Lots of Links (trill)
----------------------------------------------------

  "TRILL (TRansparent Interconnection of Lots of Links): ECN (Explicit
  Congestion Notification) Support", Donald Eastlake, Bob Briscoe,
  2018-02-25, <draft-ietf-trill-ecn-support-07.txt>

      Explicit congestion notification (ECN) allows a forwarding element to
      notify downstream devices, including the destination, of the onset of
      congestion without having to drop packets. This can improve network
      efficiency through better congestion control without packet drops.
      This document extends ECN to TRILL (TRansparent Interconnection of
      Lots of Links) switches, including integration with IP ECN, and
      provides for ECN marking in the TRILL Header Extension Flags Word
      (see RFC 7179).

Transport Area Working Group (tsvwg)
------------------------------------

  "Stream Control Transmission Protocol (SCTP) Network Address Translation
  Support", Randall Stewart, Michael Tuexen, Irene Ruengeler, 2021-10-25,
  <draft-ietf-tsvwg-natsupp-23.txt>

      The Stream Control Transmission Protocol (SCTP) provides a reliable
      communications channel between two end-hosts in many ways similar to
      the Transmission Control Protocol (TCP).  With the widespread
      deployment of Network Address Translators (NAT), specialized code has
      been added to NAT functions for TCP that allows multiple hosts to
      reside behind a NAT function and yet share a single IPv4 address,
      even when two hosts (behind a NAT function) choose the same port
      numbers for their connection.  This additional code is sometimes
      classified as Network Address and Port Translation (NAPT).
      
      This document describes the protocol extensions needed for the SCTP
      endpoints and the mechanisms for NAT functions necessary to provide
      similar features of NAPT in the single point and multipoint traversal
      scenario.
      
      Finally, a YANG module for SCTP NAT is defined.

  "Low Latency, Low Loss, Scalable Throughput (L4S) Internet Service:
  Architecture", Bob Briscoe, Koen De Schepper, Marcelo Bagnulo, Greg White,
  2022-03-04, <draft-ietf-tsvwg-l4s-arch-17.txt>

      This document describes the L4S architecture, which enables Internet
      applications to achieve Low queuing Latency, Low Loss, and Scalable
      throughput (L4S).  The insight on which L4S is based is that the root
      cause of queuing delay is in the congestion controllers of senders,
      not in the queue itself.  With the L4S architecture all Internet
      applications could (but do not have to) transition away from
      congestion control algorithms that cause substantial queuing delay,
      to a new class of congestion controls that induce very little
      queuing, aided by explicit congestion signalling from the network.
      This new class of congestion controls can provide low latency for
      capacity-seeking flows, so applications can achieve both high
      bandwidth and low latency.
      
      The architecture primarily concerns incremental deployment.  It
      defines mechanisms that allow the new class of L4S congestion
      controls to coexist with 'Classic' congestion controls in a shared
      network.  These mechanisms aim to ensure that the latency and
      throughput performance using an L4S-compliant congestion controller
      is usually much better (and rarely worse) than performance would have
      been using a 'Classic' congestion controller, and that competing
      flows continuing to use 'Classic' controllers are typically not
      impacted by the presence of L4S.  These characteristics are important
      to encourage adoption of L4S congestion control algorithms and L4S
      compliant network elements.
      
      The L4S architecture consists of three components: network support to
      isolate L4S traffic from classic traffic; protocol features that
      allow network elements to identify L4S traffic; and host support for
      L4S congestion controls.

  "Explicit Congestion Notification (ECN) Protocol for Very Low Queuing Delay
  (L4S)", Koen De Schepper, Bob Briscoe, 2022-03-04,
  <draft-ietf-tsvwg-ecn-l4s-id-25.txt>

      This specification defines the protocol to be used for a new network
      service called low latency, low loss and scalable throughput (L4S).
      L4S uses an Explicit Congestion Notification (ECN) scheme at the IP
      layer that is similar to the original (or 'Classic') ECN approach,
      except as specified within.  L4S uses 'scalable' congestion control,
      which induces much more frequent control signals from the network and
      it responds to them with much more fine-grained adjustments, so that
      very low (typically sub-millisecond on average) and consistently low
      queuing delay becomes possible for L4S traffic without compromising
      link utilization.  Thus even capacity-seeking (TCP-like) traffic can
      have high bandwidth and very low delay at the same time, even during
      periods of high traffic load.
      
      The L4S identifier defined in this document distinguishes L4S from
      'Classic' (e.g. TCP-Reno-friendly) traffic.  It gives an incremental
      migration path so that suitably modified network bottlenecks can
      distinguish and isolate existing traffic that still follows the
      Classic behaviour, to prevent it degrading the low queuing delay and
      low loss of L4S traffic.  This specification defines the rules that
      L4S transports and network elements need to follow with the intention
      that L4S flows neither harm each other's performance nor that of
      Classic traffic.  Examples of new active queue management (AQM)
      marking algorithms and examples of new transports (whether TCP-like
      or real-time) are specified separately.

  "DualQ Coupled AQMs for Low Latency, Low Loss and Scalable Throughput
  (L4S)", Koen De Schepper, Bob Briscoe, Greg White, 2022-03-04,
  <draft-ietf-tsvwg-aqm-dualq-coupled-22.txt>

      This specification defines a framework for coupling the Active Queue
      Management (AQM) algorithms in two queues intended for flows with
      different responses to congestion.  This provides a way for the
      Internet to transition from the scaling problems of standard TCP
      Reno-friendly ('Classic') congestion controls to the family of
      'Scalable' congestion controls.  These are designed for consistently
      very Low queuing Latency, very Low congestion Loss and Scaling of
      per-flow throughput (L4S) by using Explicit Congestion Notification
      (ECN) in a modified way.  Until the Coupled DualQ, these L4S senders
      could only be deployed where a clean-slate environment could be
      arranged, such as in private data centres.  The coupling acts like a
      semi-permeable membrane: isolating the sub-millisecond average
      queuing delay and zero congestion loss of L4S from Classic latency
      and loss; but pooling the capacity between any combination of
      Scalable and Classic flows with roughly equivalent throughput per
      flow.  The DualQ achieves this indirectly, without having to inspect
      transport layer flow identifiers and without compromising the
      performance of the Classic traffic, relative to a single queue.  The
      DualQ design has low complexity and requires no configuration for the
      public Internet.

  "Transport Options for UDP", Joseph Touch, 2022-03-03,
  <draft-ietf-tsvwg-udp-options-15.txt>

      Transport protocols are extended through the use of transport header
      options. This document extends UDP by indicating the location,
      syntax, and semantics for UDP transport layer options.

  "Stream Control Transmission Protocol", Randall Stewart, Michael Tuexen,
  Karen Nielsen, 2022-02-05, <draft-ietf-tsvwg-rfc4960-bis-19.txt>

      This document obsoletes RFC 4960, if approved.  It describes the
      Stream Control Transmission Protocol (SCTP) and incorporates the
      specification of the chunk flags registry from RFC 6096 and the
      specification of the I bit of DATA chunks from RFC 7053.  Therefore,
      RFC 6096 and RFC 7053 are also obsoleted by this document, if
      approved.  In addition to that, the Errata documents RFC 4460 and RFC
      8540 are also obsoleted by this document, if approved.
      
      SCTP was originally designed to transport Public Switched Telephone
      Network (PSTN) signaling messages over IP networks.  It is also
      suited to be used for other applications, for example WebRTC.
      
      SCTP is a reliable transport protocol operating on top of a
      connectionless packet network such as IP.  It offers the following
      services to its users:
      
      *  acknowledged error-free non-duplicated transfer of user data,
      
      *  data fragmentation to conform to discovered path maximum
      transmission unit (PMTU) size,
      
      *  sequenced delivery of user messages within multiple streams, with
      an option for order-of-arrival delivery of individual user
      messages,
      
      *  optional bundling of multiple user messages into a single SCTP
      packet, and
      
      *  network-level fault tolerance through supporting of multi-homing
      at either or both ends of an association.
      
      The design of SCTP includes appropriate congestion avoidance behavior
      and resistance to flooding and masquerade attacks.

  "A Non-Queue-Building Per-Hop Behavior (NQB PHB) for Differentiated
  Services", Greg White, Thomas Fossati, 2022-03-04,
  <draft-ietf-tsvwg-nqb-10.txt>

      This document specifies properties and characteristics of a Non-
      Queue-Building Per-Hop Behavior (NQB PHB).  The purpose of this NQB
      PHB is to provide a separate queue that enables smooth, low-data-
      rate, application-limited traffic flows, which would ordinarily share
      a queue with bursty and capacity-seeking traffic, to avoid the
      latency, latency variation and loss caused by such traffic.  This PHB
      is implemented without prioritization and without rate policing,
      making it suitable for environments where the use of either these
      features may be restricted.  The NQB PHB has been developed primarily
      for use by access network segments, where queuing delays and queuing
      loss caused by Queue-Building protocols are manifested, but its use
      is not limited to such segments.  In particular, applications to
      cable broadband links, Wi-Fi links, and mobile network radio and core
      segments are discussed.  This document recommends a specific
      Differentiated Services Code Point (DSCP) to identify Non-Queue-
      Building flows.

  "Operational Guidance for Deployment of L4S in the Internet", Greg White,
  2021-10-25, <draft-ietf-tsvwg-l4sops-02.txt>

      This document is intended to provide guidance in order to ensure
      successful deployment of Low Latency Low Loss Scalable throughput
      (L4S) in the Internet.  Other L4S documents provide guidance for
      running an L4S experiment, but this document is focused solely on
      potential interactions between L4S flows and flows using the original
      ('Classic') ECN over a Classic ECN bottleneck link.  The document
      discusses the potential outcomes of these interactions, describes
      mechanisms to detect the presence of Classic ECN bottlenecks, and
      identifies opportunities to prevent and/or detect and resolve
      fairness problems in such networks.  This guidance is aimed at
      operators of end-systems, operators of networks, and researchers.

  "Datagram Transport Layer Security (DTLS) over Stream Control Transmission
  Protocol (SCTP)", Magnus Westerlund, John Mattsson, Claudio Porfiri,
  2022-03-07, <draft-ietf-tsvwg-dtls-over-sctp-bis-03.txt>

      This document describes the usage of the Datagram Transport Layer
      Security (DTLS) protocol to protect user messages sent over the
      Stream Control Transmission Protocol (SCTP).  It is an improved
      update of the existing rfc6083.
      
      DTLS over SCTP provides mutual authentication, confidentiality,
      integrity protection, and replay protection for applications that use
      SCTP as their transport protocol and allows client/server
      applications to communicate in a way that is designed to give
      communications privacy and to prevent eavesdropping and detect
      tampering or message forgery.
      
      Applications using DTLS over SCTP can use almost all transport
      features provided by SCTP and its extensions.  This document intends
      to obsolete RFC 6083 and removes the 16 kB limitation due to DTLS on
      user message size by defining a secure user message fragmentation so
      that multiple DTLS records can be used to protect a single user
      message.  It further updates the DTLS versions to use, as well as the
      HMAC algorithms for SCTP-AUTH, and simplifies secure implementation
      by some stricter requirements on the establishment procedures.

  "Considerations for Assigning a new Recommended DiffServ Codepoint (DSCP)",
  Ana Custura, Gorry Fairhurst, Raffaello Secchi, 2022-01-24,
  <draft-ietf-tsvwg-dscp-considerations-01.txt>

      This document discusses considerations for assigning a new
      recommended DiffServ Code Point (DSCP).  It considers the common
      remarking behaviours that the Diffserv field might be subjected to
      along an Internet path.  It also notes some implications of using a
      specific DSCP.

  "DCCP Extensions for Multipath Operation with Multiple Addresses", Markus
  Amend, Anna Brunstrom, Andreas Kassler, Veselin Rakocevic, Stephen Johnson,
  2022-03-07, <draft-ietf-tsvwg-multipath-dccp-04.txt>

      DCCP communication is currently restricted to a single path per
      connection, yet multiple paths often exist between peers.  The
      simultaneous use of these multiple paths for a DCCP session could
      improve resource usage within the network and, thus, improve user
      experience through higher throughput and improved resilience to
      network failures.  Use cases for a Multipath DCCP (MP-DCCP) are
      mobile devices (handsets, vehicles) and residential home gateways
      simultaneously connected to distinct paths as, e.g., a cellular link
      and a WiFi link or to a mobile radio station and a fixed access
      network.  Compared to existing multipath protocols such as MPTCP, MP-
      DCCP provides specific support for non-TCP user traffic as UDP or
      plain IP.  More details on potential use cases are provided in
      [website], [slide], and [paper].  All these use cases profit from an
      Open Source Linux reference implementation provided under [website].
      
      This document presents a set of extensions to traditional DCCP to
      support multipath operation.  Multipath DCCP provides the ability to
      simultaneously use multiple paths between peers.  The protocol offers
      the same type of service to applications as DCCP and it provides the
      components necessary to establish and use multiple DCCP flows across
      potentially disjoint paths.

  "Datagram PLPMTUD for UDP Options", Gorry Fairhurst, Tom Jones, 2022-02-25,
  <draft-ietf-tsvwg-udp-options-dplpmtud-03.txt>

      This document specifies how a UDP Options sender implements Datagram
      Packetization Layer Path Maximum Transmission Unit Discovery
      (DPLPMTUD) as a robust method for Path Maximum Transmission Unit
      discovery.  This method uses the UDP Options packetization layer.  It
      allows a datagram application to discover the largest size of
      datagram that can be sent across a specific network path.

Using TLS in Applications (uta)
-------------------------------

  "TLS/DTLS 1.3 Profiles for the Internet of Things", Hannes Tschofenig,
  Thomas Fossati, 2022-03-07, <draft-ietf-uta-tls13-iot-profile-04.txt>

      This document is a companion to RFC 7925 and defines TLS/DTLS 1.3
      profiles for Internet of Things devices.  It also updates RFC 7925
      with regards to the X.509 certificate profile.
      
      Discussion Venues
      
      This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.
      
      Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
      https://github.com/thomas-fossati/draft-tls13-iot.

  "Recommendations for Secure Use of Transport Layer Security (TLS) and
  Datagram Transport Layer Security (DTLS)", Yaron Sheffer, Peter
  Saint-Andre, Thomas Fossati, 2022-02-03, <draft-ietf-uta-rfc7525bis-05.txt>

      Transport Layer Security (TLS) and Datagram Transport Layer Security
      (DTLS) are widely used to protect data exchanged over application
      protocols such as HTTP, SMTP, IMAP, POP, SIP, and XMPP.  Over the
      years, the industry has witnessed several serious attacks on TLS and
      DTLS, including attacks on the most commonly used cipher suites and
      their modes of operation.  This document provides recommendations for
      improving the security of deployed services that use TLS and DTLS.
      The recommendations are applicable to the majority of use cases.
      
      This document was published as RFC 7525 when the industry was in the
      midst of its transition to TLS 1.2.  Years later this transition is
      largely complete and TLS 1.3 is widely available.  Given the new
      environment, updated guidance is needed.

  "Service Names in TLS", Peter Saint-Andre, Jeff Hodges, Rich Salz,
  2021-11-18, <draft-ietf-uta-rfc6125bis-04.txt>

      Many application technologies enable secure communication between two
      entities by means of Transport Layer Security (TLS) with Internet
      Public Key Infrastructure Using X.509 (PKIX) certificates.  This
      document specifies procedures for representing and verifying the
      identity of application services in such interactions.
      
      This document obsoletes RFC 6125.

IPv6 Operations (v6ops)
-----------------------

  "IPv6 Deployment Status", Giuseppe Fioccola, Paolo Volpato, Nalini Elkins,
  Jordi Martinez, Gyan Mishra, Chongfeng Xie, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-ietf-v6ops-ipv6-deployment-05.txt>

      This document provides an overview of IPv6 deployment status and a
      view on how the transition to IPv6 is progressing among network
      operators and enterprises.  It also aims to analyze the related
      challenges and therefore encourage actions and more investigations in
      those areas where the industry has not taken a clear and unified
      approach.

  "Pros and Cons of IPv6 Transition Technologies for IPv4aaS", Gabor Lencse,
  Jordi Martinez, Lee Howard, Richard Patterson, Ian Farrer, 2022-03-03,
  <draft-ietf-v6ops-transition-comparison-02.txt>

      Several IPv6 transition technologies have been developed to provide
      customers with IPv4-as-a-Service (IPv4aaS) for ISPs with an IPv6-only
      access and/or core network.  All these technologies have their
      advantages and disadvantages, and depending on existing topology,
      skills, strategy and other preferences, one of these technologies may
      be the most appropriate solution for a network operator.
      
      This document examines the five most prominent IPv4aaS technologies
      considering a number of different aspects to provide network
      operators with an easy to use reference to assist in selecting the
      technology that best suits their needs.

  "Operational Issues with Processing of the Hop-by-Hop Options Header",
  Shuping Peng, Zhenbin Li, Chongfeng Xie, Zhuangzhuang Qin, Gyan Mishra,
  2021-10-11, <draft-ietf-v6ops-hbh-00.txt>

      This document describes the processing of the Hop-by-Hop Options
      Header (HBH) in today's routers in the aspects of standards
      specification, common implementations, and default operations.  This
      document outlines the reasons why the Hop-by-Hop Options Header is
      rarely utilized in current networks.  In addition, this document
      describes how the HBH could be used as a powerful mechanism allowing
      deployment and operations of new services requiring a more optimized
      way to leverage network resources of an infrastructure.  The Hop-by-
      Hop Options Header is taken into consideration by several network
      operators as a valuable container for carrying the information
      facilitating the introduction of new services.  The purpose of this
      draft is to document the reasons why the HBH is rarely used within
      networks and to define a proper list of requirements aiming to allow
      a better leverage of the HBH capability.

WebTransport (webtrans)
-----------------------

  "The WebTransport Protocol Framework", Victor Vasiliev, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-ietf-webtrans-overview-03.txt>

      The WebTransport Protocol Framework enables clients constrained by
      the Web security model to communicate with a remote server using a
      secure multiplexed transport.  It consists of a set of individual
      protocols that are safe to expose to untrusted applications, combined
      with a model that allows them to be used interchangeably.
      
      This document defines the overall requirements on the protocols used
      in WebTransport, as well as the common features of the protocols,
      support for some of which may be optional.

  "WebTransport over HTTP/3", Alan Frindell, Eric Kinnear, Victor Vasiliev,
  2021-10-25, <draft-ietf-webtrans-http3-02.txt>

      WebTransport [OVERVIEW] is a protocol framework that enables clients
      constrained by the Web security model to communicate with a remote
      server using a secure multiplexed transport.  This document describes
      a WebTransport protocol that is based on HTTP/3 [HTTP3] and provides
      support for unidirectional streams, bidirectional streams and
      datagrams, all multiplexed within the same HTTP/3 connection.

  "WebTransport using HTTP/2", Alan Frindell, Eric Kinnear, Tommy Pauly,
  Martin Thomson, Victor Vasiliev, Guowu Xie, 2022-03-07,
  <draft-ietf-webtrans-http2-03.txt>

      WebTransport defines a set of low-level communications features
      designed for client-server interactions that are initiated by Web
      clients.  This document describes a protocol that can provide many of
      the capabilities of WebTransport over HTTP/2.  This protocol enables
      the use of WebTransport when a UDP-based protocol is not available.

WebRTC Ingest Signaling over HTTPS (wish)
-----------------------------------------

  "WebRTC-HTTP ingestion protocol (WHIP)", Sergio Murillo, Alex Gouaillard,
  2022-03-07, <draft-ietf-wish-whip-02.txt>

      While WebRTC has been very successful in a wide range of scenarios,
      its adoption in the broadcasting/streaming industry is lagging
      behind.  Currently there is no standard protocol (like SIP or RTSP)
      designed for ingesting media into a streaming service using WebRTC
      and so content providers still rely heavily on protocols like RTMP
      for it.
      
      These protocols are much older than WebRTC and by default lack some
      important security and resilience features provided by WebRTC with
      minimal overhead and additional latency.
      
      The media codecs used for ingestion in older protocols tend to be
      limited and not negotiated.  WebRTC includes support for negotiation
      of codecs, potentially alleviating transcoding on the ingest node
      (which can introduce delay and degrade media quality).  Server side
      transcoding that has traditionally been done to present multiple
      renditions in Adaptive Bit Rate Streaming (ABR) implementations can
      be replaced with simulcasting and SVC codecs that are well supported
      by WebRTC clients.  In addition, WebRTC clients can adjust client-
      side encoding parameters based on RTCP feedback to maximize encoding
      quality.
      
      Encryption is mandatory in WebRTC, therefore secure transport of
      media is implicit.
      
      This document proposes a simple HTTP based protocol that will allow
      WebRTC based ingest of content into streaming services and/or CDNs.

Web Packaging (wpack)
---------------------

  "Use Cases and Requirements for Web Packages", Jeffrey Yasskin, Felipe
  Morandeira, 2021-10-25, <draft-ietf-wpack-use-cases-00.txt>

      This document lists use cases for signing and/or bundling collections
      of web pages, and extracts a set of requirements from them.
      
      Discussion Venues
      
      This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.
      
      Discussion of this document takes place on the Web Packaging Working
      Group mailing list (wpack@ietf.org), which is archived at
      https://mailarchive.ietf.org/arch/browse/wpack/.
      
      Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
      https://github.com/wpack-wg/use-cases.


