

Internet Engineering Task Force                        Jan Novak
Internet-Draft                                         Cisco Systems
Intended status: Informational                         October 27, 2008
Expires: April 27, 2009


         IP Flow Information Accounting and Export Benchmarking
                               Methodology
                  draft-novak-bmwg-ipflow-meth-01.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
   documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts
   as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in 
   progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 27, 2009.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

Abstract

   This document provides methodology and framework for quantifying 
   performance implications of enabling selective monitoring of
   IP flows on a network device and export of this information to
   a collector as specified in [RFC5101].





Novak                      Expires April 27, 2009                   [Page 1]
Internet-Draft        Flow Monitoring Benchmarking              October 2008


Table of Contents

   1. Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
      1.1. Requirements Language  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   2. Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
      2.1. Existing Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
      2.2. Defined Terminology. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   3. Test Set Up . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
      3.1. Testbed Topology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
      3.2. Basic Packet Forwarding Set Up . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
      3.3  Flow Monitoring Configuration. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
      3.4  Packet Sampling. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
      3.5  Frame Format . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
      3.6  Frame Sizes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
      3.7  Flow Records . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
      3.8  Traffic Definitions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
   4. Processor Utilisation Metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
      4.1 Using CPU as Performance Metrics. . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
      4.2 Measuring CPU Usage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .10
      4.3 Implementation Specific Considerations. . . . . . . . . .10
          4.3.1 Flow Hashing  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .10
   5. CPU Usage Measurements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .11
      5.1 Executing the Metrics Measurements. . . . . . . . . . . .11
      5.2 Cache States Maintenance. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .11
          5.2.1 Metrics Definition. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .11
          5.2.2 Measurement Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .12
          5.2.3 Measurement Configuration . . . . . . . . . . . . .12
          5.2.4 Analysing the Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .12
      5.3 Cache States Update . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .12
          5.3.1 Metrics Definition  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .13
          5.3.2 Measurement Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .13
          5.3.3 Measurement Configuration . . . . . . . . . . . . .13
          5.3.4 Analysing the Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .14
      5.4 Flow Expiration Rate  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .14
          5.4.1 Metrics Definition  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .14
          5.4.2 Measurement Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .14
          5.4.3 Measurement Configuration . . . . . . . . . . . . .14
          5.4.4 Analysing the Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .15
      5.5 Flow Export Rate  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .15
          5.5.1 Metrics Definition  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .15
          5.5.2 Measurement Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .16
          5.5.3 Measurement Configuration . . . . . . . . . . . . .16
          5.5.4 Analysing the Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .16
      5.6 Cache Overflow  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .16
          5.6.1 Metrics Definition. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .16
          5.6.2 Measurement Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .17
          5.6.3 Measurement Configuration . . . . . . . . . . . . .17
          5.6.4 Analysing the Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .17
   6. Throughput Measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .18
      6.1 Single Traffic Component. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .18
      6.2 Two Traffic Components. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .19
   7. Evaluating Flow Monitoring Applicability. . . . . . . . . . .19 
   8. Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .20
   9. IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .20
   10.Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .20

Novak                      Expires April 27, 2009                   [Page 2]
Internet-Draft        Flow Monitoring Benchmarking              October 2008



   11.References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .20
      11.1. Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .20
      11.2. Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .20


1.  Introduction

   Monitoring of IP flows (Flow Monitoring) on network devices is an
   application which has numerous usage in both service provider and
   enterprise segments as detailed in [RFC3917]. The question any user
   considering its deployment asks is - And what performance
   implication Flow Monitoring will have on my network ? 

   The major network operator concerns always are:
       a. what will be CPU usage
       b. what will be the forwarding performance
       c. what will be bandwidth usage of the Flow Monitoring export

   when enabling Flow Monitoring on network devices. This document
   defines set of traffic parameters which influence most the 
   performance of network devices and provides methodology how to
   measure effects of Flow Monitoring on the network device from the
   point of view of CPU usage and forwarding performance. The Flow
   Monitoring export data rate is dependent on the actual configuration
   and particular implementation and it is not therefore in the scope of
   this document.

   IETF IPFIX working group concentrates its effort on standardising
   the Flow Monitoring data export to an external collecting
   device while the actual application providing the data inside of
   a network device is left to the implementors liberty. The goal of
   this document is to address both Flow Monitoring and Flow Monitoring
   data export performance, since typical implementation will allow to
   separately enable monitoring (for the users to query the data using 
   command line interface or SNMP) and export of the IP flow information 
   (for out off band analysis on an external device).

   This document analyses the above mentioned characteristics
   only on packet forwarding network devices, any traffic sniffing 
   probes, monitoring devices and external export data collecting
   devices are out of the scope.

   This document does not include any Flow Monitoring accuracy
   measurement, it concentrates only on the creation, export and
   deletion of the flows themselves but not the actual contents of the
   flows.

   This document covers IP (both IPv4 and IPv6) flows or MPLS
   encapsulated IP flows, any other protocols or traffic types are out
   of the scope.


Novak                      Expires April 27, 2009                   [Page 3]
Internet-Draft        Flow Monitoring Benchmarking              October 2008


   
1.1.  Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", 
   "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described
   in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].

2.  Terminology

2.1 Existing Terminology

   Device Under Test (DUT)   [RFC2285, section 3.1.1]

   IP Traffic Flow/Flow      [RFC5101, section 2]

   Flow Key                  [RFC5101, section 2]

   Flow Record               [RFC5101, section 2]

   Observation Point         [RFC5101, section 2]

   Exporter                  [RFC5101, section 2]

   Collector                 [RFC5101, section 2]

   Control Information       [RFC5101, section 2]

   Data Stream               [RFC5101, section 2]

   Flow Expiration           [IPFIX-ARCH, section 5.1.1]

   Flow Export               [IPFIX-ARCH, section 5.1.2]

   Throughput                [RFC1242, section 3.17]


2.2 Defined Terminology

2.2.1 Cache

   Definition:
      Memory area held and dedicated by the DUT to store Flow Record 
      information

2.2.2 Cache Size

   Definition:
      The size of the cache in terms of how many entries of Flow 
      Records the cache can hold




Novak                      Expires April 27, 2009                   [Page 4]
Internet-Draft        Flow Monitoring Benchmarking              October 2008


   
   Discussion:
      This term is typically represented as a configurable option in the
      particular Flow Monitoring implementation. It needs to  be at
      least known in order to define the tests circumstances properly.
      Its highest value will depend on the memory available in the 
      network device.
                     
   Measurement units: 
      Number of entries

2.2.3 Flow Expiration Rate (FER)
       
   Definition:
      Number of Flow Records which expire (as defined by the Flow 
      Expiration term) from the Cache within a time interval

   Measurement units:
      Number of Flow Records per second 

2.2.4 Active Timeout

   Definition:
      The time interval from the time when first packet of a particular
      Flow was seen till the Flow will be expired while there are still
      packets arriving to the DUT which belong to the Flow. 

   Discussion:
      This term is typically represented as a configurable option in the
      particular Flow Monitoring implementation. See section 5.1.1 of
      [IPFIX-ARCH] for more detailed discussion.
 
   Measurement units: 
      Seconds

2.2.5 Inactive Timeout

   Definition:
      The time interval after which the Flow is expired from the Cache 
      if no more packets which belong to the Flow were seen

   Discussion:
      This term is typically represented as a configurable option in the
      particular Flow Monitoring implementation. See section 5.1.1 of
      [IPFIX-ARCH] for more detailed discussion.
 
   Measurement units: 
      Seconds  

2.2.6 Baseline Processor Utilisation (BPU)

   Definition:
      The Processor (CPU) utilisation under steady traffic stream
      without Flow Monitoring configured. 

Novak                      Expires April 27, 2009                   [Page 5]
Internet-Draft        Flow Monitoring Benchmarking              October 2008

   
   Discussion:
      The CPU utilisation SHOULD BE collected from the DUT after
      sufficient time interval under the test traffic stream to obtain
      reliable average CPU usage. The recommended time before collecting     
      for example the 1 minute average CPU usage is 5 to 10 minutes.
           
   Measurement units: 
      Percent 

2.2.7 Flow Monitoring Processor Utilisation (FMPU)

   Definition:
      The Processor (CPU) utilisation under steady traffic stream with
      Flow Monitoring configured. 

   Discussion:
      The CPU utilisation SHOULD BE collected from the DUT after
      sufficient time interval under the test traffic stream to obtain 
      reliable average CPU usage. The recommended time before collecting 
      for example the 1 minute average CPU usage is 5 to 10 minutes.
 
   Measurement units: 
      Percent                 
          
3. Test Set Up

3.1 Testbed Topology

   The test set-up is identical to the one used by [RFC2544]:

   Test topology with unidirectional traffic

         +--------+         +------------+          +----------+
         |        |         |            |          |          |
         | sender |-------->|    DUT     |--------->| receiver |
         |        |         |            |          |          |
         +--------+         +------------+          +----------+
                               Figure 1


    Test topology with bidirectional traffic

         +----------+        +------------+         +----------+
         |          |        |            |         |          |
         |  sender  |------->|            |-------->| receiver |
         |          |        |    DUT     |         |          |
         |          |        |            |         |          |
         | receiver |<-------|            |<--------|  sender  |
         |          |        |            |         |          |
         +----------+        +------------+         +----------+
                               Figure 2

Novak                      Expires April 27, 2009                   [Page 6]
Internet-Draft        Flow Monitoring Benchmarking              October 2008


   
   
   The ideal way to implement the test is using one tester with a
   sending port and a receiving port. This allows for an easy check if 
   all the traffic sent by the sender was transmitted by the DUT and
   received at the receiver.

   If the effects of enabling Flow Monitoring on several interfaces are
   of concern, the topology can be expanded with several input and
   output ports.

3.2 Basic Packet Forwarding Set Up

   DUT needs to have very basic configuration just allowing IP packet
   forwarding without any use of dynamic IP routing protocols. The only
   objective of the configuration is to allow transmission of the test
   traffic with as low interference of any control (routing) traffic as
   possible.

   The base DUT configuration might include other features like packet
   filters or quality of service on the input and/or output interfaces
   if there is the need to study Flow Monitoring in the presence of
   those features. The Flow Monitoring measurement procedures do not 
   change in this case, the effect of the features will be simply
   comprised within the base line measurement. Consideration needs to be
   made when evaluating measurements results to take into account the 
   possible change of packets rates offered to the DUT and Flow
   Monitoring after application of the features to the configuration.

3.3 Flow Monitoring Configuration

   The DUT Observation Points configuration needs to be decided upon 
   depending on the interest and scope of the testing as follows:

      a. input port/ports only
      b. output port/ports only
      c. both input and output

   The testing procedures are otherwise same for all these possible
   configurations.
   
   To measure input and output simultaneously on one DUT port the
   topology in the Figure 1 can be used if the traffic sender and 
   receiver allows for full duplex operation e.g. sender can
   simultaneously receive and analyse traffic and receiver can 
   simultaneously also send traffic then the topology can be used as it 
   is. The only change is in the configurations of the sender and
   receiver to allow full duplex operation.

   If the topology in the Figure 2. is used the DUT architecture needs to   
   be taken into consideration as follows:

      a. centralised DUT architecture - the allocation of input and output  
         ports does not play any role

Novak                      Expires April 27, 2009                   [Page 7]
Internet-Draft        Flow Monitoring Benchmarking          October 2008



      b. distributed DUT architecture - the input and output ports 
         allocation can be done in several different ways depending on 
         the measurement objective or the expected network device usage. 
         The ports can be allocated on the same modules or different 
         modules to which the DUT central processor unit distributes 
         forwarding control.

3.4 Packet Sampling

   A Flow Monitoring implementation might provide the capability to
   analyse the flows after packet sampling is performed. The possible 
   procedures and ways of packet sampling are described in [PSAMP].

   This document does not intend to study the effects of packet sampling
   itself on the network devices but packet sampling can simply be
   applied as part of the Flow Monitoring configuration on the DUT and 
   perform the measurements as specified in the later sections. 
   Consideration needs to be made when evaluating measurements results
   to take into account the change of packets rates offered to the DUT
   and especially to Flow Monitoring after packet sampling is applied.

3.5 Frame Formats

   Frame format to use for IPv4 traffic is specified in [RFC2544]
   section 8.

   Frame format to use for IPv6 traffic is specified in [RFC2464].

   The Flow Monitoring implementation might allow to capture IPv4 or
   IPv6 traffic encapsulated in Multi Protocol Label Switched header
   [RFC3031]. The measurement procedures in this document can be used
   for such traffic using frame format as specified in [RFC3032]. Any
   other traffic types encapsulated in MPLS are out of scope of this 
   document.

3.6 Frame Sizes

   Frame sizes to use are specified in [RFC2544] section 9.

3.7 Flow Records

   The Flow Record definition is very implementation specific. A Flow
   Monitoring implementation might allow only for fixed Flow Record
   definition, based on the most common IP parameters in the IPv4 or
   IPv6 headers - like source and destination IP addresses, IP
   protocol numbers or transport level port numbers. Another
   implementation might allow the user to actually define his own
   completely arbitrary Flow Record to monitor the traffic. The
   requirement for the tests defined in this document is only the need
   for a large number of Flow Records in the Cache. The Flow Keys 
   needed to achieve that will typically be source and destinations IP
   addresses and transport level port numbers.


Novak                      Expires April 27, 2009                   [Page 8]
Internet-Draft        Flow Monitoring Benchmarking              October 2008


3.8 Traffic Definitions

   The traffic definitions in the sections below serve only as examples
   how to achieve the particular test objectives with certain Flow 
   Record definition, the exact set-up will therefore always be Flow
   Monitoring implementation specific.

4. Processor Utilisation Metrics

   Every Network Operator carefully monitors Processor (CPU) utilisation
   on all network devices for two major reasons:

      a. increased CPU usage can indicate unwanted network activity like
         Denial of  Service attacks or faulty device or network 
         connection
      b. each network device typically runs quite large routing
         protocols tables and needs some free processing power to
         maintain routing and forwarding

   There is no commonly accepted limit to the CPU usage but typically
   usage in the range of 70 - 80 % becomes already a critical issue.

4.1 Using CPU as Performance Metrics

   On one hand the CPU usage of any tested equipment will always be a
   local, subjective value which can be collected only from the DUT and
   can not be independently verified.

   On the other hand pure traffic characteristic like non drop rate does
   not provide enough of information to evaluate a network device Flow
   Monitoring performance. This document identifies that the major 
   factor affecting the network device running Flow Monitoring is the
   Flow Expiration Rate and this parameter is not related in any way to
   the amount of forwarded traffic but influences purely the CPU usage of
   the network device. From this point of view there is a need to use 
   it as a generic metrics despite of the above mentioned subjectivity of
   the CPU usage value.

   On purely software based and centralised network devices the CPU
   handles both traffic forwarding and Flow Monitoring in some time 
   shared manner. The [RFC2544] throughput measurements with addition of 
   Flow Expiry Rate as another traffic parameter can still be used here
   to fully quantify Flow Monitoring performance.

   On any distributed or hardware assisted network device packet
   forwarding can carry on for some period of time without direct 
   involvement of any CPU. In this case just the throughput measurements 
   do not provide enough of information to judge if Flow Monitoring can
   be deployed.




Novak                      Expires April 27, 2009                   [Page 9]
Internet-Draft        Flow Monitoring Benchmarking              October 2008



4.2 Measuring CPU usage

   The CPU usage value is provided by the operating system (OS) of the
   network device and always will include some OS dependent and periodic
   tasks. This makes impossible to compare the absolute values of CPU
   usage between different network devices but it is still possible to
   compare the relative values of how much of CPU usage Flow Monitoring 
   has added under certain traffic circumstances.
      
   The CPU usage provided by the network device OS will always be an 
   average value over certain period of time where the average is most
   often calculated in the sliding window manner. The CPU usage 
   measurements SHOULD NOT use averages on the scale of less than one 
   minute. The measurement time to gather the CPU usage SHOULD be five to 
   ten multiple of the period the OS uses to calculate the CPU average. 
   For example if the OS provides one minute CPU usage averages the
   measurement time should be at least 5 to 10 minutes.

   Typically both centralised and distributed architecture network
   devices will have one main CPU handling the communication with the
   outside world. This CPU SHOULD always be used for any usage
   measurements defined in this document.

   When testing network devices with distributed architecture the CPU
   usage measurement needs to take into account the packet forwarding
   path through the device. Depending on the measurement topology decided 
   upon in the section 3.3 the CPU usage measurements SHOULD also be
   performed on all the network device modules which have an active Flow
   Monitoring configuration during the particular test.

4.3 Implementation Specific Considerations 

4.3.1 Flow Hashing

   The particular Flow Monitoring implementation might choose a Flow
   hashing mechanism in order to manage Flows lookups in large databases
   more efficiently. Typically such a hashing mechanism will include
   source and destination IP addresses. Also typically the performance 
   metrics defined below will be most easily measured by creating large 
   amounts of flows using linearly incremented IP addresses. This is far  
   from a real network scenario where rather random set of IP addresses 
   will be present in the Flow database. The test scenario might 
   therefore lead to an increased amount of hash collisions (where two 
   different Flows map to the same hash value) which can have negative 
   impact on the measured CPU usage. Handling of flows with same hash 
   value could lead to considerably higher CPU usage then it would be on 
   the real network device without hash collisions.

   The performed measurements SHOULD include monitoring of Flow hash
   collisions during the test.



Novak                      Expires April 27, 2009                  [Page 10]
Internet-Draft        Flow Monitoring Benchmarking              October 2008



5. CPU Usage Measurements

   The following CPU usage metrics are defined and measured here:

      a. Cache States Maintenance CPU usage
      b. Cache States Update CPU usage
      c. Flow Expiration Rate CPU usage
      d. Flow Export Rate CPU usage
      e. Cache Overflow CPU usage

5.1 Executing the metrics measurements

   The CPU tests methodology is same for all the tests specified in this
   section. The whole test course step by step SHOULD be executed as 
   follows:

      a. Configure DUT for base forwarding as specified in the section
         3.2               
      b. Configure traffic streams on the Sender and configure Receiver
         to just sink the traffic. The Receiver SHOULD perform checks
         that the traffic sent by the Sender was successfully forwarded
         by the DUT to the Receiver

      c. Perform measurements in a loop from 1 to n, where n is the
         number of defined streams:

            1) Start traffic stream n
            2) Measure Baseline Processor Utilisation
            3) Stop traffic, clear all packet statistics and apply Flow
               Monitoring configuration on the DUT as specified in the 
               section 3.3 and as defined in the particular test section
            4) Start traffic stream n
            5) Wait to populate the cache and verify Flow Monitoring
               statistics  
            6) Measure Flow Monitoring Processor Utilisation
            7) Stop traffic and clean all Flow Monitoring DUT
               configuration

   The whole measurement procedure SHOULD be performed at several
   different levels of the base line CPU load in order to verify the
   behaviour of the Flow Monitoring implementation under different
   overall load conditions. This can be achieved by using two traffic
   components as specified in the section 6.2

5.2 Cache States Maintenance

5.2.1 Metrics Definition

   CPU usage needed on the DUT to maintain the Flow Record information
   held in the Cache in a completely static scenario without any changes
   to the stored information.


Novak                      Expires April 27, 2009                  [Page 11]
Internet-Draft        Flow Monitoring Benchmarking              October 2008



5.2.2 Measurement Procedure

   To measure the Cache States Maintenance CPU utilisation the presence
   of a large amount of Flows Records in the Cache is needed but with no
   Flow Expiration from the Cache during the test and also no counter
   refresh - the test traffic is sent just once to populate the cache.

5.2.3 Measurement Configuration

   Flow Keys Definition:
      Needs to allow for large numbers of unique Flow Records to be 
      created in the Cache
           
   Cache Size: 
      Maximum configurable value on the network device.

   Sender Traffic Definition:

      Define n traffic streams while incrementing the number of unique
      Flow Keys combinations in the increments of about 1/nth of the
      cache size, leaving about 10% of the cache entries free at the 
      maximum.

      The total number of created Flow Records in the Cache MUST NOT
      exceed the configured Cache Size at any point of the measurement.
                  
   Number of packets sent: each stream sends just the configured
      number of unique Flow Keys values in one batch to just populate the 
      cache before the measurement starts

   Flow Monitoring Configuration:

      Inactive Timeout:
         Inactive Timeout must be configured in such a way, that the Flow 
         Records get created in the Cache and never expire. The best
         value is the maximum configurable Inactive Timeout.
                  
      Active Timeout:
         Active Timeout MUST be configured in such a way that the active 
         Flow Records never expire from the Cache during the whole
         measurement period with one of the defined traffic streams.

   The Flow Monitoring statistics SHOULD be checked during the
   measurement execution to verify that the measurement conditions have
   been reached as specified - namely the number of entries and number of
   added entries in the Cache SHOULD NOT change during and after the 
   cache has been populated.

 5.2.4 Analysing the Results

   The test run will produce n triplets of values as follows:
       "Number of Flow Records in the Cache" "BPU" "FMPU"

Novak                      Expires April 27, 2009                  [Page 12]
Internet-Draft        Flow Monitoring Benchmarking              October 2008



   The CPU usage needed to maintain the states in the Cache is
   represented by the values of difference (FMPU - BPU) and is a function
   of the number of states held in the Cache.          
        
5.3 Cache States Update

5.3.1 Metrics Definition

   CPU usage needed on the DUT to update the Flow Record information held
   in the Cache while the number of Flow Records does not change, only
   the counters (typically bytes and packets numbers) corresponding to
   each Flow Record are updated by the flowing traffic stream.

5.3.2 Measurement Procedure

   To measure the Cache States Update CPU utilisation the presence of a
   large amount of Flows Records in the Cache is needed but with no Flow
   Expiration from the Cache during the test. The traffic needs to flow 
   steadily at certain rate while updating the Flow Record counters.

5.3.3 Measurement Configuration

   Flow Keys Definition:
      Needs to allow for large numbers of unique Flow Records to be
      created in the Cache

   Flow Record Definition - MUST contain counter fields like bytes and
      packets which get updated with each sent packet.
           
   Cache Size: 
      Maximum configurable value on the network device.

   Sender Traffic Definition:

      Define n traffic streams while incrementing the packet rate. The
      number of unique Flow Keys combinations SHOULD be at about 90% of 
      the configured Cache Size.

      The total number of created Flow Records in the Cache MUST NOT 
      exceed the configured Cache Size at any point of the measurement.
                  
   Number of packets sent: continuous traffic stream

   Flow Monitoring Configuration:

      Inactive Timeout:
         Inactive Timeout must be configured in such a way, that the Flow 
         Records get created in the Cache and never expire. The best
         value is the maximum configurable Inactive Timeout.
                  
      Active Timeout:
         Active Timeout MUST be configured in such a way that the active
         Flow Records never expire from the Cache during the whole
         measurement period with one of the defined traffic streams.

Novak                      Expires April 27, 2009                  [Page 13]
Internet-Draft        Flow Monitoring Benchmarking              October 2008

   The Flow Monitoring statistics SHOULD be checked during the    
   measurement execution to verify that the measurement condition have 
   been reached as specified - namely the number of entries and number of
   added entries in the Cache SHOULD NOT change after the cache is fully
   populated.
       
5.3.4 Analysing the Results

   The test run will produce n triplets of values as follows:
      "Packet Rate" "BPU" "FMPU"

   The CPU usage needed to update and maintain the states in the Cache is
   represented by the values of difference (FMPU - BPU) and is a function  
   of the number of updates per second - in this particular set-up it is 
   equal to the packet rates.
         
5.4 Flow Expiration Rate

5.4.1 Metrics Definition

   CPU usage needed on the DUT to expire at certain rate the Flow Record
   information held in the Cache while the total number of Flow Records 
   in the Cache never exceeds the configured Cache Size.

5.4.2 Measurement Procedure

   To measure the Flow Expiration Rate CPU utilisation the traffic needs
   to populate the Cache at certain steady rate. The Flow Record needs to
   be expired from the Cache before it can be refreshed by the next 
   packet with the same Flow Key parameters combination. The total amount
   of Flow Records in the Cache MUST NOT reach the configured Cache Size. 

5.4.3 Measurement Configuration

   Flow Keys Definition:
      Needs to allow for large numbers of unique Flow Records to be 
      created in the Cache
           
   Cache Size: 
      Maximum configurable value on the network device.

   Sender Traffic Definition:

      Define n traffic streams while incrementing the packet rate. The 
      number of unique Flow Keys combinations MUST be many multiples of 
      the configured Cache Size.

      The total number of created Flow Records in the Cache MUST NOT 
      exceed the configured Cache Size at any point of the 
      measurement. This can be achieved by the Flow Monitoring timers 
      configuration as specified below.

                  
Novak                      Expires April 27, 2009                  [Page 14]
Internet-Draft        Flow Monitoring Benchmarking              October 2008


   
   Number of packets sent: continuous traffic stream

   Flow Monitoring Configuration:

      Inactive Timeout:
         Inactive Timeout must be configured in such a way, that the Flow 
         Records get created in the Cache and expire before they can be 
         refreshed by the next packet in the stream with the same 
         parameters. The Inactive Timeout value MUST be smaller than (90% 
         configured Cache Size) divided by the stream packet rate. This 
         way the number of active Flow Records in the Cache will never 
         exceed the Cache Size. The same thing can be achieved if the            
         Flow Monitoring implementation allows to configure Inactive 
         Timeout equal to 0 seconds (e.g. immediate expiration).

   The Flow Monitoring statistics SHOULD be checked during the 
   measurement execution to verify that the measurement conditions have 
   been reached as specified - namely the number of entries MUST NOT 
   exceed the Cache Size during the whole measurement with one of the 
   defined traffic streams.

   The number of Flow Records in the Cache entries SHOULD oscillate
   around the value:

           (Inactive Timeout * packet rate)

   or ideally be stable and equal to that value. 
           
5.4.4 Analysing the Results

   The test run will produce N triplets of values as follows:
      "Packet rate" "BPU" "FMPU"

   Due to the Flow Monitoring and the test traffic configuration the 
   packet rate represents also the Flow Expiration Rate - each packet of 
   the test traffic streams creates one Flow and the Flows later expire 
   at the same rate the packets were sent and the Flows created.
   The triplets can therefore be interpreted as:
      "Flow Expiration Rate" "BPU" "FMPU"

   The measured Flow Monitoring Processor Usage represents the CPU usage 
   of three components:

      a. Baseline Processor Utilisation
      b. Cache state updates and maintenance 
      c. Flow Expiration Rate

5.5 Flow Export Rate

5.5.1 Metrics Definition

   CPU usage needed on the DUT to export at certain rate the Flow Record
   information held in the Cache while the number of Flow Records in the 
   Cache never exceeds the configured Cache Size.

Novak                      Expires April 27, 2009                  [Page 15]
Internet-Draft        Flow Monitoring Benchmarking              October 2008

5.5.2 Measurement Procedure

   Same as in 5.5.2, the DUT is in addition configured with Flow Export

5.5.3 Measurement Configuration

   Flow Monitoring Configuration:

   The DUT needs to be configured for Flow Export to one or more 
   Collectors. The Collectors do not need to exist neither any export 
   data analysis needs to be done. The DUT MUST have a route and 
   forwarding adjacency to reach all the Collectors. The export packets 
   SHOULD exit the DUT on another interface than the one used to connect 
   the Receiver so that the test traffic statistics on that interface are 
   not polluted by the export packets. The Flow Export statistics SHOULD 
   be checked on the DUT and compared to the expected Flow Expiration 
   Rate. The Flow Export packets exit interface SHOULD be checked for the 
   packets statistics to make sure the export packets indeed leave the 
   DUT.

   All the other measurement components need to be configured exactly 
   same way as in the section 5.4.
             
5.5.4 Analysing the Results

   The test run will produce n triplets of values as follows:
      "Flow Expiration Rate" "BPU" "FMPU"

   The measured Flow Monitoring Processor Usage represents now the CPU 
   usage of four components

      a. Baseline Processor Utilisation
      b. Cache state update and maintenance 
      c. Flow Expiration Rate
      d. Flow Export Rate

5.6 Cache Overflow

   The common factor of sections 5.2 to 5.4 was that the number of Flow 
   Records created in the Cache never exceeded the configured Cache Size. 
   This represents a normal and very healthy network status. This picture 
   can easily change in the environment of a more busy network device ? 
   either having less resources available for Flow Monitoring or simply 
   more active Flow Monitoring due to different traffic patterns. The 
   Flow Monitoring implementation specific processes which handle Cache 
   maintenance can significantly change under the condition where the 
   amount of created Flow Records exceeds the available Cache Size to 
   hold them.
          
5.6.1 Metrics Definition

   CPU usage needed on the DUT to expire at certain rate the Flow Record
   information held in the Cache while the number of Flow Records created 
   in the Cache always reaches and overflows the configured Cache Size.

Novak                      Expires April 27, 2009                  [Page 16]
Internet-Draft        Flow Monitoring Benchmarking              October 2008

5.6.2 Measurement Procedure

   To measure the Cache Overflow CPU utilisation the traffic needs to 
   fill the Cache at the beginning of the measurement. The number of 
   unique Flow Key values combinations must be very large as compared to 
   the configured Cache Size so that each packet always creates a new 
   Flow Record and forces another Flow Record to be expired from the 
   Cache.

5.6.3 Measurement Configuration
 
  Flow Keys Definition:
     Needs to allow for large numbers of unique Flow Records to be 
     created in the Cache

  Cache Size: 
     Configured to such a value so that the Cache gets filled up within 
     short initial interval of the stream sending.
 
  Sender Traffic Definition:

     Define n traffic streams while incrementing the packet rate. The 
     number of unique Flow Keys combinations MUST be many multiples of 
     the configured Cache Size.

     The total number of created Flow Records in the Cache MUST exceed 
     the configured Cache Size before the test starts. 

  Flow Monitoring Configuration:

     Inactive Timeout:
        Inactive Timeout SHOULD be configured to the largest possible 
        value so that the flows do not expire from the Cache using 
        ordinary expiration processes.
        Under this Sender and Flow Monitoring configuration the number of 
        Flow Records created in the Cache will exceed the configure Cache 
        Size in the first seconds of sending the traffic. 

     Active Timeout:
        Active Timeout SHOULD be configured equal or larger than Inactive 
        Timeout.

     The Flow Monitoring statistics SHOULD be checked during the test 
     execution to verify that the test conditions have been reached as 
     specified - namely the number of Flow Records in the Cache needs to 
     be always very close or equal to the configured Cache Size.
           
5.6.4 Analysing the Results

   The test run will produce N triplets of values as follows:
      "Packet rate" "BPU" "FMPU"

   
Novak                      Expires April 27, 2009                  [Page 17]
Internet-Draft        Flow Monitoring Benchmarking              October 2008



   Due to the Flow Monitoring and the test traffic configuration the 
   packet rate represents also the Flow Expiration Rate - each packet of 
   the test traffic stream creates one Flow and the Flows later expire at 
   the same rate the packets were sent and the Flows created. The 
   triplets can therefore be interpreted as:
      "Flow Expiration Rate" "BPU" "FMPU"

   The measured Flow Monitoring Processor Usage represents the CPU usage 
   of three components:

   a. Baseline Processor Utilisation
   b. Cache state updates and maintenance 
   c. Flow Expiration Rate under the condition of Cache overflow      

6. Throughput Measurements

   The throughput tests can use the methodology as defined in [RFC2544] 
   but in the presence of Flow Monitoring configuration on the DUT. This 
   represents certain challenge to create controlled and well defined 
   test environment also from the point of view of Flow Monitoring. 
   [RFC2544] defines frames formats, sizes and rates for the Throughput 
   tests. From the prospective of Flow Monitoring these test streams can 
   be used in two ways to create Cache as specified in the following 
   sections.

6.1 Single Traffic Component

   Section 12 of [RFC2544] discusses the use of protocol source and
   destination addresses for the Throughput tests. In order to perform
   Throughput measurement with Flow Monitoring enabled the defined
   Flow Keys MUST contain IP source and destination address. The IP Flow
   Monitoring measurements 5.4, 5.5 and 5.6 can be executed using    
   [RFC2544] throughput test methodology under these additional 
   conditions:

      a. the test traffic does not use just single unique pair of source 
  and destination address
        
      b. the Sender allows to define test traffic as follows
            
         1) define the test streams exactly as specified in the sections 
            5.4, 5.5 and 5.6
         2) allow for a parameter to say send N (where N is an integer 
            number starting at 1 and incremented in small steps) packets 
            with IP addresses A and B before changing both IP addresses 
            to the next value

    This test traffic definition allows to execute the above defined IP 
    Flow Monitoring tests with one defined Flow Expiration rate while 
    measuring at the same time the DUT Throughput as defined in 
    [RFC2544]. This set-up is the better option since it best simulates 
    the life network traffic scenario with Flows containing more than 
    just one packet.

Novak                      Expires April 27, 2009                  [Page 18]
Internet-Draft        Flow Monitoring Benchmarking              October 2008
    

6.2 Two Traffic Components

   The test traffic set-up in the section 6.1 might be difficult to 
   achieve with commercial traffic generators. The way around it is to 
   define two traffic components in the test traffic - one to populate 
   Flow Monitoring Cache and the second one to execute the throughput 
   test.

   Flow Monitoring Test Traffic Component - the exact traffic definition 
   as specified in the sections 5.4, 5.5 and 5.6.

   Throughput Test Traffic Component - test traffic as specified by 
   [RFC2544] but under the condition it MUST create just one Flow Record 
   in the DUT Cache. In the particular set-up discussed here this would 
   mean a traffic stream with just one pair of unique source and 
   destination IP address (but could be avoided if Flow Keys were for   
   example UDP/TCP source and destination ports).

   The first traffic component will exercise the DUT CPU in terms of IP 
   Flow activity while the second traffic component will measure the 
   Throughput under the conditions of [RFC2544]. The traffic rates of 
   first component can be simply added to the achieved Throughput value 
   of the second component.             

7. Evaluating Flow Monitoring Applicability

   The results obtained for certain DUT allow for a preliminary analysis 
   of a Flow Monitoring deployment based on Internet traffic analysis 
   data provided by organisations like [CAIDA]. The data needed to make
   an estimate of a network device CPU usage spent on Flow Monitoring
   are as follows:

   Average packet size:            350 bytes
   Number of packets per IP Flow:  20

   Expected data rate on the network device: 1 Gbit/s

   This results in:

   Expected packet rate: 357 000 pps  

      being (1 Gbit/s divided by 350 bytes/packet)

   Flows per second:   : 18 000

      being (packet rate 357 000 pps divided by 20 packets per IP Flow)

   Under constant load of traffic with the parameters above the network
   device will always run in the Cache Overflow mode (if the network is 
   large enough the Flows will hardly ever repeat itself within few 
   seconds needed to fill up lets say 300 000 entries Cache).


Novak                      Expires April 27, 2009                  [Page 19]
Internet-Draft        Flow Monitoring Benchmarking              October 2008

 

8.  Acknowledgements

   This work could have been performed thanks to the patience and support
   of Cisco System Netflow development team, namely Paul Aitken, Paul 
   Atkins and Andrew Johnson. Thanks belong also to Aamer Akhter for 
   initiating this work.
   
9.  IANA Considerations

   This document requires no IANA considerations.

10.  Security Considerations

   Documents of this type do not directly affect the security of
   the Internet or corporate networks as long as benchmarking
   is not performed on devices or systems connected to operating
   networks.

11. References

11.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC5101]  Claise B., "Specification of the IP Flow Information Export
              (IPFIX) Protocol for the Exchange of IP Traffic Flow
              Information", Standards Track, RFC 5101, January 2008.

11.2.  Informative References

   [RFC1242]  Bradner, S., "Benchmarking Terminology for Network
              Interconnection Devices", RFC 1242, July 1991.

   [RFC2285]  Mandeville R., "Benchmarking Terminology for LAN Switching
              Devices", Informational, RFC 2285, October 27998.

   [RFC2464]  M. Crawford, "Transmission of IPv6 Packets over Ethernet
              Networks", Standards Track, RFC 2464, December 1998

   [RFC3031]  E. Rosen et al, "Multiprotocol Label Switching 
              Architecture", Standards Track, RFC 3031, January 2001

   [RFC3032]  E. Rosen et al, "MPLS Label Stack Encoding", Standards
              Track, RFC 3032, January 2001

   [RFC2544]  Bradner, S., "Benchmarking Methodology for Network 
              Interconnect Devices", Informational, RFC 2544, March 1999

   [RFC3917]  Quittek j., "Requirements for IP Flow Information Export
              (IPFIX)", Informational, RFC 3917, October 2004.


Novak                      Expires April 27, 2009                  [Page 20]
Internet-Draft        Flow Monitoring Benchmarking              October 2008



[IPFIX-ARCH]  Sadasivan, G., Brownlee, N., Claise, B., and J. Quittek, 
              "Architecture Model for IP Flow Information Export", Work
              in Progress, September 2006.

     [PSAMP]  Claise B., "Packet Sampling (PSAMP) Protocol 
              Specifications", Work in Progress, December 2007
 
     [CAIDA]  Claffy, K., "The nature of the beast: recent traffic 
              measurements from an Internet backbone",
              http://www.caida.org/publications/papers/1998/Inet98/Inet98.html

Author's Addresses

   Jan Novak (editor)
   Cisco System
   Edinburgh,
   UK
   Phone: +44 7740 925889
   Email: janovak@cisco.com

Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

Novak                      Expires April 27, 2009                  [Page 21]
Internet-Draft        Flow Monitoring Benchmarking              October 2008

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.
















































Novak                      Expires April 27, 2009                  [Page 22]
Internet-Draft        Flow Monitoring Benchmarking              October 2008

