


Network Working Group                                       B. Carpenter
Internet-Draft                                         Univ. of Auckland
Intended status: Informational                          October 28, 2007
Expires: April 30, 2008


    Considering availability of free software when evaluating Draft
                               Standards
                  draft-carpenter-ipr-patent-frswds-00

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 30, 2008.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

Abstract

   This draft responds to a request for input by the IPR WG Chair.  It
   proposes that the IETF's criteria for evaluating Draft Standard
   specifications should include the availability of free software.







Carpenter                Expires April 30, 2008                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft             Free software at DS              October 2007


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Changed environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   3.  Possible change in IETF criteria  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   4.  Charter objective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   5.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   6.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   7.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   8.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
     8.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
     8.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements  . . . . . . . . . . 7





































Carpenter                Expires April 30, 2008                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft             Free software at DS              October 2007


1.  Introduction

   The IPR working chair has requested input addressing:
   o  What contributors think has changed since the last IPR WG
      evaluation of patent policy.
   o  What changes in overall direction they think the WG should
      address.
   o  What the charter for this activity should look like.

   This draft is a response to that request, specifically addressing the
   criteria for advancement of specifications from Proposed Standard to
   Draft Standard.


2.  Changed environment

   In recent years, while patent law and the motivations of patent
   holders have not changed significantly, large sections of the
   software business have moved towards a free software model based on a
   variety of open source licenses.  Furthermore, there are at least two
   camps in the IT industry, those who oppose the very existence of such
   software, and those who have embraced it in their way of developing
   commercial products and services.

   Patent holders therefore offer a wide variety of conditions when it
   comes to licensing patents alleged to be infringed by software
   implementing open standards.  The available patent licenses vary
   widely, from essentially free of restriction at one end to
   traditional royalty-based conditions at the other.  Even patent
   licenses intended to be friendly to open-source software often
   contain reciprocity clauses (to protect the patent-holder against
   unreasonable licensing conditions from other patent-holders), or a
   requirement for all implementors to register their use of the patent
   in some way.

   At the same time, open source licenses vary widely, from saying
   little or nothing about patents at one end to requiring open source
   distributors to warrant the absence of royalties at the other.

   This range of conditions, both for patent licenses and for open
   source licenses, makes it essentially impossible for the IETF to
   devise rules that satisfy all parties:
   o  patent-holders who stick to a traditional, royalty-based approach
      to patents;
   o  patent-holders who are friendly to open source software but need
      to defend themselves against others who aren't;





Carpenter                Expires April 30, 2008                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft             Free software at DS              October 2007


   o  open source advocates whose basic quarrel is with the existence of
      patents affecting software in the first place.

   The importance of free software and of open source licenses was much
   less when the current IETF IPR regime was instituted by [RFC2026].
   Amendments since then [RFC3979] have not changed anything in this
   respect.  As a result, there is now a recurrent difficulty in IETF
   discussions of specifications where patent disclosures have been made
   and there is interest in open source implementations.


3.  Possible change in IETF criteria

   When [RFC2026] was developed, a key insight was that the IETF should
   never put itself in the position of making judgements about the
   applicability of patents or about the reasonable and non-
   discriminatory nature of patent licenses.  Any such judgements are
   left to the courts; if the IETF made such judgements it would expose
   itself (and its participants) to court action.  Therefore, the IETF
   process only requires contributors to disclose relevant patents (and
   applications) reasonably and personally known to them, and requires
   the IETF to publish those disclosures.  The IETF makes use of such
   disclosures in deciding whether to adopt a particular technology, but
   without passing judgement on them.

   However, there is one point where the IETF indirectly considers
   whether IPR conditions have had a practical or empirical effect.
   [RFC2026] says:


4.1.2  Draft Standard

   A specification from which at least two independent and interoperable
   implementations from different code bases have been developed, and
   for which sufficient successful operational experience has been
   obtained, may be elevated to the "Draft Standard" level.  For the
   purposes of this section, "interoperable" means to be functionally
   equivalent or interchangeable components of the system or process in
   which they are used.  If patented or otherwise controlled technology
   is required for implementation, the separate implementations must
   also have resulted from separate exercise of the licensing process.
   Elevation to Draft Standard is a major advance in status, indicating
   a strong belief that the specification is mature and will be useful.


   Thus, the IETF makes no judgement about patent claims or licenses; it
   judges by results.




Carpenter                Expires April 30, 2008                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft             Free software at DS              October 2007


   A straightforward and robust way to favor free (and presumably open
   source) implementations of IETF protocols is simply to rewrite the
   first sentence above as:


      A specification from which at least two independent and interoperable
      implementations from different code bases have been developed, of
      which at least one is available as free software, and
      for which sufficient successful operational experience has been
      obtained, may be elevated to the "Draft Standard" level.


   This leaves open the question of what exactly is "free" software,
   which merits further discussion [I-D.josefsson-free-standards-howto].
   But apart from that, it is an extremely simple change to the IETF's
   empirical approach to advancement along the standards track, which
   will encourage the provision of interoperable free software, without
   damaging the IETF's proven methodology and without involving the IETF
   in legal interpretations of either patent licenses or open source
   licenses.


4.  Charter objective

   A possible IPR WG charter objective to deal with this is:

   - A short document (BCP) updating RFC 2026 to add the requirement
   that the implementations evaluated for advancement of a specification
   to Draft Standard must include at least one free software
   implementation.

   An alternative objective would be a process experiment [RFC3933] to
   try this change for a while.


5.  Security Considerations

   This document has no direct impact on the security of the Internet.


6.  IANA Considerations

   This document requests no action by the IANA.


7.  Acknowledgements

   The basic idea of this draft comes from an email sent by Sam Hartman.



Carpenter                Expires April 30, 2008                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft             Free software at DS              October 2007


   This document was produced using the xml2rfc tool [RFC2629].


8.  References

8.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2026]  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision
              3", BCP 9, RFC 2026, October 1996.

8.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.josefsson-free-standards-howto]
              Josefsson, S., "Guidelines for Free Standards in the
              IETF", draft-josefsson-free-standards-howto-01 (work in
              progress), October 2007.

   [RFC2629]  Rose, M., "Writing I-Ds and RFCs using XML", RFC 2629,
              June 1999.

   [RFC3933]  Klensin, J. and S. Dawkins, "A Model for IETF Process
              Experiments", BCP 93, RFC 3933, November 2004.

   [RFC3979]  Bradner, S., "Intellectual Property Rights in IETF
              Technology", BCP 79, RFC 3979, March 2005.


Author's Address

   Brian Carpenter
   Department of Computer Science
   University of Auckland
   PB 92019
   Auckland,   1142
   New Zealand

   Email: brian.e.carpenter@gmail.com














Carpenter                Expires April 30, 2008                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft             Free software at DS              October 2007


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Carpenter                Expires April 30, 2008                 [Page 7]


