
  Internet Draft                                               Penn Pfautz
  Document: <draft-pfautz-lind-enum-carrier-00.txt>                   AT&T
  Category: Informational                                       Steve Lind
                                                                      AT&T
                                                              July 7, 2004
   
   
                                      
                                      
                         A Combined User/Carrier ENUM 
   
                        <draft-pfautz-lind-enum-carrier-00.txt> 
   
   
   
   
  Status of this Memo 
   
     By submitting this Internet-Draft, I certify that any applicable 
     patent or other IPR claims of which I am aware have been 
     disclosed,and any of which I become aware will be disclosed, in 
     accordance with RFC 3668. 
      
     Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
     Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
     other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
     Drafts. 
      
     Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
     months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
     documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts 
     as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in 
     progress." 
      
     The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
     http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt. 
      
     The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
     http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
      
     This Internet-Draft will expire on January 7, 2005. 
      
  Abstract 
      
     This document considers how so-called "carrier" or 
     "infrastructure" ENUM and "end user" or "public" ENUM can share a 
     single Tier 1 registry yet have independent Tier 2 providers. This 
     approach allows the common cooperative infrastructure required by 
     ENUM to be shared by end users and carriers reducing costs and 
     facilitating adoption of ENUM generally. The essence of the 
     proposal is to populate the Tier 1 registry with non-terminal 
     NAPTRs rather than NS records and use different ENUM service 
     fields for carrier and end user records. 
      
   
   
   
   
   
      

    
  <draft-pfautz-lind-enum-carrier-00  Expires January 2005     1 

   User/Carrier ENUM                           July 2004 
   
   
  1. Introduction 
      
     Work on the implementation of ENUM [1] in the ITU [2] and various 
     national bodies [3] has tended to assume an end user focus with 
     number assignees proactively and uniquely controlling whether 
     their numbers are registered into ENUM and being able to select 
     the Tier 2 registry that contains the actual NATPR records. As the 
     GSTN is seen to evolve towards an application on an underlying IP 
     network, carriers have become increasingly interested in using 
     ENUM for interconnection, i.e., to provide information, such as a 
     SIP address of record, about where interconnecting carriers should 
     direct calls to a number which the carrier serves even where the 
     customer's ultimate connection to the carrier's network and the 
     customer's premise equipment may not be IP based. Also, as VoIP 
     carriers proliferate there is an understandable desire to be able 
     to connect calls between users of such services without going 
     through the GSTN. 
      
     These needs have led to proposals for separate "carrier" or 
     "infrastructure" ENUM based on a root other than e164.arpa or to 
     suggestions that carriers be able to populate NAPTR records in 
     their own Tier 2 if the number assignee does not choose to 
     register or in the number assignee's Tier 2 if the assignee 
     selects a Tier 2 provider other than that used by the carrier by 
     which the number is served in the GSTN. 
      
     The difficulties with such proposals are that they either require 
     construction of a separate parallel tree or complicate 
     provisioning and may not support carrier grade service. For 
     example, if the number assignee selects a Tier 2 other than the 
     one chosen by the carrier that serves their number in the GSTN, 
     the carrier would need to find a way to provision its NAPTRs into 
     that Tier 2 which may also not meet carrier reliability needs. 
     Also, obtaining user consent for registration, while essential for 
     applications that may open vulnerabilities to an end user, is 
     burdensome where all numbers must be registered for effective 
     interconnection of carriers and may be unnecessary where 
     registration only involves association of E.164 numbers with 
     carrier network elements.  
      
  2. Terminology and Abbreviations 
      
      
     ENUM   Telephone Number to URI mapping 
      
     GSTN   Global Switched Telephone Network 
   
     ITU    International Telecommunication Union 
   
     NAPTR  Naming Authority Pointer 
      
     RFC    Request For Comment  
   
     SIP    Session Initiation Protocol 
      
     URI    Uniform Resource Identifier 
      
     URL    Uniform Resource Locator 

    
  <draft-pfautz-lind-enum-carrier-00>             Expires January 2005   2 

   User/Carrier ENUM                           July 2004 
   
   
      
      
  3. Proposal 
      
     We propose that a common ENUM instantiation that meets both 
     carrier and end user needs without duplication of infrastructure 
     or restriction of either party's prerogatives is possible. 
      
     As commonly discussed today, ENUM implementation is based on a 
     tiered architecture with Tier 1 containing NS records that point 
     to the Tier 2 which contains the actual NATPR records for a given 
     E.164 number. It is here proposed that, instead of NS records, 
     Tier 1 be populated with two non-terminal NAPTR records containing 
     distinct services parameters, one pointing to the end user Tier 2 
     and the other to the carrier Tier 2. 
      
     RFC 3761 defines the service field of the ENUM NAPTR record as the 
     string "E2U" (for E.164 to URI) plus some enumservice spec, e.g. 
     "E2U+sip". ENUM NAPTR records also contain the flag "u" to 
     indicate the rule is the last one and that the output is a URI. 
      
     We propose there be two classes of service  
          "E2U" for end user and, 
          "E2C" for carrier 
      
      
     populated in NAPTR records at Tier 1. Note that these would not 
     include the enumservice spec (e.g., "sip") as NAPTR records for 
     specific services would only be provided in the corresponding Tier 
     2. At Tier 2 the NAPTR records would include the full enumservice 
     spec e.g. ("E2U+sip" or "E2C+sip"). 
      
     Because the object of the query to Tier 1 is to obtain a domain 
     name to query rather than a URI, it is proposed to use the 
     Replacement field of the NAPTR rather than the Regexp as described 
     in RFC 3403 [4]. Thus records for a number in Tier 1 might look 
     like: 
      
     $Origin 9.0.3.5.7.6.8.7.9.4.1.e164.arpa. 
       IN NAPTR 100 50 "" "E2U"   "" 9.0.3.5.7.6.8.7.9.4.1.joesenum.com 
        
       IN NAPTR 100 50 "" "E2C"   "" 9.0.3.5.7.6.8.7.9.4.1.telco.net 
   
                  
   
   
  5. Security Considerations 
   
      
     Existing security considerations for ENUM detailed in [1] still 
     apply. Note that some registration validation issues concerning 
     end user ENUM may not apply to carrier ENUM. Where the Tier 1 
     registry is able to identify the carrier serving a number e.g., 
     based on industry data for number block assignments and number 
     portability, registration might be more easily automated and a 
     separate registrar not required. 
      
      

    
  <draft-pfautz-lind-enum-carrier-00>             Expires January 2005   3 

   User/Carrier ENUM                           July 2004 
   
   
  6. IANA Considerations 
      
     If the proposal offered is accepted IANA would need to update 
     existing ENUMservices registrations to add corresponding E2C 
     entries to existing E2U entries. 
      
  7. Discussion 
      
     The proposal offered here seeks to preserve and leverage the work 
     done to implement end user ENUM to support carrier ENUM in a way 
     that minimizes duplication of infrastructure, and allow carriers 
     and end users to make use of the technology without foreclosing 
     the options of either.  
      
     It is recognized that there may be instances where end users and 
     carriers both populate different NAPTR records for the same 
     capabilities (e.g., SIP) in their respective Tier 2s. In such 
     cases the client originating the ENUM query will be responsible 
     for deciding which records to make use of in initiating 
     communication. 
      
     Another issue which has prompted discussion of carrier ENUM has 
     been concerns from carriers about placing certain network 
     information in the publicly accessible DNS. Although the current 
     proposal does not specifically address this, the separation of 
     Tier 2s may facilitate restrictions on information access. 
      
      
   
   
      
  REFERENCES 
      
      
     [1]  P. Faltstrom & M. Mealing, "The E.164 to Uniform Resource       
          identifiers (URI) Dynamic Delegation Discovery System (DDDS) 
          Application (ENUM)," RFC 3761, April 2004. 
      
     [2]  International Telecommunications Union, _Supplement 3 to 
          Recommendation E.164: Operational and administrative issues 
          associated with national implementations of the ENUM 
          functions._ 
      
     [3]  ENUM Forum, _ENUM Forum Specifications for US Implementation 
          of ENUM, Document 6000_1 0, March 14, 2003. 
      
     [4]  M. Mealing, " Dynamic Delegation Discovery System (DDDS) Part 
          Three: The Domain Name system (DNS) Database," RFC 3403, 
          October 2002. 
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   

    
  <draft-pfautz-lind-enum-carrier-00>             Expires January 2005   4 

   User/Carrier ENUM                           July 2004 
   
   
  Authors' Addresses 
   
      
     Penn Pfautz 
     AT&T 
     Room E4-3A01 
     200 South Laurel Avenue 
     Middletown, NJ 07748 
     U.S.A. 
     Phone: +1-732-420-4962 
     Email: ppfautz@att.com 
      
      
     Steve Lind 
     AT&T 
     Room A201 
     180 Park Avenue, P.O. BOX 971 
     Florham Park, NJ 07932-0971   
     U.S.A. 
     Phone: +1-973-236-6787 
     Email: sdlind@att.com 
   
   
   
     Full Copyright Statement 

      
     "Copyright (C) The Internet Society (year).  This document is 
     subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 
     78, and except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their 
     rights." 
      
     "This document and the information contained herein are provided 
     on an"AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE 
     REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND 
     THE INTERNET 
     ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR 
     IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF 
     THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED 
     WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR 
     PURPOSE." 
      

















    
  <draft-pfautz-lind-enum-carrier-00>             Expires January 2005   5 


