





Network Working Group                                   Jeremy De Clercq
INTERNET DRAFT                                                   Alcatel
<draft-ietf-ppvpn-ce-based-01.txt>                            Cliff Wang
                                                              SmartPipes
                                                            Dave McDysan
                                                                Worldcom

                                                           February 2002
                                                    Expires August, 2002

                      Applicability Statement for
        Provider Provisioned CE-based Virtual Private Networks
                              using IPsec

               <draft-declercq-ppvpn-ce-based-as-00.txt>

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC 2026 ([RFC-2026]).

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This document is submitted to the IETF's Provider Provisioned Virtual
   Private Network (ppvpn) working group. Comments should be addressed
   to WG's mailing list at ppvpn@ppvpn.francetelecom.com. The charter
   may be found at http://www.ietf.org/html.charters/ppvpn-charter.html

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2000). All Rights Reserved.
   Distribution of this memo is unlimited.

Abstract

   This document is an applicability statement for Provider Provisioned
   CE-based IPsec VPNs, as discribed in [CEVPN].  This document



De Clercq et al.           Expires May 2002                    [Page 1]

Internet Draft  draft-declercq-ppvpn-ce-based-as-00.txt   February 2002


   describes how provider provisioned CE-based approaches meet the key
   requirements that are outlined in the PPVPN Applicability Statements
   Guideline document [ASGUIDE].

1. Sub-IP area summary

   This document is an output of the design team formed to develop
   applicability statements for Layer 3 PPVPNs in the PPVPN working
   group. As such this work fits within the scope of the PPVPN working
   group.  This document discusses the applicability of CE-based IPsec
   approaches for PPVPNs.

2. Introduction

   This document provides an Applicability Statement for the VPN
   solution described in [CEVPN]. We refer to these VPNs as "provider
   provisioned CE-based IPsec VPNs".

   A VPN service is provided by a Service Provider to a Customer.
   Provider provisioned CE-based IPsec VPNs are intended for the
   situation in which:

      - a SP wants to offer VPN services to its customers without
      implementing VPN specific functions in its edge or backbone
      routers;

      - the customer does not trust the access network and the backbone
      networks that are used to interconnect the customer's sites;

      - CE-to-CE VPN data might need to be forwarded through the
      Internet;

      - the customer does not want to configure and manage the VPN-
      specific functions of its edge equipment;

      - the customer trusts its SP to properly and securely configure
      and manage its CE devices, and trusts the SP to take care of the
      security of its VPN;

   There are different business scenarios wherein PP CE-based IPsec VPNs
   can be offered to a customer.

   The first case is where the different sites of a customer attach to
   the network of a particular SP, and where this SP is offering VPN
   services to its customers. In that case the SP is both the managed
   VPN provider and the network provider. This case can be extended to a
   multi-SP scenario, where the SP, offering the VPN service and the
   network service, has trusting agreements with other SPs to enable



De Clercq et al.           Expires May 2002                    [Page 2]

Internet Draft  draft-declercq-ppvpn-ce-based-as-00.txt   February 2002


   customer sites that are not attached to the former SP to belong to
   the same VPN.

   The second case is where the different sites of a customer have
   access to the Internet via the (I)SP of their choice and where a
   (VPN) SP ('the SP') manages the customer's CE devices for VPN
   purposes.

   The basic scenario is the following. Every CE device has IP
   connectivity with the other CE devices that will belong to the same
   VPN (this can be via a SP's 'private network' or via the Internet).
   The SP's management system provisions the site's CE devices with the
   necessary topology and security information. The CE devices establish
   IPsec protected tunnels to the appropriate peering CE devices
   (according to the VPN's topology). The VPN sites start exchanging
   reachability information by tunneling routing protocol messages
   through the IPsec protected tunnels. Alternatively, the SP may
   provision static routes or tunnel  traffic policy to the CEs,
   especially for those small size VPNs. Under that scenario, dynamic
   routing protocol tunneling is not required.

   In CE-based VPNs, there are different aspects that need to be
   provisioned on the customers' CE devices: the tunnels, the (IPsec)
   security aspects, the intra- and inter-site routing aspects. Now,
   depending on what aspects are provisioned by the SP and what aspects
   are provisioned by the customer, different scenarios can be
   considered, and these scenarios may have a different applicability.

   We can consider the following scenarios :

      (a) the customer provisions all aspects : this scenario will not
      be considered here, as it does not belong to the provider
      provisioned scope.

      (b) the SP provisions the VPN tunnels and the security aspects.
      The routing aspects are under control of the VPN customer: the
      customer treats the provisioned tunnels as (virtual) direct
      interfaces towards the other CE devices.

      (c) the SP provisions the VPN tunnels, the security aspects and
      the routing aspects in the CE devices. This means that the SP has
      complete control of the CE device (that has most likely been
      provided to the customer by that SP).

      (d) the SP provisions the CE devices and the other routers in the
      customer's site.

   This applicability statements document will cover scenarios (b) and



De Clercq et al.           Expires May 2002                    [Page 3]

Internet Draft  draft-declercq-ppvpn-ce-based-as-00.txt   February 2002


   (c).

   When dynamic routing is used, and the customers are responsible for
   the routing aspects on the CE devices (scenario (b)), the customers
   are free to choose the routing protocol(s) they want to use to
   distribute the reachability information (as long as these can be
   tunneled over IP or GRE). Note that the CEs in different sites are
   direct routing peers. The Service Provider does not interact in the
   customer routing.

   In the case that the SP manages all aspects on the CE device
   (scenario (c)), the customers are limited in the choice of their IGP
   to the IGPs that the SP provides on the CE devices.

   For provider provisioned CE-based IPsec VPNs, the topology of the VPN
   has an important impact on the scalability and the performance of the
   solution. All kinds of VPN topologies are supported by PP CE-based
   IPsec VPNs: hub and spoke topology, partial mesh topology, full mesh
   topology.

   In [CEVPN], the SP is responsible for provisioning the CE-devices
   with the necessary security information. Indeed, the CE devices that
   will use IPsec to protect the inter-site traffic, need (long-term)
   secure credentials. These credentials will be used by a key exchange
   protocol (such as IKE) to generate the actual (short-term) keys that
   will be used to protect the data traffic.

   One option for the (long-term) credentials is for the SP to directly
   configure them in the CE devices in the form of pre-shared keys
   (PSK). Alternatively, the SP can provide a public key infrastructure
   (PKI) to its VPN customers.

3. Applicability based on requirements that are common to all PPVPN
   types

3.1 Isolated exchange of routing and data information

3.1.1 Isolated data forwarding

   With CE-based IPsec VPNs, tunnels are deployed between CE devices.
   These tunnels are either IP-in-IP (or GRE) tunnels that are protected
   via IPsec in transport mode, or IPsec tunnel mode tunnels.

   In both cases, the forwarding in the shared infrastructure (access
   network and SP network(s)) is based on the IP addresses in the
   packets' outer IP header. These IP addresses can be public IP
   addresses (e.g. when the Internet is used for the CE-to-CE
   forwarding), or more generally IP addresses that belong the SP's



De Clercq et al.           Expires May 2002                    [Page 4]

Internet Draft  draft-declercq-ppvpn-ce-based-as-00.txt   February 2002


   addressing realm (these might be private addresses when the
   interconnectivity between CEs is offered by a particular SP). Note
   that if IP unnumbered is used between CE and PE devices, this IP
   address actually belongs to the PE.

   Isolated exchange of data information is assured because :

      (i) IP routing and forwarding takes care of forwarding the
      encapsulated IP packets to the correct destination CEs in the
      shared infrastructure, using the destination address in the IPsec
      packets.

      (ii) the customer IP packets can, if necessary, be encrypted on
      every CE-to-CE part of the network; as such, no intermediate
      router or other device that does not belong to the same VPN can
      read the customer traffic, even if mis-routing occurs. This is
      particularly applicable in the case that the Internet is used for
      forwarding the CE-to-CE traffic, as the SP then doesn't have
      control on the actual path of the customer traffic.

3.1.2 Constrained distribution of reachability to only VPN sites

   The distribution of VPN IP reachability information among VPN sites
   is achieved by tunneling the reachability information (in the form of
   routing protocol messages) through the CE-to-CE VPN tunnels. CE
   devices must be configured to forward  reachability information only
   to those interfaces that are associated with the particular VPN : the
   intra-site interfaces and the IPsec-protected interfaces that lead to
   the other sites that belong to the same VPN.

   As such, the reachability information of one VPN site will only be
   distributed to other sites that belong to the same VPN. This also
   makes sure that VPN routes will not be distributed into the Internet,
   and that Internet routes will not be distributed to VPN sites (unless
   this behavior is explicitely expected and provisioned).

   Of course, configuration errors by the SP can compromise the
   constrained distribution of reachability, and the overall security of
   the VPN.

   [Note: A more detailed analysis of the effect of mis-configuration
   (how much must be mis-configured and what is the result or damage ?)
   will be discussed in a next version of this applicability statements
   draft.]

3.1.3 Internal VPN topology not visible to shared public network

   Note that in addition to the fact that the VPN reachability



De Clercq et al.           Expires May 2002                    [Page 5]

Internet Draft  draft-declercq-ppvpn-ce-based-as-00.txt   February 2002


   information distribution is isolated, the reachability information
   can also be carried in an encrypted form on the CE-to-CE part of the
   network. This means that even when misconfiguration, misrouting or
   malicious snooping occurs, the internal topology of the VPN is not
   visible outside of the considered VPN.

3.2 Overlapping customer address space

   In CE-based IPsec VPNs, it is assumed that the CE devices have one IP
   address that is public or that belongs to the SP's routing realm.
   These are the IP addresses that will be used in the encapsulating
   (outer) IP headers of the packets that will be sent on the CE-PE
   link. Next to this IP address (that will never be used by the
   customer's IGP for intra-site routing and forwarding), there is no
   constraint on the IP addresses that are internally used within the
   VPN.

   Overlapping customer addresses are  supported (meaning that different
   VPN customers that are provisioned by the same (or different) SP may
   use overlapping address spaces). There is no requirement that such
   addresses be in conformance with RFC 1918. There is no requirement
   that customer VPN addresses be distinct from addresses in the SP
   network.

   Any set of addresses used in the VPN can be supported, irrespective
   of how they are assigned, how well they aggregate, whether they are
   public or private. However, the set of addresses which are reachable
   from a given site must be unique.

   Network address translation for packets leaving/entering a VPN is
   possible, and is transparent to the VPN scheme.

3.3 Management

   [Note : this section will be completed in following versions of this
   draft.]

3.3.1 Configuration/provisioning

3.3.2 Monitoring

3.3.3 Customer management

3.3.4 SLA monitoring

3.3.5 Security

3.4 Migration impacts



De Clercq et al.           Expires May 2002                    [Page 6]

Internet Draft  draft-declercq-ppvpn-ce-based-as-00.txt   February 2002


   The migration impacts that are discussed here deal with :

      (i) a customer who migrates from a legacy (frame-relay type)
      Layer-2 VPN to a provider provisioned CE-based IPsec VPN, or

      (ii) a customer who migrates from a customer provisioned CE-based
      IPsec VPN to a provider provisioned CE-based IPsec VPN.

3.4.1 Functions to be added to the customer's CE device

   - migration scenario (i)

      Assuming that the customer CE router has IP connectivity with the
      PE router, the following functionality needs to be added on the
      customer equipment:

         - the customer's CE device needs to implement the IPsec
         protocol suite and an IPsec key exchange functionality, such as
         IKE.

         - the CE device needs to support a highly secure management
         channel from the SP's management system.

         - the CE device's routing protocol(s) need to treat the
         different IPsec secured CE-to-CE tunnels as independent
         interfaces.

   - migration scenario (ii)

      TBD.

3.4.2 functions to be added by the Service Provider

   - The SP needs to deploy a secure management system that is able to
   configure and manage a large amount of CE devices per VPN customer.

   - In the case that the SP is also the backbone network provider, the
   SP needs to provide IP connectivity between CE devices.

   - The SP needs to be able to define topology, security protection,
   and reach-ability attributes for each customer VPN it manages.

   - The SP needs to be able to configure each managed CE, based on the
   attributes of the VPN that the CE belongs to.

   - The SP needs to be able to update each VPN, based on customer needs
   from time to time. Changes such as adding or deleting VPN sites,
   upgrading VPN functions are common.



De Clercq et al.           Expires May 2002                    [Page 7]

Internet Draft  draft-declercq-ppvpn-ce-based-as-00.txt   February 2002


   - The SP needs to have the capability of managing and monitoring the
   SLA of its VPN.

   - The SP needs to be able to gather and creating appropriate usage
   and accounting report for each VPN it manages.

3.5 Supported topologies and traffic types

   Provider provisioned CE-based IPsec VPNs allow for all desired
   topologies: fully meshed VPNs, hub and spoke VPNs, partially meshed
   VPNs, etc.

   The customer VPN may carry both user data and control data. User data
   is the site-to-site traffic that carries user applications. The
   control data may contain site-to-site reachability, keep-alives, etc.

   Provider provisioned CE-based IPsec VPNs are not targetted at
   providing Layer-2 services. By (GRE- or IP-) encapsulating Layer-2
   datagrams at the CE devices first, this traffic-type can be
   transported with CE-based IPsec VPNs.

   Carrying multicast traffic with CE-based IPsec VPNs will require the
   (GRE- or IP-) encapsulation of multicast-packets at the CE devices
   first.

4. Applicability based on requirements that are specific to Layer-3
   PPVPNs

   Note that the use of the IPsec protocol suite is not a requirement
   per se with regards to provider provisioned CE-based VPNs. A SP could
   offer a VPN service that uses non-encrypted or authenticated site-
   to-site tunnels (using e.g. IP-in-IP, GRE, L2TP).

   Whether (IPsec) secured tunnels are used or not has a large impact on
   the applicability of the offered VPN service. This version of the
   applicability statements draft focusses on IPsec-secured CE-based
   VPNs.

4.1 Security

   [Note : A more detailed analysis of provider provisioned CE-based
   IPsec VPNs with regards to security will be documented in a next
   version of this applicability statements draft.]

4.1.1 Customer data security

   Customer data, both control plane data and user plane data are
   encapsulated by IPsec before sent to the shared SP backbone. The



De Clercq et al.           Expires May 2002                    [Page 8]

Internet Draft  draft-declercq-ppvpn-ce-based-as-00.txt   February 2002


   customer data remain to be protected until it reaches the peer CE.
   When the customer data is encrypted by IPsec, it is considered secure
   when it is being transferred through the shared IP backbone.

   [Note : A more detailed analysis of the customer data security will
   be documented in a next version of this draft.]

4.1.2 SP data security

   A management channel exists between SP and the managed CE. It is
   important for SP to build a secure management channel to prevent
   attacks from the adversary.

   [Note: A more detailed analysis of the SP data security will be
   documented in a next version of this draft.]

4.2 Tunneling

4.2.1 Supported tunneling techniques

   In provider provisioned CE-based IPsec VPNs, VPN tunnels are
   initiated and terminated at the CE devices, and it is assumed that
   the PE devices receive IP packets from the CE-PE links. This limits
   the supported tunneling techniques to IP-in-IP, L2TP, GRE and IPsec
   (tunnel mode). [CEVPN] uses IPsec (transport mode) protected IP-in-IP
   or GRE tunnels, or IPsec tunnel mode tunnels.

4.2.2 Tunnel termination points

   The tunnel termination points in CE-based IPsec VPNs are the CE
   devices.

4.3 QoS

   TBD.

4.4 Scalability

   See section 5.1

4.5 Internet Access from within a VPN

   [Note : this section will be completed in future versions of this
   draft.]

   When the CE-based VPN traffic shares the access with Internet-
   traffic, a denial of service attack from sites outside the VPN is
   possible, while such an attack can only come from other VPN sites



De Clercq et al.           Expires May 2002                    [Page 9]

Internet Draft  draft-declercq-ppvpn-ce-based-as-00.txt   February 2002


   when the access connection is not shared with the Internet.

5. Applicability based on requirements that are specific to CE-based
   PPVPNs using IPsec

   An important aspect of CE-based PPVPNs using IPsec is the presence of
   a key-distribution system. This is the system that provides the CE
   devices with the (long term) credentials.

   When this key distribution system provides the CE devices with pre-
   shared keys, then this key distribution can be done together with the
   configuration of the CE devices by the SP management system.
   Alternatively, the SP may provide its VPNs with a Public Key
   Infrastructure, with the cost of extra complexity.

5.1 Scalability

   This section discusses how certain specific VPN-metrics affect the
   scalability of the VPN-solution.

5.1.1 Number of supported VPNs

   It is assumed that a certain site is only part of one VPN.
   Architectures that allow sites to be a member of multiple VPNs will
   have impact on the CE devices and on the supported addressing
   schemes.

   When a site can be a member of only one VPN, the number of VPNs that
   a SP can support has an impact on the SP's management system.

   For every supported VPN, the SP's management system will need to be
   able to provision every site's CE device that belongs to that VPN.
   The management system will need to maintain information that is
   specific for every VPN site (IP addresses of the other peering sites
   in the considered VPN, security information, etc.).

   The number of VPNs that a SP can support is dependent on the number
   of sites per VPN and is limited by the number of management sessions
   the SP's VPN management system can support and the amount of VPN
   information the SP's VPN database can maintain.

   Note however that when the number of VPNs increases, the SP can
   deploy additional management systems with their own VPN databases :
   the SP can use multiple independent management systems as there is no
   interaction between different VPNs.

5.1.2 Number of sites per VPN




De Clercq et al.           Expires May 2002                   [Page 10]

Internet Draft  draft-declercq-ppvpn-ce-based-as-00.txt   February 2002


   In a fully-meshed VPN, the number of sites per VPN has an impact on
   the CE devices within that VPN and on the SP's management system.

   In a particular fully-meshed VPN, for every additional site, a
   certain CE router needs to maintain an additional VPN tunnel (in the
   form of an additional Security Association) and additional
   reachability information.

   For every VPN site, the SP's management system will need to maintain
   some information and will need to be able to establish a management
   connection to the site's CE device.

   The number of sites per VPN has an impact of O(n) on the CE devices,
   and has an impact of O(n^2) on the number of tunnels that the SP
   management system needs to provision (in a fully-meshed VPN).

   In VPNs that are not fully meshed (partial mesh or hub and spoke
   topology), the impact of the number of sites per VPN on the
   scalability of the system is reduced.

   In a hub and spoke VPN, the CE of the hub site still needs to
   maintain as much tunnels as there are other sites (n-1), and will
   still need to maintain the complete set of VPN routes. The CEs of the
   spoke sites on the other hand, need only to maintain one tunnel
   towards the hub CE. Moreover, in a hub and spoke topology, the spoke
   CEs may not need to maintain the other CE's routes: a default route
   towards the hub CE may suffice. The SP's management system needs to
   maintain O(n) tunnels in a hub and spoke VPN.

5.1.3 Number of tunnels per VPN

   The number of tunnels per VPN depends on the number of sites per VPN
   and on the VPN topology.

   The hub-and-spoke topology requires the least amount of tunnels to
   provide inter-connection among all participating sites (O(n)), while
   a fully meshed VPN requires the most tunnels (O(n^2)).

   Aside from the number of tunnels, the VPN security attributes also
   affect the scalability of a VPN. For example, when a VPN uses 3DES as
   the tunnel encryption scheme, the total number of tunnels that a hub
   may support may be smaller than the case when e.g. DES is selected.

5.1.4 Number of tunnels per CE

   The number of tunnels to be supported by a CE device has implications
   on the performance of that CE device : every supported tunnel
   represents a new interface; every tunnel is protected by a specific



De Clercq et al.           Expires May 2002                   [Page 11]

Internet Draft  draft-declercq-ppvpn-ce-based-as-00.txt   February 2002


   Security Association.

   The overall CE performace will decline when the number of tunnels
   increases as the memory consumption increases and the processing
   increases. The increase of the processing is manyfold:

    - packets that are sent over a specific tunnel will need to be
   authenticated and/or encrypted

    - every Security Association that protects a tunnel needs to be
   frequently re-negotiated. This (frequent) re-keying of existing
   (permanent) tunnels requires a certain amount of processing (key
   generation) and of control protocol message exchanges (via IKE or an
   alternative key exchange protocol).

   The number of tunnels a CE will need to support at a given time can
   be dependent on whether 'traffic-driven' tunnel set-up or 'traffic-
   independent' tunnel set-up is used.

   Note that the use of traffic-driven tunnel set-up has important
   implications. In traffic-driven tunnel establishment, if a certain
   tunnel does not carry traffic during a certain amount of time, the
   IPsec SA will be removed. When traffic starts flowing again, a new
   Security Association will need to be established first. The two
   tunnel endpoints will re-negotiate the necessary SAs, and will
   generate the necessary key material. This behavior does not only
   introduce control protocol message exchanges but also a considerable
   delay in the forwarding of the user packets.

   Note also that the inter-site reachability distribution interacts
   with traffic-driven tunnel establishment : routing protocols send
   routing updates and keep-alive messages, even when no actual user
   traffic is flowing.

   As such, traffic-driven tunnel set-up may be applicable in CE-based
   IPsec PPVPNs that use statically provisioned routing information. The
   use in an environment that dynamically distributes inter-site
   reachability is much more complicated and not advised.

   The impact of the number of tunnels per CE on the customer's IGP is
   TBD.

5.1.5 Number of routes per VPN

   The number of routes per VPN has only an impact on the CE devices.
   The SP network and management system are not affected by the number
   of routes per VPN (except when static routes are configured by the
   SP).



De Clercq et al.           Expires May 2002                   [Page 12]

Internet Draft  draft-declercq-ppvpn-ce-based-as-00.txt   February 2002


   In a fully-meshed VPN, the number of routes a VPN can support is
   limited by the maximum number of routes that the 'smallest' CE can
   maintain.

   In a VPN with a hub and spoke topology, the number of routes a VPN
   can support is limited by the maximum number of routes that the hub
   CE can maintain.

5.1.6 Rate of configuration changes

   TBD.

5.1.7 Impact of adding a new site : how does this increase control
   traffic; convergence time ?

   TBD.

5.1.8 Performance impact

   The deployment of a CE-based VPN will have a performance impact on
   the system.

   With regards to the control plane, the CE devices will need to
   negotiate Security Associations and generate cryptographic key
   material. The initial SA negotiations are triggered by SP
   provisioning or by traffic flowing (traffic-driven SA setup).
   Established SA's need to be frequently 'refreshed' : new key material
   needs to be generated and exchanged. As such, the maintenance of SA's
   introduces a constant load on the CE's control plane.

   In the data-plane, the use of IPsec protected CE-to-CE tunnels means
   that every IP packet that is sent from one CE to another needs to be
   encrypted and/or authenticated by IPsec. This affects the performance
   as it requires additional processing and introduces some delay.

   Note that in a hub and spoke topology, this impact is doubled: a
   packet that flows from one spoke site to an other spoke site will be
   encrypted at the first spoke's CE, decrypted at the hub CE, routed at
   the hub CE, encrypted at the hub CE and finally decrypted at the
   second spoke's CE router.

   [Note : The scalability analysis of the SP's eventually provisioned
   PKI will be discussed in further versions of this draft.]

5.2 Addressing

   See section 3.2




De Clercq et al.           Expires May 2002                   [Page 13]

Internet Draft  draft-declercq-ppvpn-ce-based-as-00.txt   February 2002


5.3 Management

5.3.1 Configuration/provisioning

   Configuration by the SP comes in at two levels: VPN level and CE
   level.

   At the VPN level, the topology and security requirements must be
   determined. Common topologies include hub and spoke and full mesh.
   For large VPNs, a combination of simple topologies may be used, such
   as a full mesh core that connects individual hub and spoke
   topologies. A given VPN must have a general security grade selected,
   since every link of the VPN is expected to meet this security grade.
   In addition to the topology and security information, at the VPN
   level, when no inter-site tunneled dynamic routing is required, the
   reachability information may also be determined.

   At the CE level, each CE must know all of its CE peers in the same
   VPN, the security parameters, the tunnel attributes, the device or
   tunnel authentication credentials, and any associated routing setups.

5.3.2 Monitoring

   TBD.

5.3.3 Customer management

   Since a customer outsources the VPN provisioning and management, it
   may not have the permission to change any of the VPN parameters in
   its CE devices.

5.3.4 SLA monitoring

   TBD.

5.3.5 Security

   TBD.

5.3.6 Fault handling

   The faults that occur in the network(s) that interconnect CEs have an
   impact on the CE-to-CE routing.

   If the timers used for the CE-to-CE routing peering are shorter than
   the timers used for the routing peering within the service
   provider(s) network, then a single failure within a service provider
   network may look like a collection of uncorrelated failures in the



De Clercq et al.           Expires May 2002                   [Page 14]

Internet Draft  draft-declercq-ppvpn-ce-based-as-00.txt   February 2002


   VPN.

   Moreover, since a CE doesn't really "know" what causes the failure,
   the CE may react to such a failure by re-routing along some other
   tunnel, while this other tunnel may be also affected by the same
   failure. As a result, this would slow down routing convergence within
   the VPN.

   To avoid the problems mentioned above one may consider making the
   timers used for the CE-to-CE peering longer than the timers used for
   the routing peering within the service provider network (so that
   failures within the service provider network would be "invisible" to
   the CE-CE tunnels). But that has its own set of problems.  While this
   may be possible to accomplish within a single routing domain (one
   needs to appropriately set the IGP timers within the domain), doing
   this in a network that includes more than one routing domain may be
   fairly problematic (as timers include both IGP and BGP timers, and
   moreover, timers include IGP timers in several routing domains).
   Moreover, making the timers used for the CE-to-CE peering over the
   tunnels longer than the timers used for the routing peering within
   the service provider network would increase the amount of traffic
   that will be "black holed" in the case of CE failures.

5.4 QoS and SLA

   In addition to the VPN service (reachability and security) from the
   SP, the VPN customer may want to acquire QoS features for its VPN.
   Dependent on the business scenario, the SLA will be provided by the
   VPN SP or by the Network Provider.

   Note that the fact that customer IP packets are encapsulated (and
   possibly encrypted) at the CE devices has an impact on the QoS
   treatment of the IP packets: QoS-related information inside the
   customer IP packets may become invisible.

   An eventual translation of QoS-related fields (e.g. DSCP) in the
   inner IP header to QoS-related fields in the outer IP headers need to
   be done at the CE-level.

   [Note: A more detailed discussion of QoS and SLAs will be provided in
   a next version of this draft.]

5.5 Access Network requirements

5.5.1 Access types supported

   CE-based IPsec VPNs are applicable in every access scenario where the
   CE device has IP connectivity with the PE device. Every CE device



De Clercq et al.           Expires May 2002                   [Page 15]

Internet Draft  draft-declercq-ppvpn-ce-based-as-00.txt   February 2002


   only needs one IP address that is routable in the shared backbone.
   This CE-PE IP connectivity may be provided over any Layer-2
   infrastructure (PPP, ATM, Frame Relay, etc.).

5.5.2 Access QoS support

   TBD.

5.5.3 Access security support

   CE-based IPsec VPNs have the additional advantage that the security
   of the VPN is not dependent on the security of the access network.
   Customer data packets may traverse the access network in an encrypted
   way.

   Note however that, as IP packets that are sent from CE to PE are not
   authenticated by the PE devices, the CE-based IPsec VPN model does
   not protect against resource spoofing by invalid users. An intruder
   can still inject traffic on the access link, which will be forwarded
   by the PE device.

6. Security considerations

   This draft contains sections that discuss the security of provider
   provisioned CE-based IPsec VPNs.

7. Acknowledgements

   The authors of this draft would like to thank Eric Rosen, Yakov
   Rekhter, Tom Nadeau and Marco Carugi for their valuable comments and
   suggestions.

8. References

   [ASGUIDE] Sumimoto J., et al., "Guidelines of Applicability State-
             ments for PPVPNs," work in progress.

   [CEVPN]   De Clercq J., et al., "Provider Provisioned CE-based Vir-
             tual Private Networks using IPsec", draft-ietf-ppvpn-ce-
             based-01.txt, work in progress.

   [FRMWORK] Callon R., et al., "A Framework for Layer-3 Provider Pro-
             visioned Virtual Private Networks," work in progress.

   [REQS]    Carugi M., McDysan D., et al., "Service Requirements for
             Layer-3 Provider Provisioned Virtual Private Networks,"
             work in progress




De Clercq et al.           Expires May 2002                   [Page 16]

Internet Draft  draft-declercq-ppvpn-ce-based-as-00.txt   February 2002


   [1918]    Rekhter Y., et al., "Address Allocation for Private Inter-
             nets," RFC 1918, February 1996.

   [2026]    Bradner S., "The Internet Standards Process - Revision 3,"
             RFC 2026, October 1996.


9. Authors' Addresses

   Jeremy De Clercq
   Alcatel
   Fr. Wellesplein 1, 2018 Antwerpen, Belgium
   E-mail: jeremy.de_clercq@alcatel.be

   Cliff Wang
   SmartPipes
   565 Metro Place South
   Dublin, OH 43017, USA
   Phone:  1-614-923-6241
   E-mail:  cwang@smartpipes.com

   Dave McDysan
   WorldCom
   22001 Loudoun County Parkway
   Ashburn VA 20147, USA
   E-mail: dave.mcdysan@wcom.com

























De Clercq et al.           Expires May 2002                   [Page 17]

