                     Internet-Telephony Directory           April 2000

   Telephone Number Mapping (enum)                             D. Peek
                                                             R. Walter
                                                            D. Ranalli
   Internet Draft                                              VMA-TWG
   Document: draft-peek-enum-itd-00.txt>                    April 2000
   Category: Informational


                     Internet-Telephony Directory for
                    Mapping E.164 to Internet Addresses


Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 [1].

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of
   six months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
   documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts
   as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in
   progress."  The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

1. Abstract

   A holistic directory system is described which translates a standard
   E.164 telephone number into the Internet address information
   required to support IP-enabled communications applications such as
   real-time voice, voice-messaging, fax or unified-messaging. The
   proposed system utilizes two logical control tiers to implement the
   translation.

   The first logical control tier is patterned after a Top Level Domain
   (TLD) of the Internet Domain Name System (DNS).  This first-tier
   provides a mechanism for locating the appropriate directory within
   the second logical tier of the Internet-Telephony directory system
   where authoritative Internet address information is stored for a
   given E.164 number.  This first-tier is expected to conform to the
   regulatory and operational standards defined by the Internet
   Corporation for the Assignment of Names and Numbers (ICANN) for the
   operation of top-level domains.

   The second logical control tier provides a mechanism for accessing
   and managing authoritative Internet address information associated
   with an E.164 number.  This tier consists of widely distributed DNS
   servers controlled by service providers, and corporate network
   operators.  Distributed ownership of the second tier directories
   allows organizations to control the Internet address information
   associated with the E.164 numbers under their day-to-day control.







Peek, Walter, Ranalli     Expires - October 2000                     1

                     Internet-Telephony Directory           April 2000


                          Table of Contents


   1.    Abstract                                               1

   2.    Conventions used in this document                      3
   2.1     Terminology                                          3

   3.    Introduction                                           5
   3.1     Overview                                             5
   3.2     Requirements                                         5

   4.    System Description                                     6
   4.1     Directory Locator Service (DLS)                      6
   4.1.1   The E.164 Domain Name Space                          7
   4.1.2   Multiple Application Support                         7
   4.1.3   Application Specific E.164 Domain Name Resolution    8
   4.2     Authoritative Directory Service (ADS)                9
   4.2.1   Resource Record for URI's                            9

   5.    E.164 Domain Name Registration                         10
   5.1     Background & Scope                                   10
   5.2     List Of Actors                                       10
   5.3     DLS Registration Process                             11

   6.    Application Scenarios                                  11
   6.1     SIP appliction                                       11
   6.2     VPIM application using LDAP                          12
   6.3     VPIM application without LDAP                        12
   6.4     Multiple Internet-Telephony service providers        13

   7.    Security Considerations                                13
   7.1     DLS Security                                         13
   7.2     ADS Security                                         13

   8.    Prevous Work                                           13

   9.    References                                             14

   10.   Acknowledgments                                        15

   11.   Author's Addresses                                     15

   Appendix A.    Conflict Resolution Process                   16

   Full Copyright Statement                                     17















Peek, Walter, Ranalli     Expires - October 2000                     2

                     Internet-Telephony Directory           April 2000

2. Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in
   this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [2].

2.1 Terminology

   A-record             - Address Record; a standard DNS resource
                           record.

   ADS                  - Authoritative Directory Service. The second
                           logical control tier of the Internet-
                           Telephony Directory.

   DLS                  - Directory Locator Service.  The first logical
                           control tier of the Internet-Telephony
                           Directory.

   DNS                  - Domain Name System

   E.164 Number         - International telephone number as defined
                           by the ITU E.164/I.331 [13] standard.
                           (e.g. 16033624315)

   E.164 Subscriber     - Corporation or individual that has subscribed
                           to a PSTN service and been assigned one or
                           more associated E.164 numbers.

   EMA                  - E-Business Forum (www.ema.org)

   ENUM                 - IETF Telephone Number Mapping work group.

   ITD                  - Internet-Telephony Directory defined in this
                           Document.

   ITU                  - International Telecommunications Union.  See
                           www.itu.org.

   ICANN                - Internet Corporation for the Assignment of
                           Names and Numbers (ICANN).

   IETF                 - Internet Engineering Task Force(www.ietf.org)

   Internet Address     - General term that provides a simple and
                           extensible means for identifying an Internet
                           resource. Used synonymously with a URI.

   LDAP                 - Lightweight Directory Access Protocol;

   NAPTR-Record         - Naming Authority PoinTeR; a standard DNS
                           resource record.

   NS-record            - Name Server record; a standard DNS resource
                           record


   PSTN Carrier         - Telephone company that assigns E.164 numbers
                           to E.164 subscribers. (Corporations or
                           individuals)


Peek, Walter, Ranalli     Expires - October 2000                     3

                     Internet-Telephony Directory           April 2000


   Registrant           - E.164 subscriber (corporation or individual)
                           that has registered one or more E.164
                           numbers in the Internet-Telephony directory.

   SIP                  _ Session Initiation Protocol; used in
                           establishing a voice over IP call.

   TXT-Record           - Text record; a standard DNS resource record.

   URI                  - Uniform Resource Identifier
                           (i.e. sip:joe@acme.com, ldap://server.com)

   VMA                  - International Association for Enhanced Voice
                           Services. (www.ivma.ch)

   VPIM                 - Voice Profile for Internet Mail

   Zone                 - A region of a domain name space that is
                           managed by a DNS name server.










































Peek, Walter, Ranalli     Expires - October 2000                     4

                     Internet-Telephony Directory           April 2000


3. Introduction

3.1 Overview

   This document defines the architecture of an Internet telephony
   directory system suitable for global deployment.  It draws upon
   information contained in the many previous proposals related to
   Internet directory services.  This document attempts to extract the
   most useful features of each proposal and meld them into an approach
   designed to best meet the needs of the entire Internet-Telephony
   industry.

   A serious impediment to the development and acceptance of Internet-
   Telephony services is the different addressing schemes employed by
   the Public Switched Telephone Network (PSTN) and the Internet.  A
   global directory service that enables the translation of a PSTN
   telephone number (E.164 number) into a corresponding Internet
   address eliminates this impediment.  The precise nature and
   structure of such a directory has been the object of considerable
   speculation, research and discussion.  A number of companies and
   technical groups, including the VMA, EMA, IETF and various
   organizations within the ITU have made numerous contributions to
   this effort.

   Telephone numbers follow a well-defined format governed by the E.164
   standard of the International Telecommunications Union (ITU).
   Therefore, translating a telephone number into an Internet address
   is a rather straightforward task.  However, complexities emerge as
   the concept is expanded globally and extended to include multiple
   Internet-Telephony service providers, each providing different
   services tied to the same E.164 number.

   Consensus appears to have emerged on at least two key points:

     -  The Internet Domain Name System (DNS) is an excellent
        technology for the first-tier of the Internet Telephony
        Directory.

     -  A single-tier system cannot adequately meet the needs of all
        Internet-Telephony applications.  Scalability, operational
        complexity and information control issues, all mitigate against
        a single tier model.

   The system proposed herein utilizes the Internet Domain Name System
   within a two-tier logical control model to translate an E.164
   telephone number into an application specific Internet Address.


   Please send comments on this document to the ENUM working group or
   directly to peek@evds.com.











Peek, Walter, Ranalli     Expires - October 2000                     5

                     Internet-Telephony Directory           April 2000

   3.2 Requirements

   The directory solution:

        1. MUST be globally accessible.

        2. MUST be highly scalable, responsive, and efficient in its
           use of network resources.

        3. MUST be flexible enough to support the addressing
           requirements of all Internet-Telephony applications. (e.g.
           Voice messaging, IP-Telephony, Fax, etc.)

        4. Must support multiple Internet-Telephony applications per
           E.164 number that may be provided by different application
           service providers. (e.g. IP-Centrex from one provider and
           Unified-Messaging from another application service provider)


4.  System Description

   The system proposed herein utilizes DNS within a two-tier control
   model to translate an E.164 telephone number into an application
   specific Internet Address.  The first-tier is a "Directory Locator
   Service" (DLS) that maps an E.164 telephone number into the IP
   address of a second-tier authoritative directory.  The second-tier
   is an "Authoritative Directory Service" (ADS) that translates an
   E.164 number into an application specific Internet address.

4.1 Directory Locator Service (DLS)

   The DLS provides the high-level function of referring a requesting
   Internet-Telephony application to the Authoritative Directory
   Service (ADS) containing the desired Internet address information
   associated with an E.164 number.  The DLS is envisioned as a global
   resource for the entire Internet-Telephony industry and as such, is
   an ideal candidate for an Internet Domain Name System "Top Level
   Domain" (TLD).

   Following conventions observed with all existing top-level domains,
   (i.e., .com, .net, .org, etc.) the DLS utilizes Name Server (NS)
   records and associated A records to delegate authority to
   subordinate Name Servers.  This system allows an Internet-Telephony
   application or platform to iteratively access a hierarchy of DNS
   name servers until the desired resource record information is found
   or until the search is exhausted.  This process is commonly referred
   to as "resolution".  See RFC1034 [12] for more information.

   A Directory Locator Service defined as a DNS top-level domain offers
   several advantages:

        - A top-level Internet domain is a global resource that
          operates under a well-defined regulatory and operational
          structure.

        - Through the use of standard DNS resolution, a single query is
          sufficient to locate the desired Internet address
          information.




Peek, Walter, Ranalli     Expires - October 2000                     6

                     Internet-Telephony Directory           April 2000

4.1.1 The E.164 Domain Name Space

   The current practice for IETF ENUM working group documents is to use
   "e164.foo" when referring to top-level domains.  This document
   proposes the creation of a new top-level domain called "tel" as the
   root domain of the E.164 domain name space.  Sub-domains of "tel"
   may not be arbitrarily defined; rather they are defined in
   accordance with the ITU E.164/I.331 [14] standard. For simplicity of
   understanding the context and use of this proposed TLD, the examples
   in this document utilize the "tel" top-level domain in place of
   "e164.foo".

   An E.164 standard [14] telephone number consists of a country code
   and a nationally specific part.  For reasons of scalability,
   reliability and flexibility, the E.164 domain name space should be
   partitioned into a number of zones distributed across multiple name
   servers.  The segmentation of an E.164 number into a country code
   and a nationally specific part, with the latter further segmented by
   area-code/city-code, presents natural boundaries for such
   partitioning.

4.1.2 Multiple Application Support

   One of the key design requirements of the Internet Telephony
   Directory is the ability to support multiple Internet-Telephony
   applications using a single E.164 number.  For example, a single
   E.164 number will frequently be used for both real-time voice
   (SIP/H.323) and voice messaging (VPIM) applications.

   This multi-application requirement has been addressed in all
   previous ENUM drafts.  The Internet-Telephony Directory system
   described in this document further advances this concept by enabling
   various application specific Internet addresses tied to a single
   E.164 number to be controlled by different service providers.

   Consider the following scenario:  A company wants to use Service
   Provider-A for an IP-enabled real-time voice service and Service
   Provider-B for a unified messaging service.  Both service providers
   require control over the Internet address information associated
   with their respective services.  As a result, the requirement exists
   to distribute control of Internet address information at the
   application level.  Further qualifying a name within the E.164
   domain name space through the addition of an application specific
   prefix or "Service Protocol", fulfills this requirement.

   The Service Protocol naming conventions associated with various
   Internet-Telephony applications are subject to standardization.  For
   example, the list of supported Service Protocol names might include:

        sip or h323     (for voice over IP applications)
        vpim            (for voice messaging service)
        smtp            (for e-mail and unified messaging applications)
        fax             (for IP-fax applications)

   These example names correspond to several of the service names
   discussed in the ENUM workgroup.  This list will increase as new and
   different IP-communications services become available.





Peek, Walter, Ranalli     Expires - October 2000                     7

                     Internet-Telephony Directory           April 2000


4.1.3  Application Specific E.164 Domain Name Resolution

   Internet-Telephony applications query the DLS using a DNS query
   based on an application specific E.164 domain name.  The following
   steps define its formulation:

   1.   Start with a complete E.164 telephone number.

                Example: +1-603-362-4315

   2.   Remove all characters other than digits.

                Example: 16033624315

   3.   Reverse the order of the phone number.

                Example: 51342633061

   4.   Insert a "." between each digit and at the end.

                Example: 5.1.3.4.2.6.3.3.0.6.1.

   5.   Append, as a suffix, the E.164 top-level domain.

                Example: 5.1.3.4.2.6.3.3.0.6.1.tel.

   6.   Append, as a Prefix, a "Service Protocol" name indicative of
        the desired service.

                Example: sip.5.1.3.4.2.6.3.3.0.6.1.tel.

   When a client DNS resolver queries the DLS, the DLS returns the NS-
   and A-records which define the IP address of the next DNS name
   server.  Upon receipt of the NS and A records from the DLS, the
   client resolver reissues the query to the newly discovered name
   server.

   The following illustrates a sample zone file fragment containing NS
   and A records:

    4.3.2.1.5.9.4.1.6.1.4.4.tel.        IN NS  ns1.UKSP.tel.
                                        IN NS  ns2.UKSP.tel.
    5.1.3.4.2.6.3.3.0.6.1.tel.          IN NS  ns1.CompanyA.tel.
                                        IN NS  ns2.CompanyA.tel.

    ns1.UKSP.tel.                       IN A   208.146.45.55
    ns2.UKSP.tel.                       IN A   208.146.45.56
    ns1.CompanyA.tel.                   IN A   208.155.55.55
    ns2.CompanyA.tel.                   IN A   208.155.55.56












Peek, Walter, Ranalli     Expires - October 2000                     8

                     Internet-Telephony Directory           April 2000


4.2 Authoritative Directory Service (ADS)

   The ADS provides authoritative Internet address information in
   support of one or more Internet-Telephony applications associated
   with a subset of E.164 numbers.  The ADS is a delegated DNS name
   server [12] that must be properly registered with the top-tier DLS.
   Any E.164 Subscriber (corporation or individual that has been
   assigned one or more E.164 numbers) may register, deploy and operate
   an ADS or delegate the function to a third-party service provider.

   The ADS will return one of the following results based on a query
   using an application specific E.164 domain name.

        1. An end-point address in the form of a URI. For example:

           Query:   sip.5.1.3.4.2.6.3.3.0.6.1.tel
           Result:  sip:user@company.com

           Query:   smtp.5.1.3.4.2.6.3.3.0.6.1.tel
           Result:  mailto:user@company.com

        2. A referral to a non-DNS service in the form of a URI.  For
           example, voice messaging applications requiring spoken name
           will utilize a referral to an LDAP directory:

           Query:   vpim.5.1.3.4.2.6.3.3.0.6.1.tel
           Result:  ldap://ldap.company.com:389/e164=16033624315,dc=tel

        3. The NS-records and associated A-records for a delegated ADS
           that contains the URI for the requested application.  This
           ADS delegation feature enables control over various
           Internet-Telephony applications tied to the same E.164
           number to be delegated out to different service providers.

        4. A negative response.  Indicates that no Internet address
           information exists for the specific application queried.


4.2.1  Resource Record for URI's

   Currently, no standard DNS resource record exists which specifically
   maps a domain name to a complete URI.  However, existing resource
   records such as the TXT or NAPTR records may be utilized to achieve
   the desired effect until a new resource record with the specific
   intent of mapping a domain name to a complete URI is standardized
   and deployed.

   The Text (TXT) resource record provides a simple yet effective
   mechanism for associating an E.164 domain name to a URI.  The Domain
   Implementation and Specification RFC 1035[15] defines TXT records as
   follows:

        "TXT RRs are used to hold descriptive text.  The semantics of
        the text depends on the domain where it is found."


   In the context of the E.164 domain name space, the TXT record is
   semantically defined as mapping an application specific E.164 domain
   name to a URI.  Both NAPTR and TXT records could be used to
   implement this solution.  Neither is perfect for the task at hand
   but TXT records have the advantage of being simple, efficient, and
Peek, Walter, Ranalli     Expires - October 2000                     9

                     Internet-Telephony Directory           April 2000

   widely supported.  The following example zone file fragment
   demonstrates the utility of TXT resource records.

     $ORIGIN 2.6.3.3.0.6.1.tel.

     sip.5.1.3.4   IN TXT  sip:dpeek@ServiceProvider2.com
     smtp.5.1.3.4  IN TXT  mailto:dpeek@acme.com
     vpim.5.1.3.4  IN TXT  ldap://ldap.acme.com/e164=16033624315,dc=tel


5.  E.164 Domain Name Registration

5.1 Background & Scope

   The creation and eventual assignment of E.164 numbers to end-user
   corporations and individuals (E.164 Subscribers) is a well-defined
   process that exists within the PSTN today.  The registration of
   E.164 numbers in the Internet-Telephony Directory is complimentary
   to this existing process and takes place only after a number has
   already been assigned by a PSTN Carrier to an E.164 Subscriber.

5.2 List Of Actors

   Following the current practice with all Internet top-level domains,
   the registration of E.164 numbers in the DLS will be managed by a
   single trusted "Registry".  It is assumed that this exclusive
   Registry function will fall under the regulatory control of ICANN.
   The actors involved in the registration process are as follows:

   ICANN:
     -  Internet Corporation for the Assignment of Names and Numbers.
     -  Selects and regulates the exclusive DLS Registry.
     -  Defines pricing for the top-tier regulated DLS service.

   DLS Registry:
     -  Entity that deploys and operates the globally distributed DLS
        service under contract from ICANN.
     -  Entity that builds, deploys and maintains a DLS registration
        service for use by all E.164 Registrants.
     -  Entity that manages the DLS "Conflict Resolution Process".
        (See Appendix A for Conflict Resolution Process proposal)

   E.164 Registrant:
     -  E.164 Subscriber or designated representative that registers
        numbers and an associated ADS in the top-level DLS.
     -  Entity that either operates its own ADS or outsources the
        function to a third-party provider.  (Corporations may choose
        to operate their own ADS while individuals are likely to
        outsource the function to a service provider)
     -  Entity that agrees to the terms and conditions of the DLS
        Registration Agreement as set out by the DLS Registry.











Peek, Walter, Ranalli     Expires - October 2000                    10

                     Internet-Telephony Directory           April 2000


5.3  DLS Registration Process

   1. E.164 Registrant deploys an ADS or contracts with a third-party
      provider of ADS services.

   2. Registrant "registers" one or more E.164 numbers and associated
      ADS via the DLS registration service.

   3. Registrant agrees to the terms and conditions of the DLS
      Registration Agreement as set forth by the Registry under the
      control of ICANN.

   4. DLS Registration service (operated by the Registry) checks the
      Registrants E.164 numbers against the list of existed registered
      numbers to determine if a conflict exists.  If no conflict
      exists, the registration is approved.  If a conflict exists, the
      DLS Registry works with the two parties that have both claimed to
      be the valid E.164 Subscriber for the same number to resolve the
      conflict. (See Appendix A for a more detailed description of the
      Conflict Resolution Process)

   5. Registrant pays the DLS Registry fees and any associated conflict
      resolution fees as set forth under the DLS Registration agreement
      defined by ICANN.

   6. DLS Registry makes Registrant name, address, and contact
      information freely available via an on-line Who-is database.
      This is a requirement for any top-level domain and an important
      support feature for the conflict resolution process.




6.  Application Scenarios

6.1 SIP Application

   A SIP application seeking to establish a SIP session formulates an
   application specific E.164 domain name and issues a single query to
   the DLS for the associated TXT-record through a standard DNS
   resolver.

      Query:   sip.5.1.3.4.2.6.3.3.0.6.1.tel.

   The DLS responds to this query with the NS- and A-records of the
   appropriate ADS.  The DNS resolver, after receiving the NS- and A-
   records, automatically reissues the identical query to the new name
   server (ADS).

   Note that the SIP application is only aware of the first query. The
   DNS resolver automatically reissues queries through the standard
   iterative resolution process [12] until the TXT-record information
   is returned.

      Result:  sip:user@company.com

   The requesting SIP application now has the Internet-Telephony
   address information it requires to establish a voice over IP call
   using the SIP protocol based simply on a telephone number.


Peek, Walter, Ranalli     Expires - October 2000                    11

                     Internet-Telephony Directory           April 2000

6.2 VPIM application using LDAP

   A VPIM application seeking to send a voicemail message over the
   Internet formulates an application specific E.164 domain name and
   issues a single query to the DLS for the associated TXT-record
   through a standard DNS resolver.

      Query:   vpim.5.1.3.4.2.6.3.3.0.6.1.tel.

   The DLS responds to this query with the NS- and A-records of the
   appropriate ADS.  The DNS resolver, after receiving the NS- and A-
   records, automatically reissues the identical query to the new name
   server (ADS).

   Note that the VPIM application is only aware of the first query. The
   DNS resolver automatically reissues queries through the standard
   iterative resolution process [12] until the TXT-record information
   is returned.

      Result:  ldap://ldap.acme.com:389/e164=16033624315,dc=tel

   Using the LDAP URI, the VPIM application queries the LDAP directory
   to retrieve a VPIM address and "spoken name" via the standard VPIM
   schema [4].  Note, the LDAP directory is used in this scenario to
   retrieve an audio representation of the destination party's name
   that cannot be easily stored in a DNS directory.




6.3 VPIM application without LDAP

   LDAP is clearly the technology of choice to manage and store complex
   VPIM user information such as spoken-name, audio encoding types, and
   other VPIM related address.  However, the installed base of LDAP
   servers is limited at present and their increased operational
   complexity may inhibit some organizations from deploying enhanced
   VPIM services.  For organizations that are not prepared to operate
   an LDAP directory, the ADS can be provisioned to return VPIM mailbox
   addresses in the form of a mailto URI.  For example:

      Query:   vpim.5.1.3.4.2.6.3.3.0.6.1.tel.

      Result:  mailto:610002@sprovider.net

   By returning a mailto URI the organization forfeits the ability to
   supply spoken-name and other enhanced capabilities to querying VPIM
   applications.














Peek, Walter, Ranalli     Expires - October 2000                    12

                     Internet-Telephony Directory           April 2000


6.4  Multiple Internet-Telephony service providers

   A company wants to use Service Provider-1 (SP1) for an IP-enabled
   real-time voice service and Service Provider-2 (SP2) for a unified
   messaging service.  Both service providers require control over the
   Internet address information associated with their respective
   services.  As a result, the requirement exists to distribute control
   of Internet address information at the application level.

   To achieve this objective the Company utilizes the inherent
   delegation capabilities of the ADS and provisions its application
   specific E.164 domain names to reference the appropriate service
   provider:

   sip.0.0.0.5.2.6.3.3.0.6.1.tel      IN NS ns.SP1.tel
   vpim.2.0.0.5.2.6.3.3.0.6.1.tel     IN NS ns.SP2.tel
                       ns.SP1.tel     IN A  208.150.79.113
                       ns.SP2.tel     IN A  78.21.79.114


7. Security Considerations

7.1 DLS Security

   All data stored in the DLS is considered public Internet-Telephony
   information and may be retrieved by any requesting Internet-
   Telephony application.

7.2 ADS Security

   All data stored in the ADS is considered public Internet-Telephony
   information that may be retrieved by any requesting Internet-
   Telephony application.



8. Previous Work

   Many of the concepts outlined in this document are drawn from two
   years of direct experience associated with implementing a directory
   service in support of the voice messaging industry initiative called
   the "Global Voice Mail Service" or GVMS.

   The International Association for Enhanced Voice Service (formerly
   the Voice Mail Association or VMA) created and began funding the
   GVMS initiative in early 1997.  The goal of the GVMS initiative has
   been to connect service provider and enterprise voicemail platforms
   on a worldwide basis via the Internet.  Key functionality
   demonstrated through the GVMS initiative included the ability for
   end-users to send voice messages or reply to voice messages over the
   Internet without incurring the long distance charges associated with
   placing a return telephone call.

   Eight leading voicemail vendors participated in creating the GVMS
   solution that was demonstrated at VMA conferences in Athens (98),
   Helsinki (99) and at Telecom 99 in Geneva.  The vendors include
   Comverse, Brite, Glenayre, Lucent, Nortel, Tecnomen, Alcatel, and
   UNISYS.  NetNumber.com, Inc. (formerly EVDS) provided the global
   directory service supporting the GVMS demonstrations.


Peek, Walter, Ranalli     Expires - October 2000                    13

                     Internet-Telephony Directory           April 2000

9. References

   [1] Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3",
        BCP 9, RFC 2026, October 1996.

   [2] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
        Levels", BCP 14,RFC 2119, March 1997

   [3] Faltstrom, P., "E.164 and DNS", Work in progress,
        <draft-faltstrom-e164-05.txt>,January 2000

   [4] Brown, A., "E.164 Resolution", Work in progress,
        <draft-brown-e164-01.txt>, October 1999

   [5] Brown, A., "Enum Requirements", Work in progress,
        <draft-ietf-enum-00.txt>, NOvember 1999

   [6] Vaudreuil, G., "Voice Messaging Directory; Address Resolution
        Services", Work in progress, <draft-vaudreuil-ars-01.txt>,
        December 1999

   [7] Vaudreuil, G., "Address Validation Service", Work in progress,
        <draft-vaudreuil-avs-00.txt>, December 1999

   [8] Vaudreuil, G., "Telephone Number Base Directory Service", Work
        in progress, <draft-vaudreuil-e164dir-00.txt>, March 2000

   [9] Shockey, R., "The Use of DNS based E.164 Resolution Services by
        Internet Fax", Work in progress,
        <draft-shockey-e164toifax-00.txt>, December 1999

   [10] Berners-Lee, T., "Uniform Resource Identifiers (URI): Generic
        Syntax", Standards Track,  RFC 2396, August 1998

   [11] Daniel, R., Mealing, M, "Resolution of Uniform Resource
        Identifiers using the Domain Name System", Experimental,
        RFC 2168, June 1997

   [12] Mockapetris, P., "Domain Names - Concepts and Facilities",
        STD 13, RFC 1034, November 1987.

   [13] ITU-T Rec, "The International Public Telecommunication
        Numbering Plan", Recommendation, ITU-T Rec. E.164/I.331 ,
        May 1997.


















Peek, Walter, Ranalli     Expires - October 2000                    14

                     Internet-Telephony Directory           April 2000


10. Acknowledgments

   Our special thanks to Dr. Thomas P. Sosnowski for his help in
   editing this document. Also thanks to Chuck Santos for providing us
   with many technical details.  We would also like to recognize Anne
   Brown, Greg Vandreuil, and Patrik Falstrom for their previous work
   in this area.  Thanks also to Michael Mealling for providing us with
   details on NAPTR records.


11. Author's Addresses

   David P. Peek
     VMA, Technical Working Group Chairman
     13 Village Drive
     Atkinson, NH  03811
     Phone: 1-603-362-4315
     Email: peek@evds.com

   Robert Walter
     NetNumber.com, VP Development & Operations
     Wannilancit Technology Center
     650 Suffolk Street, Suite 307
     Lowell, MA 01854
     rwalter@netnumber.com

   Douglas Ranalli
     NetNumber.com, President/CEO
     Wannilancit Technology Center
     650 Suffolk Street, Suite 307
     Lowell, MA  01854
     dranalli@netnumber.com





























Peek, Walter, Ranalli     Expires - October 2000                    15

                     Internet-Telephony Directory           April 2000


Appendix A:  Conflict Resolution Process:

   Conflict over the registration of numbers in the top-level DLS could
   occur for one of three general reasons:

     -  Data Entry Error:  E.164 Registrant makes a data entry error
        during the DLS registration process and inadvertently registers
        a wrong number.

     -  Old Data Error:  E.164 Registrant returns day-to-day control
        over one or more numbers to the originating PSTN carrier but
        fails to update the DLS registration records.  Example:  A
        corporation shuts down an office, terminates its phone service
        but fails to un-register the numbers in the DLS.

     -  Intentional Error:  E.164 Registrant intentionally claims to be
        the E.164 Subscriber that has day to day control over a number
        when in fact they are not.

   Conflict occurs when two Registrants both claim to be the valid
   E.164 Subscriber for the same number.  Conflict over ownership of a
   name or number in the Internet naming space is not a new problem.
   In the domain name space conflict occurs when one entity registers a
   name like "McDonalds" in a top-level-domain (mcdonalds.com) and then
   another entity claims trademark control over the name "McDonalds".
   In the case of the E.164 domain name space, conflict can be easily
   resolved because it is clear how the day-to-day control of a number
   is defined:

     -  PSTN Service Provider Control:  A PSTN Service Provider
        (telephone company) that has registered an E.164 number in the
        Internet-Telephony directory on behalf of a customer can
        certainly validate the identity of the E.164 Subscriber.

     -  E.164 Subscriber Control:  A corporation or individual that has
        been assigned a number through the normal PSTN provisioning
        process is the E.164 Subscriber and is the only valid
        Registrant for that number.  Confirmation of such assignment
        can be obtained through reviewing PSTN billing records.

   Conflict is identified when an entity attempts to register a number
   that has already been registered by another E.164 Registrant.  The
   burden of maintaining a system for resolving conflict in an orderly
   process falls on the DLS Registry.  A process might operate under
   the following principles:

     -  Cost of resolution should be born by the mistaken party:  It
        seems reasonable to expect E.164 Registrants to take
        responsibility for their own mistakes.  If the DLS Registry is
        required to take action to correct a registration mistake made
        by a Registrant then the mistaken party should pay the direct
        costs associated with the resolution process.  The terms of
        such a process can be outlined in the DLS Registration
        Agreement signed by each E.164 Registrant.







Peek, Walter, Ranalli     Expires - October 2000                    16

                     Internet-Telephony Directory           April 2000


     -  Cost of conflict resolution should be zero:  In most cases,
        conflict will be the result of a simple human error.
        Registrants that make a data entry mistake should be given an
        opportunity to correct the mistake at zero cost.  An on-line
        system can easily be maintained by the DLS Registry to identify
        conflicts, notify the appropriate Registrant, and enable on-
        line corrections.  In the event that the entire process can be
        managed via an automated on-line process and resolved in a
        reasonable period of time then the cost to all parties should
        be zero.

     -  Billing records can be used to clarify difficult conflicts:  In
        the most difficult case where two entities claim control over a
        number and the conflict cannot be resolved through an automated
        system, billing records can be used to clarify day to day
        control over a number.  Extended conflict like this is likely
        to be rare, particularly in light of the provision that the
        mistaken party is required to pay the direct cost of conflict
        resolution under this model.



Full Copyright Statement

   "Copyright (C) The Internet Society (date). All Rights Reserved.
   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph
   are included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Acknowledgement

   Funding for the RFC editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.








Peek, Walter, Ranalli     Expires - October 2000                    17
