





INTERNET-DRAFT                                      Kurt D. Zeilenga
Intended Category: Standard Track                OpenLDAP Foundation
Expires in six months                                     3 May 2003



                          The LDAP No-Op Control
                    <draft-zeilenga-ldap-noop-01.txt>


Status of this Memo

  This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with all
  provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

  This document is intended to be, after appropriate review and
  revision, submitted to the IESG for consideration as a Standard Track
  document.  Distribution of this memo is unlimited.  Technical
  discussion of this document will take place on the IETF LDAP
  Extensions Working Group mailing list <ldapext@ietf.org>.  Please send
  editorial comments directly to the author <Kurt@OpenLDAP.org>.

  Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering Task
  Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that other
  groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.
  Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
  and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
  time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
  material or to cite them other than as ``work in progress.''

  The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
  <http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt>. The list of
  Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
  <http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html>.

  Copyright 2003, The Internet Society.  All Rights Reserved.

  Please see the Copyright section near the end of this document for
  more information.


Abstract

  This document defines the Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (LDAP)
  No-Op control which can be used to disable the normal effect of an
  operation.  The control can be used to discover how a server might
  react to a particular update request without updating the directory.




Zeilenga                   LDAP No-Op Control                   [Page 1]

INTERNET-DRAFT         draft-zeilenga-ldap-noop-01            3 May 2003


1.  Overview

  It is often desirable to be able to determine if an operation would
  successful complete or not without having the normal effect of the
  operation take place.  For example, an administrative client might
  want to verify that new user could update their entry (and not other
  entries) without the directory actually being updated.  The mechanism
  could be used to build more sophisticated security auditing tools.

  This document defines the Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (LDAP)
  [RFC3377] No-Op control.  The presence of the No-Op control in an
  operation request message disables the normal effect of the operation.

  For example, when present in a LDAP modify operation [RFC2251], the
  modify operation will do all processing necessary to perform the
  operation but not actually modify the directory.

  The No-Op control is not intended to be used by user clients to
  determine "effective rights".

  The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
  "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
  document are to be interpreted as described in BCP 14 [RFC2119].


2.  No-Op Control

  The No-Op control is an LDAP Control [RFC2251] whose controlType is
  1.3.6.1.4.1.4203.1.10.2, criticality is TRUE, and controlValue is
  absent.  Criticality of TRUE is REQUIRED to prevent unintended
  modification of the directory.  There is no corresponding response
  control.

  The control is appropriate for LDAP Add, Delete, Modify and Modify DN
  operations [RFC2251].

  When the control is attached to an LDAP request, the server SHALL do
  all normal processing possible for the operation without modification
  of the directory.  A result code other than success (0) means that the
  server is not able or willing to complete the processing for the
  reasons indicated by the result code.  A result code of success (0)
  indicates that the server found no reason why the operation would fail
  if submitted without the No-Op control.

  Servers SHOULD indicate their support for this control by providing
  1.3.6.1.4.1.4203.1.10.2 as a value of the supportedControl attribute
  type in their root DSE.  A server MAY choose to advertise this
  extension only when the client is authorized to use this operation.



Zeilenga                   LDAP No-Op Control                   [Page 2]

INTERNET-DRAFT         draft-zeilenga-ldap-noop-01            3 May 2003


3.  Security Considerations

  The No-Op control mechanism allows directory administrators (and
  users) to verify that access control and other administrative policy
  controls are properly configured.  The mechanism may also lead to the
  development (and deployment) of more sophisticated security auditing
  tools.

  The No-Op control mechanism is believed not to introduce any security
  risks beyond those of the base operation it is attached to.  Security
  considerations for the base operations, as well as general LDAP
  security considerations, are discussed discussed in RFCs comprising
  the LDAP Technical Specification [RFC3377].


4.  IANA Considerations

  This OID 1.3.6.1.4.1.4203.1.10.2 to identify the LDAP No-Op control.
  This OID was assigned [ASSIGN] by OpenLDAP Foundation, under its
  IANA-assigned private enterprise allocation [PRIVATE], for use in this
  specification.

  Registration of this protocol mechanism is requested [RFC3383].

  Subject: Request for LDAP Protocol Mechanism Registration
  Object Identifier: 1.3.6.1.4.1.4203.1.10.2
  Description: No-Op Control
  Person & email address to contact for further information:
      Kurt Zeilenga <kurt@openldap.org>
  Usage: Control
  Specification: RFCxxxx
  Author/Change Controller: IESG
  Comments: none


5.  Author's Address

  Kurt D. Zeilenga
  OpenLDAP Foundation
  <Kurt@OpenLDAP.org>


6. Normative References

  [RFC2119] S. Bradner, "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
            Requirement Levels", BCP 14 (also RFC 2119), March 1997.

  [RFC2251] M. Wahl, T. Howes, S. Kille, "Lightweight Directory Access



Zeilenga                   LDAP No-Op Control                   [Page 3]

INTERNET-DRAFT         draft-zeilenga-ldap-noop-01            3 May 2003


            Protocol (v3)", RFC 2251, December 1997.

  [RFC3377] J. Hodges, R. Morgan, "Lightweight Directory Access Protocol
            (v3): Technical Specification", RFC 3377, September 2002.


7. Informative References

  [RFC3383]  K. Zeilenga, "IANA Considerations for LDAP", BCP 64 (also
            RFC 3383), September 2002.

  [ASSIGN]   OpenLDAP Foundation, "OpenLDAP OID Delegations",
            http://www.openldap.org/foundation/oid-delegate.txt.

  [PRIVATE]  IANA, "Private Enterprise Numbers",
            http://www.iana.org/assignments/enterprise-numbers.


Copyright 2003, The Internet Society.  All Rights Reserved.

  This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
  others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
  or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published and
  distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any kind,
  provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
  included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
  document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
  the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
  Internet organizations, except as needed for the  purpose of
  developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
  copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be followed,
  or as required to translate it into languages other than English.

  The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
  revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

  This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
  "AS IS" basis and THE AUTHORS, THE INTERNET SOCIETY, AND THE INTERNET
  ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
  INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
  INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
  WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.









Zeilenga                   LDAP No-Op Control                   [Page 4]

