



Network Working Group                               Phillip J. Nesser II
Internet Draft                                Nesser & Nesser Consulting
                                                            April Marine
                                                      NASA Ames/Raytheon
                                                           November 1998



                         Obsolete FYI Documents
                   <draft-ietf-uswg-historic-00.txt>


Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft.  Internet-Drafts are working
   documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas,
   and its working groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   To view the entire list of current Internet-Drafts, please check the
   "1id-abstracts.txt" listing contained in the Internet-Drafts Shadow
   Directories on ftp.is.co.za (Africa), ftp.nordu.net (Northern
   Europe), ftp.nis.garr.it (Southern Europe), munnari.oz.au (Pacific
   Rim), ftp.ietf.org (US East Coast), or ftp.isi.edu (US West Coast).

   This document will expire May 1999. Distribution of this draft is
   unlimited.


Abstract

    Traditionally, the User Services Area of the IETF has been
    responsible for keeping FYI documents updated.  However, as the
    Internet has progressed and developed, it has become clear that not
    all FYIs are worth updating.  Some of the information is simply
    obsolete.  This memo documents which FYIs are considered obsolete,
    and lets users know not to trust the information they contain.

Introduction

    There is a sub-series of RFCs called For Your Information (FYI)
    documents.  These documents were intended to be kept up to date with
    information about the Internet that was designed for the end user



User Services Working Group                                      [Page 1]





<draft-ietf-uswg-historic-00.txt>- 2 -                     November 1998


    audience.  The responsibility of updating these FYIs rests primarily
    with the User Services Area of the IETF.  As the Internet has
    progressed, however, it has become clear that not all FYIs are worth
    updating.  Some of the information they contain is simply obsolete.
    This memo is intended to let Internet users know that some of the
    FYI documents are considered obsolete and the information they
    contain should not be referenced or used.


List of Documents

    The following documents are obsolete:


      FYI  2: FYI on a network management tool catalog

      FYI  3: A bibliography of internetworking information

      FYI  4: FYI on Q&A to commonly asked "New Internet User" Questions

      FYI  7: FYI on Questions and Answers: Answers to commonly asked
              "experienced Internet user" questions

      FYI  9: Who's Who in the Internet: Biographies of IAB, IESG
              and IRSG Members

      FYI 10: There's Gold in them thar Networks! or Searching for
              Treasure in all the Wrong Places

      FYI 12: Building a Network Information Services Infrastructure

      FYI 15: Privacy and Accuracy Issues in Network Information Center
              Databases

      FYI 16: Connecting to the Internet - What Connecting Institutions
              Should Anticipate

      FYI 19: A Short Bibliography of Introductory Internetworking
              Readings

      FYI 20: FYI on "What is the Internet?"

      FYI 21: A Survey of Advanced Usages of X.500

      FYI 23: Guide to Network Resource Tools

      FYI 25: A Status Report on Networked Information Retrieval:
              Tools and Groups



User Services Working Group                                      [Page 2]






<draft-ietf-uswg-historic-00.txt>- 3 -                     November 1998


      FYI 27: Tools for DNS debugging

More Information

    Not all FYIs are obsolete.  A complete list of FYI documents can be
    found at ftp://ftp.isi.edu/in-notes/fyi/ .

Security Considerations

    This type of non-protocol document does not directly affect the
    security of the Internet.

Authors' Addresses

    Philip J. Nesser II
    Nesser & Nesser Consulting
    13501 100th Ave N.E.
    Suite 5202
    Kirkland, WA 98052

    Phone: (425) 481-4303 (voice)
           (425) 482-9721 (fax)
    Email: pjnesser@nesser.com
           pjnesser@martigny.ai.mit.edu


    April Marine
    NASA Ames Research Center
    M/S 204-14
    Moffett Field, CA 94035-1000

    Phone:  (650) 604-0762
    EMail:  amarine@archimedes.nasa.gov


















User Services Working Group                                      [Page 3]




