Internet-Draft                                                Ryan Moats
draft-moats-ldap-taxonomy-00                                        AT&T
Expires in six months                                     Roland Hedberg
                                                               Catalogix
                                                               June 1999

        A Taxonomoy of Methods for LDAP Clients Finding Servers
               Filename: draft-moats-ldap-taxonomy-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.  Internet-Drafts are working
   documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas,
   and its working groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

Abstract

   There are several different methods for a LDAP client to find a LDAP
   server. This draft discusses these methods and provides pointers for
   interested parties to learn more about implementing a particular
   method.

1. Introduction

   The Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (LDAP) [1] can be used to
   build "islands" of servers that are not a priori tied into a single
   Directory Information Tree (DIT.) Here, it is necessary to determine
   how a client can discover LDAP servers. This documents discusses the
   currently available methods and provides pointers for interested
   parties to learn more about implementing a particular method.

   While this draft documents only those methods that are currently
   documented, other methods have been considered for this problem. The

Expires 12/31/99                                                [Page 1]

INTERNET DRAFT              DMTF LDAP Schema                   June 1999

   history of these other methods are presented in an Appendix.

2. Methods

2.1 Client Configuration

   The simplest method of enabling a LDAP client to discover LDAP
   servers is for the client administrator to configure the client with
   a list of known LDAP servers (and associated base objects) to send
   queries to.  While this method has the advantage of being correct
   (initially), it adds the requirement that the list of initial servers
   be kept small and constant.  Otherwise, the required client update
   process won't scale.

2.2 Well known DNS aliases

   If the DIT uses a naming scheme similar to that in RFC 2377 [2], then
   it is possible to build the DNS names of potential servers using well
   known DNS aliases, like those documented in RFC 2219 [3].  When a
   different naming scheme is used, it is also possible to build
   potential server names based on the client's fully qualified domain
   name or local (within the organization or country) environment.

   One shortcoming of this method are that it is not exact.  Multiple
   DNS lookups and LDAP protocol operations may be necessary to find the
   proper LDAP server to serve the client requests.  To support client
   roaming, it is necessary that either the RFC 2377 (or similar) naming
   scheme be used or that roaming be implemented through tunnels.

   Because this method uses DNS, it inherits all the security
   considerations of using DNS to discover LDAP servers: see the
   security consideration in [3] for more details.

2.3 Service Location Protocol

   If a client supports the service location protocol [4], it could use
   a SLP query for LDAP servers.  The SLP template that is used to
   describe LDAP servers is presented in [5], and requires that the
   servers announce themselves using SLP and this template.

   Using this method inherits the scaling and security considerations
   for the service location protocol, which are documented further in
   [4].

2.4 Referrals

   In LDAPv3, servers can return referrals to the client if the server
   has knowledge of where a query might be satisfiable.  Two ways of

Expires 12/31/99                                                [Page 2]

INTERNET DRAFT              DMTF LDAP Schema                   June 1999

   deploying referral information are deploying a LDAP knowledge server
   or exchanging CIP index objects [6] between servers.

   A LDAP knowledge server would hold cross references to possibly
   hundreds of other LDAP  servers, so that a client would only need to
   know about its local LDAP server and the knowledge server.  As an
   optimization, the local LDAP server could also act as a knowledge
   server.

   If CIP index objects are exchanged between LDAP servers, then those
   objects can also carry URL information for providing referrals to
   clients. Here, the client would only need to know about the local
   server. Using CIP index objects inherits the security considerations
   of CIP: see [6, 7, 8] for more details.

   In either of these cases, the local LDAP server could be determined
   using another of the methods discussed.

3. Implementation

   The Norwegian Directory Forum plan to start a service based on a
   central LDAP service containing contact information for every
   organization within Norway [12]. And if a organization has more
   information about its organizational units,employees or functions
   that it wants to publish it can do so by placing this information in
   a publicly available LDAP server and providing the management of the
   central service with a pointer (URL) to this server.

   The TISDAG project is running a testservice based on the TISDAG
   specification [13]. This service gathers indeces from connected White
   Pages Service Providers using CIP Tagged Index Objects [9].  The
   rationale for this service is that by supplying the name of a person
   or a function/role to the service it will return pointers to where
   more information can be found about persons/functions with that name.

   The European Co-funded project DESIRE (www.desire.org) is using a
   LDAP server that communicates with a referral index that is based on
   CIP Tagged Index Objects [9] and fed by LDAP crawlers. DANTE plans to
   set up an European infrastructure of such referral index servers.

4. References

   Request For Comments (RFC) and Internet Draft documents are available
   from numerous mirror sites.

         [1]         M. Wahl, T. Howes, S. Kille, Lightweight Directory
                     Access Protocol (v3), RFC 2251, December 1997.

Expires 12/31/99                                                [Page 3]

INTERNET DRAFT              DMTF LDAP Schema                   June 1999

         [2]         A. Grimstad, R. Huber, S. Sataluri, M. Wahl, Naming
                     Plan for Internet Directory-Enabled Applications,
                     RFC 2377, September 1998.

         [3]         M. Hamilton, R. Wright, "Use of DNS Aliases for
                     Network Services," RFC 2219 (Also BCP 17), October,
                     1997.

         [4]         E. Guttman, C. Perkins, J. Veizades, M. Day, "Ser-
                     vice Location Protocol, Version 2," Internet Draft
                     (work in progress), April 1999.

         [5]         J. Wood, R. Tam, "The LDAP Service Type," Internet
                     Draft (work in progress), February 1998.

         [6]         J. Allen, M. Mealling, "The Architecture of the
                     Common Indexing Protocol (CIP)," Internet Draft
                     (work in progress), November 1998.

         [7]         J. Allen, M. Mealling, "MIME Object Definitions for
                     the Common Indexing Protocol (CIP)," Internet Draft
                     (work in progress), June 1997.

         [8]         J. Allen, P. Leach, R. Hedberg, "CIP Transport Pro-
                     tocols," Internet Draft (work in progress), April
                     1999.

         [9]         R. Hedberg, B. Greenblatt, R. Moats, M. Wahl, "A
                     Tagged Index Object for use in the Common Indexing
                     Protocol," Internet Draft (work in progress),
                     December 1998.

         [10]        L. Hedstrom, L. Howard, "DHCP Options for Locating
                     LDAP Servers," Internet Draft (work in progress),
                     July 1997

         [11]        R. Droms, "Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol,"
                     RFC 2131, March 1997.

         [12]        R.Hedberg, H. Alverstrand, "Technical Specifica-
                     tion, The Norwegian Directory of Directories
                     (NDD)," Internet Draft (work in progress), May 1999

         [13]        R.Hedberg, L. Daigle, "Technical Infrastructure for
                     Swedish Directory Access Gateways (TISDAG)," Inter-
                     net Draft (work in progress), June 1999

Expires 12/31/99                                                [Page 4]

INTERNET DRAFT              DMTF LDAP Schema                   June 1999

5. Author's Addresses

      Ryan Moats                  Roland Hedberg
      AT&T                        Catalogix
      15621 Drexel Circle         Dalsveien 53
      Omaha, NE 68135             0775 Oslo
      USA                         Norway
      Email: jayhawk@att.com      Email: roland@catalogix.ac.se

Appendix A. Other methods

A.1 Discovery

   The discovery approach was to use a combination of other methods
   presented in this taxonomy along with storing either the search DN or
   a related URL in the DNS in some way.  This method requires an
   administrator to configure the DNS with the information and the idea
   of storing either a DN or an URL in the DNS is an extremely contr-
   oversial one.  Therefore, this summary is presented just for history
   and will not be further expounded.

A.2 DHCP extensions

   In an internet-draft [10], now expired, a method was proposed for
   using DHCP to deliver information about LDAP server to a DHCP client.
   This would require that such information be configured into the DHCP
   server and that the client use DHCP to load host configuration infor-
   mation. Interested parties should contact the draft's authors for
   more information.

   Such a method would inherit the security considerations for DHCP. See
   [11] for more details.

Expires 12/31/99                                                [Page 5]
