

MMUSIC                                                       P. Stallard
Internet-Draft                                       TANDBERG Television
Expires: August 11, 2003                                        T. Paila
                                                       Nokia Corporation
                                                       February 10, 2003


            DVB thoughts on Service Discovery and Selection
              draft-stallard-mmusic-dvb-thoughts-on-sds-00

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at http://
   www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 11, 2003.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003).  All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   This memo presents some thoughts on the requirements of Internet
   Media Guides.  It is based on some similar work undertaken by the
   Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB) group.










Stallard & Paila        Expires August 11, 2003                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft            DVB thoughts on SDS              February 2003


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3.  Assumptions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   4.  Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   4.1 Service Provider and Service Discovery . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   4.2 Selection  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   4.3 General  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   4.4 Transport/Network  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
       Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   A.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
       Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . 10






































Stallard & Paila        Expires August 11, 2003                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft            DVB thoughts on SDS              February 2003


1. Introduction

   The Digital Video Broadcasting Project (DVB) is an industry-led
   consortium of over 300 broadcasters, manufacturers, network
   operators, software developers and others in over 40 countries
   committed to designing global standards for the delivery of digital
   media including digital television and data services.

   DVB has established a working group called DVB-IPI (IP
   Infrastructure) responsible for solutions to carry DVB services over
   IP networks.  In addition to the traditional DVB services that
   include digital TV and radio services, DVB-IPI will also consider new
   purely IP-based services.  Several activities of the DVB apply
   protocols of the IETF and DVB-IPI is committed to use existing
   protocols wherever possible.

   The work of DVB-IPI has been divided into several areas, one of which
   is "Service Discovery and Selection" (SD&S).  SD&S provides a
   mechanism for receivers to discover both service providers and
   services and sufficient information on these services to initiate
   reception.

   This document is an informative input to the IETF MMUSIC WG while
   working on "Internet Media Guides".  It is drawn from the DVB's
   baseline requirements for Service Discovery and Selection and is
   provided here for information.  Some requirements are annotated with
   comments preceded by "INFORMATIVE".  These comments are for
   information/clarification only and are not part of the requirements.

2. Terminology

   The following terms are used throughout this document:

   HNED (Home Network End Device): For the purpose of this document, the
      HNED can be thought of a set top box capable of functioning as a
      network node in an IP network.

   SD&S: Refers to the entire Service Discovery and Selection mechanism,
      including the transport protocols and data structures.

   SD&S information: Refers specifically to the SD&S data structures and
      their representation.

   Service provider: An entity offering DVB services over IP.  For the
      purposes of this document, a service provider can be regarded as
      an IP unicast or multicast source.





Stallard & Paila        Expires August 11, 2003                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft            DVB thoughts on SDS              February 2003


3. Assumptions

   It is assumed that SD&S is provided with an entry point from which
   the process begins.  (This could be something like a well-known
   multicast address or a web server URL).  This entry point may be
   statically configured, provided as part of a network provisioning
   step, or acquired by some other mechanism outside the scope of SD&S.

4. Requirements

   The requirements are grouped under the following headings that
   vaguely reflect the chronological order in which SD&S is expected to
   operate.

   1.  Service Provider and Service Discovery

   2.  Selection

   3.  General

   4.  Transport/Network

   The headings do not impose any restrictions on the implementation of
   the mechanism.

4.1 Service Provider and Service Discovery

   1000.  SD&S shall enable the HNED to receive/retrieve, parse and
      render SD&S information for all available service providers and
      services.  Services shall include multicast services, unicast
      services and scheduled services.

      INFORMATIVE: As examples, multicast services may include
      traditional broadcast services, unicast services may include
      content on demand and scheduled services may include pay-per-view
      events and Near Video on Demand.

   1002.  SD&S shall enable the discovery and selection of local
      DVB-over-IP services that originate from within the home network.

      INFORMATIVE: For example, services originating from a personal
      video recorder.

   1005.  SD&S shall allow the discovery of service providers.

      INFORMATIVE: This could be an automatic or manual process so both
      must be possible.  Users might learn of a new service provider and
      want to type in the address and/or the HNED may choose to scan for



Stallard & Paila        Expires August 11, 2003                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft            DVB thoughts on SDS              February 2003


      new service providers.  Some HNEDs may choose to disable this
      feature (if provided by a specific service provider for example).

   1006.  SD&S information shall be dynamic, enabling service providers
      to be created and removed, and for their service announcements to
      be updated as required.

   1010.  SD&S shall enable service providers to package sets of
      services such that, for example, packages can be offered to
      subscribers as a single entity.

      INFORMATIVE: This can provide a mechanism similar to the bouquet
      table of existing DVB Service Information.

   1015.  Service providers shall have the option to identify themselves
      by means of a name and a logo.

   1016.  SD&S shall provide service information likely to be used by
      filtering operations to present services of interest to the user.

      INFORMATIVE: The intention here is that SD&S shall give sufficient
      information to allow first-pass filtering so as to present only
      services which match certain criteria set by the user.  Examples
      include the language, the country where a service is available and
      the genre/theme.

   1017.  SD&S shall provide a mechanism to acquire more comprehensive
      information on a given service if requested by the viewer.

   1020.  SD&S shall allow multiple service providers to coexist on a
      network.

   1025.  SD&S shall support service providers aggregating services from
      multiple service providers

   1030.  It shall be possible to uniquely identify services and service
      providers.

      INFORMATIVE: This is intended to enable HNEDs to determine that an
      identical service offered by different service providers is indeed
      the same service.  The identifiers may be globally unique or
      unique to a particular domain of operation.  Unique identifiers
      could be based on URLs.


4.2 Selection

   Prior to selection, a list (or some other representation) of the



Stallard & Paila        Expires August 11, 2003                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft            DVB thoughts on SDS              February 2003


   discovered services will be presented to the user.  Selection (in
   terms of SD&S) takes place after the user has made a choice about
   which service to view.  The "user" could be a person, system agent,
   terminal or some other entity.  This presentation phase is private to
   the HNED and it therefore imposes no requirements on SD&S.

   2000.  SD&S shall allow the HNED to acquire all the information
      required to receive the chosen service.

      INFORMATIVE: This is the information required by the corresponding
      transport specification.  Examples include a multicast address/
      source address/port number, or an RTSP URL.  For MPEG-2 TS, a
      mapping for the RTP payload type is also required.

   2010.  SD&S shall allow the description of all DVB services contained
      in MPEG-2 transport streams.

      INFORMATIVE: This includes MPEG-2 video and audio services
      (digital TV) and MPEG-1/MPEG-2 audio services (radio channels).
      Later transport mechanisms will be dealt with by Requirement 2020.

   2020.  This mechanism shall be extensible to support the selection of
      services not yet defined in TM-IPI transport specifications.  An
      open-ended requirement.

      INFORMATIVE: The intent is that a reasonable level of flexibility
      is available that will allow the mechanism to be reasonably future
      proof.  For example, MPEG-2 TS services are a single stream - it
      is likely that other formats will have separate streams for audio/
      video etc.


4.3 General

   3015.  It shall be possible for part or all of the SD&S information
      to be encrypted.

   3020.  SD&S shall enable HNEDs to authenticate the source of service
      discovery and selection information.

      INFORMATIVE: There needs to be some way of ensuring that one
      service provider cannot masquerade as another service provider.

   3025.  SD&S shall enable HNEDs to verify the integrity of SD&S
      information.






Stallard & Paila        Expires August 11, 2003                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft            DVB thoughts on SDS              February 2003


      INFORMATIVE: A companion requirement to 3020.  In addition to
      knowing that the information has come from where it says, the HNED
      should be able to verify that it hasn't been modified en route.

   3030.  SD&S shall provide a mechanism for HNEDs to detect when
      information has been added, updated, and deleted.

      INFORMATIVE: Without wanting to get in to the implementation
      choices, the premise is that the HNEDs need some way of keeping up
      to date with the minimum of effort.  Of course some HNED
      manufacturers might opt to ignore this mechanism.

   3035.  It shall be possible to specify a valid-from and/or
      valid-until time for SD&S information.

      INFORMATIVE: This enables new SD&S information to be sent in
      advance with a time at which it will become valid, and to specify
      an expiry time after which the information will be invalid.

   3040.  SD&S shall allow the carriage of application-specific
      extensions.

      INFORMATIVE: The intention is to allow service providers to add
      proprietary features.

   3045.  SD&S shall be extensible for future use.

      INFORMATIVE: This is current DVB practice to support future
      requirements.

   3050.  SD&S information shall be encoded in an efficient manner to
      minimise/reduce the bandwidth required for its delivery.  The
      coding may be different for different network paths and
      constituent links to enable optimisation between bandwidth and
      processing efficiency.

      INFORMATIVE: This is a non-testable requirement but it is included
      as a reminder that an efficient representation will be required.

   3060.  Any descriptor that can currently be carried in the service
      discovery tables of DVB SI shall have an equivalent representation
      in SD&S, unless there is a clear reason that it is not needed.

      INFORMATIVE: The intention here is that a piece of information
      that DVB previously described as necessary for service discovery
      (and filtering) should be present under SD&S unless we can clearly
      argue why it is not needed.




Stallard & Paila        Expires August 11, 2003                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft            DVB thoughts on SDS              February 2003


4.4 Transport/Network

   4000.  SD&S shall support push and pull models of delivery.

      INFORMATIVE: The model used will be a deployment decision.  It is
      a trade off between bandwidth usage (push) and server capability
      (pull).

   4010.  The contents and representation of the SD&S information shall
      be independent of the delivery model (pull or push).

      INFORMATIVE: This enables a service provider to offer both models
      without having to duplicate data.  This requirement is applicable
      end-to-end such that it does not conflict with requirement 3050,
      which allows for transcoding for certain links.

   4020.  Any SD&S information that can be pushed may also be pulled,
      and vice-versa.

      INFORMATIVE: This implies that there is neither data that must be
      multicast, nor data that cannot be multicast.  This is a
      deliberate clarification of 4000 to make it clear that the push/
      pull applies to all data items and not to any single point.

   4030.  SD&S shall be scalable.  It shall work efficiently from small
      to large HNED populations, and from small to large service
      offerings.

   4040.  Carriage of SD&S information should be as efficient as
      possible to reduce distribution costs and network congestion.

      INFORMATIVE: For example, it is expected that the option of
      multicast delivery will need to be provided.



Authors' Addresses

   Paul Stallard
   TANDBERG Television
   Strategic Park
   Comines Way
   Hedge End
   Southampton  SO30 4DA
   United Kingdom

   EMail: pstallard@tandbergtv.com
   URI:   http://www.tandbergtv.com/



Stallard & Paila        Expires August 11, 2003                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft            DVB thoughts on SDS              February 2003


   Toni Paila
   Nokia Corporation
   Itamerenkatu 11-13
   00180 Helsinki
   Finland

   EMail: toni.paila@nokia.com
   URI:   http://www.nokia.com/

Appendix A. Acknowledgements

   The authors gratefully acknowledges the contributions of their
   colleagues within DVB.






































Stallard & Paila        Expires August 11, 2003                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft            DVB thoughts on SDS              February 2003


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it
   has made any effort to identify any such rights.  Information on the
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11.  Copies of
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of
   licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to
   obtain a general license or permission for the use of such
   proprietary rights by implementors or users of this specification can
   be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF Executive
   Director.


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003).  All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assignees.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION



Stallard & Paila        Expires August 11, 2003                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft            DVB thoughts on SDS              February 2003


   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Acknowledgement

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.











































Stallard & Paila        Expires August 11, 2003                [Page 11]

