

                                                            Edmon Chung 
Internet Draft                                                   Neteka 
<draft-chung-idnop-zoneprep-00.txt>                                     
Intended Category: Informational                             April 2003 
 
 
                  ZONEPREP - Zone Preparations for IDN 
 
 
STATUS OF THIS MEMO 
 
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.  
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.  Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of 
   six months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
   documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as 
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."  
    
   The reader is cautioned not to depend on the values that appear in 
   examples to be current or complete, since their purpose is primarily 
   educational.  Distribution of this memo is unlimited. 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at  
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.  
    
Abstract 
    
   Zoneprep intends to provide a framework for applying Charprep 
   variants to zone file management.  More specifically, Charprep 
   profiles are used to generate a set of perceptually equivalent 
   domains from a given primary domain, Zoneprep policy profiles are 
   used to determine which among the generated set of Charprep variants 
   to include into the DNS zone file. 
    
   This document does NOT provide any specific Zoneprep policy profiles, 
   instead it describes a framework for Zone Administrators (e.g. 
   registries) to consider when implementing IDN.  More importantly, to 
   consider the policy on reserving and publishing variants from the 
   given primary domain to the DNS zone files. 
    
   This framework also leads into the discussion of provisioning 
   protocol for IDN, more importantly for a server to announce its 
   policies on reserved variants and zone variants, as well as for the 
   client to further manage the IDN.  This document will NOT describe 
   extensively this issue, for further discussion please refer to [EPP-
   I], which incorporates this framework into EPP. 
    
  
Chung                                                          [Page 1] 
ZONEPREP                                                     April 2003 
 
 
Table of Contents 
    
   1. Introduction....................................................2 
   1.1 Terminology....................................................3 
   1.2 Nomenclature...................................................3 
   2. Charprep & Zoneprep.............................................3 
   3. Reserved Variants (RV)..........................................4 
   3.1 Restricted Reserved Variants (rRV).............................4 
   3.2 Automatic Zone Variants (AutoZV)...............................5 
   3.3 Normal Reserved Variants (nRV).................................5 
   3.4 Suggested Reserved Variants (sRV)..............................5 
   4. Zone Variants (ZV)..............................................5 
   4.1 Same Delegation Name Servers as Primary Domain (Same NS).......6 
   4.2 Alias to Primary Domain Only (Alias Only)......................6 
   4.3 Normal Zone Variants (Normal ZV)...............................7 
   5. Zoneprep Policy Profiles........................................7 
   5.1 Zoneprep Policy Tables.........................................7 
   5.2 Publishing Zoneprep Profiles...................................8 
   5.3 Generating Zoneprep Variant (ZV) Sets..........................9 
   5.4 Managing Multiple Language Registrations.......................9 
   6. Provisioning Considerations....................................10 
   7. IANA Considerations............................................10 
   8. Security Considerations........................................11 
    
    
1. Introduction 
    
   While the issue with character equivalency has been raised as an 
   important concern for the introduction and management of IDN, one key 
   problem is that the possible set of variants is potentially huge. 
    
   For example, 1 domain with 5 characters, each having 1 Charprep 
   variant would already create a set of 2^5 = 32 domains (including the 
   primary domain).  And if one of the characters actually had 2 
   variants, then the set would balloon up to 48 domains. 
    
   If character equivalency mandates that all of the Charprep variants 
   be managed in DNS zone files, the scaling factor may cause Zone 
   Administrators (e.g. registries) a lot of problem. 
    
   To address this problem, Zoneprep policies should be used to select 
   which variants to be published in the DNS zone files and which ones 
   to simply reserve and be blocked from registration. 
    
   Zoneprep will describe a framework for categorizing the different 
   types of variants and how a Zone Administrator should treat the 
   different categories.  Specific Zoneprep policy profiles SHOULD 
   however be determined by the individual zone administrators (e.g. 
   registries). 
    



  
Chung                                                          [Page 2] 
ZONEPREP                                                     April 2003 
 
 
1.1 Terminology 
    
   The key words "MUST", "SHALL", "REQUIRED", "SHOULD", "RECOMMENDED", 
   and "MAY" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 
   2119 [RFC2119]. 
    
1.2 Nomenclature 
    
   As in the Unicode Standard [UNICODE], Unicode codepoints are denoted 
   by "U+" followed by four to six hexadecimal digits. 
    
   The following terms will carry specific definitions within this 
   document: 
    
   Zone Administrator û A domain operator or service that manages sub-
   domain delegations. This would include domain registries such as TLD 
   registries as well as domain operators of SLDs to issue third level 
   domains, etc. 
    
   Registration û Entry of a domain into the zone file of an 
   authoritative name server. 
    
   Resolution û Matching or lookup of domain names within the name 
   server. 
    
   IDN û Internationalized Domain Names: domain names consisted of one 
   or more characters out of the A-z 0-9 and "-" repertoire. 
    
2. Charprep & Zoneprep 
    
   Charprep forms the basis of Zoneprep.  The Charprep variant set is 
   further categorized into different types in the Zoneprep framework. 
    
   There are three main types of domain names within a package or bundle 
   of domain names as identified in Zoneprep: 
    
   - Primary Domain 
   - Reserved Variants (RV) 
   - Zone Variants (ZV) 
    
   The Primary Domain is the original domain name that was submitted for 
   registration.  The set of Reserved Variants (RV) is a set of Charprep 
   variants derived from a particular Charprep profile. 
    
   The set of Zone Variants (ZV) is a subset of the RV set, which will 
   be published in the DNS zone file and available for resolution. 
    
   All of the domain names considered MUST be properly Nameprep-ed and 
   fully qualified domain names. 
    
   While Charprep is based on scripts, Zoneprep is conceptually based on 
   languages (Further discussion in Section 5). 
    
  
Chung                                                          [Page 3] 
ZONEPREP                                                     April 2003 
 
 
   While Charprep can be used as a basis for a consistent user 
   experience in that a particular string of characters based on the 
   script they are using will result in the same set of reserved 
   variants, Zone Administrators can use Zoneprep policies to determine 
   the resolvability of a particular variant. 
    
3. Reserved Variants (RV) 
    
   The RV set is precisely the set of Charprep variants generated based 
   on the chosen Charprep mapping profile in the particular Zoneprep 
   policy profile.  Each RV (except for suggested reserved variants) is 
   considered a registered domain and MUST be blocked from registration. 
    
   More specifically, upon submission of registration for a domain name, 
   one or more intended languages SHOULD be provided.  With the language 
   information, the Zone Administrator will choose to use the relevant 
   Zoneprep policy profile, within which would be the specification for 
   which Charprep profile to use.  From the Primary Domain, the Zone 
   Administrator can then generate the RV set based on the Charprep 
   table. 
    
   After generating the RV set, the Zoneprep policy profile then 
   determines how each RV should be categorized into the four types of 
   RVs: 1. Restricted Reserved Variants (rRV); 2. Automatic Zone 
   Variants (AutoZV); 3. Normal Reserved Variants (nRV); and, 4. 
   Suggested Reserved Variants (sRV). 
    
   OR, a Zone Administrator may choose to define in the Zoneprep Policy 
   Profile to have all RVs in a zone to be in the same type: rRV, AutoZV 
   or nRV.  Because sRVs are NOT registered domains, if a Zone 
   Administrator chooses to define all RVs to be sRVs initially, a 
   policy for the RVs once they are registered MUST still be provided. 
    
3.1 Restricted Reserved Variants (rRV) 
    
   Restricted RVs are RVs that cannot be activated as Zone Variants 
   (ZV).  Domains listed as rRVs are blocked from registration by 
   another user but MUST not be published into the zone file, therefore 
   rRVs are NOT resolvable domains. 
    
   For a registered domain label to be categorized as an rRV, all of the 
   characters comprising the string, that are subjected to variants 
   (including primary characters), MUST be determined as an rRV 
   candidate based on the corresponding Zoneprep policy profile. 
    
   For example, if <U+0430> is listed as an rRV for a primary domain 
   with <U+03B1>, then suppose the primary domain is 
   <U+03B1><U+03B1>.example, then the RV: <U+0430><U+0430>.example will 
   be categorized as an rRV, while <U+0430><U+0061>.example will NOT be. 
    



  
Chung                                                          [Page 4] 
ZONEPREP                                                     April 2003 
 
 
3.2 Automatic Zone Variants (AutoZV) 
    
   Automatic Zone Variants are RVs that MUST be published into the zone 
   files.  Upon registration of the Primary Domain, AutoZVs as well as 
   the Primary Domain will by default be included in the DNS zone files. 
   Domains listed as an AutoZV cannot be deactivated (which means that 
   the domain should only be removed from the zone files if the primary 
   domain is deleted. 
    
   For a domain label to be categorized as an AutoZV, all of the 
   characters comprising the string, that are subjected to variants 
   (including primary characters), MUST be determined as an AutoZV 
   candidate based on the corresponding Zoneprep policy profile. 
    
   For example, if <U+0061> is listed as an AutoZV for a primary domain 
   with <U+03B1>, then suppose the primary domain is 
   <U+03B1><U+03B1>.example, then the RV: <U+0061><U+0061>.example will 
   be categorized as an AutoZV, while <U+0430><U+0061>.example will NOT 
   be. 
    
3.3 Normal Reserved Variants (nRV) 
    
   Normal RVs are RVs that can be activated as Zone Variants (ZV) after 
   the initial registration.  Domains listed as nRVs could be selected 
   to be included into the DNS zone files. 
    
   ZVs that are activated from nRVs could be deactivated at anytime. 
    
3.4 Suggested Reserved Variants (sRV) 
    
   Suggested RVs are RVs that are generated from the Charprep profile, 
   but have NOT been registered yet. More specifically, sRVs continue to 
   be available for registration by other users and are NOT blocked. 
    
   Any RV that is not categorized as rRV, AutoZV or nRV will be an 
   "sRV". 
    
   Suggested RVs can be registered.  Upon registration the RV will 
   assume one of the abovementioned types of RVs.  Also, once registered 
   the RV will be included in a package or bundle of domain names 
   corresponding to the primary domain and SHOULD NOT be independently 
   unregistered. 
    
4. Zone Variants (ZV) 
    
   The ZV set is a subset of a given RV set that is published into the 
   DNS zone files.  Because they are published into the zone files, the 
   Zone Administrator SHOULD consider each ZV as a unique domain in the 
   DNS. 
    
   By default, the Primary Domain MUST be included into the zone file.  
   The ZV set will then be determined by 2 ways: 
    
  
Chung                                                          [Page 5] 
ZONEPREP                                                     April 2003 
 
 
   - Included as an Automatic Zone Variant (AutoZV) 
   OR 
   - An nRV being activated into a ZV 
    
   Similar to the concept of the categorization of RVs, there are three 
   possible types of ZVs as determined by a Zoneprep Policy Profile: 1. 
   Same Delegation Name Servers; 2. Alias Only; and, 3. Normal Zone 
   Variants. 
    
   The type of ZV determines the behavior of the ZV domain in the zone 
   file.  More specifically, the types of resource records (RR) that may 
   be associated with the ZV. 
    
4.1 Same Delegation Name Servers as Primary Domain (Same NS) 
    
   ZV domains that are determined to be "Same NS" MUST have the same set 
   of sub-delegation Name Servers as the Primary Domain.  Within the 
   sub-delegated hostname servers however, there could be different sets 
   of sub-domains as administered by the Zone Administrator of the sub-
   delegated domain. 
    
   For a domain label to be categorized as "Same NS", all of the 
   characters comprising the string, that are subjected to variants 
   (including primary characters), MUST be determined to be a "Same NS" 
   candidate based on the corresponding Zoneprep policy profile. 
    
   OR, a Zone Administrator may choose to define in the Zoneprep Policy 
   Profile to have all ZVs in a zone to be "Same NS". 
    
4.2 Alias to Primary Domain Only (Alias Only) 
    
   ZV domains that are defined as "Alias Only" should have no RR sets 
   except for a CNAME (or DNAME) record gluing the ZV to the Primary 
   Domain. 
    
   For a domain label to be categorized as "Alias Only", all of the 
   characters comprising the string, that are subjected to variants 
   (including primary characters), MUST be determined as an "Alias Only" 
   candidate based on the corresponding Zoneprep policy profile. 
    
   OR, a Zone Administrator may choose to define in the Zoneprep Policy 
   Profile to have all ZVs in a zone to be "Alias Only". 
    
   Note that in order to create an Alias, the DNS server for the Zone 
   must be able to handle dynamic CNAME.  More specifically to allow the 
   use of wildcards within a CNAME record: 
    
        *.Alias-ZV.example CNAME *.PrimaryDomain.example 
    
   Or, utilize a DNAME record for a similar effect (backwards 
   compatibility to resolvers may however be compromised); Or, the Zone 
   Administrator will have to be responsible for all sub-domains and 

  
Chung                                                          [Page 6] 
ZONEPREP                                                     April 2003 
 
 
   delegations.  All of these is however beyond the scope of this 
   document. 
    
4.3 Normal Zone Variants (Normal ZV) 
    
   Normal ZVs are managed the same way as any regular unique domain 
   name.  Any type of RR set may be assigned and administered by the 
   Zone Administrator. 
    
   Any ZV that is not categorized as "Same NS" or "Alias Only" will be a 
   "Normal ZV".  Because a ZV set is a subset of the RV set, the sum of 
   "Same NS", "Alias Only" and "Normal ZV" must therefore be less than 
   or equal to the total number of domains in the given RV set. 
    
5. Zoneprep Policy Profiles 
    
   Zoneprep Policy Profiles directly impact the resolvability of a 
   domain name.  That is, if a particular Charprep variant is restricted 
   and must not be included in the zone file, that particular form will 
   NOT be resolvable. 
    
   In essence, Zoneprep Policy Profiles describe the operational policy 
   of a Zone Administrator (e.g. registry) on how Charprep Profiles and 
   Tables will be utilized and how variants will be managed within the 
   DNS zone files and the registry database. 
    
   Zoneprep Policy Profiles SHOULD be published by languages based on 
   the ISO639 "Code for the representation of names of languages" 
   standard.  One Zoneprep Policy Profile may describe the policies for 
   multiple languages. 
    
   A Zoneprep Policy Profile MUST include: 
    
   1. A set of Zoneprep Policy Tables relevant to the language(s) of 
      domain names covered by the particular Zoneprep Policy Profile 
    
   2. A report describing the languages of domain names accepted and 
      rationale on the choice of Charprep tables as well as Zoneprep 
      considerations (including general concepts for the categorization 
      of domain names into nRV, rRV, AutoZV, sRV as well as "Normal 
      ZV", "Same NS" and "Alias Only") 
    
5.1 Zoneprep Policy Tables 
    
   A Zoneprep Policy Table MUST identify which Charprep profile(s) it is 
   referring to as well as what language(s) are included within the 
   profile.  The table MUST have the following 7 fields: 
    
    Primary 
    Char     nRV     AutoZV     rRV    SameNS   Alias       Remarks 
   +------+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+---------------+ 
   |U+XXXX|U+XXXX..|U+XXXX..|U+XXXX..|U+XXXX..|U+XXXX..| OptÆl Remarks | 
   :      :          :          :          :          :                : 
  
Chung                                                          [Page 7] 
ZONEPREP                                                     April 2003 
 
 
    
   The Primary Char column will be the key for the table and contain one 
   Unicode codepoint only per entry.  The total number of entries MUST 
   not be more than the total number of entries in the corresponding 
   Charprep profile(s). 
    
   The next 5 columns: nRV, AutoZV, rRV, SameNS and Alias, consists of a 
   set of one or more space delimited codepoints corresponding to the 
   codepoint in the Primary Char column.  The codepoint identified in 
   the primary character column MAY also be inputted into the other 
   columns.  For multi-codepoint entries, the convention: U+XXXX+XXXX 
   will be used. 
    
   Entries to the columns for nRV, AutoZV and rRV are mutually 
   exclusive.  Codepoints included in AutoZV MUST NOT be included in rRV 
   for the same row entry (same Primary Char), vice versa and thereon. 
    
   Similarly, entries to the pair of columns for "SameNS" and "Alias" 
   are mutually exclusive.  Codepoints included in "SameNS" MUST NOT be 
   included in "Alias" for the same row entry (same Primary Char) and 
   vice versa. 
    
   Furthermore, codepoints included in rRV MUST NOT be included in "Same 
   NS" or "Alias Only" in the same row entry (same Primary Char) and 
   vice versa.  In summary, any codepoint that is included in rRV MUST 
   NOT exist in the other columns for the same entry (Primary Char). 
    
   Note that there are no columns allocated for sRV or Normal ZV because 
   by default any codepoint not included in the other relevant columns 
   will be determined as sRV and Normal ZV respectively.  Optional 
   remarks on rationale for the allocations could be provided. 
    
5.2 Publishing Zoneprep Profiles 
    
   A Zone Administrator, especially Top-Level Domain Registries, SHOULD 
   publish Zoneprep profiles for all languages they allow registrations 
   in, and make it publicly available for end users to understand the 
   registration policies. 
    
   As mentioned, Zoneprep Policy Profiles should be published based on 
   languages identified in the ISO639 standard and correspond to 
   Charprep profiles.  Multiple languages could be considered in one 
   Zoneprep Policy Profile. 
    
   A text format for the Zoneprep Policy Table as follows should be 
   published together with the profile: 
    
     #Zoneprep Table for XXX 
     #Version 1.0 
     #Charprep profile: latn 
     #Languages: en el ru 
    
     U+0061;U+0061;;U+03B1 U+0430;;;English Domain 
  
Chung                                                          [Page 8] 
ZONEPREP                                                     April 2003 
 
 
     U+03B1;U+03B1;U+0061;U+0430;U+0061;No Cyrillic for Greek as Primary 
     U+0430;;U+0061;;;U+03B1;Alias onlt for Greek variant  
    
   Note that multiple Charprep profiles and languages may be identified. 
    
5.3 Generating Zoneprep Variant (ZV) Sets 
    
   This section provides an example on how RVs and ZVs would be managed 
   based on a given Zoneprep Policy Profile.  Taking the example given 
   in Section 5.2 corresponding to the Charprep Mapping Profile given as 
   an example in Charprep [CHARPREP] section 6 (meant for Script:LATN). 
    
   Given a request for registration IDN: 
    
        Lang = el 
        Primary Domain = <03B1><03B1>.example  [<Alpha><Alpha>.example] 
    
   An RV set of 8 Charprep Variants will be generated: 
    
        <03B1><0061>.example  ( nRV    & Normal ZV ) 
        <03B1><0430>.example  ( sRV    & Normal ZV ) 
        <0061><0061>.example  ( AutoZV & SameNS    ) 
        <0061><03B1>.example  ( nRV    & Normal ZV ) 
        <0061><0430>.example  ( sRV    & Normal ZV ) 
        <0430><0061>.example  ( sRV    & Normal ZV ) 
        <0430><03B1>.example  ( sRV    & Normal ZV ) 
        <0430><0430>.example  ( rRV    & N/A       ) 
    
   Within this RV set, there will be one AutoZV: <0061><0061>.example 
   and one Restricted RV: <0430><0430>.example.  All domains containing 
   the Cyrillic <A> will be an sRV and the others would be Normal RVs 
   and both may be activated as ZVs. 
    
   Additionally, the AutoZV: <0061><0061>.example MUST have the same set 
   of sub-delegation name servers as the primary domain: 
   <03B1><03B1>.example. 
    
5.4 Managing Multiple Language Registrations 
    
   Zoneprep allows the management of multiple languages within a single 
   domain label by either using multiple Zoneprep tables or by having a 
   Zoneprep profile that addresses multiple languages.  When multiple 
   Charprep tables are used, the most conservative approach based on the 
   combined equivalency variants will prevail (i.e. a superset of the 
   variants generated by both Charprep tables will be used).  When 
   multiple Zoneprep tables are used, the most restrictive approach will 
   be used.  Restrictive-ness of Zoneprep policies are ranked as 
   follows: 
    
   For RV types (from most restrictive): 
   1. Restricted RV 
   2. Auto ZV 
   3. Normal RV 
  
Chung                                                          [Page 9] 
ZONEPREP                                                     April 2003 
 
 
   4. Suggested RV 
    
   For ZV types (from most restrictive): 
   1. Alias Only 
   2. Same NS 
   3. Normal ZV 
    
   More specifically, a permutation of the label for the multiple 
   Zoneprep profiles will be compiled and the resulting parameters for 
   RV and ZV types compared. 
    
6. Provisioning Considerations 
    
   In order to implement the Charprep and Zoneprep framework, Zone 
   Administrators (e.g. registries) should consider incorporating the 
   mechanisms into their provisioning protocols with subscribers (e.g. 
   registrars or registrants directly). 
    
   In terms of a provisioning framework for a top-level domain registry, 
   it is possible to envision a model whereby the equivalence rules are 
   enforced at the registrar level between the registrar and the 
   registrant, while the registry will simply accept registrations and 
   allow registrars to hold domains and to set delegation NS records as 
   usual to effect the Zoneprep policies.  However that is NOT 
   RECOMMENDED because it may cause a lot of end-user (registrant) 
   confusion if Zoneprep policies between registrars are not consistent.  
   It is also very risky to assume that an out-of-band enforcement of 
   the policies between the registry and registrar will be highly 
   reliable. 
    
   Therefore, the registry-registrar provisioning protocol should be 
   able to handle the announcement of the RV and ZV policies upon 
   registration of a domain name.  As well as to allow the further 
   provisioning of the variant domains (e.g. activating an RV into a 
   ZV). 
    
   Further discussion on incorporating Charprep and Zoneprep 
   considerations for EPP (Extensible Provisioning Protocol) could be 
   found in the document: EPP IDN Mapping [EPP-I]. 
    
   Because Charprep and Zoneprep will likely have implications on the 
   existing LDH (Letters, Digits & Hyphens) domain names currently 
   registered within the zone (e.g. registry), the Zone Administrator 
   should take into consideration the policies for handling the 
   grandfathering of variants for the existing domain names.  This 
   document does NOT explicitly talk about the management of this 
   process. 
    
7. IANA Considerations 
    
   There are no explicit IANA considerations required for Zoneprep.  
   IANA may however choose to maintain a registry for Zoneprep Policy 
   Profiles as described in Section 5 for TLD registries. 
  
Chung                                                         [Page 10] 
ZONEPREP                                                     April 2003 
 
 
    
8. Security Considerations 
    
   This document does not talk about DNS security issues, and it is 
   believed that the proposal does not introduce additional security 
   problems not already existent and/or anticipated by adding 
   multilingual characters to DNS and/or using ACE (ASCII Compatible 
   Encoding). 
    
   Zoneprep and Charprep considerations should however help to improve 
   the security and authenticity for the usage of IDNs by reducing the 
   confusion of perceptually equivalent characters. 
    
Acknowledgements 
    
   This document incorporates many of the discussions from the CJK 
   community (from CNNIC, TWNIC, JPRS and KRNIC respectively) and by the 
   JET (Joint Engineering Team) as well as at different forums including 
   IETF and ICANN.  More importantly discussions in the document: 
   "Internationalized Domain Names Registration and Administration 
   Guideline for Chinese, Japanese and Korean". 
    
   Furthermore, many valuable comments and discussions with the 
   following people were incorporated: 
    
   Xiaodong (Sheldon) Lee 
   Kenny Huang 
   Paul Hoffman 
   Mark Davis 
   Vincent Chen 
    
References 
 
   [TSCONV]   XiaoDong LEE, et al., ôTraditional and Simplified Chinese 
              Conversionö, November 2001 
    
   [JPCHAR]   Yoshiro Yoneya & Yasuhiro Morishita, JPNIC, ôJapanese 
              characters in multilingual domain name labelsö, March 2, 
              2001 
     
   [HANGULCHAR] Soobok Lee & GyeongSeog Gim, ôHangeul NAMEPREP 
              recommendation version 1.0ö, June 2001 
    
   [RFC1034]  Mockapetris, P., "Domain Names - Concepts and  
              Facilities," STD 13, RFC 1034, USC/ISI, November 1987 
       
   [RFC1035]  Mockapetris, P., "Domain Names - Implementation and  
              Specification," STD 13, RFC 1035, USC/ISI, November  
              1987 
    
   [RFC2119]  S. Bradner, "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate  
              Requirement Levels," RFC 2119, March 1997 
    
  
Chung                                                         [Page 11] 
ZONEPREP                                                     April 2003 
 
 
   [RFC2181]  R. Elz, University of Melbourne & R. Bush, RGnet, Inc., 
              ôClarifications to the DNS Specificationö, July 1997 
    
   [RFC3454]  P. Hoffman, IMC & VPNC & M. Blanchet, Viagenie, 
              öPreparation of Internationalized Strings ("stringprep")ö, 
              December 2002 
    
   [RFC3490]  P. Faltstrom, Cisco, P. Hoffman, IMC & VPNC & A. Costello 
              UC Berkeley, ôInternationalizing Domain Names in 
              Applications (IDNA)ö, March 2003 
    
   [RFC3491]  P. Hoffman, IMC & VPNC & M. Blanchet, Viagenie, ôNameprep: 
              A Stringprep Profile for Internationalized Domain Names 
              (IDN)ö, March 2003 
    
   [RFC3492]  A. Costello, Univ. of California, Berkeley, ôPunycode: A 
              Bootstring encoding of Unicode for Internationalized 
              Domain Names in Applications (IDNA)ö, March 2003 
    
   IDN-Admin  Editors: James SENG & John KLENSIN; Authors: K. KONISHI, 
              K. HUANG, H. QIAN & Y. KO, ôInternationalized Domain Names 
              Registration and Administration Guideline for Chinese, 
              Japanese and Koreanö 
    
   [IDNOP]    E. Chung, ôIDN Operationsö, March 2003 
    
   [CHARPREP] E. Chung, ôCharacter Preparations for IDNö, March 2003 
    
   [EPP-I]    E. Chung, ôEPP IDN Mappingö, March 2003 
    
   [IDNREG]   E. Chung, ôIDN Registry Implementation Guidelinesö, March 
              2003 
    
    
   Authors: 
    
   Edmon Chung 
   Neteka 
   Suite 100, 
   243 College St., Toronto, 
   Ontario, Canada M5T 1R5 
   edmon@neteka.com 











  
Chung                                                         [Page 12] 
