


Network Working Group                                         J. Klensin
Internet-Draft                                         February 23, 2007
Expires: August 27, 2007


                  ASCII Escaping of Unicode Characters
                 draft-klensin-unicode-escapes-03.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 27, 2007.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

Abstract

   There are a number of circumstances in which an escape mechanism is
   needed in conjunction with a protocol to encode characters that
   cannot be represented or transmitted directly.  With ASCII coding the
   traditional escape has been either the decimal or hexadecimal offset
   of the character, written in a variety of different ways.  The move
   to Unicode, where characters occupy two or more octets and may be
   coded in several different forms, has further complicated the
   question of escapes.  This document discusses some options now in use
   and discusses considerations for selecting one for use in new IETF



Klensin                  Expires August 27, 2007                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft               Unicode Escapes               February 2007


   protocols and protocols that are now being internationalized.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.1.  Context and Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.2.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     1.3.  Discussion List  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.  Encodings that Represent Unicode Code Points . . . . . . . . .  4
     2.1.  Unicode Table Position versus UTF-8 or UTF-16 Octets . . .  4
   3.  Referring to Unicode Characters  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   4.  Syntax for Code Point Escapes  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   5.  Presentation Variants for Unicode Code Points  . . . . . . . .  6
     5.1.  The C Programming Language: Backslash-U  . . . . . . . . .  7
     5.2.  XML and HTML . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     5.3.  Perl: A Hexadecimal String . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     5.4.  Java: Escaped UTF-16 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   6.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   7.  Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   8.  Change log . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     8.1.  Changes in -01 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   9.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     9.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     9.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 12
























Klensin                  Expires August 27, 2007                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft               Unicode Escapes               February 2007


1.  Introduction

1.1.  Context and Background

   There are a number of circumstances in which an escape mechanism is
   needed in conjunction with a protocol to encode characters that
   cannot be represented or transmitted directly.  With ASCII [ASCII]
   coding the traditional escape has been either the decimal or
   hexadecimal offset of the character, written in a variety of
   different ways.  For example, in different contexts, we have seen
   %dNN or %NN for the decimal form, %NN, %xNN, X'nn', and %X'NN' for
   the hexadecimal form. "%NN" has become popular in recent years to
   represent a hexadecimal value without further qualification, perhaps
   as a consequence of its use in URLs and their prevalence.  There are
   even some applications around in which octal forms are used and,
   while they do not generalize well, the MIME Quoted-Printable and
   Encoded-word forms can be thought of as yet another set of escapes.
   So, even for the fairly simple cases of ASCII and standard built by
   extending ASCII, such as the ISO 8859 family, we have been living
   with several different escaping forms, each the result of some
   history.

   When one moves to Unicode [Unicode] [ISO10646], where characters
   occupy two or more octets and may be coded in several different
   forms, the question of escapes becomes even more complicated.  In
   particular, we have seen fairly extensive use of both hexadecimal
   representations of the UTF-8 encoding [RFC3629] of a character and
   variations on the U+NNNN[N[N]] notation (i.e., "U+" and four to six
   hexadecimal digits) commonly used in conjunction with the Unicode
   Standard.

   In accordance with existing best-practices recommendations [RFC2277],
   new protocols that are required to carry textual content SHOULD be
   designed in such a way that the full repertoire of Unicode characters
   may be represented in that text.

   This document proposes that existing protocols being
   internationalized, and that need an escape mechanism, SHOULD use some
   contextually-appropriate variation on references to code points as
   described in Section 2 unless other considerations outweigh those
   described here.

   This recommendation is not applicable to protocols that already
   accept native UTF-8 or some other encoding of Unicode.  In general,
   when protocols are internationalized, it is preferable to accept
   those forms rather than using escapes.  This recommendation applies
   to cases, including transition arrangements, in which that is not
   practical.



Klensin                  Expires August 27, 2007                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft               Unicode Escapes               February 2007


   In addition to the protocol contexts addressed in this specification,
   escapes to represent Unicode characters also appear in presentations
   to users, i.e., in user interfaces (UI).  The formats specified in,
   and the reasoning of, this document may be applicable in UI contexts
   as well, but this is not a proposal to standardize UI or presentation
   forms.

   This document does not make general recommendations for processing
   Unicode strings or for their contents.  It assumes that the strings
   that one might want to escape are valid and reasonable and that the
   definition of "valid and reasonable" is the province of other
   documents.  Recommendations about general treatment of Unicode
   strings may be found in many places, including the Unicode Standard
   itself and the W3C Character Model [W3C-CharMod] as well as specific
   rules in individual protocols.

1.2.  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].

1.3.  Discussion List

   Discussion of this document should be addressed to the
   discuss@apps.ietf.org mailing list.


2.  Encodings that Represent Unicode Code Points

   There are many different ways to designate, encode, or call out a
   Unicode character.  Given adequate decoding facilities, all of these
   other than the formal character name are equivalent.  However, when
   information about characters is to be processed by people,
   information about the Unicode code point is preferable to a further
   encoding of the encoded form of the character.  It is also desirable
   to use hexadecimal references to code points because the Unicode
   Standard is organized on a hexadecimal basis.

   These issues are discussed in the following subsections.

2.1.  Unicode Table Position versus UTF-8 or UTF-16 Octets

   There are two major families of ways to represent Unicode characters.
   One uses the code point position in the table in some representation
   (see the next section), the other encodes the octets of the UTF-8
   encoding or some other short-form encoding.  Some other options are
   possible, but they have been rare in practice.  This specification



Klensin                  Expires August 27, 2007                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft               Unicode Escapes               February 2007


   recommends that, in the absence of compelling reasons to do
   otherwise, the Unicode code point forms SHOULD be used rather than
   the UTF-8 (or UTF-16) ones.  There are several reasons for this,
   including:

   o  One reason for the success of many IETF protocols is that they use
      human-interpretable text forms to communicate, rather than
      encodings that generally require computer programs (or hand
      simulation of algorithms) to decode.  This suggests that the
      presentation form should reference the Unicode tables for
      characters and to do so as simply as possible.

   o  The nature of UTF-8 implies that a decimal or hexadecimal numeral
      representation of UTF-8 requires conversion to the UTF-8 form,
      then conversion from the UTF-8 form to a Unicode character
      position form in order to look the character up in a table.  That
      may be appropriate in some cases where the goal is really to
      represent the UTF-8 form but, in general, it just obscures desired
      information and makes errors more likely and debugging harder.

   o  Except for characters in the ASCII subset of Unicode (U+0000
      through U+007F), the character code position form is generally
      more compact than forms based on coding UTF-8 octets, sometimes
      much more compact.

   The same considerations that apply to encoding of UTF-8 octets also
   apply to more compact ACE encodings such as the "bootstring" encoding
   [RFC3492] with or without its "Punycode" profile.

   Similar considerations apply to UTF-16 encoding, such as the \uNNNN
   form used in Java (See Section 5.4).  While those forms are
   equivalent to code point references for the Basic Multilingual Plane
   (BMP, Plane 0), a two-stage decoding process is needed to handle
   surrogates to access higher planes.


3.  Referring to Unicode Characters

   Regardless of what decisions are made about escapes for Unicode
   characters in protocol or similar contexts, references to Unicode
   characters in text SHOULD use the U+NNNN[N[N]] syntax for code point
   references specified in the Unicode Standard, where the NNNN...
   string consists of hexadecimal numbers.


4.  Syntax for Code Point Escapes

   There are many options for code point escapes, some of which are



Klensin                  Expires August 27, 2007                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft               Unicode Escapes               February 2007


   summarized below.  All are equivalent in content and semantics -- the
   differences lie in syntax.  The best choice of syntax for a
   particular protocol or other application depends on that application:
   one form may simply "fit" better in a given context than others.  It
   is clear, however, that hexadecimal values are preferable to other
   alternatives: Systems based on decimal or octal offsets SHOULD NOT be
   used.

   Since this specification does not recommend one specific syntax,
   protocols specifications that use escapes MUST define the syntax they
   are using, including any necessary escapes to permit the escape
   sequence to be used literally.

   The application designer selecting a format should consider at least
   the following factors:

   o  If similar or related protocols already use one form, it may be
      best to select that form for consistency and predictability.

   o  A Unicode code point can fall in the range from U+0000 to
      U+10FFFF.  Different escape systems may use four, five, six, or
      eight hexadecimal digits.  To avoid clever syntax tricks and the
      consequent risk of confusion and errors, forms that use explicit
      string delimiters are generally preferred over other alternatives.
      In many contexts, symmetric paired delimiters are easier to
      recognize and understand than visually-unrelated ones.

   o  Syntax forms starting in "\u", without explicit delimiters, have
      been used in several different escape systems, including the four
      or eight digit syntax of C Section 5.1, the UTF-16 encoding of
      Java Section 5.4, and some arrangements that may follow the "\u"
      with four, five, or six digits.  The possible confusion about
      which option is actually being used may argue against use of any
      of these forms.

   o  Forms that require decoding surrogate pairs share most of the
      problems that appear with encoding of UTF-8 octets and SHOULD NOT,
      in general, be used.


5.  Presentation Variants for Unicode Code Points

   There are a number of different ways to represent a Unicode code
   point position.  No one of them appears to be "best" for all
   contexts.  In addition, when an escape is needed for the escape
   mechanism itself, the optimal one of those might differ from one
   context to another.




Klensin                  Expires August 27, 2007                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft               Unicode Escapes               February 2007


   Some forms that are in popular use and that might reasonably be
   considered for use in a given protocol, are described below and
   identified with a current-use context when feasible.

5.1.  The C Programming Language: Backslash-U

   The forms

      \UNNNNNNNN (for any Unicode character) and

      \uNNNN (for Unicode characters in plane 0)

   are utilized in the C Programming Language [ISO-C] when an ASCII
   escape for embedded Unicode characters is needed.

   Specifically, in ABNF [RFC4234],

   EmbeddedUnicodeChar =  BMP-form / Full-form

   BMP-form =  %x5C.75 4HEXDIG ; starting with lower case "\u"
      ; In both this case and the one above, note that the encodings are
      considered to be abstractions for the relevant characters, not
      designations of specific octets.

   Full-form =  %x5C.55 8HEXDIG ; starting with upper case "\U"

   HEXDIG =  "0" / "1" / "2"/ "3"/ "4"/ "5"/ "6"/ "7"/ "8"/ "9"/ "A"/
      "B" / "C"/ "D"/ "E"/ "F"
      ; effectively identical with definition in RFC 4234.

   There are disadvantages of this form which may be significant.
   First, the use of a case variation (between "u" for the four digit
   form and "U" for the eight digit form) may not seem natural in
   environments in which upper and lower case characters are generally
   considered equivalent and might be confusing to people who are not
   very familiar with Latin-based alphabets (although those people might
   have even more trouble reading relevant English text and
   explanations).  Second, as discussed in Section 4 the very fact that
   there are several different conventions that start in \u or \U may
   become a source of confusion as people make incorrect assumptions
   about what they are looking at.

5.2.  XML and HTML

   XML uses the form &#xNNNN;.  Like the Perl form, this form has a
   clear ending delimiter, reducing ambiguity.  HTML uses a similar
   form, but the semicolon may be omitted in some cases.  If that is
   done, the advantages of the the delimiter disappear so the HTML form



Klensin                  Expires August 27, 2007                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft               Unicode Escapes               February 2007


   without the semicolon SHOULD NOT be used.  However, this format is
   generally considered ugly and awkward outside of its native HTML,
   XML, and similar contexts.

   In ABNF:

   EmbeddedUnicodeChar =   %x26.23.78 2*6HEXDIG ";" ; starts with "&#x"

   Note that a literal "&" can be expressed by "&#x26;" when using this
   style.

5.3.  Perl: A Hexadecimal String

   Perl uses the form \x{NNNN...}.  The advantage of this form is that
   there are explicit delimiters, resolving the issue of having
   variable-length strings or using the case-change mechanism of the
   proposed form to distinguish between Plane 0 and more general forms.
   Some other programming languages would tend to favor X'NNNN...' forms
   for hexadecimal strings and perhaps U'NNNN...' for Unicode-specific
   strings, but those forms do not seem to be in use around the IETF.

   In ABNF:

   EmbeddedUnicodeChar =   %x5C.78 "{" 2*6HEXDIG "}" ; starts with "\x"

5.4.  Java: Escaped UTF-16

   Java [Java] uses the form \uNNNN, but as a reference to UTF-16
   values, not Unicode code points.  While it uses a syntax similar to
   that described in Section 5.1, this relationship to UTF-16 makes it,
   in many respects, more similar to the encodings of UTF-8 discussed
   above than to an escape that designates Unicode code points.  Note
   that the UTF-16 form, and hence the Java escape notation, can
   represent characters outside Plane 0 (i.e., above U+FFFF) only by the
   use of surrogate pairs, raising some of the same issues as the use of
   UTF-8 octets discussed above.  For characters in Plane 0, the Java
   form is indistinguishable from the Plane 0-only form described in
   Section 5.1.  If only for that reason, it SHOULD NOT be used as an
   escape except in those Java contexts in which it is natural.


6.  Security Considerations

   This document proposes a set of rules for encoding Unicode characters
   when other considerations do not apply.  Since all of the recommended
   encodings are unambiguous and normalization issues are not involved,
   it should not introduce any security issues that are not present as a
   result of simple use of non-ASCII characters, no matter how they are



Klensin                  Expires August 27, 2007                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft               Unicode Escapes               February 2007


   encoded.  The mechanisms suggested should slightly lower the risks of
   confusing users with encoded characters by making the identity of the
   characters being used somewhat more obvious than some of the
   alternatives.

   An escape mechanism such as the one specified in this document can
   allow characters to be represented in more than one way.  Where
   software interprets the escaped form, there is a risk that security
   checks, and any necessary checks for, e.g., minimal or normalized
   forms, are done at the wrong point.


7.  Acknowledgments

   This document was produced in response to a series of discussions
   within the IETF Applications Area and as part of work on email
   internationalization and internationalized domain name updates.  It
   is a synthesis of a large number of discussions, the comments of the
   participants in which are gratefully acknowledged.  The help of Mark
   Davis in constructing a list of alternative presentations and
   selecting among them was especially important.

   Tim Bray, Stephane Bortzmeyer, Frank Ellermann, Clive D.W. Feather,
   Philip Guenther, Bjoern Hoehrmann, Simon Josefsson, Bill McQuillan,
   der Mouse, Phil Pennock, and Julian Reschke provided careful reading
   and some corrections and suggestions on early drafts.  Taken
   together, their suggestions motivated the significant revision of
   this document and its recommendations between version -00 and version
   -01 and further improvements in -02.


8.  Change log

   [[anchor10: RFC Editor: Please remove this section before
   publication.]]

8.1.  Changes in -01

   o  Corrected ABNF syntax for Hex-quad and Full-form.


9.  References

9.1.  Normative References

   [ISO10646]
              International Organization for Standardization,
              "Information Technology - Universal Multiple- Octet Coded



Klensin                  Expires August 27, 2007                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft               Unicode Escapes               February 2007


              Character Set (UCS)"", ISO/IEC 10646:2003, December 2003.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC3629]  Yergeau, F., "UTF-8, a transformation format of ISO
              10646", STD 63, RFC 3629, November 2003.

   [RFC4234]  Crocker, D., Ed. and P. Overell, "Augmented BNF for Syntax
              Specifications: ABNF", RFC 4234, October 2005.

   [Unicode]  The Unicode Consortium, "The Unicode Standard, Version
              5.0", 2006.

              (Addison-Wesley, 2006.  ISBN 0-321-48091-0).

9.2.  Informative References

   [ASCII]    American National Standards Institute (formerly United
              States of America Standards Institute), "USA Code for
              Information Interchange", ANSI X3.4-1968, 1968.

              ANSI X3.4-1968 has been replaced by newer versions with
              slight modifications, but the 1968 version remains
              definitive for the Internet.

   [ISO-C]    International Organization for Standardization,
              "Information technology --  Programming languages -- C",
              ISO/IEC 9899:1999, 1999.

   [Java]     Sun Microsystems, Inc., "Java Language Specification,
              Third Edition", 2005, <http://java.sun.com/docs/books/jls/
              third_edition/html/lexical.html#95413p>.

   [RFC2277]  Alvestrand, H., "IETF Policy on Character Sets and
              Languages", BCP 18, RFC 2277, January 1998.

   [RFC3492]  Costello, A., "Punycode: A Bootstring encoding of Unicode
              for Internationalized Domain Names in Applications
              (IDNA)", RFC 3492, March 2003.

   [W3C-CharMod]
              Duerst, M., "Character Model for the World Wide Web 1.0",
              W3C Recommendation, February 2005,
              <http://www.w3.org/TR/charmod/>.






Klensin                  Expires August 27, 2007               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft               Unicode Escapes               February 2007


Author's Address

   John C Klensin
   1770 Massachusetts Ave, #322
   Cambridge, MA  02140
   USA

   Phone: +1 617 245 1457
   Email: john-ietf@jck.com










































Klensin                  Expires August 27, 2007               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft               Unicode Escapes               February 2007


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Klensin                  Expires August 27, 2007               [Page 12]


