





Network Working Group                                         Alan DeKok
INTERNET-DRAFT                                                FreeRADIUS
Category: Proposed Standard
Updates: 2885
<draft-dekok-radext-request-authenticator-03.txt>
Expires: May 04, 2018
4 December 2017


                Correlating requests and replies in the
      Remote Authentication Dial In User Service (RADIUS) Protocol
                     via the Request Authenticator.
            draft-dekok-radext-request-authenticator-03.txt


Abstract

   RADIUS uses a one-octet Identifier field to correlate requests and
   responses, which limits clients to 256 "in flight" packets per
   connection.  This document removes that limitation by allowing
   Request Authenticator to be used as an additional field for
   identifying packets.  The capability is negotiated on a per-
   connection basis, and requires no changes to the RADIUS packet
   format, attribute encoding, or data types.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on November 18, 2017.




DeKok, Alan                  Standards Track                    [Page 1]

INTERNET-DRAFT         Identifying RADIUS packets.       4 December 2017


Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2017 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info/) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

   This document may contain material from IETF Documents or IETF
   Contributions published or made publicly available before November
   10, 2008.  The person(s) controlling the copyright in some of this
   material may not have granted the IETF Trust the right to allow
   modifications of such material outside the IETF Standards Process.
   Without obtaining an adequate license from the person(s) controlling
   the copyright in such materials, this document may not be modified
   outside the IETF Standards Process, and derivative works of it may
   not be created outside the IETF Standards Process, except to format
   it for publication as an RFC or to translate it into languages other
   than English.

























DeKok, Alan                  Standards Track                    [Page 2]

INTERNET-DRAFT         Identifying RADIUS packets.       4 December 2017


Table of Contents

   11.1. .....................................................    3
1.  Introduction .............................................    4
   1.1.  Compatability with Existing RADIUS ..................    5
   1.2.  Outline of the document .............................    6
   1.3.  Terminology .........................................    6
   1.4.  Requirements Language ...............................    7
2.  Review of Current Behavior ...............................    8
   2.1.  Client Behavior .....................................    8
   2.2.  Server Behavior .....................................    9
3.  Alternative Approaches ...................................   10
   3.1.  Multiple Source Ports ...............................   11
   3.2.  Diameter ............................................   11
   3.3.  Multiple RADIUS packets in UDP ......................   11
   3.4.  An Extended ID field ................................   12
   3.5.  This Specification ..................................   13
4.  Protocol Overview ........................................   13
   4.1.  Why this works ......................................   14
5.  Signaling via Status-Server ..............................   15
   5.1.  Static Configuration ................................   17
6.  Original-Request-Authenticator Attribute .................   17
7.  Transport Considerations .................................   19
   7.1.  UDP .................................................   19
   7.2.  TCP .................................................   20
   7.3.  Dynamic Discovery ...................................   21
   7.4.  Connection Issues ...................................   21
8.  System Considerations ....................................   22
   8.1.  Client Considerations ...............................   22
   8.2.  Server Considerations ...............................   23
   8.3.  Proxy Considerations ................................   24
9.  IANA Considerations ......................................   24
10.  Security Considerations .................................   25
   10.1.  Access-Request Forging .............................   25
   10.2.  MD5 Collisions .....................................   26
11.  Normative References ....................................   27
11.1. ........................................................   27














DeKok, Alan                  Standards Track                    [Page 3]

INTERNET-DRAFT         Identifying RADIUS packets.       4 December 2017


1.  Introduction

   The Remote Authentication Dial In User Service (RADIUS) protocol
   contains an Identifier field, defined in [RFC2865] Section 5 as:

      The Identifier field is one octet, and aids in matching requests
      and replies.  The RADIUS server can detect a duplicate request if
      it has the same client source IP address and source UDP port and
      Identifier within a short span of time.

   The small size of the field allows for only 256 outstanding requests
   without responses. If a client requires more than 256 packets to be
   outstanding to the RADIUS server, it must open a new connection, with
   a new source port.

   This limitation does not severely impact low-load RADIUS systems.
   However, it is an issue for high-load systems.  Opening new sockets
   is more expensive than tracking requests inside of an application,
   and is generally unnecessary in other UDP protocols.

   For very high load systems, this "new socket" requirement can result
   in a client opening hundreds or thousands of connections.  There are
   a number of problems with this approach:

   * RADIUS is connection oriented, and each connection operates
     independently of all other connections.

   * each connection created by the client must independently discover
     server availability.  i.e. the connections can have different views
     of the status of the server, leading to packet loss and network
     instability.

   * The small size of RADIUS packets means that UDP traffic can reach
     Ethernet rate limits long before bandwidth limits are reached for
     the same network.  This limitation prevents high-load systems from
     fully using available network bandwidth.

   * The limit of 256 outstanding requests means that RADIUS over TCP
     [RFC6613] is also limited to a small amount of traffic per
     connection, and thus will rarely achieve the full benefit of TCP
     transport.

   * the existence of hundreds of simultaneous connections can impose
     significant management overhead on clients and servers.

   * network stacks will generally operate more efficiently with a
   larger
     amount of data over one connection, instead of small amounts of



DeKok, Alan                  Standards Track                    [Page 4]

INTERNET-DRAFT         Identifying RADIUS packets.       4 December 2017


   data
     split over many connections.

   For these reasons, it is beneficial to extend RADIUS to allow more
   than 256 outstanding requests per connection.

1.1.  Compatability with Existing RADIUS

   It is difficult in practice to extend RADIUS.  Any proposal must not
   only explain why it cannot use Diameter, but it also must fit within
   the technical limitations of RADIUS.

   We believe that this specification is appropriate for RADIUS, due to
   the following reasons:

   * this specification makes no change to the RADIUS packet format;

   * this specification makes no change to RADIUS security;

   * this specification adds no new RADIUS data types;

   * this specification uses standard RADIUS attribute formats;

   * this specification uses standard RADIUS data types;

   * this specification adds a single attribute to the RADIUS Attribute
     Type registry;

   * all existing RADIUS clients and servers will accept packets
     following this specification as valid RADIUS packets;

   * due to negotiation of capabilities, implementations of this
     specification are fully compatible with all existing RADIUS
     implementations;

   * clients implementing this specification can fall back to standard
     RADIUS in the event of misbehavior by a server;

   * servers implementing this specification use standard RADIUS unless
     this functionality has been explicitly negotiated;

   * low-load RADIUS systems do not need to implement this
   specification;

   * high-load systems can use this specification to remove all
     RADIUS-specific limits on filling available network bandwidth;

   * this specification allows for effectively unlimited numbers of



DeKok, Alan                  Standards Track                    [Page 5]

INTERNET-DRAFT         Identifying RADIUS packets.       4 December 2017


     RADIUS packets over one connection, removing almost all issues
     related to connection management from client and server;

   * as a negative, implementations of this specification must have code
     paths for standard RADIUS, as well as for this specification.

   In short, this specification is largely limited to changing the way
   that clients and server implementations internally match requests and
   responses.

   We believe that the benefits of this specification outweigh the costs
   of implementing it.

1.2.  Outline of the document

   The document gives a high level overview of proposal.  It then
   describes how the functionality is signaled in a Status-Server
   [RFC5997] It then defines the Original-Request-Authenticator
   attribute.  It then describes how this change to RADIUS affects each
   type of packet (ordered by Code).  Finally, it describes how the
   change affects transports such as UDP, TCP, and TLS.

1.3.  Terminology

   This document uses the following terms:

ID tracking
     The traditional RADIUS method of tracking request / response
     packets by use of the Identifier field.  Many implementations also
     use a socket descriptor, and/or src/dst IP/port as part of the
     tuple used to track packets.

ORA tracking
     The method defined here which allows request / response packets
     extends ID tracking, in order to add Request Authenticator or
     Original-Request-Authenticator as part of the tuple used to track
     packets.

Network Access Server (NAS)
     The device providing access to the network.  Also known as the
     Authenticator (in IEEE 802.1X terminology) or RADIUS client.

RADIUS Proxy
     In order to provide for the routing of RADIUS authentication and
     accounting requests, a RADIUS proxy can be employed. To the NAS,
     the RADIUS proxy appears to act as a RADIUS server, and to the
     RADIUS server, the proxy appears to act as a RADIUS client.




DeKok, Alan                  Standards Track                    [Page 6]

INTERNET-DRAFT         Identifying RADIUS packets.       4 December 2017


'request packet' or 'request'
     One of the allowed packets sent by a client to a server.  e.g.
     Access-Request, Accounting-Request, etc.

'response packet' or 'response'
     One of the allowed packets sent by a server to a client, in
     response to a request packet.  e.g. Access-Accept, Accounting-
     Response, etc.

1.4.  Requirements Language

   In this document, several words are used to signify the requirements
   of the specification.  The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED",
   "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY",
   and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
   [RFC2119].



































DeKok, Alan                  Standards Track                    [Page 7]

INTERNET-DRAFT         Identifying RADIUS packets.       4 December 2017


2.  Review of Current Behavior

   In this section, we give a short review of how clients and servers
   currently operate.  This review is necessary to help contextualize
   the subsequent discussion.

2.1.  Client Behavior

   When a client sends a request to a server, it allocates a unique
   Identifier for that packet, signs the packet, and sends it to the
   server over a particular network connection.  When a client receives
   a response from a server over that same network connection, the
   client uses the Identifier to find the original request.  The client
   then uses the original Request Authenticator to verify the Response
   Authenticator of the response.

   We call this behavior "ID tracking".  It is the traditional method
   used in RADIUS to track requests and responses.  The term "ID
   tracking" is used in preference to "traditional RADIUS".

   This tracking behavior is similar across all packet types.  However,
   the management of the ID field is largely unspecified.  For example.
   [RFC2865] Section 5 says

      The Identifier field is one octet, and aids in matching requests
      and replies.  The RADIUS server can detect a duplicate request if
      it has the same client source IP address and source UDP port and
      Identifier within a short span of time.

   Similar text is contained in [RFC2866] Section 3, while [RFC5176]
   Section 2.3 has a more extensive discussion of the use of the
   Identifier field.  However, all three documents are silent on the
   topic of how Identifiers are managed.

   This silence means that there are no guidelines in the specifications
   for how a client can re-use an Identifier value.  For example, can a
   client re-use an Identifier after a response is received?  Can a
   client re-use an Identifier after a timeout, when no response has
   been received?  If the client sends multiple requests and finally
   receives a response, can the Identifier be re-used immediately, or
   should the client wait until it receives all duplicate responses to
   its duplicate requests?

   There are no clear answers to any of these questions.

   The specifications are not much clearer on the subject of response
   packets.  For example, [RFC2865] Section 4.2 has the following text
   for Access-Accept responses:



DeKok, Alan                  Standards Track                    [Page 8]

INTERNET-DRAFT         Identifying RADIUS packets.       4 December 2017


      On reception of an Access-Accept, the Identifier field is matched
      with a pending Access-Request.  The Response Authenticator field
      MUST contain the correct response for the pending Access-Request.
      Invalid packets are silently discarded.

   [RFC2866] Section 4.2 has similar text, while [RFC5176] has no such
   text, and assumes that the reader knows that Identifiers are used to
   match a CoA-ACK packet to a CoA-Request packet.

   While these issues are undefined, they nevertheless have to be
   addressed in practice.  Client implementations have therefore chosen
   some custom behavior for Identifier management.  This behavior has
   proven to be inter-operable, despite being poorly defined.

   We bring this issue up solely to note that much of the RADIUS
   protocol is undefined or implementation-defined.  As a result, it
   should be possible to define behavior which was previously left open
   to implementation interpretation.  Even better, this new behavior can
   be defined in such a way as to obtain new and useful features in
   RADIUS.

2.2.  Server Behavior

   Server implementations have similar issues related to managing
   Identifiers for request packets.  For example, while clients are
   permitted to send duplicate requests, [RFC2865] is not clear on how
   servers should handle those duplicates.

   That issue was addressed in [RFC5080] Section 2.2.2, which defines
   how servers should perform duplicate detection.  This duplicate
   detection aids in lowering the load on servers by allowing them to
   send cached responses to duplicates, instead of re-processing the
   request.

   However, the issue of duplicate packets and retransmissions by the
   clients can result in another situation which is not discussed in any
   RADIUS specification.  This topic deserves more discussion, because
   as we will see below, this topic motivates this specification.

   The specifications do not describe what a server should do if it
   receives a new packet which is on the same connection as a previous
   one, and shares the Code and Identifier fields, but for which the
   Request Authenticator is different.  That is, a client may send a
   request using an Identifier, not get a response, then time out that
   request.  The client is then implicitly allowed by the specifications
   to re-use that Identifier when sending a new request.

   That new request will be on the same connection as a previous



DeKok, Alan                  Standards Track                    [Page 9]

INTERNET-DRAFT         Identifying RADIUS packets.       4 December 2017


   request, using the same Code and Identifiers as a previous request,
   but will have a different Request Authenticator.

   When the server receives this new packet, it has no knowledge that
   the client has timed out the original request.  The server may still
   be processing the original request.  If the server responds to the
   original request, the response will likely get ignored by the client,
   as it has timed out that original request.  If the server responds to
   the new request, the client will probably accept the response, but
   the server must then not respond to the original request.

   The server now has two "live" requests from a client, but it can
   respond only to one.  These request are "conflicting packets", and
   the process used to detect them is conflict detection and conflict
   management.

   While the concept of "conflicting packets" is not defined in the
   RADIUS specifications, it nevertheless has had to be addressed in
   practice.  Server implementations have each chosen some behavior for
   conflict detection and management.  This implementation-defined
   behavior has proven to be inter-operable in practice, which allows
   RADIUS to operate in the face of conflicts.

   The concept conflict detection is the key concept driving this
   specification.  If servers were instead allowed to process and reply
   to both requests, then the limits of the Identifier field would be
   entirely bypassed.

   The rest of this specification describes the impact of allowing these
   otherwise "conflicting packets" to be processed.  We discuss a
   framework required to negotiate this functionality in an inter-
   operable manner.  We define a new method of tracking packets, called
   "ORA tracking", which is discussed further below.

3.  Alternative Approaches

   There are other ways that the per-connection Identifier limitation
   could have been addressed.  As extending RADIUS is a controversial
   topic, we believe it is useful to discuss some alternative
   approaches, and to explain their costs and benefits.  This discussion
   ensures that readers of this specification are fully informed as to
   why this design is the preferred approach.

   We finish this section by explaining why this solution was chosen.







DeKok, Alan                  Standards Track                   [Page 10]

INTERNET-DRAFT         Identifying RADIUS packets.       4 December 2017


3.1.  Multiple Source Ports

   One approach is to follow the suggestion of [RFC2865] Section 5,
   which says:

      NAS needs more than 256 IDs for outstanding requests, it MAY use
      additional source ports to send requests from, and keep track of
      IDs for each source port.  This allows up to 16 million or so
      outstanding requests at one time to a single server

   This suggestion has been widely implemented.  However, practice shows
   that the number of open ports has a practical limitation much lower
   than 65535.  This limitation is due both to ports being used by other
   applications on the same system, and application and OS-specific
   complexities related to opening thousands of ports.

   The "multiple source port" approach is workable for low-load systems.
   However, implementors of high-load systems have requested an
   alternative to that approach.  The justification is that this
   approach has proven to be problematic in practice for them.

3.2.  Diameter

   Another common approach is to suggest that implementors switch to
   using Diameter instead of RADIUS.  We believe that the Diameter
   protocol does not satisfy the requirements of the implementors who
   are requesting extensions to RADIUS.

   The short summary is that implementors have significant investment in
   a RADIUS infrastructure.  Switching to Diameter would involve either
   deprecating or throwing away all of that infrastructure.  This
   approach is simply not technically or economically feasible.

   Ad hoc surveys indicate that the majority of the implementations that
   will use this specification do not have pre-existing Diameter code
   bases.  We suggest that it is simpler for implementors to make minor
   changes to their RADIUS systens than it is to implement a full
   Diameter stack.  This reality is a major consideration when creating
   new specifications.

   For these reasons, switching to Diameter is not a useful approach.

3.3.  Multiple RADIUS packets in UDP

   Another approach would be to allow multiple RADIUS packets in one UDP
   packet.  This method would allow an increased amount of RADIUS
   traffic to be sent in the same number of UDP packets.




DeKok, Alan                  Standards Track                   [Page 11]

INTERNET-DRAFT         Identifying RADIUS packets.       4 December 2017


   However, this approach still has the limit of 256 outstanding
   requests, which means that implementations have extra work of
   juggling RADIUS packets, UDP packets, and UDP connections.  In
   addition, this approach does not address the issues discussed above
   for RADIUS over TCP.

   As a result, this approach is not suitable as a solution to the ID
   limit problem.

3.4.  An Extended ID field

   Another approach it to use an attribute which contained an "extended"
   ID, typically one which is 32 bits in size.  That approach has been
   used in at least one commercial RADIUS server for years, via a
   Vendor-Specific Attribute.

   The benefits of this approach is that it makes no change to the
   RADIUS protocol format, attribute encoding, data types, security,
   etc.  It just adds one "integer" attribute, as an "extended ID"
   field.  Client implementations add the "extended ID" attribute to
   requests, and server implementations echo it back in responses.  The
   "extended ID" field is also used in doing duplicate detection,
   finding conflicting packets, etc.

   Implementations using this approach have generally chosen to not
   perform negotiation of this functionality.  Instead, they require
   both client and server to be statically configured to enable the
   "extended ID".

   Clients implementing the "extended ID" must, of course, manage this
   new identifier.  As the identfier is still local to a connection, it
   is possible to simply take the "extended ID" from a counter which is
   incremented for every request packet.  There is no need to mark these
   identifiers as unused, as the 32-bit counter space is enough to
   ensure that re-use happens rarely.  i.e. at 1 million packets per
   second, the counter is enough to last for over an hour, which is a
   time frame much larger than the lifetime of any individual packet.

   This approach is compatible with all RADIUS transports, which is a
   major point in its favor.

   An implementation of the "extended ID" approach is less than 200
   lines of C code [PATCH].  That patch includes capability negotiation
   via Status-Server, and full client / server / proxy support.

   This approach has therefore been proven to be workable in practice,
   and simple to implement.




DeKok, Alan                  Standards Track                   [Page 12]

INTERNET-DRAFT         Identifying RADIUS packets.       4 December 2017


3.5.  This Specification

   The approach discussed here was chosen after looking at the handling
   of packet conflicts, as discussed above in Section X.  The conclusion
   was that since the behavior around "conflicting packets" was entirely
   implementation-defined, then changing the behavior would involve
   minor changes to the RADIUS specifications.

   This specification suggests that clients and servers can choose to
   use the Request Authenticator as a an additional field to uniquely
   identify request packets.  This choice is entirely local to the
   client or server implementation, and involves no changes to the wire
   format or wire protocol.  There are additional considerations which
   are outlined below.

   The approach outlined in this specification is largely similar to the
   "extended ID" approach, except that it leverages a pre-existing field
   as an identifier, instead of creating a new one.  This re-use means
   that the client does not need to track or allocate new identifiers

   The use of the Request Authenticator as an identifier means that
   there are 128 bits of space available for identifiers.  This large
   space means that the "conflicting packet" problem is avoided almost
   entirely, as the Request Authenticator is either random data (Access-
   Request), or an MD5 signature (other packets).

   The subject of MD5 collisions is addressed below, in Section X.

   As with the "extended ID" approach. this approach is compatible with
   all transports.

   We believe that this approach is slightly simpler than the next best
   approach ("extended ID"), while at the same time providing more
   benefits.  As a result, it is the recommended approach for allowing
   more than 256 outstanding packets on one connection.

4.  Protocol Overview

   We extend RADIUS to allow the use of the Request Authenticator field
   as an additional identifier.  Subject to certain caveats outlined
   below, the Request Authenticator can be treated as being temporally
   and globally unique.  This uniqueness is what makes it a useful
   identifier field.

   The capability is first negotiated via Status-Server, as outlined
   below.  Once both client and server agree on the use of this
   capability, the client can start sending normal request packets.




DeKok, Alan                  Standards Track                   [Page 13]

INTERNET-DRAFT         Identifying RADIUS packets.       4 December 2017


   The client creates a request packet as usual.  When the client needs
   to store the request packet, it adds the Request Authenticator as
   part of the unique key which tracks the request.  The packet is then
   sent to the server.

   The server receives the request, and uses the Request Authenticator
   to track the request, in addition to any previously used information.
   When the server sends a reply, it copies the Request Authenticator to
   the response packet, and places the 16 octet value into the Original-
   Request-Authenticator attribute.  The response is then sent as
   before.

   When the client receives the response, it uses the Original-Request-
   Authenticator attribute to create the lookup key, in order to find
   the original request.  Once the original request is found, packet
   verification and processing continues as before.

   We note again that the Identifier field is still used to correlate
   requests and responses, along with any other information that the
   implementation deems necessary.  (e.g. Code, socket descriptor,
   src/dst IP/port, etc.)  The only change is that the Request
   Authenticator is added to that tuple.

   In short, the "ID tracking" method of tracking requests and responses
   is extended to allow the use of the Request Authenticator as part of
   the tuple used to track requests and responses.  This new tracking
   method is called "ORA tracking".

   Further details and implementation considerations are provided below.

   Since the Request Authenticator field is sixteen octets in size, this
   process allows an essentially unlimited number of requests to be
   outstanding on any one connection.  This capability allows clients to
   open only one connection to a server, and to send all data over that
   connection.  As noted above, using fewer connections will increase
   the clients ability to perform dead server detection, do fail-over,
   and will result in increased network stability.

4.1.  Why this works

   In this section, we explain why the Request Authenticator makes a
   good packet identifier.

   For Access-Request packets, [RFC2865] Section 3 defines the Request
   Authenticator to contain random values.  Further, it is suggested
   that these values "SHOULD exhibit global and temporal uniqueness".
   The same definition is used in [RFC5997] Section 3, for Status-Server
   packets.  Experience shows that implementations follow this



DeKok, Alan                  Standards Track                   [Page 14]

INTERNET-DRAFT         Identifying RADIUS packets.       4 December 2017


   suggestion.  As a result, the Request Authenticator is a good
   identifier which uniquely identifies packets.

   Other request packets create the Request Authenticator as an MD5
   calculation over the packet and shared secret.  i.e. MD5(packet +
   secret).  The MD5 digest algorithm was designed to be strongly
   dependent on input data, and to have half of the output bits change
   if one bit changed in the input.  As a result, the Request
   Authenticator is a good hash which can distinguish different packets.

   The question is whether or not the Request Authenticator is a good
   identifier.  The following discussion make this case.

   One argument is that MD5 has low collision rates.  In the absence of
   an explicit attack, there should be one collision every 2e64 packets.
   Since the packet lifetime is small (typically 30 seconds maximum), we
   can expect a collision only if more than 2e59 packets are sent during
   that time frame.  For more typical use-cases, the packet rate is low
   enough (i.e. even 2e20 packets per second), that there is a one in
   2e39 chance of a collision every 30 seconds.

   We believe that such collision rates are acceptibly low.  Explicit
   attacks are discussed in the Security Considerations section, below.

   The one case where collisions will occur naturally is when the packet
   contents are identical.  For example, a transmission of a second
   Access-Request after the first one times out.  In this situation,
   though, there is in fact no collision, as the input data is
   identical.  Both requests are entirely identical, and any response to
   one is a response to both.

   For non-identical requests, the packet typically contains the
   Identifier and Length fields, along with counters, timestamps, etc.
   These values change on a per-packet basis, making the Request
   Authenticator also change.

   As a result, the MD5 signature of a request is appropriate to use as
   a packet identifier.  In all cases (barring attacks), it will contain
   a globally and temporally unique identifier for the request.

5.  Signaling via Status-Server

   When a client supports this functionality, it sends a Status-Server
   packet to the server, containing an Original-Request-Authenticator
   attribute.  See Section X, below, for the definition of the Original-
   Request-Authenticator attribute.

   The contents of the Original-Request-Authenticator attribute in the



DeKok, Alan                  Standards Track                   [Page 15]

INTERNET-DRAFT         Identifying RADIUS packets.       4 December 2017


   Status-Server packet MUST be zero.  The Original-Request-
   Authenticator attribute MUST NOT appear in any request packet other
   than Status-Server.  If a server does see this attribute in a request
   packet, the attribute MUST be treated as an "invalid attribute", and
   ignored as per [RFC6929] Section 2.8.

   A server which supports this functionality SHOULD signal that
   capability to the client by sending a response packet which contains
   an Original-Request-Authenticator attribute.  That attribute MUST
   contain an identical copy of the Request Authenticator from the
   original Status-Server packet.

   When a client sends an Original-Request-Authenticator attribute in a
   Status-Server and does not receive that attribute in the response,
   the client MUST NOT use "ORA tracking" for requests and responses.
   The client MUST then behave as a normal RADIUS client, and use "ID
   tracking" for requests and response.

   If a server does not support this functionality, it MUST NOT place an
   Original-Request-Authenticator attribute in the response packet.  As
   the default behavior of existing RADIUS servers is to not place this
   attribute in the response to a Status-Server, negotiation will
   downgrade automatically to traditional RADIUS, and "ID tracking".

   As the response to a Status-Server can use one of many RADIUS Codes,
   we use a generic "response" name above.  See following sections for
   how to handle specific types of responses.

   We note that "ORA tracking" negotation SHOULD be done per connection.
   i.e. per combination of (transport, src/dst ip/port).  Section X,
   below, discusses additional issues related to client/server
   connections.  In this section, when we refer to a client and server
   performing negotiation, we mean that negotiation to be specific to a
   particular connection.

   Once the "ORA tracking" has been negotiated on a connect, then all
   packets for that connection MUST use it, no matter what values they
   allow for the Code field.  For example, [RFC6613] permits multiple
   Codes on one connection.

   Even if a client and server negotiate "ORA tracking", the client can
   still fall back to "ID tracking".  There is no need for the client to
   signal the server that this change has happened.  The client can use
   "ID tracking" while the server uses "ORA tracking", as the two
   systems are entirely compatible from the client side.

   The situation is a bit different for a server.  Once "ORA tracking"
   has been negotiated, a server MUST use that method, and MUST include



DeKok, Alan                  Standards Track                   [Page 16]

INTERNET-DRAFT         Identifying RADIUS packets.       4 December 2017


   the Original-Request-Authenticator attribute in all response packets.
   If a client negotiates "ORA tracking" on a connection and later sees
   response packets which do not contain an Original-Request-
   Authenticator attribute, the client SHOULD discard those non-
   compliant packets.  For connection-oriented protocols, the client
   SHOULD close the connection.

   There is a time frame during this failure process during which
   outstanding requests on that connection may not receive responses.
   This situation will result in packet loss, which will be corrected
   once the new connection is used.  The possibility of such problems
   should be used instead by implementors as incentive to ensure that
   they do not create invalid Original-Request-Authenticator attributes.
   Implementing the specification correctly will prevent this packet
   loss from occuring.

   The negotiation outlined here ensures that RADIUS clients and servers
   supporting this functionality are entirely backwards compatible with
   existing RADIUS clients and servers.

5.1.  Static Configuration

   As an alternative to using Status-Server, clients and servers MAY be
   administratively configured with a flag which indicates that the
   other party supports this functionality.  Such a flag can be used
   where the parties are known to each other.  Such a flag is not
   appropriate for dynamic peer discovery [RFC7585], as there are no
   provisions for encoding the flag in the DNS queries or responses.

   When a client is administratively configured to know that a server
   supports this functionality, it SHOULD NOT do negotiation via Status-
   Server.

   If a client is administratively configured to believe that a server
   supports the Original-Request-Authenticator attribute, but the
   response packets do not contain an Original-Request-Authenticator
   attribute, the client MUST update its configuration to mark the
   server as not supporting this functionality.

   This process allows for relatively simple downgrade negotiation in
   the event of misconfiguration on either the client or the server.

6.  Original-Request-Authenticator Attribute

   We define a new attribute, called Original-Request-Authenticator.  It
   is intended to be used in response packets, where it contains an
   exact copy of the Request Authenticator field from the original
   request that elicited the response.



DeKok, Alan                  Standards Track                   [Page 17]

INTERNET-DRAFT         Identifying RADIUS packets.       4 December 2017


   As per the suggestions of [RFC8044], we describe the attribute using
   a data type defined therein, and without the use of ASCII art.

   Type

      TBD - IANA allocation from the "extended" type space

   Length

      19 - TBD double-check this after IANA allocation

   Data Type

      octets

   Value

      MUST be 16 octets in length.  For Status-Server packets, the
      contents of the Value field MUST be zero.  For response packets,
      the contents of the Value field MUST be a copy of the Request
      Authenticator from the original packet that elicited the response.

   The Original-Request-Authenticator attribute can be used in a Status-
   Server packet.

   The Original-Request-Authenticator attribute can be used in a
   response packet.  For example, it can be used in an Access-Accept,
   Accounting-Response, CoA-ACK, CoA-NAK, etc.

   Note that this document updates multiple previous specifications, in
   order to allow this attribute in responses.

   * [RFC2865] Section 5.44 is updated to allow
     Original-Request-Authenticator in Access-Accept, Access-Reject, and
     Access-Challenge responses

   * [RFC2866] Section 5.13 is updated to allow
     Original-Request-Authenticator in Accounting-Response responses.

   * [RFC5176] Section 3.6 is updated to allow
     Original-Request-Authenticator in CoA-ACK, CoA-NAK,
     Disconnect-Ack, and Disconnect-NAK responses.

   The Original-Request-Authenticator attribute MUST NOT be used in any
   request packet.  That is, it MUST NOT be used in an Access-Request,
   Accounting-Request, CoA-Request, or Disconnect-Request packets.

   When it is permitted in a packet, the Original-Request-Authenticator



DeKok, Alan                  Standards Track                   [Page 18]

INTERNET-DRAFT         Identifying RADIUS packets.       4 December 2017


   attribute MUST exist either zero or one times in that packet.  There
   MUST NOT be multiple occurances of the attribute in a packet.

   The contents of the Original-Request-Authenticator attribute MUST be
   an exact copy of the Request Authenticator field of a request packet
   sent by a client.  As with "ID tracking", the Identifier field in the
   response MUST match the Identifier field in a request.

   Where the format and/or contents of the Original-Request-
   Authenticator attribute does not meet these criteria, the received
   attribute MUST be treated as an "invalid attribute" as per [RFC6929],
   Section 2.8.  That is, when an invalid Original-Request-Authenticator
   attribute is seen by either a client or server, their behavior is to
   behave as if the attribute did not exist.

7.  Transport Considerations

   This section describes transport considerations for this
   specification.

   The considerations for DTLS are largely the same as for UDP.  The
   considerations for TLS are largely the same as for TCP.  We therefore
   do not have different sections herein for the TLS-enabled portion of
   the protocols.

7.1.  UDP

   RADIUS over UDP is defined in [RFC2866].  RADIUS over DTLS is defined
   in [RFC7360].

   When negotiated by both peers, this proposal changes the number of
   requests which can be outstanding over a UDP connection.

   Where clients are sending RADIUS packets over UDP, they SHOULD
   include the Original-Request-Authenticator attribute in all Status-
   Server messages to a server, even if the functionality has been
   previously negotiatied.  While the client can generally assume that a
   continual flow of packets means that the server has not been changed,
   this assumption is not true when the server is unresponsive, and the
   client decides it needs to send Status-Server packets.

   Similarly, the server cannot assume that it is respond to the same
   client on every packet.  However, once Original-Request-Authenticator
   has been negotiasted, the server can safely include that attribute in
   all response packets to that client.  If the client changes to not
   supporting the attribute, the attribute will be ignored by the
   client, and the behavior falls back to standard RADIUS.




DeKok, Alan                  Standards Track                   [Page 19]

INTERNET-DRAFT         Identifying RADIUS packets.       4 December 2017


   Where clients are sending RADIUS packets over DTLS, there is an
   underlying TLS session context.  The client can therefore assume that
   all packets for one TLS session are for the same server, with the
   same capabilities.  The server can make the same assumption.

7.2.  TCP

   RADIUS over TCP is defined in [RFC6614].  RADIUS over TLS is defined
   in [RFC6614].

   When negotiated by both peers, this proposal changes the number of
   requests which can be outstanding over a TCP connection.

   Status-Server packets are also used by the application-layer
   watchdog, described in [RFC6614] Section 2.6.  Where clients have
   previously negotiated Original-Request-Authenticator for a
   connection, they MUST continue to send that attribute in all Status-
   Server packets over that connection.

   There are other consideratiosn with the use of Status-Server.  Due to
   the limitations of the ID field, [RFC6613] Section 2.6.5 suggests:

      Implementations SHOULD reserve ID zero (0) on each TCP connection
      for Status-Server packets.  This value was picked arbitrarily, as
      there is no reason to choose any one value over another for this
      use.

   This restriction can now be relaxed when both client and server have
   negotiated the use of the Original-Request-Authenticator attribute.
   Or, with no loss of generality, implementations can continue to use a
   fixed ID field for Status-Server application watchdog messages.

   We also note that the next paragraph of [RFC6614] Section 2.6.5.
   says:

      Implementors may be tempted to extend RADIUS to permit more than
      256 outstanding packets on one connection.  However, doing so is a
      violation of a fundamental part of the protocol and MUST NOT be
      done.  Making that extension here is outside of the scope of this
      specification.

   This specification extends RADIUS in a standard way, making that
   recommendation redundant.

   [RFC6613] Section 2.5 describes congestion control issues which
   affect inter-transport proxies.  If both inbound and outbound
   transports support this specification, those congestion issues no
   longer apply.



DeKok, Alan                  Standards Track                   [Page 20]

INTERNET-DRAFT         Identifying RADIUS packets.       4 December 2017


   If however, a proxy supports this specification on inbound
   connections but does not support it on outbound connections, then
   congestion may occur.  The only solution here is to ensure that the
   proxy is capable of opening multiple source ports, as per [RFC2865]
   Section 5.

7.3.  Dynamic Discovery

   The dynamic discovery of RADIUS servers is defined in [RFC7585].

   This specification is compatible with [RFC7585], with the exception
   of the statically configured flag described in Section X, above.  As
   the server is dynamically discovered, it is impossible to have a
   static flag describing the server capabilities.

   The other considerations for dynamic discovery are the same as for
   RADIUS over TLS.

7.4.  Connection Issues

   Where clients start a new connection to a server (no matter what the
   transport), they SHOULD negotiate this functionality for the new
   connection, unless the ability has been statically configured.  There
   is no guarantee that the new connection goes to the same server.

   When a client has zero connections to a server, it MUST perform this
   negotiation for the new connection, prior to using this
   functionality, unless the ability has been statically configured.
   There is every reason to believe that server has remained the same
   over extended periods of time.

   If a client has one or more connections open to a server, and wishes
   to open a new one, it may skip the renegotiation.

   Each client and server MUST negotiate and track this capability on a
   per-connection basis.  Implementations MUST be able to send packets
   to the same peer at the same time, using both this method, and the
   traditional RADIUS ID allocation.

   A client may have a backlog of packets to send while negotiating this
   functionality.  In the interests of efficiency, it SHOULD send
   packets from atthat backlog while negotiation is taking place.  As
   negotiation has not finished, these packets and their responses MUST
   be managed as per standard RADIUS.

   After this functionality has been negotiated, new packets from that
   connection MUST follow this specification.  Reponses to earlier
   packets sent on that connection during the negotiation phase MUST be



DeKok, Alan                  Standards Track                   [Page 21]

INTERNET-DRAFT         Identifying RADIUS packets.       4 December 2017


   accepted and processed.

   We recognize that this tracking may be complex, which is why this
   behavior is not mandatory.  Clients may choose instead to wait until
   negotiation is complete before sending packets; or to assume that the
   functionality of the server is the same across all connections to it,
   and therefore only do negotiations once.

8.  System Considerations

   This section describes implementation considerations for clients and
   servers.

8.1.  Client Considerations

   Clients SHOULD have an configuration flag which lets administators
   statically configure this behavior for a server.  Clients MUST
   otherwise negotiate this functionality before using it.

   If this functionality has been negotiated, clients MUST use the
   Request Authenticator as an part of the Key used to uniquely identify
   request packets.  Clients MUST use the Original-Request-Authenticator
   attribute from response packets as part of the Key to find the
   original request packet.

   The Original-Request-Authenticator attribute has been (or is likely
   to be) allocated from the "extended" attribute space.  We note that
   despite this allocation, clients are not required to implement the
   full [RFC6929] specification.  That is, clients may be able to
   originate and receive Original-Request-Authenticator attributes,
   while still being unable to originate or receive any other attribute
   in the "extended" attribute space.

   The traditional behavior of clients is to track one or more
   connections, each of which has 256 IDs available for use.  As
   requests are sent, IDs are marked "used".  As responses are received,
   IDs are marked "free".  IDs may also marked "free" when a request
   times out, and the client gives up on receiving a response.

   If all of the IDs for a particular connection are marked "free", the
   client opens a new connection, as per the suggestion of [RFC2865]
   Section 5.  This connection and any associated IDs are then made
   available for use by new requests.

   Similarly, when a client notices that all of the IDs for a connection
   are marked "free", it may close that connection, and remove the IDs
   from the ones available for use by new requests.  The connections may
   have associated idle timeouts, maximum lifetimes, etc. to avoid



DeKok, Alan                  Standards Track                   [Page 22]

INTERNET-DRAFT         Identifying RADIUS packets.       4 December 2017


   "connection flapping".

   All of this management is complex, and can be expensive for client
   implementations.  While this management is still necessary for
   backwards compatibility, this specification allows for a
   significantly simpler process for ID allocation.  There is no need
   for the client to open multiple connections.  Instead, all traffic
   can be sent over one connection.

   In addition, there is no need to track "used" or "free" status for
   individual IDs.  Instead, the client can re-use IDs at will, and can
   rely on the uniqueness of the Request Authenticator to disambiguate
   packets.

   As there is no need to track ID status, the client may simply
   allocate IDs by incrementing a local counter.

   With this specification, the client still needs to track all outgoing
   requests, but that work was already required in traditional RADIUS.

   Client implementors may be tempted to require that the Original-
   Request-Authenticator be the first attribute after the RADIUS header.
   We state instead that clients implementing this specification MUST
   accept the Original-Request-Authenticator attribute, no matter where
   it is in the response.  We remind implementors that this
   specification adds a new attribute, it does not change the RADIUS
   header.

   Finally, we note that clients MUST NOT set the ID field to a fixed
   value for all packets.  While it is beneficial to use the Request
   Authenticator as an identifier, removing the utility of an existing
   identifier is unwarranted.

8.2.  Server Considerations

   Servers SHOULD have an configuration flag which lets administators
   statically configure this behavior for a client.  Servers MUST
   otherwise negotiate this functionality before using it.

   If this functionality has been negotiated, servers MUST use the
   Request Authenticator as an part of the key used to uniquely identify
   request packets.  Servers MUST use the Original-Request-Authenticator
   attribute from response packets as part of the Key to find the
   original request packet.

   The Original-Request-Authenticator attribute has been (or is likely
   to be) allocated from the "extended" attribute space.  We note that
   despite this allocation, servers are not required to implement the



DeKok, Alan                  Standards Track                   [Page 23]

INTERNET-DRAFT         Identifying RADIUS packets.       4 December 2017


   full [RFC6929] specification.  That is, servers may be able to
   originate and receive Original-Request-Authenticator attributes,
   while still being unable to originate or receive any other attribute
   in the "extended" attribute space.

8.3.  Proxy Considerations

   There are additional considerations specific to proxies.  [RFC6929]
   Section 5.2 says in part;

       Proxy servers SHOULD forward attributes, even attributes that
      they do not understand or that are not in a local dictionary.
      When forwarded, these attributes SHOULD be sent verbatim, with no
      modifications or changes.  This requirement includes "invalid
      attributes", as there may be some other system in the network that
      understands them.

   On it's face, this recommendation applies to the Original-Request-
   Authenticator attribute.  The caveast is that Section X, above,
   requires that servers do not send the Original-Request-Authenticator
   to clients unless the clients have first negotiated the use of that
   attribute.  This requirment should ensure that proxies which are
   unaware of the Original-Request-Authenticator attribute will never
   receive it.

   However, if a server has been administratively configured to send
   Original-Request-Authenticator to a client, that configuration may be
   in error.  In which case a proxy or originating client may
   erroneously receive that attribute.  If the proxy or server is
   unaware of Original-Request-Authenticator, then no harm is done.

   It is possible foraA proxy or client to be aware of Original-Request-
   Authenticator, and not negotiate it with a server, but that server
   (due to isses outlined above) still forwards the attribute to the
   proxy or client.  In that case, the requirements of Section X, above,
   are that the client treat the received Original-Request-Authenticator
   attribure as an "invalid attribute", and ignore it.

   The net effect of these requiremnts and cross-checks is that there
   are no interoperability issues between existing RADIUS
   implementations, and implementations of this specification.

9.  IANA Considerations

   This specification allocates one attribute in the RADIUS Attribute
   Type registry, as follows.

   Name



DeKok, Alan                  Standards Track                   [Page 24]

INTERNET-DRAFT         Identifying RADIUS packets.       4 December 2017


      Original-Request-Authenticator

   Type
      TBD - allocate from the "extended" space

   Data Type
      octets


10.  Security Considerations

   This proposal does not change the underlying RADIUS security model,
   which is poor.

   The contents of the Original-Request-Authenticator attribute are the
   Request Authenticator, which is already public information for UDP or
   TCP transports.

   The use of Original-Request-Authenticator is defined in such a way
   that all systems fall back gracefully to using standard RADIUS.  As
   such, there are no interoperability issues between this specification
   and existing RADIUS implementations.

   There are few, if any, security considerations related to
   implementations.  Clients already must track the Request
   Authenticator, so matching it in a response packet is minimal extra
   work.  Servers must also track and cache duplicate packets, as per
   [RFC5080] Section 2.2.2, so using the Request Authenticator as an
   additional identifier is minimal extra work.

   The use (or not) of Original-Request-Authenticator has no other
   security considerations, as it is used solely as an identifier to
   match requests and responses.  It has no other meaning or use.

10.1.  Access-Request Forging

   The Request Authenticator in Access-Request packets is defined to be
   a 16 octet random number [RFC 2865] Section 3.  As such, these
   packets can be trivially forged.

   The Message-Authenticator attribute was defined in [RFC2869] Section
   5.14 in order to address this issue.  Further, [RFC5080] Section
   2.2.2 suggests that client implementations SHOULD include a Message-
   Authenticator attribute in every Access-Request to further help
   mitigate this issue.

   The Status-Server packets also have a Request Authenticator which is
   a 16-octet random number [RFC5997] Section 3.  However, [RFC5997]



DeKok, Alan                  Standards Track                   [Page 25]

INTERNET-DRAFT         Identifying RADIUS packets.       4 December 2017


   Section Section 2 says that a Message-Authenticator attribute MUST be
   included in every Status-Server packet, which provides per-packet
   authentication and integrity protection.

   We extend that suggestion for this specification.  Where the
   transport does not provide for authentication or integrity protection
   (e.g. RADIUS over UDP or RADIUS over TCP), each Access-Request packet
   using this specification MUST include a Message-Authenticator
   attribute.  This inclusion ensures that packets are accepted only
   from clients which know the RADIUS shared secret.

   This protection is, of course, insufficient.  Malicious or
   misbehaving clients can create Access-Request packets which re-use
   Request Authenticators.  These clients can also create Request
   Authenticators which exploit implementation issues in servers, such
   as turning a simply binary lookup into a linked list lookup.

   As a result, server implementations MUST NOT assume that the Request
   Authenticator is random.  Server implementations MUST be able to
   detect re-use of Request Authenticators.

   When a server detects that a Request Authenticator is re-used, it
   MUST replace the older request with the newer request.  It MUST NOT
   respond to the older request.  It SHOULD issue a warning message to
   the administrator that the client is malicious or misbehaving.

   Server implementations SHOULD use data structures such as Red-Black
   trees, which are immune to maliciously crafted Request
   Authenticators.

10.2.  MD5 Collisions

   For other packet types (Accounting-Request, etc.), the Request
   Authenticator is the MD5 signature of the packet and the shared
   secret.  Since this data is used directly as an identifier, we need
   to examine the security issues related to this practice.

   We must note that MD5 has been broken, in that there is a published
   set of work which describes how to create two sets of input data
   which have the same MD5 hash.  These attacks have been extended to
   create sets of data of arbitrary length, which differ only in 128
   bytes, and have the same MD5 hash.

   This attack is possible in RADIUS, as the protocol has the capability
   to transport opaque binary data in (for example) Vendor-Specific
   attributes.  There is no need for the client or server to understand
   the data, it simply has to exist in the packet for the attack to
   succeed.



DeKok, Alan                  Standards Track                   [Page 26]

INTERNET-DRAFT         Identifying RADIUS packets.       4 December 2017


   Another attack allows two sets of data to have the same MD5 hash, by
   appending thousands of bytes of carefully crafted data to the end of
   the file.  This attack is also possible in RADIUS, as the maximum
   packet size for UDP is 4096 octets, and [RFC7930] permits packets up
   to 65535 octets in length.

   However, as the packets are authenticated with the shared secret,
   these attacks can only be performed by clients who are in possession
   of the shared secret.  That is, only trusted clients can create MD5
   collisions.

   We note that this specification requires server implementations to
   detect duplicates, and to process only one of the packets.  This
   requirement could be exploited by a client to force a server to do
   large amounts of work, partially processing a packet which is then
   made obselete by a subsequent packet.  This attack can be done in
   RADIUS today, so this specification adds no new security issues to
   the protocol.

   In fact, this specification describes the problem of "conflicting
   packets" for the first time, and defines how they should be processed
   by servers.  This addition to the RADIUS protocol in fact increases
   it's security, by specifying how this corner case should be handled.
   The fact that RADIUS has been widely implemented for almost 25 years
   without this issue being described shows that the protocol and
   implementations are robust.

   We do not offer a technical solution to the problem of trusted
   parties misbehaving.  Instead, the problem should be noted by the
   server which is being attacked, and administrative (i.e. human)
   intervention should take place.

11.  Normative References

11.1.

[RFC2119]
     Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
     Levels", RFC 2119, March, 1997.

[RFC2865]
     Rigney, C., Willens, S., Rubens, A. and W. Simpson, "Remote
     Authentication Dial In User Service (RADIUS)", RFC 2865, June 2000.

[RFC2869]
     Rigney, C. et. al., "RADIUS Extensions", RFC 2869, June 2000.





DeKok, Alan                  Standards Track                   [Page 27]

INTERNET-DRAFT         Identifying RADIUS packets.       4 December 2017


[RFC5080]
     Nelson, D., DeKok, A, "Common Remote Authentication Dial In User
     Service (RADIUS) Implementation Issues and Suggested Fixes", RFC
     5080, December 2007.

[RFC6929]
     DeKok, A. and Lior, A., "Remote Authentication Dial-In User Service
     (RADIUS) Protocol Extensions", RFC 6929, April 2013.

[RFC8044]
     DeKok, A., "Data Types in RADIUS", RFC 8044, January 2017.
     Informative references

[RFC2866]
     Rigney, C., "RADIUS Accounting", RFC 2866, June 2000.

[RFC2866]
     Rigney, C., "RADIUS Accounting", RFC 2866, June 2000.

[RFC5176]
     Chiba, M., et al, "Dynamic Authorization Extensions to Remote
     Authentication Dial In User Service (RADIUS)", RFC 5176, January
     2008.

[RFC5997]
     DeKok, A., "Use of Status-Server Packets in the Remote
     Authentication Dial In User Service (RADIUS) Protocol", RFC 5997,
     August 2017.

[RFC6613]
     DeKok, A., "RADIUS over TCP", RFC 6613, May 2012.

[RFC6614]
     Winter, S., et al, "Transport Layer Security (TLS) Encryption for
     RADIUS", RFC 6614, May 2012.

[RFC7360]
     DeKok, A., "Datagram Transport Layer Security (DTLS) as a Transport
     Layer for RADIUS", RFC 7360, September 2014.

[RFC7585]
     Winter, S., and McCauley, M., "Dynamic Peer Discovery for
     RADIUS/TLS and RADIUS/DTLS Based on the Network Access Identifier
     (NAI)", RFC 7585, October 2015

[RFC7930]
     Hartman, S., "Larger Packets for RADIUS over TCP", RFC 7930, August
     2016.



DeKok, Alan                  Standards Track                   [Page 28]

INTERNET-DRAFT         Identifying RADIUS packets.       4 December 2017


[PATCH]
     Naiming Shen, "Re: [radext] I-D Action: draft-chen-radext-
     identifier-attr-01.txt",
     https://mailarchive.ietf.org/arch/msg/radext/BkXgD68MASxqD4vjXV1M2CaRWAY,
     April 2017.

Acknowledgments


Author's Address

   Alan DeKok
   The FreeRADIUS Server Project
   http://freeradius.org

   Email: aland@freeradius.org



































DeKok, Alan                  Standards Track                   [Page 29]

