


TSVWG                                                     Naotaka Morita
Internet-Draft                                           NTT Corporation
Expires: December 22, 2003                               Gunnar Karlsson
                                                                     KTH
                                                           June 23, 2003


                 Framework of Priority Promotion Scheme
                       draft-morita-tsvwg-pps-00

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at http://
   www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 22, 2003.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   This document describes a framework of a new scheme for traffic
   control to achieve end-to-end QoS for interactive multimedia
   services.  The scheme is based on end-to-end measurement of network
   resources by end systems.  The network is assumed to fully support
   the priority control scheme specified in the Diffserv architecture
   for QoS and SIP [1]  for session control.  Since the scheme relies on
   the behavior of the end systems, this document also touches on
   mechanisms for monitoring end-system behavior.

Conventions used in this document




Morita & Karlsson      Expires December 22, 2003                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft    Framework of Priority Promotion Scheme       June 2003


   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [2].

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  The target service - Interactive multimedia services . . . . .  4
   3.  Motivation to focus on an end-system oriented
       measurement-based approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   4.  Basic concepts behind the Priority Promotion Scheme  . . . . .  7
   5.  Variation of specific usage of the Priority Promotion
       Scheme . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   6.  Functional architecture of the Priority Promotion Scheme . . . 10
   7.  Requirements of the Priority Promotion Scheme  . . . . . . . . 11
   7.1 Routers  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   7.2 End system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   7.3 SIP proxy  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   7.4 Edge router  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   7.5 Media monitoring server  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   8.  Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   9.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   10. IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   11. Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
       References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
       Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
       Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . 19
























Morita & Karlsson      Expires December 22, 2003                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft    Framework of Priority Promotion Scheme       June 2003


1. Introduction

   Emerging services such as VoIP, video chat, and video conferencing
   require session-based QoS.  A few schemes for providing the needed
   QoS have been put forward, but they either require per-flow
   management of routers within the network or handle the provision of
   QoS on a per-class basis by allocating high capacity resources.  In
   this document a framework for a new QoS scheme is proposed.  The
   scheme is suitable for session-based interactive multimedia and adds
   less complexity to the network than previous approaches, while
   delivering per-flow QoS.

   Karlsson [3][4] originally proposed this concept.  Based on his
   ideas, we clarify the requirements to routers, introduce enhancements
   to session control using SIP, and show some alternatives to monitor
   end-system behavior.  We refer to this scheme as the "Priority
   Promotion Scheme".

   One of the key functions of the Priority Promotion Scheme is routers
   behavior.  We introduce a new MF-PHB (Measurable Forwarding Per Hop
   Behavior) to represent such function.  MF-PHB should be verified
   whether it is feasible by exiting equipment.

   This framework is intended as a guide for device manufacturers,
   network administrators and operators who need a way to provide QoS
   for Interactive Multimedia services.  It is not intended, in its
   current state, for use by the majority of networks in the Internet.
   The reason that this proposal is being made at this time is that we
   feel that the only way to achieve a long-term solution for
   inter-domain QoS is to start with practicing on intra-domain
   solutions, and incrementally expand the scope of the work as more
   experience is gained in deployment.

   In this document, we introduce a framework for such a Priority
   Promotion.  We describe a target service category, which we refer to
   as "Interactive Multimedia Services", in section 2.  In section 3, we
   explain our motivation in focusing on an end-system oriented
   measurement based approach.  The basic concepts behind the Priority
   Promotion Scheme are then explained in section 4.  In section 5,
   variations of specific usage of the Priority Promotion Scheme are
   presented to show the potential of this scheme.  The functional
   architecture of the scheme is described in section 5, and finally
   requirements for the individual functional entities are summarized in
   section 6.







Morita & Karlsson      Expires December 22, 2003                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft    Framework of Priority Promotion Scheme       June 2003


2. The target service - Interactive multimedia services

   The major targeted services of the Priority Promotion Scheme are for
   multimedia and interactive communication software tools running on
   PCs, and operated by human being.  We call such services interactive
   multimedia (IMM) services.  The typical examples of IMM are VoIP,
   video chat, and video conferencing.  IMM services have several
   characteristics that differentiate them from existing data services.
   Web browsing and some of file retrieval are based on client/server
   models and the data transfers speeds required are not so high in
   general.  On the contrary, IMM services are any-to-any and relatively
   high speed at the range of less than 1 Mbps to a few Mbps.  These
   IMM-inherent characteristics may cause big fluctuations of traffic
   patterns and may not be predictable in advance.

   Other important characteristics of IMM services are the requirements
   for bandwidth guarantees and the real time nature in terms of QoS.
   This is because normal codecs are sensitive to the fluctuation of
   bandwidth and the degradation of QoS.  There are several codecs that
   adjust their information rates according to the available bandwidth,
   but they impose high processing load on the end system and can never
   avoid noticeable and maybe also annoying fluctuation in the
   perceptual quality.  This is why we need to assume that there will be
   bandwidth guarantees.  This implies that once the session is
   established, the bandwidth is to be guaranteed.  In other words, if
   the required bandwidth is not available, the session should not be
   established.  It should be noted that a more extended interpretation
   of this concept is that once the bandwidth is guaranteed at a certain
   level, it should be maintained until the end of the session.
   Improvement is acceptable but degradation is not acceptable.

   Finally, IMM services are set up on-demand and may last for a period
   of time in the order of minutes.

   Taking into account the characteristics or requirements of IMM as
   described above, explicit admission control on per-flow basis becomes
   necessary.  There is an argument that simple over-provisioning is
   capable of meeting these kinds of requirements.  But, as described
   above, IMM has the characteristics of relatively high bandwidth,
   unpredictability of traffic pattern and strict QoS needs.  Therefore,
   we need session based admission control to delivery QoS for IMM
   services.

   It should be emphasized that admission control has a completely
   different goal from existing TCP base functionality.  The goal is to
   provide bandwidth guarantees with the appropriate QoS for a certain
   maximum number of sessions.  For example, if the network resource is
   100 Mbps and 100 users request sessions with guarantees of 1 Mbps,



Morita & Karlsson      Expires December 22, 2003                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft    Framework of Priority Promotion Scheme       June 2003


   nearly 100 sessions should be established.  If 1000 users request the
   same 1 Mbps guarantees, still only around 100 sessions should be
   established.  This is quite different from existing data services,
   typically operated using TCP.  With TCP, the network resources are
   shared in a "fair" manner among existing sessions at that time.  If
   the network resource is 100 Mbps and 100 users request sessions, 100
   sessions should be established with 1 Mbps throughput.  If 1000 users
   request, all 1000 sessions should be established with around 0.1 Mbps
   throughput.

   SIP has become a suitable way to control IMM services.  Although we
   focus on SIP in this description, session-control protocols for the
   Priority Promotion Scheme are not restricted to it.

   The application of a QoS policy, which means any differentiation
   based on the identity of a caller or callee in the session, needs to
   be studied. There are issues such as the competition between a VIP
   call with an ordinary call, or between a preferential call and an
   ordinary call in case of a disaster.  If such policy is applied along
   with simple admission control based on the resource availability,
   policy credential information from SIP or other signaling methods may
   needs to be incorporate into this framework.





























Morita & Karlsson      Expires December 22, 2003                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft    Framework of Priority Promotion Scheme       June 2003


3. Motivation to focus on an end-system oriented measurement-based
   approach

   As IP-based networks proliferate, the overall network configuration
   becomes increasingly complex.  In terms of bandwidth available in the
   access network, DSL alone includes many variants.  12-Mbps ADSL is
   quite popular in Japan and higher speed ADSL services will be
   deployed in the near future, but the actual throughput is completely
   dependent on conditions that have nothing to do with the access
   network, such as the distance from the central office and
   interference among lines.

   Another point is the variations in the network configurations of
   customers, including broadband routers.  The broadband routers
   initially offered for use with higher-speed access lines may not be
   capable of providing maximum throughput.  A customer's PC may impose
   similar restrictions. The network to which the customer is connected
   adds a lot of variables.

   In such a complicated situation, end-to-end guarantees of QoS are
   difficult to achieve and the role of the end system becomes more
   important, because only the end system knows the actual communication
   conditions.  In the Priority Promotion Scheme, the end systems
   measure, monitor, or probe network resources to set up and maintain a
   media stream with the required QoS.

   We refer to terminal points of the media stream, i.e. PCs or
   residential gateways, as end systems.























Morita & Karlsson      Expires December 22, 2003                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft    Framework of Priority Promotion Scheme       June 2003


4. Basic concepts behind the Priority Promotion Scheme

   As is described in the previous section, we will take end-system
   oriented measurement-based approach.

   When it comes to the network, the routers and L2 switches within the
   network also have their roles, and the Diffserv architecture is very
   popular for these devices.  Certain configurations of the priority
   mechanism provided by Diffserv give us very simple ways to get
   information on the availability of network resources.  There are two
   examples.

   When expedited forwarding (EF) and best effort (BE) are applied on a
   certain link and the maximum-rate limit for EF is the same as the
   link capacity, the throughput of BE represents the bandwidth
   remaining after allocation of bandwidth to the EF traffic.

   Let us consider the other example.  One assured forwarding (AF) class
   with two-drop precedence might be configured as, for example, af11
   with a low drop precedence and af12 with a high drop precedence.  In
   this case, the throughput of af12 represents the bandwidth remaining
   after allocation to af11.

   We can automatically achieve the required QoS by setting up
   communication between the devices that play the two roles above.  In
   other words, the network provides two priority classes, which share
   the same capacity.  The end system at the transmitter's side sends
   data before or during the first phase of the media stream as
   lower-priority traffic, and the other end system, at the receiver
   side, reports the condition of the received media to the transmitter
   side. The transmitter-side system uses this information to decide
   whether it will assign the higher priority to the packets for the
   remainder of the media stream, give up on this and send
   lower-priority packets, or stop setting up the media stream.  The key
   is to promote and demote the priority between the monitoring phase
   and the real media transmission, or in the very early stage of stream
   delivery.  Changing the packet priority in this way gives us a way to
   measure remaining bandwidth, while maintaining the QoS of established
   media streams.  If all of the end systems in a network behave this
   way, per-flow QoS is inevitably achieved.  We refer to this basic
   concept as end-system oriented, measurement-based connection/session
   admission control.

   It should be noted that we are talking about scheduling priority in
   the diff-serv scheduler as opposed to call control preference from a
   policy perspective or drop preference in a common queue.

   The measurement-based approach has many variants.  Any of the end



Morita & Karlsson      Expires December 22, 2003                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft    Framework of Priority Promotion Scheme       June 2003


   systems-the proxy or home gateway, the edge router at the ingress
   point of the network, or the border gateway-might have the role of
   measurement entity.  The items for measurement might be packet loss
   and/or delay, from which we can find the remaining bandwidth.
   Explicit indication by the network, e.g. of congestion, is another
   possible information to use in forming measurement results.  When it
   comes to the media, the media characteristics are an important
   factor.  If the media streams are all constant bit rate, the overall
   behavior of the system is quite simple.  However, most actual media
   streams, particularly video, flow at variable rates.

   For the sake of simplicity, we would like to focus on an approach
   that is 1) end-system oriented, 2) loss-rate-based, 3) includes no
   explicit indications from the network, and has 4) streams which flow,
   at constant bit rates, for periods of the order of minutes.

   As we previously have noted, the above concept is not new.  It was
   originally proposed by Karlsson [3][4].  We would like to extend
   Karlsson's proposal to meet the needs of a real service.

   How we check the end system's behavior is an important point for a
   real service.  Since the Priority Promotion Scheme is completely
   reliant on knowledge of the end system's behavior, incorrect
   behavior, whether accidental or intentional, will affect the QoS for
   other customers.

   One possible solution for this is to introduce two-stage monitoring
   of end-system behavior.  Primary monitoring may be implemented at the
   edge router and is triggered by session initiation.  Secondary
   monitoring might be done by a dedicated media monitoring server.  The
   primary monitor checks all media streams that it handles which are
   controlled by the Priority-Promotion-Scheme.  Example items to check
   are whether the flow is allowed to enter the network and whether the
   flow is less than the declared peak bit rate.  The secondary monitor
   checks end-systems behavior in detail.  Whether or not the two
   monitoring stages are really used will depend on the specific network
   environment, but it should be possible to use both to good effect.

   Another solution is that such checking mechanism is installed in
   every edge routers.

   As we describe in the next section, The Priority Promotion Scheme as
   described in the following sections is quite suitable for constant-
   bit- rate traffic such as voice coded by G.711 without silence
   compression, but we should investigate the possibility of tackling
   variable bit-rate traffic in future work.  Initial investigations
   have already been done by Karlsson.




Morita & Karlsson      Expires December 22, 2003                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft    Framework of Priority Promotion Scheme       June 2003


5. Variation of specific usage of the Priority Promotion Scheme

   As is described above, the Priority Promotion Scheme can be used as a
   kind of admission control.  However, it is not limited to the
   connection/session admission control as is imagined in the legacy
   telephone network.  For example, if the initial trial fails, there
   are options for the next actions.  One is to give up the connection
   establishment.  This is like the ordinary admission control.  Another
   one is to stop sending the real media at the low level, but then try
   to send it with another class.  After a while, the transmitter will
   retry and if this try succeeds, the real media is sent with the high
   class.  Another possibility is that depending on the received
   condition information, the transmitter estimates the actual available
   bandwidth, selects the closest bandwidth lower than the available
   bandwidth and then sends the media with high priority.  Another
   possible action is to send media at the full rate but only the core
   part of the flow is sent with high priority, and the other parts are
   sent with low priority.  If hierarchical coding is used, this
   approach may work well (for example, in MPEG, sending I frames with
   high priority and P or B frames with low priority).































Morita & Karlsson      Expires December 22, 2003                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft    Framework of Priority Promotion Scheme       June 2003


6. Functional architecture of the Priority Promotion Scheme

   Figure 1 shows the functional architecture of the Priority Promotion
   Scheme.  The main functional elements are the two end systems, i.e.
   the transmitter and receiver, the transmitter-side edge router, core
   routers, the SIP proxy, and media-monitoring server.

                            SIP proxy           (Media-monitoring server)
                             +------+            +------+
             /---------------|      |------------|      |
            /                +------+            +------+
           /                   |               //
          /                    |              //
     +------+               +------+      +------+      +------+      +------+
     |      |===============|Edge  |======|Core  |======|      |======|      |
     +------+               +------+      +------+      +------+      +------+
   End system                                                      End system
   (Transmitter)                                                     (Receiver)


   Figure 1: Functional architecture of the Priority Promotion Scheme






























Morita & Karlsson      Expires December 22, 2003               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft    Framework of Priority Promotion Scheme       June 2003


7. Requirements of the Priority Promotion Scheme

   In this section, we describe the requirements for each functional
   entity.

7.1 Routers

   Although the end systems perform an important role in the Priority
   Promotion Scheme, there are a few requirements put on the network.
   More specifically, the queuing mechanism or the PHB (per-hop
   behavior) for the PPS creates new requirements for network elements.
   The Priority Promotion Scheme appears to work with the existing
   Diffserv PHB, as was indicated in the introduction.  However, to
   clearly explain the scheme's requirements, we have to define a new
   PHB.  We refer to this as measurable forwarding (MF).  The essential
   requirements for MF are as follows.

      *  MF has two sub classes, MF-High (MF-H) and MF-Middle (MF-M)

      *  MF-H and MF-M share the same capacity

      *  MF-H takes priority over MF-M

   In other words, the total amount of MF-H and MF-M traffic is set as a
   limit, rather than having separated limits for MF-H and MF-M traffic.
   However, since MF-M traffic will always defer to MF-H traffic, MF-M
   traffic may experience markedly higher jitter and loss than MF-H; in
   fact, one would expect MF-H traffic to experience very nominal jitter
   or loss.

   Another view of MF is that, if a given amount of MF-M traffic for a
   particular stream passes through a router, the same amount of MF-H
   traffic for that stream must also be able to pass through.

   In the absence of other classes, it appears feasible to configure
   existing commercially available routers to produce the desired
   MF-PHB.  Further requirements are as follows.

      1.  The MF must co-exist with other PHBs, such as the EF, AF, and
          BE.  Existing implementations may not be capable of satisfying
          this extended requirement.

      2.  MF should take priority over AF and BE.  This is because the
          target services are IMM services, where real-time variations
          in traffic characteristics are crucially important.






Morita & Karlsson      Expires December 22, 2003               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft    Framework of Priority Promotion Scheme       June 2003


7.2 End system

   The transmitter should send trial packets before or at the beginning
   of a session.

   The receiver should record the results of trial-packet reception and
   report this information to the transmitter.

   The RTCP would be the best candidate to handle reporting of the
   receiving result.  Some improvements might be necessary to reduce the
   measurement period and to make quick decisions.  Actually, the
   minimum measurement period is the key factor of the usability of the
   Priority Promotion Scheme.  This determines the possible service
   scenarios as is described in section 5.

   The transmitter then decides on the next action.

      *  If the conditions of reception are good, the transmitter sends
         the remaining packets with the higher priority.

      *  If conditions are not good, the transmitter gives up sending
         monitor packets and either 1) sends the remaining packets with
         other classes such as BE, 2) stops sending any media data and,
         after a while, starts sending monitoring packets again, or 3)
         terminates the session.

   Synchronization between the two directions of the media stream
   remains a subject for further study.

7.3 SIP proxy

   In principle, SIP is not directly related to the Priority Promotion
   Scheme.  However, for commercial applicability, the operator would
   have to be able to monitor the service subscription of the customer
   before establishing the call.  Furthermore, if the edge router has
   the capability to monitor the user stream, the SIP proxy can send
   commands to the edge router asking it to check up on the end system's
   behavior.

   The specific signaling sequence may depend on the chosen service
   model.

   If the policy is applied as is described in the previous section,
   signaling is where the policy credentials can get exchanged.

7.4 Edge router

   As noted above, in some networks the SIP server is able to instruct



Morita & Karlsson      Expires December 22, 2003               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft    Framework of Priority Promotion Scheme       June 2003


   the edge router to monitor the end system's behavior.  The edge
   router might monitor the following things:

      *  The transmitter should not send packets at rates above the peak
         bit rate offered in the monitoring phase.

      *  The transmitter should not pause while sending packets.  This
         is because, if it does this, the other end systems overestimate
         the remaining network resources and incorrectly send
         higher-priority packets.


7.5 Media monitoring server

   In addition to primary monitoring by the edge routers, more detailed
   monitoring may be required.  The typical items to monitor are as
   follows:

      *  The accuracy of packet-reception information from receivers,
         and the correct reaction of transmitters to the information
         from receivers should be achieved.

      *  If the received information indicates poor conditions, the
         transmitter stops sending high priority packets.  If a next
         trial is allowed, a certain time interval should be maintained
         between the initial trial and next trial.

























Morita & Karlsson      Expires December 22, 2003               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft    Framework of Priority Promotion Scheme       June 2003


8. Conclusion

   With the architecture described above, the next step will be a
   detailed specification of each relevant functional entity's actions.
   Candidates to be specified include;

      1.  MF-based per-hop behavior;

      2.  A SIP signaling extension for the Priority Promotion Scheme;

      3.  The interface between an SIP proxy and edge router;

   Although the existing Diffserv architecture may already meet the
   requirements of a MF class, there is an urgent need to verify this.
   This is because, although new requirements may not seem like much,
   the MF PHB is essential to the realization of the Priority Promotion
   Scheme.

   Other items may be left to each implementation.
































Morita & Karlsson      Expires December 22, 2003               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft    Framework of Priority Promotion Scheme       June 2003


9. Security Considerations

   To be described.
















































Morita & Karlsson      Expires December 22, 2003               [Page 15]

Internet-Draft    Framework of Priority Promotion Scheme       June 2003


10. IANA Considerations

   To be described.
















































Morita & Karlsson      Expires December 22, 2003               [Page 16]

Internet-Draft    Framework of Priority Promotion Scheme       June 2003


11. Acknowledgements

   The authors would like to thank Fred Baker, David Oran, Glenn Reitsma
   and other Cisco technical experts for their insightful suggestions.















































Morita & Karlsson      Expires December 22, 2003               [Page 17]

Internet-Draft    Framework of Priority Promotion Scheme       June 2003


References

   [1]  Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston, A.,
        Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley, M. and E. Schooler, "SIP:
        Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261, June 2002.

   [2]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
        Levels", RFC 2119, BCP 14, March 1997.

   [3]  Karlsson, G., "Providing Quality for Internet Video Services",
        in Proc. of the CNIT/IEEE 10th International Tyrrhenian Workshop
        on Digital Communications, Ischia, Italy, September 1998.

   [4]  Elek, V., Karlsson, G. and R. Ronngren, "Providing Quality for
        Internet Video Services", in Proc. IEEE INFOCOM Tel-Aviv,
        Israel, March 2000.


Authors' Addresses

   Naotaka Morita
   Network Service Systems Laboratories
   NTT Corporation
   9-11, Midori-Cho 3-Chome
   Musashino-shi, Tokyo  180-8585
   Japan

   EMail: morita.naotaka@lab.ntt.co.jp


   Gunnar Karlsson
   KTH, Royal Institute of Technology
   Isafjordsgatan 39
   P.O.Box Electrum 229
   SE-164 40, Kista
   Sweden

   EMail: gk@imit.kth.se













Morita & Karlsson      Expires December 22, 2003               [Page 18]

Internet-Draft    Framework of Priority Promotion Scheme       June 2003


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it
   has made any effort to identify any such rights. Information on the
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11. Copies of
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of
   licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to
   obtain a general license or permission for the use of such
   proprietary rights by implementors or users of this specification can
   be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice
   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF Executive
   Director.


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assignees.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION



Morita & Karlsson      Expires December 22, 2003               [Page 19]

Internet-Draft    Framework of Priority Promotion Scheme       June 2003


   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.











































Morita & Karlsson      Expires December 22, 2003               [Page 20]


