


Network Working Group

Internet-Draft
Intended status: Proposed standard
S.Fujimoto
Document: draft-fujimoto-urn-onem2m-00.txt
FUJITSU
Expires: December 2016
P.Niblett

IBM



October 2016


A Uniform Resource Name (URN) Namespace
for the oneM2M Partnership Project (oneM2M)


Abstract

This document describes the Namespace Identifier (NID) for Uniform 
Resource Namespace (URN) resources published by the oneM2M Partnership
Project (oneM2M). oneM2M defines and manages resources that utilize
this URN name model.  Management activities for these and other
resource types are provided by the oneM2M Secretariat.

Status of this Memo

This memo provides information for the Internet community. It does not
specify an Internet standard of any king. Distribution of this memo is
unlimited.

This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering Task
Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that other groups
may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts. 

The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html. 

The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference material 
or to cite them other than as "work in progress."



Copyright Notice

Copyright (c) 2016 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
document authors.  All rights reserved.

This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
(http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
publication of this document.  Please review these documents
carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with
respect to this document. Code Components extracted from this document 
must include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of 
the rust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as described 
in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents


1. Introduction 2
2. URN Specification for the oneM2M Namespace Identifier (NID) 2
3. Examples 5
4. Namespace Considerations 6
5. Community Considerations 6
6. Security Considerations 6
7. IANA Considerations 6
8. References 8
9. Author's Addresses 8


1. Introduction

oneM2M is the global standards initiative that covers requirements, 
architecture, API specifications, security solutions and
interoperability for Machine-to-Machine(M2M) and IoT technologies.
This activity is supported by a membership composed of network 
operators, equipment vendors, and other suppliers to the M2M/IoT market.

Some of the technologies being developed by oneM2M need URN namespaces 
that are managed so that they are unique and persistent.  To assure that 
the uniqueness is absolute, the registration of a specific NID for use 
by oneM2m was deemed appropriate. Therefore, a full and complete 
registration will follow the namespace specification process as defined
in RFC 3406 [RFC3406].

2. URN Specification for the oneM2M Namespace Identifier (NID) 

Namespace ID:

 1m2m

Registration Information:

   registration version number: 1
   registration date:           (TBD)

   Declared registrant of the namespace:
							
      Registering organization 
           Name:    oneM2M Partnership Project
           
         Address: ETSI
                  650, route des Lucioles
                  06921 Sophia-Antipolis Cedex
                  France

      Designated contact
         Role:    Technical expert
         Email:   miguelangel.reinaortega@etsi.org




   Declaration of syntactic structure:

The Namespace Specific String (NSS) of all URNs that use the "1m2m"
NID will have the following structure:

            urn:1m2m:{onem2m-urn}

      where the "onem2m-urn" is a US-ASCII string that conforms to the
NSS(Namespace Specific String) Syntax described in RFC 2141 [RFC2141]
and defines a specific resource type.

   Relevant ancillary documentation:

      oneM2M provides information on registration for each URN. More
information about oneM2M and the registration activities and procedures
to be followed are available at:

      http://www.onem2m.org/urn
   Identifier uniqueness considerations:

      oneM2M will manage resources using the "1m2m" NID and will be the 
authority for managing the "onem2m-urn" strings. In the associated 
procedures, oneM2M will ensure the uniqueness of the strings themselves
 or shall permit secondary responsibility for management of well-defined
sub-trees.

      oneM2M may permit use of experimental type values that will not be
registered. As a consequence, multiple users may end up using the
same value for separate uses. Unregistered type values will only be
 allowed in sub-namespaces clearly marked as experimental, to 
help implementers avoid "leaking" experimental values into real use.

   Identifier persistence considerations:

      oneM2M will provide clear documentation of the registered uses of
the "1m2m" NID.  This will be structured such that each "onem2m-urn", if
needed, will have a separate description and registration table.

      The registration tables and information will be published and
 maintained by oneM2M on its web site.

   Process of identifier assignment:

      oneM2M will provide procedures for registration of each type of
resource that it maintains.  Each such resource may have three types of
registration activities:

      1.  Registered values associated with oneM2M specifications or 
services

      2.  Registration of values or sub-trees to other entities


      3.  Name models for use in experimental purposes

   New Namespace Identifier (NID) labels

      The Entries in the registration table will be the following:

        onem2m-urn:  the registered value;
        Description: description of the registered value;
        Reference:   oneM2M Technical Specification that defines the 
                     value;
        Contact:     person requesting the URN assignment.

   Process for identifier resolution:

      The namespace is not listed with a Resolution Discovery System
      (RDS), as this is not relevant.

   Rules for Lexical Equivalence:

      No special considerations; the rules for lexical equivalence of
      RFC 2141 [RFC2141] apply.

   Conformance with URN Syntax:

      No special considerations.

   Validation mechanism:

      None specified.  URN assignment will be handled by procedures
      supported and maintained by oneM2M.

   Scope:

      Global

3. Examples

The following examples are representative URNs that could be assigned by
oneM2M.  They are not actual strings that are assigned.

   urn:1m2m:pro

      Defines the "onem2m-urn" to be used for "pro(tocol)" WG.

   urn:1m2m:model:sensor-a

      Defines the URN associated with the information model for some 
types of sensor devices identified by the name "sensor-a".


4. Namespace Considerations

The oneM2M Partnership Project is developing technical specifications 
and reports to ensure M2M(Machine-to-Machine) devices can successfully 
communicate on a global scale. 

For proper operation, descriptions of the needed information must exist 
for the URNs and be available in a unique, reliable, and persistent 
manner.

As oneM2M covers multiple technical areas, the possibility of binding to 
various other namespace repositories has been deemed impractical.  Each 
object or description, as defined in oneM2M, could possibly be related 
to multiple different other namespaces, so further conflicts of 
association could occur. Thus the intent is to utilize the oneM2M 
Secretariat as the naming authority for oneM2M-defined URNs and its 
descriptions.

5. Community Considerations

The objects and descriptions produced by oneM2M are generally available
for use by other organizations. The oneM2M will provide access and 
support for name requests by these organizations. This support can be 
enabled in a timely and responsive fashion as new objects and 
descriptions are produced.


6. Security Considerations

There are no security considerations other than those normally 
associated with the use and resolution of URNs in general.


7. IANA Considerations

This section registers a new URN NID with the registration provided in 
Section 2.

"onem2m-urn" strings are identified by label managed by oneM2M.  Thus, 
creating a new label does not require any IANA action.


8. References

Normative

   [RFC3406]  Daigle, L., van Gulik, D., Iannella, R., and P. Faltstrom,
              "Uniform Resource Names (URN) Namespace Definition
              Mechanisms", BCP 66, RFC 3406, October 2002.

   [RFC2141]  Moats, R., "URN Syntax", RFC 2141, May 1997.

9. Author's Addresses

Shingo Fujimoto
FUJITSU LABORATORIES LTD.
Kamikodanaka 4-1-1, Nakaharaku, Kawasaki
JAPAN
Email: shingo_fujimoto@jp.fujitsu.com

Peter Niblett
UK Head Office 
IBM United Kingdom Limited 
PO Box 41, North Harbour 
Portsmouth 
Hampshire, PO6 3AU 
Email: peter_niblett@uk.ibm.com

URN namespace for oneM2M





Fujimoto & Niblett           Informational Page 2]



Fujimoto & Niblett           Informational Page 1]

