


     Network Working Group                                        K. Carlberg
                                                                    I. Brown
     Internet Draft
     <draft-carlberg-ieps-framework-00.txt>                        University
                                                                      College
                                                                       London
                                                                        11/00

                  Framework for Supporting IEPS in IP Telephony


     Status of this Memo

        This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
        all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 [1].

        Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
        Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that
        other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
        Drafts. Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of
        six months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
        documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts
        as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in
        progress."
        The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt
        The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

        For potential updates to the above required-text see:
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-guidelines.txt


     Abstract

        This document presents a framework for supporting authorized
        emergency-related communication within the context of IP telephony.
        We present a series of objectives that reflect a general view of
        how authorized emergency service, in line with International
        Emergency Preparedness Scheme (IEPS), should be realized within
        today's IP architecture and service models.  From these objectives,
        we present a corresponding set of functional requirements, which
        provide a more specific set of recommendations regarding existing
        IETF protocols.  Finally, we present two scenarios that act as
        guiding models for the objectives and functions listed in this



     Carlberg & Brown                 Expires May,2001                    1


              Framework for Supporting IEPS in IP Telephony     Nov,2000


        document.  These, models, coupled with an example of an existing
        service in the PSTN, contribute to a constrained solution space.


     1. Introduction

        The Internet has become the primary target for worldwide
        communications. This is in terms of recreation, business, and
        various imaginative reasons for information distribution. A
        constant fixture in the evolution of the Internet has been the
        support of Best Effort as the default service model.  Best Effort,
        in general terms, infers that the network will attempt to forward
        traffic to the destination as best as it can with no guarantees
        being made, nor any resources reserved, to support specific measure
        of Quality of Service (QoS). An underlying goal is to be 'fair' to
        all the traffic in terms of the resources used to forward it to the
        destination.

        In an attempt to go beyond best effort service, [2] presented an
        overview of Integrated Services (int-serv) and its inclusion into
        the Internet architecture.  This was followed by [3], which
        specified the RSVP signaling protocol used to convey QoS
        requirements.  With the addition of [4] and [5], specifying control
        load (bandwidth bounds) and guaranteed service (bandwidth & delay
        bounds) respectively, one was now able to achieve specific measures
        of QoS for an end-to-end flow of traffic traversing an IP network.
        In this case, our reference to a flow is one that is granular in
        definition and applying to specific application sessions.

        From a deployment perspective (as of the date of this document),
        int-serv has been predominantly constrained to stub intra-domain
        paths, at best resembling isolated "island" reservations for
        specific types of traffic (e.g., audio and video) by stub domains.
        [6] and [7] will probably contribute to additional deployment of
        int-serv to ISPs and possibly some inter-domain paths, but it seems
        unlikely that the original vision of end-to-end int-serv between
        hosts in source and destination stub domains will become a reality
        in the near future (the mid- to far-term is a subject for others to
        contemplate).

        In 1998, the IETF produced [8], which presented an architecture for
        Differentiated Services (diff-serv).  This effort focused on a more
        aggregated perspective and classification of packets than that of
        [2].  This is accomplished with the recent specification of the
        diff-serv field in the IP header (in the case of IPv4, it replaced



     Carlberg & Brown                Expires May,2001                     2


              Framework for Supporting IEPS in IP Telephony     Nov,2000


        the old ToS field).  This new field is used for code points
        established by IANA, or set aside as experimental.  It can be
        expected that sets of microflows, a granular identification of a
        set of packets, will correspond to a given code point, thereby
        achieving an aggregated treatment of data.

        One constant in the introduction of new service models has been the
        designation of Best Effort as the default service model.  If
        traffic is not, or cannot be, associated as diff-serv or int-serv,
        then it is treated as Best Effort and uses what resources are made
        available to it.

        Beyond the introduction of new services, the continued pace of
        additional traffic load experienced by ISPs over the years has
        continued to place a high importance for intra-domain traffic
        engineering.  The explosion of IETF contributions, in the form of
        drafts and RFCs produced in the area of Multi Protocol Label
        Switching (MPLS), exemplifies the interest in versatile and
        manageable mechanisms for intra-domain traffic engineering.  One
        interesting observation is the work involved in supporting QoS
        sensitive traffic like Voice over IP (VoIP).  Specifically, we
        refer to the discussion of a framework to support VoIP using MPLS
        [9], and the inclusion of fault tolerance [10].  This latter item
        can be viewed as being similar to "crank-back", a term used to
        describe the means by which the Public Switched Telephone Network
        (PSTN) routes around congested switches.


     1.2  Emergency Related Data

        The evolution of the IP service model architecture has
        traditionally centered on the type of application protocols used
        over a network.  By this we mean that the distinction, and possible
        bounds on QoS, usually centers on the type of application (e.g.,
        audio video tools).

        While protocols like SMTP [11] and SIP [12] have embedded fields
        denoting "priority", there has not been a previous IETF standards
        based effort to state or define what this distinction means with
        respect to the underlying network and how it should be supported.
        Given the emergence of IP telephony, a natural inclusion of it as
        part of a telco carriers backbone network, or into the Internet as
        a whole, implies the ability to support existing emergency related
        services.  Typically, one associates emergency calls with "911"
        telephone service in the U.S., or "999" in the U.K. -- both of



     Carlberg & Brown                Expires May,2001                     3


              Framework for Supporting IEPS in IP Telephony     Nov,2000


        which are attributed to national boundaries and accessible by the
        general public.  Outside of this exists emergency telephone
        services that involved authorized usage, as described in the
        following subsection.


     1.2.1  Government Emergency Telecommunications Service (GETS)

        GETS is an emergency telecommunications service available in the
        U.S. and established by the National Communications System (NCS) --
        an office established by the White House under an executive order.
        Unlike "911", it is only accessible by authorized individuals.  The
        majority of these individuals are from various government agencies
        like the Department of Transportation, NASA, the Department of
        Defense, and the Federal Emergency Management Agency (to name but a
        few).  The purpose of GETS is to increase the probability that
        phone service will be available to selected government agency
        personnel in times of emergencies, such as hurricanes, earthquakes,
        and other disasters that may produce a burden in the form of call
        blocking (i.e., congestion) on the U.S. Public Switched Telephone
        Network by the general public.

        The key aspect is that GETS only supports a probabilistic approach
        to call completion, as opposed to call preemption.  This
        distinction is important because under U.S. law, emergency systems
        like GETS are not allowed to terminate existing calls in order to
        allow a GETS call to be established.  Thus, the mechanisms and
        specifications that comprise GETS only focus on increasing the
        chances that a particular telephone call will be established.

        The basis for GETS with respect to Signaling System 7 (SS7) support
        is found in the T1.619 protocol on High Probability of Completion
        (HPC) network capability [13].  This document describes the
        specification of a National Security and Emergency Preparedness
        (NS/EP) code point used for SS7 ISDN User Part (ISUP) Initial
        Address Message (IAM).  Together with this code point, Local
        Exchange Carriers (LEC) increase the time out period for call
        establishment in the hopes of increasing the chances that a circuit
        will be freed and thus be made available for a GETS call.  If
        necessary (and if the ability is supported), the LEC will attempt
        to forward the call through alternate inter-exchange carriers (IXC)
        if it cannot complete the call through the default IXC.

        The procedure for a user (i.e., a person) establishing a GETS call
        is as follows:



     Carlberg & Brown                Expires May,2001                     4


              Framework for Supporting IEPS in IP Telephony     Nov,2000



           1) Dial a non-geographical area code number: 710-XXX-XXXX
           2) Dial a PIN used to authenticate the call
           3) Dial the actual destination number to be reached

        In conjunction with the above, the source LEC (where the call
        originated) attempts to establish the call through an IXC that it
        has arbitrarily chosen.  This is done even if the destination
        number is within the LEC itself.  If the IXC cannot forward the
        call to the destination LEC, then the source LEC attempts to
        forward the call through an alternate IXC.  If alternate IXCs
        cannot help establish the call, then a busy signal is finally
        returned to the user.  Otherwise, the call is completed and retains
        the same quality of service and priority as all other telephone
        calls.

        The HPC component of GETS is not ubiquitously supported by the
        U.S. PSTN.  The only expectation is that the 710 area code is
        recognized by all carriers.  Additional support is conditional and
        dependent upon the equivalent service level agreements established
        between the U.S. Government and various telco carriers.  Thus, the
        default end-to-end service for establishing a GETS call can be
        viewed as best effort and associated with the same priority as
        calls from the general public.  The exception to this rule is when
        the call is forwarded through carriers that have been contracted to
        support HPC, which results in a higher probability that the GETS
        call will be established.


     1.2.2  International Emergency Preparedness Scheme (IEPS)

        [18] is a recent ITU standard that describes emergency related
        communications over international telephone service.  While systems
        like GETS are national in scope, IEPS acts as an extension to local
        authorized emergency call establishment and provides a building
        block for a global service.

        As in the case of GETS, IEPS promotes mechanisms like extended
        queuing, alternate routing, and exemption from restrictive
        management controls in order to increase the probability that
        international emergency calls will be established.  The specifics
        of how this to be accomplished are to be specified in future ITU
        document(s).





     Carlberg & Brown                Expires May,2001                     5


              Framework for Supporting IEPS in IP Telephony     Nov,2000


     1.3  Scope of this Document

        The scope of this document centers on the support of IEPS within
        the context of IP telephony, though not necessarily Voice over IP.
        We make a distinction between these two by treating IP telephony as
        a subset of VoIP, where in the former we assume some form of
        application layer signaling is used to explicitly establish and
        maintain voice data traffic.  This explicit signaling capability
        provides the hooks from which VoIP traffic can be bridged to the
        PSTN.

        As an example of the distinction is when the Redundant Audio Tool
        (RAT) [14] begins sending VoIP packets to a unicast (or multicast)
        destination.  RAT does not use an explicit signaling like SIP to
        establish an end-to-end call between two users.  It simply sends
        data packets to the target destination.  On the other hand, "SIP
        phones" are host devices that use a signaling protocol to establish
        a call signal before sending data towards the destination.

        Beyond this, part of our motivation in writing this document is to
        provide a reference point for ISPs and carriers so that they have
        an understanding of objectives and accompanying function
        requirements used to support IEPS related IP telephony traffic.  In
        addition, we also wish to provide a reference point for potential
        customers (users of IEPS) in order to constrain their expectations.
        In particular, we wish to avoid any temptation of trying to
        replicate the exact capabilities of existing emergency voice
        service currently available in the PSTN to that of IP and the
        Internet.  If nothing else, intrinsic differences between the two
        communications architectures precludes this from happening.  Note,
        this does not prevent us from borrowing design concepts or
        objectives from existing systems.

        Section 2 presents several primary objectives that articulate what
        is considered important in supporting IEPS related IP telephony
        traffic.  These objectives represent a generic set of goals and
        capabilities attributed to supporting IEPS based IP telephony.
        Section 3 presents additional value added objectives.  These are
        capabilities that are viewed as useful, but not critical in support
        of IEPS.  Section 4 presents a series of functional requirements
        that stem from the objectives articulated in section 2.  Finally,
        Section 5 presents two scenarios in IEPS can be deployed over IP
        networks.  These are not all-inclusive scenarios, nor are they the
        only ones that can be articulated.  However, they do show cases




     Carlberg & Brown                Expires May,2001                     6


              Framework for Supporting IEPS in IP Telephony     Nov,2000


        where some of the functional requirements apply, and where some do
        not.

        Finally, we need to state that this document focuses its attention
        on the IP layer and above.  Specific operational procedures
        pertaining to Network Operation Centers (NOC) or Network
        Information Centers (NIC) are outside the scope of this document.
        This includes the "bits" below IP, other specific technologies, and
        service level agreements between ISPs and carriers with regard to
        dedicated links.


     2. Objective

        The support of IEPS within IP telephony can be realized in the form
        of several primary objectives.  These objectives define the generic
        functions or capability associated with IEPS, and the scope of the
        support needed to achieve these capabilities.  From this generic
        set of objectives, we present specific functional requirements of
        existing IP protocols (presented below in section 3).

        There are two underlying goals in the selection of these
        objectives.  One goal is to produce a design that maximizes the use
        of existing IP protocols and minimizes the set of additional
        specifications needed to support IP-telephony based IEPS.  Thus,
        with the inclusion of these minimal augmentations, the bulk of the
        work in achieving IEPS over a proprietary IP network, or the
        Internet, involves operational issues.  Examples of this would be
        the establishment of Service Level Agreements (SLA) with Internet
        Service Providers (ISP), and/or the provisioning of traffic
        engineered paths for IEPS-related telephony traffic.

        A second underlying goal in selecting the following objectives is
        to take into account experiences from an existing emergency-type
        communication system (as described in section 1.2.1) as well as the
        existing restrictions and constraints placed by some countries.  In
        the former case, we do not attempt to mimic the system, but rather
        extract information as a reference model. With respect to
        constraints based on laws or agency regulations, this would
        normally be considered outside of the scope of any IETF document.
        However, these constraints act as a means of determining the lowest
        common denominator in specifying technical functional requirements.
        If such constraints do not exist, then additional functions can be
        added to the baseline set of functions.  This last item will be
        expanded upon in the description of Objective #3 below.



     Carlberg & Brown                Expires May,2001                     7


              Framework for Supporting IEPS in IP Telephony     Nov,2000



        The following list of objectives are termed primary because they
        pertain to that which defines the underlying goals of IEPS in
        relation to IP telephony.  However, the primary objectives are not
        meant to dictate major overhauls of existing IP protocols, nor do
        they require new protocols to be developed.

        Primary Objectives in support of authorized emergency calls:

             1) High Probability of Call Completion
             2) Interaction with PSTN
             3) Distinction of IEPS data traffic
             4) Non-preemptive action
             5) Non-ubiquitous support
             6) Authenticated service

        The first objective is the crux of our work because it defines our
        expectations for both data and call signaling for IP telephony.  As
        stated, our objective is achieving a high probability that
        emergency related calls (both data and signaling) will be forwarded
        through an IP network.  Specifically, we envision the relevance of
        this objective during times of congestion, the context of which we
        describe further below in this section.  The critical word in this
        objective is "probability", as opposed to assurance or guarantee --
        the latter two placing a higher burden on the network.  It stands
        to reason, though, that the word "probability" is a less tangible
        description that cannot be easily quantified.  It is relative in
        relation to other traffic transiting the same network.  Objectives
        3 through 5 below help us to qualify the term probability in the
        context of other objectives.

        The second objective involves the interaction of IP telephony
        signaling with existing PSTN support for emergency related voice
        communications.  As mentioned above in Section 1.2, standard T1.613
        specifies code points for SS7.  Specifically, the National Security
        and Emergency Preparedness (NS/EP) code point is defined for ISUP
        IAM messages used by SS7.  Hence, our objective in the interaction
        between the PSTN and IP telephony with respect to IEPS is a direct
        mapping between directly related code points.

        The third objective focuses on the ability to distinguish IEPS data
        packets from other types of VoIP packets.  With such an ability,
        transit providers can more easily ensure that service level
        agreements relating to IEPS are adhered.  Note that we do not
        assume that the actions taken to distinguish IEPS type packets is



     Carlberg & Brown                Expires May,2001                     8


              Framework for Supporting IEPS in IP Telephony     Nov,2000


        easy.  Nor, in this section, do we state the form of this
        distinction.  We simply present the objective of identifying flows
        that relate to IEPS versus others that traverse a transit network.

        At an abstract level, the forth objective pertains to the actions
        taken when an IP telephony call, via a signaling protocol such as
        SIP, cannot be forwarded because the network is experiencing a form
        of congestion.  We state this in general terms because of two
        reasons: a) there may exist applications other than SIP, like
        H.248, used for call establishment, and b) congestion may come in
        several forms.  For example, congestion may exist at the IP packet
        layer with respect to queues being filled to their configured
        limit. Congestion may also arise from resource allocation
        attributed per call or aggregated sets of calls.  In this latter
        case, while there may exist resources to forward the packets, a
        signaling server may have reached its limit as to how many
        telephony calls it will support while retaining toll-quality
        service per call.  Typically, one terms this form of congestion as
        call blocking. Note that we do not address the case when congestion
        occurs at the bit level below that of IP, due to the position that
        it is outside the scope of IP and the IETF.

        So, given the existence of congestion in its various forms, our
        objective is to support IEPS-related IP telephony call signaling
        and data traffic via non-preemptive actions taken by the network.
        More specifically, we associate this objective in the context of IP
        telephony acting as part of the Public Telephone Network (PTN).
        This, as opposed to the use of IP telephony within a private or
        stub network.  In section 5 below, we expand on this through the
        description of two distinct scenarios of IP telephony and its
        operation with IEPS and the PSTN.

        It is important mention that this is a default objective influenced
        by existing laws & regulations.  those countries not bound by these
        restrictions can remove this objective and make provisions to
        enforce preemptive action.  In this case, it would probably be
        advantageous to deploy a signaling system similar to that proposed
        in [15], wherein multiple levels of priority are defined and
        preemption via admission control from SIP servers is enforced.

        The fifth objective stipulates that we do not advocate the need or
        expectation for ubiquitous support of IEPS across all
        administrative domains of the Internet.  While it would be
        desirable to have ubiquitous support, we feel the reliance of such
        a requirement would doom even the contemplation of supporting IEPS



     Carlberg & Brown                Expires May,2001                     9


              Framework for Supporting IEPS in IP Telephony     Nov,2000


        by the IETF and the expected entities (e.g., ISPs) involved in its
        deployment.

        We use the existing GETS service in the U.S. as an existing example
        in which emergency related communications does not need to be
        ubiquitous.  As mentioned previously, the measure and amount of
        support provided by the U.S. PSTN for GETS is not ubiquitous across
        all U.S. Inter-exchange Carriers (IXC) nor Local Exchange Carriers
        (LEC).  The fact that GETS still works within this context, it is
        our objective to follow this deployment model such that we can
        accomplish the first objective listed above -- a higher probability
        of call completion than that of normal IP telephony call traffic.

        Our final objective is that only authorized users may use the
        services outlined in this framework. GETS users are authenticated
        using a PIN provided to the telecommunications carrier, which
        signals approval back to the user's local exchange over SS7. In an
        IP network, the authentication center will need to securely signal
        back to the IP ingress point that a given user is authorized for
        the NS/EP diffserv codepoint. Similarly, transit networks with IEPS
        SLAs must securely interchange authorized IEPS traffic. In both
        cases, IPSec authentication transforms may be used to protect this
        traffic. This is entirely separate from end-to-end IPSec protection
        of user traffic, which will be configured by users. IP-PSTN
        gateways must also be able to securely signal IEPS authorization
        for a given flow. As these gateways are likely to act as SIP
        servers, we further consider the use of SIP's security functions to
        aid this objective.


     3. Value Added Objectives

        These are objectives that are viewed as being helpful in achieving
        a high probability of call completion.  It is expected that their
        realization within an IP network would be in the form of new
        protocols or major enhancements to existing ones.  Thus, objectives
        listed in this section are treated as value added -- an expectation
        that their existence would be beneficial, and yet not viewed as
        critical to support IEPS related IP telephony traffic.

        The value added objectives are:

             1) Alternate Path Routing
             2) IEPS Domain Discovery




     Carlberg & Brown                Expires May,2001                    10


              Framework for Supporting IEPS in IP Telephony     Nov,2000


        The first involves the ability to discover and use a different path
        to route IP telephony traffic around congestion points and thus
        avoid them.  Ideally, the discovery process would be accomplished
        in an expedient manner (possibly even a priori to the need of its
        existence).  At this level, we make no assumptions how the
        alternate path is accomplished, or even at which layer it is
        achieved -- e.g., the network versus the application layer.  But
        this kind of capability, at least in a minimal form, would help
        contribute to increasing the probability of call completion of IEPS
        traffic by making use of noncongested alternate paths.  We use the
        term "minimal form" to concede the fact that care must be taken in
        how the system provides an alternate paths so it does not
        significantly contribute to the congestion that is to be avoided
        (e.g., via excess control/discovery messages).

        The second item above stems from one of the primary objectives that
        precludes the need for ubiquitous support for IEPS.  Thus, given
        that we assume only a subset of transit ISPs will be contracted to
        support IEPS, it stands to reason that it would be beneficial to
        have networks/domains discover the nearest domain that supports
        IEPS, and in turn forward IEPS telephony messages in that
        direction.


     4. Functional Requirements

        In this section, we take the objectives presented above and specify
        a corresponding set of functional requirements to achieve them.
        Given that the objectives are predominantly atomic in nature, the
        corresponding functional requirements are to be viewed as separate
        with no specific dependency upon each other as a whole.  They may
        be complimentary with each other, but there is no need for all to
        exist given different scenarios of operation, and that IEPS support
        is not viewed as a ubiquitously available service.  We divide the
        functional requirements into 4 areas:

             1) Signaling
             2) Policy
             3) Traffic Engineering
             4) Security








     Carlberg & Brown                Expires May,2001                    11


              Framework for Supporting IEPS in IP Telephony     Nov,2000


     4.1 Signaling

        SIP

        Signaling is further divided into two perspectives.  The first is
        application level signaling.  We focus our attention on the Session
        Initiation Protocol (SIP), since it is viewed as being used by
        applications like IP telephony.  Currently, SIP has an existing
        "priority" field that distinguishes different types of sessions.
        The five currently defined values are: "emergency", "urgent",
        "normal", "non-urgent", "other-priority".

        We propose the addition of a new value for this field titled
        "authorized-emergency".  This new value is used to denote an
        emergency-related session that has been initiated by an authorized
        user.  In particular, we distinguish this value from the existing
        "emergency" value, which could be attributed to emergency sessions
        from the general public (e.g., a "911" call).

        It is important to note that this is the one functional requirement
        that is considered mandatory with respect to supporting IEPS within
        IP telephony.  We take this position because regardless of the
        extent by which the underlying network supports IEPS-based traffic,
        there is a need to distinguish IEPS sessions from others.

        The existence of this new value in the SIP priority field allows an
        IP telephony domain to map the NS/EP code point from an SS7
        telephony domain.  This will help facilitate a seamless interaction
        between the PSTN and the an IP network acting as either an internal
        backbone or as a peering ISP.

        Author's Note:  We do not make reference to the current Polk draft
        [16] and its advocacy of expanding the SIP priority field to
        include values attributed to Multi-Level Precedence and Preemption.
        However, if that   document were to be advanced, we could satisfy
        our requirement of adding an "authorized-emergency" value with
        minimal changes to the Polk draft.  Specifically, by make
        "preemption" a local and optional administrative issue, and adding
        to the values specified in [16].

        Diff-Serv

        In accordance to [16] , the differentiated services code point
        (DSCP) field is divided into 3 sets of values.  The first set are
        assigned by IANA.  Within this set, there are currently, three



     Carlberg & Brown                Expires May,2001                    12


              Framework for Supporting IEPS in IP Telephony     Nov,2000


        types of Per Hop Behaviors have been specified: Default
        (correlating to best effort forwarding), Assured Forwarding, and
        Expedited Forwarding.  The second set of DSCP values are set aside
        for local or experimental use.  The third set of DSCP values are
        also set local or experimental use, but may later be reassigned to
        IANNA in case the first set has been completely assigned.

        We recommend the specification of a new type of PHB referred to as
        Emergency Related Forwarding (ERF).  This provides a means of
        distinguishing emergency related traffic (signaling and user data)
        from other traffic.  The existence of this PHB then provides a
        baseline by which specific code points may be defined related to
        various emergency related traffic: authorized emergency sessions
        (e.g., IEPS), general public emergency calls (e.g., "911"), etc.


        Authors note:  It is probable that this section may be contentious
        given the advocacy of a new PHB group.  Hence, this section may
        require additional input and refinement.


     4.2  Policy

        One of the objectives listed in section 3 above is to treat IEPS-
        signaling, and related data traffic, as non-preemptive in nature.
        Further, that this treatment is to be the default mode of operation
        or service.  This is in recognition that existing regulations or
        laws of certain countries governing the establishment of SLAs may
        not allow preemptive actions (e.g., dropping existing telephony
        flows).  On the other hand, the laws and regulations of other
        countries influencing the specification of SLA(s) may allow
        preemption, or even require its existence.  Given this disparity,
        we rely on local policy to determine the degree by which emergency
        related traffic affects existing traffic load of a given network or
        ISP.  Important note: we reiterate our earlier comment that laws
        and regulations are generally outside the scope of the IETF and its
        specification of designs and protocols.  However, these constraints
        can be used as a guide in producing a baseline function to be
        supported; in our case, a default policy for non-preemptive call
        establishment of IEPS-signaling and data.

        Policy can be in the form of static information embedded in various
        components (e.g., SIP servers or bandwidth brokers), or it can be
        realized and supported via COPS with respect to allocation of a
        domain's resources [17].  There is no requirement as to how policy



     Carlberg & Brown                Expires May,2001                    13


              Framework for Supporting IEPS in IP Telephony     Nov,2000


        is accomplished.  Instead, if a domain follows actions outside of
        the default non-preemptive action of IEPS-related communication,
        then we stipulate a functional requirement that some type of policy
        mechanism is in place to satisfy the local policies of an SLA
        established for IEPS type traffic.


     4.3  Traffic Engineering

        In those cases where a network operates under the constraints of
        SLAs, one or more of which pertains to IEPS based traffic, it can
        be expected that some form of traffic engineering is applied to the
        operation of the network.  We make no requirements as to which type
        of traffic engineering mechanism is used, but that such a system
        exists and can distinguish and support IEPS signaling and data
        traffic.

        A potentially complimentary work in progress can be found in [9],
        which articulates a framework for Voice over MPLS.  We cite the
        draft only as a point of reference, with the idea that it may be
        augmented to reflect labeled path(s) dedicated to different values
        in the SIP priority field -- such as those pertaining to
        emergencies.  But of more significance, [9] presents a specific
        framework for traffic engineering support of toll quality (i.e., a
        particular grade of service)  IP telephony.

        Note: As a point of reference, existing SLAs established by the NCS
        for GETS service tend to focus on a maximum allocation of 1% of
        calls allowed to be established through a given LEC using HPC.
        Once this limit is reached, all other GETS calls experience the
        same probably of cal completion as the general public.  It is
        expected, and encouraged, that IEPS related SLAs will have a limit
        with respect to the amount of traffic distinguished as being
        emergency related, and initiated by an authorized user.


     4.4  Security

        As IEPS support moves from intra-domain PSTN and IP networks to
        diffuse inter-domain pure IP, authenticated service becomes more
        complex to provide.  Where an IEPS call is carried from PSTN to
        PSTN via one carrier's backbone IP network, very little IP-specific
        security support is required.  The user authenticates herself as
        usual to the network using a PIN.  The gateway from her PSTN
        connection into the backbone IP network must be able to signal that



     Carlberg & Brown                Expires May,2001                    14


              Framework for Supporting IEPS in IP Telephony     Nov,2000


        the flow has IEPS priority. The carrier's traffic engineering
        measures than attempt to provide a higher probability of call
        completion to that flow. The gateway back into the PSTN must
        similarly signal the call's higher priority. A secure link between
        the gateways may be set up using IPSec or SIP security
        functionality. If the endpoint is an IP device on the carrier's
        network, the link may be set up securely from the ingress gateway
        to the end device.

        As flows traverse more than one IP network, domains whose peering
        agreements include IEPS support must have means to securely signal
        a given flow's IEPS status. They may choose to use physical link
        security and/or IPSec authentication, combined with traffic
        conditioning measures to limit the amount of IEPS traffic that may
        pass between the two domains. The inter-domain agreement may
        require the originating network to take responsibility for ensuring
        only authorized traffic is marked with IEPS priority; the
        downstream domain may still perform redundant conditioning to
        prevent the propagation of theft and denial of service attacks.
        Security may be provided between ingress and egress gateways or IP
        endpoints using IPSec or SIP security functions.

        When a call originates from an IP device, the ingress network may
        authorize IEPS traffic over that link as part of its user
        authentication procedures without necessarily communicating with a
        central IEPS authentication center as happens with POTS-originated
        calls. These authentication procedures may occur at the link or
        network layers, but are entirely at the discretion of the ingress
        network. That network must decide how often it should update its
        list of authorized IEPS users based on the bounds it is prepared to
        accept on traffic from recently-revoked users.


     5. Key Scenarios

        There are various scenarios in which IP telephony can be realized,
        each of which can infer a unique set of functional requirements
        that may include just a subset of those listed above.  We
        acknowledge that a scenario may exist whose functional requirements
        are not listed above.  Our intention is not to consider every
        possible scenario by which support for emergency related IP
        telephony can be realized.  Rather, we narrow our scope using a
        single guideline;  we assume there is a signaling & data
        interaction between the PSTN and the IP network with respect to
        supporting emergency-related telephony traffic.  We stress that



     Carlberg & Brown                Expires May,2001                    15


              Framework for Supporting IEPS in IP Telephony     Nov,2000


        this does not preclude an IP-only end-to-end model, but rather the
        inclusion of the PSTN expands the problem space and includes the
        current dominate form of voice communication.

        There are two scenarios that we use as a model for determining our
        objectives and subsequent functional requirements.  These being:


        Single IP Administrative Domain
        -------------------------------

        This scenario is a direct reflection of the evolution of the PSTN.
        Specifically, we refer to the case in which data networks have
        emerged in various degrees as a backbone infrastructure connecting
        PSTN switches at its edges.  This represents a single isolated IP
        administrative domain that has no directly adjacent IP domains
        connected to it.  We show an example of this scenario below in
        Figure 1.  In this example, we show two types of carriers.  One is
        the legacy carrier, whose infrastructure retains the classic
        switching architecture attributed to the PSTN.  The other is the
        next generation carrier, which uses a data network (e.g., IP) as
        its core infrastructure, and Signaling Gateways at its edges.
        These gateways "speak" SS7 externally with peering carriers, and
        another protocol (e.g., SIP) internally, which rides on top of the
        IP infrastructure.


           Legacy            Next Generation            Next Generation
           Carrier              Carrier                    Carrier
           *******          ***************             **************
           *     *          *             *     ISUP    *            *
          SW<--->SW <-----> SG <---IP---> SG <--IAM--> SG <---IP---> SG
           *     *   (SS7)  *     (SIP)   *    (SS7)    *    (SIP)   *
           *******          ***************             **************


                                                 SW - Telco Switch
                                                 SG - Signaling Gateway

                                    Figure 1


        The significant aspect of this scenario is that all the resources
        of each IP "island" fall within a given administrative authority.
        Hence, there is no problem of retaining toll quality Grade of



     Carlberg & Brown                Expires May,2001                    16


              Framework for Supporting IEPS in IP Telephony     Nov,2000


        Service as the voice traffic (data and signaling) exists the IP
        network because of the existing SS7 provisioned service between
        carriers.  Thus, the need for support of mechanisms like diff-serv,
        and an expansion of the defined set of Per-Hop Behaviors is reduced
        (if not eliminated) under this scenario.

        Another function that has little or no importance within the closed
        IP environment of Figure 1 is that of IP security.  The fact that
        each administrative domain peers with each other as part of the
        PSTN, means that existing security, in the form of Personal
        Identification Number (PIN) authentication, is the default scope of
        security.  We do not claim that the reliance of a PIN based
        security system is highly reliable or even desirable.  But, we use
        this system as a default mechanism in order to avoid placing
        additional requirements on existing authorized emergency telephony
        systems.


        Multiple IP Administrative Domains
        ----------------------------------

        We view the scenario of multiple IP administrative domains as a
        superset of the previous scenario.  Specifically, we retain the
        notion that the IP telephony system peers with the existing PSTN.
        In addition, segments (i.e., portions of the Internet) may exchange
        signaling with other IP administrative domains via non-PSTN
        signaling protocols like SIP.


           Legacy           Next Generation            Next Generation
           Carrier              Carrier                    Carrier
           *******          ***************            **************
           *     *          *             *            *            *
          SW<--->SW <-----> SG <---IP---> SG <--IP--> SG <---IP---> SG
           *     *   (SS7)  *     (SIP)   *    (SIP)   *    (SIP)   *
           *******          ***************            **************


                                                 SW - Telco Switch
                                                 SG - Signaling Gateway


                                    Figure 2





     Carlberg & Brown                Expires May,2001                    17


              Framework for Supporting IEPS in IP Telephony     Nov,2000


        Given multiple IP domains, and the presumption that SLAs relating
        to IEPS traffic may exist between them, the need for something like
        diff-serv grows with respect to being able to distinguish the
        emergency related traffic from other types of traffic.  In
        addition, IP security becomes more important between domains in
        order help ensure that the act of distinguishing IEPS-type traffic
        is indeed valid for the given source.


     8. Security Considerations

        Information related to this area have been presented in sections 2
        and 4.


     9. References


        1  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3", BCP
           9, RFC 2026, October 1996.

        2  Braden, R., et. al., "Integrated Services in the Internet
           Architecture: An Overview", Informational, RFC 1633, June 1994.

        3  Braden, R., et. al., "Resource Reservation Protocol (RSVP) _
           Version 1, Functional Specification", Proposed Standard, RFC
           2205, Sept. 1997.

        4  Shenker, S., et. al., "Specification of Guaranteed Quality of
           Service", Proposed Standard, RFC 2212, Sept 1997.

        5  Wroclawski, J., "Specification for Controlled-Load Network
           Service Element", Proposed Standard, RFC 2211, Sept 1997.

        6  Gai, S., et. al., "RSVP Proxy", Internet Draft, Work in
           Progress, July 2000.

        7  Wang, L, et. al., "RSVP Refresh Overhead Reduction by State
           Compression", Internet Draft, Work In Progress, March 2000.

        8  Blake, S., et. al., "An Architecture for Differentiated
           Service", Proposed Standard, RFC 2475, Dec. 1998.






     Carlberg & Brown                Expires May,2001                    18


              Framework for Supporting IEPS in IP Telephony     Nov,2000



        9  Kankkunen, A., et. al., "VoIP over MPLS Framework_, Internet
           Draft, Work In Progress, July 2000.

        10 Sharma, V., et. al., "Framework for MPLS-based Recovery",
           Internet Draft, Work In Progress, September 2000.

        11 Postel, J., "Simple Mail Transfer Protocol", Standard, RFC 821,
           August 1982.

        12 Handley, M., et. al., "SIP: Session Initiation Protocol",
           Proposed Standard, RFC 2543, March 1999.

        13 ANSI, "Signaling System No. 7(SS7) _ High Probability of
           Completion (HPC) Network Capability_, ANSI T1.631, 1993.

        14 Reliable Audio Tool (RAT):
              http://www-mice.cs.ucl.ac.uk/multimedia/software/rat                                                                                                                                   

        15 Polk, J., "SIP Precedence mapping to MLPP Interworking",
           Internet Draft, Work In Progress, March, 2000.

        16 Nichols, K., et. al.,"Definition of the Differentiated Services
           Field (DS Field) in the Ipv4 and Ipv6 Headers_, Proposed
           Standard, RFC 2474, December 1998.

        17 Durham, D., "The COPS (Common Open Policy Service) Protocol",
           Proposed Standard, RFC 2748, Jan 2000.

        18 ITU, "International Emergency Preparedness Scheme_, ITU
           Recommendation, E.106, March 2000.

















     Carlberg & Brown                Expires May,2001                    19









     10.  Acknowledgments

        To be done_


     11. Author's Addresses

        Ken Carlberg
        University College London
        Department of Computer Science
        Gower Street
        London, WC1E 6BT
        United Kingdom


        Ian Brown
        University College London
        Department of Computer Science
        Gower Street
        London, WC1E 6BT
        United Kingdom



     Full Copyright Statement

        "Copyright (C) The Internet Society (date). All Rights Reserved.
        This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
        others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain
        it or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied,
        published and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction
        of any kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this
        paragraph are included on all such copies and derivative works.
        However, this document itself may not be modified in any way, such
        as by removing the copyright notice or references to the Internet
        Society or other Internet organizations, except as needed for the
        purpose of developing Internet standards in which case the
        procedures for copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process
        must be followed, or as required to translate it into languages
        other than
        English.



     Carlberg & Brown                 Expires May,2001                   20


              Framework for Supporting IEPS in IP Telephony     Nov,2000


        The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
        revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

        This document and the information contained herein is provided as
        an "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
        ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR
        IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
        THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
        WARRANTIES OR MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PRUPOSE.







































     Carlberg & Brown                Expires May,2001                    21
