Network Working Group                                      M. Vigoureux
Internet Draft                                           Alcatel-Lucent
Intended status: Informational                                  D. King
Expires: May 2015                                    Old Dog Consulting
                                                           C. Pignataro
                                                    Cisco Systems, Inc.

                                                      November 11, 2014




                     IETF Working Groups' Secretaries
                    draft-secretaries-good-practices-07


Abstract

   The Working Group Secretary's role was succinctly defined in RFC
   2418. However, this role has greatly evolved and increased both in
   value and scope, since the writing of RFC 2418. This document thus
   provides a compilation of good practices and general guidelines
   regarding the fulfilment of the role.

   This document is intended for established Working Group Secretaries,
   individuals motivated by taking up that role, or anyone else simply
   interested in understanding better the Working Group Secretary's
   role. This document may also be useful for Working Group Chairs to
   better appreciate and help develop the value of Working Group
   Secretaries.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress".





WG Secretaries           Expires May 11, 2015                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft              WG Secretaries                November 2014


   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

   This Internet-Draft will expire on May 11, 2015.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2014 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors. All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document. Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.

Table of Contents

   1. Introduction...................................................2
   2. Applicability Statement........................................3
   3. WG Secretary's Functions and Responsibilities..................4
      3.1. IETF Meeting Specific Tasks...............................4
         3.1.1. Pre WG Session Phase.................................4
         3.1.2. WG Session Phase.....................................7
         3.1.3. Post WG Session Phase................................8
      3.2. Continuous Tasks..........................................8
   4. Complementary Considerations..................................10
   5. Conclusions and Perspectives..................................11
   6. Security Considerations.......................................12
   7. IANA Considerations...........................................13
   8. References....................................................13
      8.1. Informative References...................................13
   9. Acknowledgments...............................................13
   Contributors' Addresses..........................................14
   Authors' Addresses...............................................15

1. Introduction

   The Working Group (WG) Secretary's role was defined as a minute taker
   and to record WG discussions' points, and decisions (see section 6.2
   of RFC 2418 [1]). Over time, the WG Secretary's role has greatly


WG Secretaries           Expires May 11, 2015                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft              WG Secretaries                November 2014


   evolved to include a number of additional delegated functions and
   responsibilities which are critical to the smooth operation of IETF
   WGs. This document describes these additional functions and
   responsibilities.

   In that context, it shall be noted that a certain number of tools and
   means exist in support of WG operation (e.g., Session Request Tool,
   Meeting Materials Manager, the Datatracker, Etherpad, Trac Tool,
   Wiki). Most, if not all, of these are accessible from the WG Chairs'
   page (https://www.ietf.org/wg/chairs-page.html). It is however
   outside of the scope of this document to describe the use of these
   tools and means. It shall also be noted that no specific tool exists
   in support of certain actions and tasks that can fall under the
   responsibility of a WG Secretary. It is expected that a WG Secretary
   would procure the right set of tools for the job, based on
   availability and personal preference. This might entail searching and
   finding, or developing, tools.

   Section 2 of this document sets out its scope of applicability.
   Section 3 of this document gives detailed descriptive information of
   the WG Secretary's functions, responsibilities, and good practices.
   Section 4 provides a complementary set of information.

   It is expected that upon publication, the content of this document
   will be transferred to the Working Groups Chairs' wiki, or this
   document be referenced there.

2. Applicability Statement

   The WG Secretary is a resource that can be leveraged by WG Chairs,
   and is concerned with supporting the operations of a WG to make
   forward progress, and with assisting in managing the WG processes. WG
   Chairs hold the responsibility for the decisions and actions taken at
   the level of their WG. However, WG Chairs can delegate punctually or
   durably any of their responsibilities to someone else. In essence,
   this document therefore lists a subset of WG Chairs' functions and
   responsibilities which can typically be delegated to a WG Secretary.

   The framework and perimeter of action associated to the WG
   Secretary's role, depends on the WG Secretary and the Chairs, as well
   as on the professional relationship they establish. Therefore this
   document does not prescribe what must be performed, but lists what
   might be performed by a WG Secretary. Also, this list is intended to
   be as complete as possible, but it shall not be considered as
   exhaustive. This document is therefore not a rigid job description.


WG Secretaries           Expires May 11, 2015                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft              WG Secretaries                November 2014


   Also, IETF WGs differ from one another according several aspects.
   Amongst those aspects is the "effective size" of the WG (number of
   active participants, number of active documents, rate of WG
   document's adoption calls and WG Last Calls, and mailing list
   traffic). In that regard, part or even all of the guidelines provided
   in this document might not be relevant for the successful operation
   of smaller WGs. In those, the Chairs may not need to delegate
   operational tasks.

   In fact, the appointment of a WG Secretary is a matter concerning the
   WG. As such it is fully up to the WG Chairs to decide whether or not
   they wish to appoint a Secretary, to decide who to appoint as
   Secretary and to decide which responsibilities to delegate to that
   Secretary. Area Directors may nonetheless provide useful advice.

3. WG Secretary's Functions and Responsibilities

   The WG Secretary supports the processes and workflows to make the WG
   successful during its lifetime, with specific actions at the times of
   IETF meetings. We thus classify the functions and responsibilities of
   a WG Secretary according to IETF meeting specific tasks, and to
   continuous tasks. The following sub-sections reflect that
   classification.

3.1. IETF Meeting Specific Tasks

   The set of tasks specific to an IETF meeting can be further sub-
   classified into three phases: the WG session held during that meeting
   as well as both the pre and post phases of that session.

3.1.1. Pre WG Session Phase

   o  Submitting a request for a WG session

   Using the means available, the WG Secretary could submit a request
   for a WG session at the upcoming IETF meeting. The WG Secretary
   should coordinate with the Chairs in order to correctly formulate the
   request, especially with regards to the number of sessions to request
   for and their respective duration. As part of this request, care
   should also be taken to specify precise conflicts lists (WGs and
   individuals). Concomitantly, the WG Secretary could formulate the
   request to have collaborative software (e.g., WebEx, Meetecho)
   support during the WG session. It shall be noted that holding a WG
   session is typically driven by the need for the WG to discuss some



WG Secretaries           Expires May 11, 2015                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft              WG Secretaries                November 2014


   topics or documents, and that the identification of this need may
   imply having interactions with the WG before requesting a session.

   o  Calling for discussion slots

   Working Group Chairs may organise WG sessions in different ways. As
   part of this organisation, they may allocate all or part of the WG
   session to people wishing to discuss their work (e.g., with the
   objective to resolve issues and make progress). In that context, and
   as soon as the IETF agenda for a given meeting is published, the WG
   Secretary could send an e-mail to the WG mailing list asking the WG
   participants to submit requests for discussion slots at the upcoming
   WG session. Note that WG Chairs may wish that certain conditions be
   met to accept discussion's slot requests. The call for discussion
   slots should remind the WG of these conditions as well as how should
   the requests be formulated, together with a deadline for sending
   them. The call would also typically include information on when will
   the particular WG session be held during the IETF meeting noting that
   the IETF agenda is draft until being final.

   o  Collecting the discussion's slot requests

   As a preliminary step to building the WG session agenda, the WG
   Secretary could collect all the requests for discussion slots. In
   order to be able to do so, the WG Secretary should make sure that
   he/she is aware of the formulated requests by clearly indicating in
   the call for discussion slots that he/she must be one of the
   recipients of the requests. It may nevertheless happen that some
   requests are sent to the WG Chairs only. To cover that situation, the
   WG Secretary should coordinate with the Chairs to make sure the final
   list of requests for discussion slots is complete.

   o  Proposing a WG session agenda

   Based on the collected discussion's slot requests, and depending on
   the known preferences of the WG Chairs for the typical structure of
   their WG sessions, or on the objectives Chairs have for a particular
   WG session, and/or on his/her personal view, the Secretary could
   propose to the Chairs a structured agenda for the upcoming WG
   session. Following that, the WG Secretary could work with the Chairs
   to finalise the agenda in view of publishing a first draft agenda.

   o  Submitting the WG session agenda




WG Secretaries           Expires May 11, 2015                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft              WG Secretaries                November 2014


   At the deadline, or even earlier, the WG Secretary could publish the
   draft and then final agenda for the WG session. The WG Secretary
   could then inform the WG that the agenda has been published. When
   doing so, the WG Secretary could ask the WG participants to verify
   that discussion's slot requests have not been accidentally missed.
   Also, in the case where some requests have not been granted, the WG
   Secretary could inform the participants who requested the discussion
   slots, of the reason(s) why they were not allocated a slot in the
   final WG session agenda.

   o  Requesting presentations materials

   In combination with the notification of the publication of the WG
   session agenda, or separately, the WG Secretary could ask the
   individuals who were granted a discussion slot to send the material
   in support of their upcoming presentation. This request should come
   with a deadline so as to give sufficient time to upload the materials
   before the WG session.

   Optionally the request could also include information on the practice
   the WG Chairs apply if the materials fail to be delivered prior to
   the deadline.

   o  Securing Jabber relays and minute takers

   Supporting remote participation is very important. As such, the WG
   Secretary could ask for one specific volunteer: a Jabber scribe,
   responsible for acting as a gateway for remote participants, by way
   of relaying remote questions and annotating slide numbers. Also, it
   is crucial that discussions' points and decisions be written down.
   The WG Secretary could make sure that minutes will be taken. The WG
   Secretary may self-designate and/or find at least one other volunteer
   tasked with taking notes during the WG session. Securing these two
   roles in advance sets up for a successful meeting.

   For the purpose of minutes taking, the WG Secretary may suggest the
   use of the Etherpad tool (available from each WG web page at
   https://tools.ietf.org) which enables the other WG participants to
   also contribute, as well as provides immediate access to the minutes.

   o  Preparing the WG Status material

   Working Groups sessions typically start with a slot allocated to the
   Chairs during which is presented a status of the WG. The WG Secretary
   could produce part, or the totality, of the WG status slides by


WG Secretaries           Expires May 11, 2015                  [Page 6]

Internet-Draft              WG Secretaries                November 2014


   compiling the appropriate information. As part of this step, the WG
   Secretary could query the authors of WG documents to know the status
   of -and the plans they have for- their document (e.g., envisaged date
   of readiness for WG Last Call). This, mostly if not only, applies to
   WG documents the state of which is not evident. For example there is
   no apparent need to query authors of a WG document which is in IESG
   processing.

   o  Uploading the materials

   The WG Secretary could, sufficiently ahead of time, upload the
   presentations materials. This is useful both to the WG participants
   wanting to have access to the materials and to the person responsible
   for displaying the materials during the WG session.

3.1.2. WG Session Phase

   o  Before the WG session

   For the WG Chairs to enjoy their lunch, cookie, coffee, tea (or any
   other favoured drink) until the last minute, the Secretary could
   sacrifice his/her time and enter the meeting room well in advance to
   prepare the WG session. This might include: checking if blue sheets
   are available, preparing the session's material to be displayed,
   launching collaborative software environments, preparing minute
   taking, etc. The usefulness of such preparation depends of course on
   the WG and on the WG session. A WG session with a light agenda might
   not require all this. On the other hand, a WG session with an
   extremely packed agenda, and for which every minute counts, shall
   surely benefit from such preparation.

   The WG Secretary could also confirm the Jabber scribe assignment, as
   well as the minute taker assignment if applicable.

   o  During the WG session

   The WG Secretary could be responsible for displaying the material and
   running through the slides as speakers advance through their
   presentation. The WG Secretary could also act as the time keeper to
   ensure there is sufficient remaining time for all discussions to
   happen.

   In case the WG Secretary also takes minutes, performing multiple
   tasks in parallel might pose certain challenges but nothing
   insurmountable.


WG Secretaries           Expires May 11, 2015                  [Page 7]

Internet-Draft              WG Secretaries                November 2014


   o  After the WG session

   After the end of a WG session, the WG Secretary could bring the blue
   sheets to the IETF Secretariat and socialize with the very supportive
   and welcoming people composing it.

3.1.3. Post WG Session Phase

   o  Publishing the WG session minutes

   While it is highly recommended that the minutes of a WG session be
   published as quickly as possible, this might only be feasible after
   the end of the week of an IETF meeting. In any case, if the WG
   Secretary was the minute taker he/she could polish the notes taken
   (correcting typos, or even complementing missing parts with audio
   recordings) and send these to the Chairs for validation.
   Alternatively, depending on the WG Chairs' preferences, the Secretary
   could nearly immediately share with the WG the raw minutes and
   collect corrections.

   Once the WG Chairs agree on the written minutes, the Secretary could
   publish these using the means available and ask the WG participants
   to review them and inform him/her of changes that would need to be
   performed before final publication.

3.2. Continuous Tasks

   Tracking is the word dominating the tasks a WG Secretary could be
   expected to continuously perform.

   o  Recording and tracking authors' inputs

   At least on two occasions, the WG Secretary is in position to receive
   inputs from authors of Internet-Drafts concerning the status and
   plans they have for their document(s). This is during the WG session
   preparation phase (when building the WG status material) and during
   the WG session when authors sometimes communicate such plans. The WG
   Secretary should record and track this information as it is valuable
   for sketching a plan and a schedule of the actions the Chairs will
   have to take (e.g., WG document's adoption calls, WG Last Call).

   o  Recording and tracking WG Chairs' decisions

   Decisions are sometimes taken by WG Chairs during WG sessions. These
   decisions often imply some follow-up actions that the WG Chairs need


WG Secretaries           Expires May 11, 2015                  [Page 8]

Internet-Draft              WG Secretaries                November 2014


   to take. The WG Secretary could record and track the action-points
   for the Chairs, as well as remind them of these when necessary.

   o  Tracking events

   Between IETF meetings, a number of WG events, including WG document's
   adoption calls, WG Last Calls, publication of new revisions of
   Internet-Drafts, will occur. The WG Secretary could track these
   events and report progress, or deadlines to the Chairs. For the WG
   document's adoption calls and WG Last Calls, the WG Secretary could
   notify the Chairs of the end of the call together with an evaluation
   of the positions expressed on the WG mailing list in response to
   those calls. For Internet-Drafts that require a revision before being
   progressed further, the WG Secretary could also notify the Chairs
   when the expected revision is published.

   o  Watching over compliance with IETF IPR rules

   As per [2] it is important for people making IETF contributions to
   disclose relevant IPR in a timely manner. Verification that authors
   are in compliance with IETF IPR rules may for example be conducted
   prior to a WG document's adoption call or WG Last Call (see [3]). The
   WG Secretary could monitor and track responses to such verifications,
   and chase authors and contributors where necessary. Where responses
   are not forthcoming, the WG Secretary could notify the Chairs.

   o  Tracking of documents' issues

   Working Groups have issue trackers to facilitate the tracking of
   documents issues. The WG Secretary could identify the issues raised
   in a review of a WG document or during WG discussions and record the
   information in the issue tracker. The WG Secretary could liaise with
   the document editor to find which issues were resolved and how they
   were resolved and record that information.

   o  Maintaining the Datatracker and ensuring it is up to date

   An important tool in support of WG operations is the Datatracker [4].
   The WG Secretary could have the responsibility of keeping the
   Datatracker up to date so that it reflects the exact state each
   document is effectively in. See RFC 6174 [5] for further information
   on the states of IETF WG Documents. The WG Secretary could also make
   sure that the replacement status of documents is correct, and apply
   of the proper status in case it is incorrect or not indicated and
   necessary. Note that performing actions on the Datatracker requires


WG Secretaries           Expires May 11, 2015                  [Page 9]

Internet-Draft              WG Secretaries                November 2014


   greater privileges than those associated to the WG Secretary status;
   see the following section for further information.

   o  Shepherding documents

   By convention and default WG Chairs tend to be Document Shepherds.
   This may lead to overloading the WG Chairs and they should recall
   that they are allowed to assign anyone to be a Document Shepherd (see
   [6]). One option is to assign the shepherding role for some documents
   to the WG Secretary.

4. Complementary Considerations

   o  Empowerment

   When appointed as WG Secretary, the concerned person shall be
   identified as such on the WG charter page of the Datatracker.
   Additionally, his/her e-mail address shall be added both to the WG
   Chairs general alias (wgchairs@ietf.org) and to the specific WG
   Chairs alias (<wgname>-chairs@tools.ietf.org). Also, certain tasks
   described herein require the use of credentials and some rights
   associated to these. In principle, when appointed as WG Secretary,
   the concerned person is automatically given access to both the
   Session Request Tool and the Meeting Materials Manager. The WG Chairs
   should nevertheless make sure all of these elements are effective as
   they are necessary for the Secretary to perform the various tasks.

   o  Secretary versus Delegate

   As noted in the previous section, performing actions on the
   Datatracker requires greater privileges than those associated to the
   WG Secretary status. Working Group Chairs have the possibility to
   delegate part of their privileges on the Datatracker (while retaining
   them) to anyone. As a result, the person inheriting the delegation is
   identified as Delegate on the WG charter page of the Datatracker, and
   benefits from an extended scope of action. It is up to the WG Chairs
   to decide whether a Secretary should also be a Delegate or not, and
   conversely whether a Delegate is expected to also act as a Secretary
   or not. It is nevertheless preferable that if a Delegate is expected
   to act as WG Secretary, he/she also be explicitly identified as such.

   o  Secretary to WG ratio

   Although typically a WG might only have one Secretary there is no
   reason why two Secretaries might not be appointed. This might be to


WG Secretaries           Expires May 11, 2015                 [Page 10]

Internet-Draft              WG Secretaries                November 2014


   help transition a new WG Secretary into the role, before the previous
   Secretary steps down, or simply to load balance the tasks across two
   Secretaries. Reciprocally, a person may perfectly be Secretary of
   multiple WGs. This primarily depends on his/her ability to deal with
   the induced workload, noting nevertheless that synergies may be
   realised in such a situation. In any case, this document does not
   give a recommendation on what should be the appropriate value for the
   "Secretary / WG" ratio.

   o  Further delegation

   There are tasks that the WG Secretary might be expected to perform
   but in fact may further delegate. Typical examples of those tasks are
   jabber scribing and minute taking. More generally, there are
   situations where the WG Secretary is unable to perform certain tasks
   (absence at an IETF meeting, agenda conflict with the WG session,
   participation to the technical discussions during the WG session,
   ...). The WG Secretary may fall back on the Chairs for performing the
   impacted tasks but this would defeat the purpose of the Secretary's
   role. Therefore it is preferable that, in those situations, the WG
   Secretary further delegates those tasks, in agreement with the
   Chairs.

   As a final consideration, WG Secretaries are invited to the IETF WG
   Chairs' lunch tutorial held during IETF meetings, usually on
   Wednesdays. The WG Secretaries are also welcome to attend, when it is
   scheduled, the Sunday afternoon training on WG Leadership.

5. Conclusions and Perspectives

   Section 3 has listed the typical functions and responsibilities of WG
   Secretaries. The role of a given WG Secretary can range from a few of
   these to the full spectrum of them, and even beyond. In that regard,
   there is a number of additional WG related events for which the
   support of the WG Secretary would be useful. Those for example
   include planning and setting for WG interim meetings, design team
   meetings, etc. Nevertheless, some tasks described herein apply to
   these contexts.

   It is essential that over time the WG Secretary and Chairs build
   trust to facilitate an effective and productive working relationship.
   No secret recipe was however given here on how to achieve such a
   relationship. Nevertheless, making clear expectations from both
   perspectives and clear communication, the higher the probability of
   an efficient and productive relationship. In that context, while the


WG Secretaries           Expires May 11, 2015                 [Page 11]

Internet-Draft              WG Secretaries                November 2014


   WG Secretary function can be viewed as being a support function to
   the Chairs, it is crucial that the Chairs also provide support to the
   Secretary as needed.

   The WG Secretary's role is not mandatory in WGs, hence no formal
   selection process exists and it is also difficult to identify a
   general practice for that purpose. Reality is that WG Chairs select
   their Secretary in different ways. Nevertheless, to become a WG
   Secretary, the first step is to be active and involved in the WG of
   interest as well as show willingness and have time to dedicate to
   that function.

   While the apparent value of a good WG Secretary might be in the
   delegation of tasks that the Chairs are expected to manage and in the
   smoothed operation of WGs, this role carries a second important
   value. As the WG Secretary develops the knowledge to fulfil the above
   functions and responsibilities, he/she will be in a position to both
   extend the scope of his/her actions, and to be more and more involved
   in WG operation and decision-making. The WG Secretary's role is
   therefore an excellent means for training individuals in the art of
   WG operation, and ideally towards the role of WG Chair.

6. Security Considerations

   Delegation based on trust is not expected to introduce security
   issues.

   Nevertheless, while the WG Chairs may delegate a number of tasks to
   the Secretary, they maintain the overall responsibility and
   accountability over the WG and the decisions and actions that are
   taken. As such, it is recommended that the WG Secretary does not
   operate without the agreement of the Chairs, or at least without the
   confidence that his/her choices and actions are in line with the
   Chairs views on any given matter.

   In the context of his/her functions, a WG Secretary will have access
   to the Session Request Tool and to the Meeting Materials Manager.
   This access is in principle automatically given. The WG Chairs might
   also give the Secretary the rights to perform certain actions onto
   the WG Datatracker. The WG Chairs should know how to revoke both the
   latter and former privileges.

   Also, the WG Secretary might have access to sensitive information,
   usually only destined to the Chairs. Therefore, it is very important



WG Secretaries           Expires May 11, 2015                 [Page 12]

Internet-Draft              WG Secretaries                November 2014


   that a WG Secretary acts with ethics, respecting the privacy of these
   data.

7. IANA Considerations

   This document does not require any action from the IANA.

8. References

8.1. Informative References

   [1]   Bradner, S., "IETF Working Group Guidelines and Procedures",
         BCP 25, RFC 2418, September 1998.

   [2]   Bradner, S., "Intellectual Property Rights in IETF Technology",
         BCP 79, RFC 3979, March 2005.

   [3]   Polk, T., and Saint-Andre, P., "Promoting Compliance with
         Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) Disclosure Rules", RFC 6702,
         August 2012.

   [4]   "The IETF Datatracker tool", Web Application:
         https://datatracker.ietf.org/, Version 5.7.2, November 2014.

   [5]   Juskevicius, E., "Definition of IETF Working Group Document
         States", RFC 6174, March 2011.

   [6]   Levkowetz, H., Meyer, D., Eggert, L., and Mankin, A., "Document
         Shepherding from Working Group Last Call to Publication", RFC
         4858, May 2007.

9. Acknowledgments

   The authors thank a number of Working Group Secretaries (in
   alphabetical order) who have contributed to the development of this
   document: Daniele Ceccarelli, Luigi Iannone, Subramanian Moonesamy,
   Ines Robles, and Sam Weiler. The authors also thank Scott Bradner for
   his thorough review and useful input. The authors also thank the
   following WG Chairs for their reviews and comments: Lou Berger,
   Spencer Dawkins, and Hannes Tschofenig, as well as Loa Andersson for
   also acting as Document Shepherd. Finally, the authors thank Adrian
   Farrel, as Area Director, for sponsoring this document.

   This document was prepared using 2-Word-v2.0.template.dot.



WG Secretaries           Expires May 11, 2015                 [Page 13]

Internet-Draft              WG Secretaries                November 2014


Contributors' Addresses

   Daniele Ceccarelli
   Ericsson
   Via Melen 77, Genova, Italy

   Email: daniele.ceccarelli@ericsson.com


   Luigi Iannone
   Telecom ParisTech
   23, Avenue d'Italie, 75013 Paris, France

   Email: ggx@gigix.net


   Subramanian Moonesamy
   76, Ylang Ylang Avenue
   Quatre Bornes
   Mauritius

   Email: sm+ietf@elandsys.com


   Ines Robles
   Universidad Tecnologica Nacional - FRM
   Rodriguez 273, Mendoza, Argentina

   Email: ines.robles@gridtics.frm.utn.edu.ar


   Samuel Weiler
   Parsons
   7110 Samuel Morse Drive
   Columbia, Maryland, 21046, USA

   Email: weiler@tislabs.com










WG Secretaries           Expires May 11, 2015                 [Page 14]

Internet-Draft              WG Secretaries                November 2014


Authors' Addresses

   Martin Vigoureux
   Alcatel-Lucent

   Email: martin.vigoureux@alcatel-lucent.com


   Daniel King
   Old Dog Consulting

   Email: daniel@olddog.co.uk


   Carlos Pignataro
   Cisco Systems, Inc.
   7200-12 Kit Creek Road
   Research Triangle Park, NC 27709, USA

   Email: cpignata@cisco.com



























WG Secretaries           Expires May 11, 2015                 [Page 15]

