INTERNET-DRAFT                                   W. Biemolt,         SEC
NGTRANS WG                                       M. Kaat,            SEC
November2000                                     T. Larder,        CISCO
                                                 H. Steenman,       AT&T
                                                 R. van der Pol, SURFnet
                                                 G. Tsirtsis,         BT
                                                 Y. Sekiya,          ISI
                                                 A. Durand,          SUN
                                                 K. Yamamoto,        IIJ
                                                 D. Finkerson,       UNL
                                                 A. Hazeltine,    ADVSYS
   




	On overview of the introduction of IPv6 in the Internet

      <draft-ietf-ngtrans-introduction-to-ipv6-transition-05.txt>


Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   Distribution of this memo is unlimited.

Abstract

   This document is a guide to the introduction of IPv6 in the IPv4 
   based Internet or Intranets. Several general issues to start IPv6 
   networking in a predominantly IPv4 world are discussed, such as IPv6
   addresses, IPv6 DNS and routing issues. Short descriptions are given
   of the different transition tools and mechanisms that
   translate between IPv6 and IPv4 and/or tunnel IPv6 over IPv4. The 
   remainder of this document describes how IPv6 can be introduced in 
   various environments, such as ISPs, Internet Exchanges and end user 
   environments. Suggestions are given on the use of the different 
   translation and migration tools in each environment.




Table of Contents

   1. Introduction
   2. The 6bone
   3. Basic transition mechanism
   3.1 Dual IP stack
   3.2 Tunneling
   4. The Tools In System Solutions
   4.1 Connecting IPv6 islands
   4.1.1 Configured tunnels
   4.1.2 Automatic tunnels
   4.1.3 Tunnel Broker
   4.1.4 6TO4
   4.1.5 6OVER4
   4.2 Communication between IPv4 and IPv6 nodes.
   4.2.1 Dual stack model
   4.2.2 Limited Dual stack model
   4.2.3 SOCKS64
   4.2.4 SIIT
   4.2.5 NAT-PT
   4.2.6 BIS
   4.2.7 Transport Relay Translator
   4.2.8 DSTM
   5. Case Studies
   5.1 Large organization with a lot of global IPv4 addresses
   5.1.1 Motivations
   5.1.2 Prerequisites
   5.1.3 Network infrastructure 
   5.1.4 dual stack servers
   5.1.5 dual stack clients
   5.1.6 IPv6 aware applications
   5.1.7 Connection to the IPv6 Internet
   5.1.8 IPv6 only hosts
   5.1.9 IPv6 only node and IPv4 only server
   5.2 Large organization with few global IPv4 addresses (a /24 or less)
   5.3 The extranet case
   5.4 Office or home network with ONE global IPv4 address
   5.5 New network with brand new services
   5.6 Introducing IPv6 in an ISP environment
   5.6.1 Introducing IPv6 in the core network
   5.6.2 Introducing IPv6 in the customer access network
   5.7 Internet Exchange
   5.7.1 The traditional IX model
   5.7.1.1 Address space:
   5.7.1.2 Addressing infrastructure on IX:
   5.7.1.3 Updating the IPv6 registries:
   5.7.1.4 BGP announcements:
   5.7.2 The addressing IX model
   5.7.2.1 Address space:
   5.7.2.2 Addressing infrastructure on IX:
   5.7.2.3 Updating the IPv6 registries:
   5.7.2.4 Contracts with global transit ISPs (TLA ISPs)
   5.7.2.5 BGP announcements:
   6. Security considerations
   7. References
   8. Authors' addresses
   Appendix A - IPv6 Address Issues 
   A.1 IPv6 Address Allocation
   A.1.1 Site local vs global addresses
   A.1.2 Obtaining IPv6 Address Space
   A.2 IPv6 Registration Issues
   A.3 Example of IPv6 address usage within a site /48 prefix
   Appendix B. IPv6 and DNS
   B.1 Forward mapping
   B.2 Reverse mapping
   B.3 Implementations
   Appendix C. IPv6 routing issues






   1. Introduction
 
   The goal of this document is to provide an overview of several
   transition mechanisms developed within the IETF NGtrans
   working group. It is not intended to describe the complete
   migration from IPv4 to IPv6 for the whole Internet.
   It is an attempt to describe the possibilities
   of introducing IPv6 in a predominantly IPv4 environment
   and having both IPv6 and IPv4 connectivity.

   The scope of this document is limited to IPv6 unicast transition.
   Migration of IPv4 to IPv6 multicast environments is not
   considered.

   Section 2 provide some information and pointers about the 6bone,
   an IPv6 tested.
    
   Sections 3 and 4 provide short descriptions of the different
   transition tools and mechanisms that translate between
   IPv6 and IPv4 and/or tunnel IPv6 over IPv4.
    
   Section 5 will discuss how IPv6 can be introduced in
   typical environments.

   Appendices A, B & C discuss issues about IPv6 address allocation,
   IPv6 addresses in the DNS and IPv6 routing protocols.
    
    
   
2. The 6bone

   The 6bone is an IPv6 Testbed that is an outgrowth of the
   IETF IPng project that created the IPv6 protocols intended
   to eventually replace the current Internet network layer
   protocols known as IPv4.
   The 6bone is currently a world wide informal collaborative
   project, informally operated with oversight from the "NGtrans"
   (IPv6 Transition) Working Group of the IETF.
   The 6bone started as a virtual network (using IPv6 over IPv4
   tunneling/encapsulation) operating over the IPv4-based Internet
   to support IPv6 transport, and is slowly migrating to native
   links for IPv6 transport.
   The initial 6bone focus was on testing of standards and
   implementations, while the current focus is more on testing
   of transition and operational procedures.
   The 6bone operates under the IPv6 Testing Address Allocation
   (see  RFC 2471).

   A document describing the 6bone routing guidelines has been
   published as RFC 2772.

   More information can be found on http://www.6bone.net

   By now, the 6bone is not the only IPv6 backbone. Other
   backbones, academic and commercial are offering IPv6 services.







3. Basic transition mechanism


    [RFC2893] defines some basic mechanism:

   
    - Dual IP stack. Providing complete support for both IPv4 and
      IPv6 in hosts or routers.

    - IPv6 over IPv4 tunneling. Encapsulating IPv6 packets within
      IPv4 headers to carry them over IPv4 routing infrastructures.



       +-------------------+  +--------+
       | application       |  | IPv6   |
       +-------------------+  | domain |   +--------+
       |  TCP / UDP        |  +--------*---*        |
       +-------------------+               |  IPv4  |
       |    IPv4 | IPv6    |               |networks|
       +-------------------+               |        *---*--------+
       |   network layer   |               +--------+   |  IPv6  |
       |                   |                            | domain |
       +-------------------+                            +--------+

       a. dual stack node      b. route IPv6 over IPv4 only networks


3.1 Dual IP stack

   Dual stack nodes will be able to interoperate directly with both
   IPv4 and IPv6 nodes. They must provide a resolver library capable of
   dealing with the IPv4 A records as well as the IPv6 AAAA or A6 records.
   When both A and AAAA or A6 records are listed in the DNS there are three
   different options [RFC1933, RFC2893], (i) return only IPv6 address(es), (ii)
   return only IPv4 address(es) or (iii) return both IPv4 and IPv6
   addresses. The selection of which address type to return, or, in
   which order can affect what type of IP traffic is generated. 

   The appellation "Dual Stack" in itself is somehow misleading.
   Most implementation of IPv6 do not offer two completely distinct
   TCP/IP stacks, one for IPv4 and one for IPv6, but an hybrid stack
   in which most of the code is shared between the two protocol suites.

   However, as the term "Dual Stack" is widely used in other documents,
   this text will keep on using it.



3.2 Tunneling

   IPv6 nodes (or networks) that are separated by IPv4 infrastructures
   can build a virtual link by configuring a tunnel. IPv6 packets going
   towards another IPv6 domain will then be encapsulated within IPv4
   packets. The tunnel end-points are two IPv4 addresses and
   two IPv6 addresses. Two types of tunneling can be employed:
   configured and automatic. Configured tunnels are created by
   manual configuration. The 6bone itself is an example of a network
   containing mainly configured tunnels.
   Automatic tunnels on the other hand do not need manual configuration.
   The tunnel end-points are automatically determined by using IPv4
   compatible IPv6 addresses [RFC2373].

   Since most of the known tunneling techniques described later
   are based on IPv4 addresses at both end of the tunnel,
   many of the techniques cannot work if an IPv4 address
   translation happens between the two endpoints of the tunnel.


4. The Tools In System Solutions


   When introducing IPv6 in the Internet, one faces two different
   sets of problems. The first one is related to having IPv6
   communications among two or more IPv6 islands isolated in the
   IPv4 world. The second set is related to the establishment of
   (or some sort of) communications between the existing IPv4 world 
   and the new IPv6 world.
   
   In the first set of problems, solutions are generally based
   on dual stacks routers and IPv6 in IPv4 tunnels.

   Mechanism to solve the second set of problems rely on dual stack
   techniques, application level gateways, NAT technology or on
   temporary allocation of IPv4 address and IPv4 in IPv6 tunneling.

   This document define some generic criteria to compare tools.

   Applicability scope: where the transition tool applies to:
     site, host.

   A solution with scope of site generally enables a whole site
   to connect, where a scope of a host enables the connection of
   a single host.

   IPv4 requirements: what is required in the IPv4 context
   to make the tool work.

   IPv4 address requirements: This tries to identify how many
   IPv4 addresses are required. In some contexts, the need
   for many IPv4 addresses can be a no-go criteria.

   IPv6 requirements: what is required in the IPv6 context
   to make the tool work.

   IPv6 address requirements:  This identifies how many IPv6 addresses
   are required for this specific solution.

   Host requirements:  What is needed for the hosts to participate
   in this solution.

   Router requirements: What is needed for the routers to enable
   this solution.

   NAT impact: Will this solution work if deployed behind a NAT box?

   Other requirements: other requirements not listed above.



4.1 Connecting IPv6 islands

   The mechanisms described here are designed to enable IPv6
   communication between IPv6 islands isolated in the IPv4 world.
   All of these rely on tunnels.


4.1.1 Configured tunnels

   Manually configured tunnels can be used to connect IPv6 hosts or
   networks over an IPv4 infrastructure. Typically configured tunnels
   are used between sites where traffic will be exchanged regularly.
   Note that a site can be limited to a single host.
   

   Applicability scope:        site 
   IPv4 requirements:          IPv4 inter connectivity between sites 
   IPv4 address requirements:  >= 1 per site
   IPv6 requirements:          none
   IPv6 address requirements:  end node need one IPv6 address
   Host requirements:          IPv6 stack or IPv4/IPv6 stack
   Router requirements:        IPv4/IPv6 stack
   NAT impact:                 will not work if the tunnel has to cross
                               a NAT BOX.
                               may work if the tunnel endpoint is
                               collocated with the NAT box
   Other requirements:         none


4.1.2 Automatic tunnels

   Automatic tunnels are used as configured tunnels to connect separated
   IPv6 hosts or networks. Automatic tunnels are created when needed 
   and broken up when no longer necessary. Typically automatic tunnels
   are used between individual hosts or between networks where only 
   incidentally there is a need for traffic exchange. A pre-requisite 
   for the use of automatic tunnels is the existence of IPv4 compatible 
   addresses for the IPv6 hosts that need intercommunication. These 
   addresses allow the hosts to derive the IPv4 addresses of the tunnel
   endpoints from the IPv6 addresses.


   Applicability scope:        host
   IPv4 requirements:          IPv4 interconnectivity between sites 
   IPv4 address requirements:  1 per host
   IPv6 requirements:          none 
   IPv6 address requirements:  IPv4 compatible addresses 
   Host requirements:          IPv4/IPv6 stack 
   Router requirements:        none
   NAT impact:                 will not work if the tunnels have to cross
                               a NAT BOX
   Other requirements:         none

   As this solution requires one IPv4 address per host, its domain
   of application is extremely limited.


4.1.3 Tunnel Broker

   Configuring tunnels usually require cooperation of the two parties
   to set up the correct tunnel end-points. The tunnel broker model
   helps people collect the necessary information to
   set up the tunnels. A tunnel broker can be viewed as an IPv6 ISP
   offering connectivity through IPv6 over IPv4 tunnels.
   Current implementations are web based tools that allows
   interactive setup of an IPv6 over IPv4 tunnel. By requesting a
   tunnel, the tunnel client gets assigned IPv6 addresses out of the
   address space of the tunnel provider.
   It can request either a single address or a network prefix
   if a site is to be connected.
   DNS will be updated automatically. 
   The created tunnel will provide IPv6 connectivity between the tunnel
   provider's IPv6 environment and the isolated host/site.

   Applicability scope:        host/site
   IPv4 requirements:          none specific 
   IPv4 address requirements:  1 
   IPv6 requirements:          none 
   IPv6 address requirements:  none in the isolated client case
                               a prefix allocation if there is a network
                               to connect. 
   Host requirements:          IPv4/IPv6 stack, IPv4 Web browser 
   Router requirements:        none
   NAT impact:                 will not work if the tunnel has to cross
                               a NAT BOX
                               may work if the tunnel client is
                               collocated with the NAT box
 
   Other requirements:         Tunnel server


4.1.4 6TO4

   The 6to4 [6TO4] tool is applicable for the interconnection of
   isolated IPv6 domains in an IPv4 world. The egress router of the
   IPv6 domain creates a tunnel to the other IPv6 domain.
   The IPv4 endpoints
   of the tunnel are identified in the prefix of the IPv6 domain. This
   prefix is made up of a unique 6TO4 TLA plus an NLA that identifies
   the site by the IPv4 address of the translating egress router.

   Another interesting effect of 6to4 is that it automatically derives
   a /48 IPv6 from an IPv4 address. With this mechanism, sites can
   start to deploy IPv6 without having to ask for IPv6 address space
   from the registries. It is also very valuable in the absence
   of IPv6 ISPs as it reduces to zero the management of tunnels.

   Applicability scope:        site 
   IPv4 requirements:          IPv4 interconnectivity between sites 
   IPv4 address requirements:  >= 1 per site
   IPv6 requirements:          globally unique 6to4 prefix (TLA624)
   IPv6 address requirements:  none 
   Host requirements:          IPv6 stack 
   Router requirements:        implementation of special forwarding and 
                               decapsulation rules
   NAT impact:                 will not work if the tunnel has to cross
                               a NAT BOX
                               may work if the 6to4 router is
                               collocated with the NAT box
   Other requirements:         creation of DNS record that reflects 6TO4
                               prefix and "IPv4" address NLA

4.1.5 6OVER4

   6over4 [RFC2529] interconnects isolated IPv6 hosts in a site through
   IPv6 in IPv4 encapsulation without explicit tunnels. A virtual link
   is created using an IPv4 multicast group with organizational local
   scope. IPv6 multicast addresses are mapped to IPv4 multicast
   addresses to be able to do Neighbor Discovery. To route between the
   IPv6 Internet and the 6over4 domain in an organization, a router
   needs to be configured as 6over4 on at least one interface.

   Applicability scope:        host 
   IPv4 requirements:          IPv4 multicast connectivity between hosts
   IPv4 address requirements:  1 per host
   IPv6 requirements:          none 
   IPv6 address requirements:  none
   Host requirements:          IPv4/IPv6 stack
   Router requirements:        6over4 configuration to route between
                               different virtual links and/or virtual
                               links and the IPv6 Internet 
   NAT impact:                 will probably not work easily.
                               Will have to make IPv4 multicast
                               work across NAT first.
   Other requirements:         To connect IPv6 hosts on different
                               physical links, IPv4 Multicast routing 
                               must be enabled on the routers connecting
                               the links

4.2 Communication between IPv4 and IPv6 nodes.

   When IPv6 islands are installed and connected together using
   one or several of the above mechanism, communication between
   IPv6 hosts is enabled. Communication between an IPv4 host and
   an IPv6 host may also be important to establish. This can be done
   in several ways, either by relaying at the application level,
   or translating at the network layer or by temporarily allocating
   an IPv4 address to the IPv6 node.

   Note on Protocol Translation:

   Typically a protocol translator maps the fields in the packets header
   of one of the protocols to semantically similar fields in the packet
   header of the other protocol.
   A set of rules for the translation between IPv4
   and IPv6 is defined in the SIIT [RFC2765] proposal discussed
   below. It should be noted that in IPv4 applications, it is not uncommon
   that the application has knowledge of information from the network
   layer (like address length or the address itself). An example of this
   is FTP. This makes it necessary not only to translate the network
   layer packets but also to translate at the application layer.


4.2.1 Dual stack model

   In the dual stack model, all IPv6 nodes, hosts or routers, are
   dual stacked. That way, communication to IPv4 nodes takes
   place with the IPv4 stack and communication with the IPv6 world
   takes place with the IPv6 stack. The limitation of this approach
   is the need to allocate an IPv4 address to each new IPv6
   enable device.

   Applicability scope:        site 
   IPv4 requirements:          IPv4 addressing plan and
                               IPv4 routing plan
   IPv4 address requirements:  1 per host, many per router
   IPv6 requirements:          IPv6 addressing plan and
                               IPv6 routing plan
   IPv6 address requirements:  1 per host, many per router
   Host requirements:          IPv4/IPv6 stack
   Router requirements:        IPv4/IPv6 stack, IPv6 routing protocols
   NAT impact:                 IPv6 communications will be end to end.
                               IPv4 ones won't. 
   Other requirements:         


4.2.2 Limited Dual stack model

   In the limited dual stack model, only the "server" nodes are
   dual-stacked. The new "client nodes" are IPv6 only. A server node
   is defined as a node hosting enterprise Internet services, such as
   file sharing, DNS, web... A client node is defined as a node
   not offering those services but wanting to use them.
   With this approach, many less IPv4 addresses are used,
   but the communication between an IPv4 only client node and an IPv6
   only server is broken. To re-establish this communication,
   proxies are installed for strategic services.

   Applicability scope:        site 
   IPv4 requirements:          use existing IPv4 infrastructure
   IPv4 address requirements:  1 per server node
   IPv6 requirements:          IPv6 addressing plan and
                               IPv6 routing plan
   IPv6 address requirements:  1 per new host, many per new router
   Host requirements:          IPv4/IPv6 stack on servers, IPv6 stack
                               on new clients
   Router requirements:        IPv4/IPv6 stack, IPv6 routing protocols
   NAT impact:                 ???
                               box and the proxies.
   Other requirements:         


4.2.3 SOCKS64

   The SOCKS Gateway [SOCKS-GATE] tool is a system that accepts
   enhanced [SOCKS-EXT] SOCKS [RFC1928] connections from IPv4 hosts
   and relays it to IPv4 or IPv6 hosts. Especially for "socksified"
   sites who already use SOCKS aware clients and a SOCKS server, SOCKS
   Gateway provides an easy way to let IPv4 hosts connect to IPv6 hosts.
   No DNS modifications or address mapping is needed. The principle can
   also be used to allow IPv6 hosts to connect to IPv4 hosts, IPv4 hosts
   over IPv6 networks and IPv6 hosts over IPv4 networks. The later 
   cases resemble tunnel techniques without possible problems with
   fragmentation or hop limits.

   Applicability scope:        site
   IPv4 requirements:          none specific 
   IPv4 address requirements:  1 per host
   IPv6 requirements:          >= 1 per site
   IPv6 address requirements:  none
   Host requirements:          clients should be "socksified"
   Router requirements:        none
   NAT impact:                 ???
   Other requirements:         dual stack SOCKS server


4.2.4 SIIT

   The [SIIT] protocol describes a method to translate between IPv6 and
   IPv4. Translation is limited to the IP packet header. The work does
   not describe a method to assign a temporary IPv4 address to the IPv6
   node. The translator is operating in a stateless mode, which means
   that translation needs to be done for every packet.

   Applicability scope:        site
   IPv4 requirements:          none
   IPv4 address requirements:  1 temporary per IPv6 host 
   IPv6 requirements:          none
   IPv6 address requirements:  IPv4-mapped and IPv4-translated addresses
                               to identify IPv4 nodes and IPv6 capable 
                               nodes respectively 
   Host requirements:          IPv6 stack 
   Router requirements:        none
   NAT impact:                 ???
   Other requirements:         none


4.2.5 NAT-PT

   NAT-PT, defined in [RFC2766] address the communication between
   IPv6 only and IPv4 only hosts. The communication is realized by use
   of a dedicated device that does the translation between IPv4 and IPv6
   addresses and keeps state during the time of the session.
   The NAT-PT device also includes an application layer gateway to make
   translation possible between IPv4 and IPv6 DNS requests and answers.

   Applicability scope:        site
   IPv4 requirements:          none 
   IPv4 address requirements:  >=1 per site 
   IPv6 requirements:          none 
   IPv6 address requirements:  none 
   Host requirements:          IPv6 stack 
   Router requirements:        none, but the router might be the NAT-PT
                               device
   NAT impact:                 ???
   Other requirements:         none


4.2.6 BIS

   The Bump-In-The-Stack [RFC2767] model allows for the use of non IPv6
   capable applications on an IPv4 host to communicate with
   IPv6 only hosts. Added to the IPv4 stack are three modules
   that intervene between the application and the network, an
   extension to the name resolver, an address mapper and a translator.
   The main idea is that when an IPv4 application needs to communicate
   with an IPv6 only host, the IPv6 address of that host is mapped into 
   an IPv4 address out of a pool local to the dual stack hosts. The 
   IPv4 packet generated for the communication is translated into an 
   IPv6 packet according to SIIT.
   One can view Bump-in-the-stack as a particular implementation
   of NAT-PT within the IP stack of a host.
   Note that a similar technique can be implemented at the library
   level on a dual stack host.

   Applicability scope:        host
   IPv4 requirements:          none specific 
   IPv4 address requirements:  pool of private address space per host 
   IPv6 requirements:          none 
   IPv6 address requirements:  none 
   Host requirements:          IPv6/IPv4 stack plus extensions 
   Router requirements:        none
   NAT impact:                 ???
   Other requirements:         none


4.2.7 Transport Relay Translator

   Transport Relay Translator defined in [TRT] enables direct
   communication between IPv6 hosts and IPv4 hosts. This
   mechanism is somehow similar to NAT-PT, but does the
   translation ant the transport layer, not the IP layer.
   There should be a dedicated box for a site to relay
   a TCP/IPv6 connection and a TCP/IPv4 connection.
   Also, there should be a DNS server which
   can map IPv4 addresses to IPv6 addresses. No modification is
   necessary for IPv6 hosts and IPv4 hosts. For scalability, 
   multiple dedicated boxes can be installed for a site with
   multiple dummy IPv6 prefixes. UDP traffic can be relayed by
   the same technique as that of TCP.

   Applicability scope:        site
   IPv4 requirements:          none 
   IPv4 address requirements:  1 per site 
   IPv6 requirements:          none
   IPv6 address requirements:  One dummy prefix out of the site address
   Host requirements:          none
   Router requirements:        none, but an intermediate device must be
                               a transport relay translator
   NAT impact:                 ???
   Other requirements:         DNS servers which can map IPv4 addresses
                               to IPv6 addresses


4.2.8 DSTM

   Dual Stack Transition Mechanism [DSTM] is a mechanism that
   allows a dual stack node which IPv4 stack is enable but not
   yet configured to temporarily acquire an IPv4 address to
   communicate with IPv4 only applications.

   The main idea is that when an IPv4/IPv6 host needs an IPv4
   address, it requests one for the duration of the
   communication to a DSTM server. The communication with
   the DSTM server is made on top of IPv6.

   In the absence of IPv4 internal routing  infrastructure,
   the dual stack host will encapsulate IPv4 packets in IPv6 packets
   to a tunnel endpoint that will decapsulate them and inject them
   in the IPv4 infrastructure. This encapsulation is done by a DTI
   virtual interface.

   Communication initiated from an IPv4 node to a DSTM node
   which IPv4 stack is not yet configured is not supported
   at the moment but will be defined in future work.

   Applicability scope:        site 
   IPv4 requirements:          none specific 
   IPv4 address requirements:  >= 1 per site 
   IPv6 requirements:          DHCPv6 extensions [DHCPv6-EXT]
   IPv6 address requirements:  none 
   Host requirements:          IPv4/IPv6 stack
   Router requirements:        none
   NAT impact:                 ???
   Other requirements:         IPv4 routing infrastructure or
                               tunnel end-points to decapsulate
                               IPv4 in IPv6 packets.



5. Case Studies

   This section will describe some possible transitions scenarios
   for some typical cases. Neither the list of cases nor the lists
   of solutions are exhaustive.

5.1 Large organization with a lot of global IPv4 addresses

   The scenario this is intended to address envisions a site
   with a substantial number of globally addressable
   IPv4 addresses, certainly enough to meet their immediate needs.
   We can imagine this to be a fairly large installation,
   perhaps using a /16 IPv4 addresses and one that has
   a fairly well developed infrastructure.

5.1.1 Motivations

   Such a site may be motivated to begin the integration
   of IPv6 into their network for a number of reasons:

   - They wish to remain at the forefront of technology.
   - They wish to maintain and where possible restore end-to-end
     connectivity. They see Nat's in their future and wish
     to prevent this from happening.
   - They believe there will be IPv6 only devices appearing
     at their installation and wish to be prepared for this
     technology shift.
   - Even though they have sufficient address space
     to meet their data needs for the immediate future,
     they do not have enough to transition their
     telephone system to IP.
   - They have made a strategic decision to implement IPsec
     and believe IPv6 is the best platform.

5.1.2 Prerequisites

   There are considerations that need to be met for this to be a workable  
   installation. Any attempt to integrate IPv6 cannot disrupt their current
   network. All of the IPv4 connectivity and functionality must continue
   to operate. This would include for instance not putting code into key
   routers that would cause them to fail. Installing IPv6 must not impact
   performance of anyone but those selected to test the IPv6 infrastructure.
   It is all right that their v6 performance does not match their v4
   performance, for the moment.

5.1.3 Network infrastructure

   Given that they are so motivated and have those conditions how might this
   integration begin to take place? The most likely situation is that
   there will be a small section of their network that will be made IPv6
   capable. Various tools and configurations can be tested in this area
   and as they prove stable and useful they will be extended until
   they cover the entire infrastructure. It is likely that this will 
   happen from the core of the network out, at least where installation
   is driven by the existing networking staff.

   Let us suppose that the network is made of a core set of routers
   that are redundantly interconnected. This may be an ATM core,
   it may utilize a gigabit or 100 megabit switched core,
   and it may have some POS or be some combination of all of these.
   In general each router will serve multiple wiring closets where
   the layer 2-switched infrastructure resides. Again for redundancy
   these switches are often connected to multiple routers. 

   Within this structure the decision to incorporate IPv6 might
   well proceed in the following manner. The first step would be
   to obtain and address range from some provider. This might be
   the 6bone or it might be from the sites network provider.
   Increasingly there are options for the allocation of addresses,
   in any case asking providers for such space is a good idea as
   it will tend to motivate them to obtain the space to make
   available to customers.
   Most likely the site will be allocated a /48 range,
   e.g. 3FFE:3700:0101::/48. This is an example of a 6bone
   allocation. This would give that manager the equivalent
   of the IPv4 /16 they are already in possession of.
   With the difference of course that each subnet now
   has 64 bits of host space available.

   Having obtained the network number (and note that they
   may even get more then one prefix if they have multiple
   connectors) the next step would be to determine which
   of the core or edge router nodes will be upgraded to
   a dual stack IP implementation that supports both IPv4
   and IPv6. Often the router selected will not be a
   critically important router, perhaps one somewhat on
   the periphery of the network. This is because the code
   that supports IPv6 may not be believed to be as stable
   as the mainstream code used in critical routers.
   However we may reasonably assume that the code is stable
   enough that a router running that load and configured
   to support IPv6 is stable enough to be attached to the
   core of the network.

   We would now have a situation that looks something like this:

                       ____________
                      /            \
                     /              \
                    /  IPv4 routed   \
                    \      core      /
                     \              /
                      \            /
                       ------------
                            ||
                            ||
                            ||
                            ||
                            ||Int1
                            ||
                         --------  Int0        -------------
                        | Router |____________|  IPv6switch |
                        |  R4/6  |             -------------
                         --------              | | | | | | |
                                               | | | | | | |
                                                   Hosts



   The configuration in the router called R4/6 would allow
   both IPv4 and IPv6 traffic to pass to hosts attached
   to IPv4 and IPv6 enabled interfaces. For instance on
   the interface labeled Int0 (assumed to be Ethernet)
   the following statements
   would both be in the interface configuration:
	ip address xxxx.xxxx.xxxx.xxxx/16
	ip address 3ffe:3700:101::0/64 eui-64.
   These jointly provide IPv4 and IPv6 connectivity.
   The IPv6 address instructs the router to determine
   its host address based on its mac address. This would
   not be necessary; the actual host address could be manually
   configured as well. Router R4/6 might also be configured
   to do prefix-advertisement out of that Ethernet interface.
   While this leaves out some detail of the router configuration,
   details will of course be platform dependant; fundamentally
   that Ethernet is now IPv6 capable.

   Assuming that there is a backbone network to connect to,
   the interface labeled Int1 might also be configured with
   both IPv4 and IPv6 addresses. If this is an ATM network,
   with an ATM connected provider a point-to-point PVC could
   be configured that allowed native IPv6 connectivity to that
   router from the provider. Any other layer 2 technologies
   can also bring native IPv6 service to R4/6.
   If a native IPv6 connection can not be set up, a tunnel
   could be constructed out of that router using the Int1
   interface at the local tunnel end point.

   Once the router is configured to forward IPv6 traffic
   routing must also be configured. This can be as simple
   as a static default route pointing to the IPv6 provider.
   External routing can also be done using BGP4+.
   There is nothing particularly different about configuring
   an IPv4 BGP session and an IPv6 BGP session, aside of course
   from understanding how the addresses have been allocated.
   Should there be more then one internal IPv6 router an IGP
   will also have to be configured. Again this is not different
   from setting up an IPv4 IGP. Which IGP is chosen will be
   determined by the implementations available in the router,
   the preferences of the network administrator and the
   complexity of the topology.

   Having done this much one final step remains before hosts
   are introduced to this network. As should be obvious,
   dealing with IPv6 addresses is difficult. It is much
   better to construct names. The next step should be to
   obtain and operate a DNS server that is capable of
   handling both A records and AAAA records.
   There are a couple of ways DNS can be handled within
   the network. One approach is to create an IPv6 specific
   sub-domain, for instance v6test.xxx.yyy, point the primary
   name server at the site toward one specifically for this
   domain and populate it with AAAA records.
   The DNS administrator should work with the provider to get
   the reverse delegations done. It would also be possible
   to have hosts within the domain xxx.yyy and have both A
   and AAAA records populating the existing nameserver.
   This does now make the community aware of the IPv6
   availability of systems.

   At this point then there is an operational IPv6 network
   at this site. Anyone connecting to the switch labeled
   ipv6switch can send and receive IPv6 traffic as well as
   IPv4 traffic. Other links in the site network can be
   also upgraded to support IPv6. At this stage, some
   IPv6 internal routing must be in place.

   This scenario will now introduce a step by step approach
   To introduce hosts and services in this network.

5.1.4 Dual stack servers

   The first step is to upgrade some enterprise servers to support
   a dual stack, IPv4 and IPv6.

   The dual stack servers will still serve the existing IPv4 clients.

   Note: It may be a good practice not to use stateless auto-configuration
   on the servers when the applications they run store IP addresses
   in configuration files. If the IPv6 addresses are
   derived from the MAC address of the NIC card and this one is
   changed, the IPv6 addresses of the server will change and the
   application may very well be confused if the configuration files are
   not updated as well.

5.1.5 dual stack clients

   The second step is to get a dual stack IPv4/IPv6 on some clients which are
   on the IPv6 ready link.

   Stateless auto-configuration is very convenient for those clients to lower
   the administration burden.

   At this stage, the enterprise DNS should be populated with IPv6 addresses.

5.1.6 IPv6 aware applications

   Now that some clients and some servers can communicate with IPv6,
   it is time to obtain, setup and configure IPv6 aware applications.
   In the dual stack model, these same application serve IPv4 and IPv6,
   so there is no need to run two distinct applications,
   one for IPv4 and one for IPv6.

   Where IPv6 aware versions are not available, a last resource solution
   will be to run the IPv4 versions with a wrapper implementing
   the Bump in the API technique. This solution is far from perfect,
   but allows early deployment to happen.

5.1.7 Connection to the IPv6 Internet

   The organization may now think about a connection to the IPv6 Internet.
   If its ISP can not deliver a IPv6 native link, a configured tunnel
   to an IPv6 network or a 6to4 tunnel are possible alternatives.
   That tunnel will originate from a dual stack router at the border of
   the organization site.

   Punching holes in the organization firewall may be necessary to dig the tunnel.
   However, in such a case, setting up an IPv6 firewall may be mandated
   by the organization security policy.

5.1.8 IPv6 only hosts

   When all IPv6 service and all critical IPv6 applications
   are available, one can think about deploying IPv6 only nodes
   and IPv6 only links.
   At this stage, those nodes will communicate only with other IPv6 hosts,
   IPv6 only or dual stacks.

   Getting a 'pure' IPv6 only node may in practice not be possible. Removing
   the IPv4 part of a dual stack may not be possible. However, one can use
   a dual stack node and only configure the loopback address 127.0.0.1
   on the IPv4 stack. That way, this node will not consume any global
   IPv4 addresses, and will behave very much like an IPv6 only node.

5.1.9 IPv6 only node and IPv4 only server

   Those IPv6 only nodes will eventually need to talk to IPv4 only servers,
   within the organization or on the Internet. To achieve this,
   several techniques can be used:

     -  deploying proxies per critical applications
     -  deploying SIIT, NAT-PT or TCP-Relays
     -  deploying DSTM

   The choice the right mechanism to deploy will depend from organization
   to organization.



5.2 Large organization with few global IPv4 addresses (a /24 or less)

==> Note: this section needs to be extended.

   This case is very similar to 5.1 except that,
   global IPv4 address are a scarce resource.
   Most of the time, private IPv4 addresses are used internally
   behind a NAT box.
   A big incentive to move to IPv6 is to re-establish
   end to end IP connectivity with other IPv6 hosts on the Internet.




5.3 The extranet case

   NAT techniques make it easy for a client using an internal address
   to initiate a connection to a server using an external address,
   however, the opposite, that is a client using an external address
   trying to connect to a server using an internal address,
   is a very difficult case. This makes communication between hosts
   that are behind two different NAT domains even more difficult.
 
   An organization that has a fairly large number of
   branch offices which are, each of them, using the same IPv4 private
   address space and NAT techniques, will face a very difficult problem
   to connect them over the public Internet.

   It even get worse when data have to be exchanged with all the
   organization suppliers and customers if those ones are also
   using IPv4 private addresses and NAT techniques.

   Re-establishing end to end IP connectivity for some applications
   could become an important goal.

   One way to achieve this is to deploy IPv6 in each sites as 
   describe in 5.2. The 6to4 mechanism will manage automatically all the
   necessary tunnels between the various sites, provided that each of them
   has, at least, one global IPv4 address.


5.4 Office or home network with ONE global IPv4 address

   This is an extreme case of 5.2 and similar techniques apply.
   Typically this type of environment consists of one network
   segment with a small number of hosts using IPv4 private
   addresses.  The one global IPv4 address is assigned to a NAT box
   that connects the network to an ISP.  Most organizations of this
   size do not use routers internally although some may have a few
   internal network segments connected by a router.


5.4.1 Step 1: Upgrade the NAT box and connect to the IPv6 Internet


   The first step is to upgrade or replace the NAT box with a device
   supporting a dual stack, 6to4, and NAT-PT.  In the way the NAT
   device becomes an IPv6 router while still performing the NAT
   function for IPv4.  There are several possible methods of
   connecting to the IPv6 Internet without affecting the existing
   IPv4 service:


   - a native IPv6 connection if the ISP supports both IPv4 and
     native IPv6 connections
   - a 6to4 connection
   - a configured tunnel to an IPv6 provider
   - a connection to an IPv6 tunnel broker


   A 6to4 connection is recommended since it is likely to be some
   time before most ISPs will offer native IPv6 services.  A
   configured tunnel requires more administrative effort both
   locally and at the IPv6 provider's end.  Tunnel broker
   connections are better suited to individual hosts or to small
   sites with infrequent connectivity requirements.


   At this point the organization will have a global IPv6 prefix and
   the NAT box acting as an IPv6 router will advertise this prefix
   to the internal systems.  This 6to4 global prefix is derived from
   the single global IPv4 address.


   If the IPv4 address is a DHCP-assigned or other transient
   address, then the resulting 6to4 prefix will also be transient.
   In this case, the IPv6 router should also be configured to
   advertise a site-local prefix.  The site-local addresses for
   internal hosts can then be used in an internal DNS or similar
   naming service.  Using site-local addresses will promote easier
   communication among internal hosts since these internal addresses
   will not change when the global prefix changes.


5.4.2 Step 2: Dual stack clients and servers


   Clients and servers should be upgraded to support a dual stack
   once an IPv6 infrastructure exists.  Dual stack support will
   allow the use of IPv6 to begin while still supporting existing
   IPv4 services.


5.4.3 Step 3: IPv6 aware applications


   Once IPv6 is supported by the organization, IPv6 aware
   applications can be developed and installed.  Using the dual
   stack model, one application can support both IPv4 and IPv6
   connections.


5.4.4 Step 4: IPv6 only hosts


   IPv6 only hosts can be deployed after the important applications
   have become IPv6 aware.  The private IPv4 addresses can be removed
   from the dual stack systems so that IPv6 is used for all
   communications.  The IPv4 NAT box upgraded in step 1 also includes
   NAT-PT to allow communication between IPv6 only internal hosts and
   the IPv4 Internet.





5.5 New network with brand new services

   [to be completely rewritten or deleted ???]


5.6 Introducing IPv6 in an ISP environment

   The network of an ISP consists of at least three main areas: the
   core network, the connections to other IPSs and the customer access
   network. The next two sections will discuss how an ISP can introduce
   IPv6 in those areas.

   For each area a couple of steps must be taken first:

   - Request IPv6 address space
   - Register the IPv6 site, routing and delegations
   - Setup DNS

5.6.1 Introducing IPv6 in the core network

   It is not really necessary to introduce IPv6 into the core of the
   network. An ISP may decide to tunnel IPv6 over its existing IPv4
   infrastructure. But if the ISP decides to introduce IPv6 into the
   core, this can be done in several ways.

   An ISP might decide to install separate dual stack or IPv6-only
   routers in the core. These will be interconnected by dedicated
   lines (ATM PVCs, leased lines, etc.) or (if the routers are dual
   stack) by IPv6 in IPv4 tunnels over the existing IPv4 core
   infrastructure. Tunnels may be necessary to established
   if some of the intermediary routers can not be upgraded to
   IPv6 or if dedicated lines are either not possible to install or
   simply not cost effectives.

   Routing can be setup such that IPv4 packets are
   routed through the old IPv4 infrastructure and IPv6 packets are
   routed through the new IPv6 infrastructure.

   When dual stack routers are stable enough to be used in the core,
   things become simpler. The ISP can configure the core routers as
   dual stack routers which will route both IPv4 and IPv6 packets.

   Next a connection to the global IPv6 network should be made. This
   can be done by a direct IPv6 connection or by some tunneling
   mechanism. If the core of the network supports IPv6 and the other
   ISP also supports IPv6 a direct link can be used to transport IPv6
   packets.

   When there is no direct IPv6 connection tunneling mechanisms must be
   used to reach the global IPv6 network.

   An ISP might decide to setup one or more routers at the edge of its
   network to act as 6to4 gateways. This enables other IPv6 islands to
   reach the ISP by 6to4 tunneling. An alternative to the use of
   dynamic tunnels is the use of static ones as is the case of the
   6Bone.

5.6.2 Introducing IPv6 in the customer access network

   The customer access network consists of dial up and leased lines
   connected to an access router. There are at least two possibilities
   to introduce IPv6. The first possibility is to upgrade access
   routers to dual stack routers. Both IPv4 and IPv6 customers connect
   to these dual stack routers.

   Another possibility is, as in the core network, to install separate
   IPv6 or dual stack routers. IPv4-only customers connect to
   the old IPv4-only access routers. IPv6 customers connect to
   the new access routers.

   These IPv6 access routers must be connected to the global IPv6
   network. If the core does not support IPv6, one of the transition
   mechanisms from section 3 must be used. Dynamic tunneling can be
   done with for example [6TO4]. An alternative to the use of dynamic
   tunnels is the use of statically configured ones. When the core
   network does support IPv6 the access routers can be connected to the
   nearest IPv6 core router (either by IPv4/IPv6 link, dedicated link
   or tunneling over IPv4).

   When the customer is an IPv6-only site, the ISP might decide to
   provide some transition mechanisms to help the customer reach
   IPv4-only nodes.



5.7 Internet Exchange

   Based on address space distribution we can distinguish two models
   for the setup of an IPv6 Internet eXchange (IX).

   1. The traditional model commonly used in the IPv4 world.
      In this case each ISP connecting to the IX arranges
      its own IPv6 address space. In peering arrangements between ISPs
      the prefix for this address space is exchanged.

   2. An addressing model where the IX acts as an address space
      provider. In this case the IX obtains a TLA and can assign NLAs
      from this TLA address space to connected ISPs. In order to
      obtain global connectivity for the Internet Exchange TLA, the IX
      needs to arrange for global transit through one or more global
      transit providers (TLA ISPs) which are connected to the IX.
      Implicitly, this means that the IX arranges transit for all
      connected ISPs that use the address space assigned to the IX.
      This requires quite a different business model for an IX than in
      model 1.


5.7.1 The traditional IX model

5.7.1.1 Address space:

   The IX obtains some globally unique address space.
   This can be an NLA from a transit provider (TLA provider)
   that offers connectivity for the IX infrastructure.
   A global prefix is preferred as next hop attribute in BGP4 [BGP4-IPV6].

5.7.1.2 Addressing infrastructure on IX:

   Addresses are assigned from the obtained address space to the
   interfaces of the routers connecting to the IX infrastructure.

5.7.1.3 Updating the IPv6 registries:

   The sites, allocations and route objects should be registered as
   described in appendix A2.

5.7.1.4 BGP announcements:

   ISPs connecting to the IX advertise to their peers their own
   address space which is independent of the IX. This address space
   can either be a TLA or an NLA.

5.7.2 The addressing IX model

5.7.2.1 Address space:

   The IX requests a (sub-)TLA from its regional IR. Customers on
   the Internet Exchange get a next level NLA from this (sub-)TLA.

5.7.2.2 Addressing infrastructure on IX:

   Addresses are assigned from the obtained address space to the
   interfaces of the routers connecting to the IX infrastructure.

5.7.2.3 Updating the IPv6 registries:

   The sites, allocations and route objects should be registered as
   described in section 2.

5.7.2.4 Contracts with global transit ISPs (TLA ISPs)

   The IX should contract several TLA ISPs that will provide
   connectivity to the global IPv6 network. Such a TLA ISP must
   agree to transit traffic from all customers connected to the IX.

5.7.2.5 BGP announcements:

   The transit providers for the IX address space announce the
   (sub-)TLA from the IX to the global IPv6 network. To the IX
   customers they announce all prefixes that can be reached by them
   and for which they have a contract with the IX. Customers (NLA
   ISPs) get a next level NLA from the IX. The NLA ISPs announce
   their NLA to the TLA ISPs. They also announce their NLA to other
   NLA ISPs of the IX if there is a peering agreement between them.


6. Security considerations
 
   There are no specific security issues introduced by this document.
   For the specific security issues with the different translations 
   and migration tools that are discussed in section 4 of this document
   the reader is referred to the referenced documents.


7. References

[6BONE]	   http://www.6bone.net/

[6TO4]	   B. Carpenter, K Moore, "Connection of IPv6 Domains via 
               IPv4 Clouds without Explicit Tunnels", 
               draft-ietf-ngtrans-6to4-07.txt (work in progress).

[6PAPA]        R. Fink,
               "6BONE Pre-Qualification for Address Prefix Allocation (6PAPA)",
               draft-ietf-ngtrans-6bone-6papa-01.txt (work in progress)


[BROKER]       A. Durand, P. Fasano, I. Guardini, D. Lento, "IPv6 
               Tunnel Broker", draft-ietf-ngtrans-broker-06.txt
               (work in progress).

[DHCPv6]       J. Bound,  C. Perkins, "Dynamic Host Configuration 
               Protocol for IPv6", draft-ietf-dhc-dhcpv6-14.txt
               (work in progress).

[DHCPv6-EXT]   C. Perkins, J. Bound, "Extensions for the Dynamic Host 
               Configuration Protocol for IPv6", 
               draft-ietf-dhc-v6exts-11.txt (work in progress).

[DNAME]        Matt Crawford, "Non-Terminal DNS Name Redirection",
               draft-ietf-dnsind-dname-03.txt (work in progress).

[DNSLOOKUP]    M. Crawford, C. Huitema, S. Thomson, "DNS Extensions to 
               Support IP Version 6", 
               draft-ietf-ipngwg-dns-lookups-05.txt (work in progress).

[DSTM]         J. Bound, L. Toutain, H. Affifi, "Dual Stack Transition 
               Mechanism (DSTM)", draft-ietf-ngtrans-dstm-03.txt
               (work in progress).

[IRALLOC]      Regional IRs, "Provisional IPv6 assignment and allocation
               policy document (Draft 6; 27 May 1999)",
               ipv6policy-draft-090699.txt (work in progress).

[RFC1034]      P. Mockapetris, "Domain names - concepts and facilities",
               RFC 1034, November 1987.

[RFC1035]      P. Mockapetris, "Domain names - implementation and
               specification", RFC 1035, November 1987.

[RFC1886]      S. Thomson and C. Huitema, "DNS Extensions to support IP
               version 6", RFC 1886, December 1995.

[RFC1918]      Y. Rekhter, B. Moskowitz, D. Karrenberg, G.J. de Groot 
               and E. Lear, "Address Allocation for Private Internets",
               RFC 1918, February 1996.

[RFC1928]      M. Leech, M. Ganis, Y. Lee, R. Kuris, D. Koblas and
               L. Jones, "SOCKS Protocol Version 5", RFC 1928,
               March 1996.

[RFC1933]      R. Gilligan and E. Nordmark, "Transition Mechanisms for 
               IPv6 Hosts and Routers", RFC 1933, April 1996.

[RFC2080]      G. Malkin, R. Minnear, "RIPng for IPv6", RFC 2080,
               January 1997.

[RFC2081]      G. Malkin, "RIPng Protocol Applicability Statement", 
               RFC 2081, January 1997.

[RFC2185]      R. Callon, D. Haskin, "Routing Aspects of IPv6
               Transition", RFC 2185, September 1997.

[RFC2283]      T. Bates, R. Chandra, D.Katz, Y. Rekhter, "Multiprotocol
               Extensions for BGP-4", RFC 2283, February 1998.

[RFC2373]      R. Hinden, S. Deering, "IP Version 6 Addressing
               Architecture", RFC 2373, July 1998.

[RFC2374]      R. Hinden, M. O'Dell, S. Deering, "An IPv6 Aggregatable
               Global Unicast Address Format", RFC 2374, July 1998.

[RFC2529]      B. Carpenter, C. Jung, "Transmission of IPv6 over IPv4 
               Domains without Explicit Tunnels", RFC2529, March 1999.

[RFC2545]      P. Marques, F. Dupont, "Use of BGP-4 Multiprotocol 
               Extensions for IPv6 Inter-Domain Routing", RFC2545, 
               March 1999.

[RFC2546]      A. Durand, B. Buclin, "6Bone Routing Practice",
               RFC 2546, March 1999.

[RFC2673]      Matt Crawford, "Binary Labels in the Domain Name System",
               RFC 2673, August 1999. 

[RFC2740]      R. Coltun, D. Ferguson, J. Moy, "OSPF for IPv6",
               RFC 2740, December 1999.

[RFC2765]      E. Nordmark, "Stateless IP/ICMP Translator", 
               RFC 2765, xxxx

[RFC2766]      G. Tsirtsis, P. Srisuresh,
               "Network Address Translation - Protocol Translation (NAT-PT)",
               RFC 2766, February 2000.

[RFC2767]      K. Tsuchiya, H. Higuchi, Y. Atarashi, "Dual Stack Hosts
               using the Bump-in-the-Stack technique", 
               RFC 2767, February 2000.

[RFC2772]      R. Rockell, R. Fink, "6Bone Backbone Routing Guidelines"
               RFC 2772, February 2000.

[RFC2893]      R. Gilligan and E. Nordmark,
               "Transition Mechanisms for IPv6 Hosts and Routers",
               RFC 2893, August 2000



[SOCKS-EXT]    H. Kitamura, "SOCKSv5 Protocol Extensions for IPv6/IPv4 
               Communication Environment",
               draft-kitamura-socks-ipv6-01.txt (work in progress).

[SOCKS-GATE]   H. Kitamura, A. Jinzaki, S. Kobayashi, "A SOCKS-based 
               IPv6/IPv4 Gateway Mechanism",
               draft-ietf-ngtrans-socks-gateway-05.txt 
               (work in progress). 
 
[TRT]          J. Hagino, K. Yamamoto, "An IPv6-to-IPv4 transport
               relay translator", 
               draft-ietf-ngtrans-tcpudp-relay-01.txt,
               (work in progress). 






8. Authors' Addresses

   Wim Biemolt                        Marijke Kaat
   SURFnet ExpertiseCentrum bv        SURFnet ExpertiseCentrum bv
   P.O. Box 19115                     P.O. Box 19115
   3501 DC  Utrecht                   3501 DC  Utrecht
   The Netherlands                    The Netherlands
   Phone: +31 30 230 5305             Phone: +31 30 230 5305
   Fax: +31 30 230 5329               Fax: +31 30 230 5329
   Email: Wim.Biemolt@sec.nl          Email: Marijke.Kaat@sec.nl

   Ronald van der Pol                 Henk Steenman
   SURFnet bv                         AT&T, ICoE
   P.O. Box 19035                     Laarderhoogtweg 25
   3501 DA  Utrecht                   1101 EB Amsterdam
   The Netherlands                    The Netherlands
   Phone: +31 30 230 5305             Phone: +31 20 409 7656
   Fax: +31 30 230 5329               Fax: +31 20 453 1574
   Email: Ronald.vanderPol@surfnet.nl Email: Henk.Steenman@icoe.att.com

   Tim Larder
   Cisco Systems Ltd.
   3, The Square,
   Stockley Park,
   Uxbridge,
   UB11 1BN,
   United Kingdom.
   Phone +44 (0)20 8756 8846
   email tlarder@cisco.com

   Alain Durand
   SUN Microsystems, Inc.
   901 San Antonio road
   UMPK17-202
   Palo Alto, CA 94303-4900
   USA
   Phone: +1 650 786 7503
   Email: Alain.Durand@sun.com

   Kazu Yamamoto
   IIJ

   Dale Finkerson
   29 WSEC
   University of Nebraska
   Lincoln, Ne. 68588
   Phone: +1 402 472 0450
   Email: dmf@unl.edu

   Andy Hazeltine
   Advanced Systems Consulting, Inc.
   4A Eves Drive, Suite 114
   Marlton, NJ 08053
   Phone: (856) 983-3888
   Email: andy@advsys.com




Appendix A. IPv6 Address Issues

   The IPv6 Global Unicast Address format is described in [RFC2374].
   It defines entities such as TLA (Top Level Aggregator), NLA
   (Next Level Aggregator) and SLA (Site Level Aggregator).

   This address format splits the 128 bit IPv6 addresses into
   three level of hierarchy, the public topology, the site private
   topology, and the interface identifier.

   The public topology is described in the 48 first bits of an
   IPv6 address. Those 48 bits are made of:

     - 3 bits prefix to identify the IPv6 Global Unicast Address format
     - 13 bits TLA ID
     - 8 bits reserved
     - 24 bits NLA ID

   The site private topology is a 16 bit field.

   The interface identifier is a 64 bit field.


     | 3|  13 | 8 |   24   |   16   |          64 bits               |
     +--+-----+---+--------+--------+--------------------------------+
     |FP| TLA |RES|  NLA   |  SLA   |         Interface ID           |
     |  | ID  |   |  ID    |  ID    |                                |
     +--+-----+---+--------+--------+--------------------------------+

     <--Public Topology--->   Site
                           <-------->
                            Topology
                                     <------Interface Identifier----->
 


A.1 IPv6 Address Allocation
   
   IPv6 address space is very large. Much, much larger than the
   IPv4 address space. So the objective of IPv6 address allocation
   is more focused on route aggregation that address conservation.
   However, even though IPv6 address space is very large, it is an
   important resource that must be carefully managed for the good
   of the whole Internet. IPv6 address allocation follows
   strict rules that are discussed by the regional registries
   (RIPE-NCC, ARIN, APNIC) with guidance from the IETF.

A.1.1 Site local vs global addresses

   Without special registration a site can deploy IPv6 site local 
   addresses which are similar to IPv4 private addresses [RFC1918]. 
   However, site local addresses do not allow for communication over 
   the Internet. For this, sites need to apply for globally routable 
   IPv6 addresses. Most sites will get a /48 prefix with 16 bits 
   for subnetting and 64 bits for interface ID addressing. This
   means that each site will have 65536 subnets to define its
   internal topology and in each subnet almost 20 trillion hosts
   can be numbered.

   0                                48       64                  127
   +---------------------------------+--------+--------------------+
   |              prefix             | subnet |   Interface ID     |
   +---------------------------------+--------+--------------------+
   

A.1.2 Obtaining IPv6 Address Space


   IPv6 addresses can be obtained from the same organizations as the
   ones who register IPv4 addresses. Regional IRs delegate
   a part of the IPv6 address space to local IRs who further delegate
   parts of the address space to their ISP customers. Site will
   obtain IPv6 addresses directly from their ISP.
   
   The regional IRs use a slow start mechanism [IRALLOC] to
   allocate address space (TLA) to ISPs. A special
   pre-qualification procedure [6PAPA] can be used by ISP
   participating in the 6bone.


A.2 IPv6 Registration Issues
   
   In the current IPv4 world address space allocations are registered 
   in the various databases managed by the regional IRs. Autonomous
   System (AS) information and routing policies are registered in the 
   distributed Internet Routing Registry database (IRR). The IRs, LIRs
   and ISPs are supposed to register address space allocations and 
   assignments, contact persons, AS numbers, routing policies and other 
   useful data for network management in the various databases.

   A special IPv6 registration database has been setup for the 6bone 
   community, on the whois server named "whois.6bone.net". This is a 
   special version of the RIPE database software and it is referred to 
   as the "6bone database". This database has special objects, the
   "inet6num:" object for assigned IPv6 prefixes, and the "ipv6-site:" 
   object which is used to register specific information about a site
   connected to the 6bone, such as the configured tunnels and the 
   origin AS. In the ipv6-site objects the IPV6 applications that are 
   supported on that specific site can be found. The database can be 
   queried by using a modified whois client or the web-based "whois" 
   service at http://www.6bone.net/whois.html. At this time only the 
   6bone database supports the special IPv6 objects. Currently, there 
   are no database objects to register IPv6 routing policies. 


A.3 Example of IPv6 address allocation within a site /48 prefix

   In this example a site is allocated prefix 3FFE:1234:5678::/48.




                     3FFE:1234:5678::/48
                              |
                              |
                     I1 +-----+-----+ I2  
                +-------+    R1     +-------------------+
                |       +---------+-+                   |
                |                 | I3                  |
        +-------+-------+         +----+          +-----+----+
        |               |              |          |    R2    |
        |               |              |          +----------+  
   +----+----+     +----+----+    +----+----+      ||||||||||
   |   R3    |     |   R4    |    |   R5    |         links
   +---------+     +---------+    +---------+
    | | | | |        |  |  |         |   |
      links           links          links

   R[1-5] are routers and I[1-3] are the interfaces of R1. Suppose the
   expected number of hosts on the links is:

        router         immediate        year 1        year 2
          R2              34              50            70
          R3              19              20            25
          R4               9              10            15
          R5               3               5            10

   A number plan could be like the one shown in the table below. On R1
   the following prefixes will be used on the interfaces:

        I1        3FFE:1234:5678:2000::/50
        I2        3FFE:1234:5678:0000::/49
        I3        3FFE:1234:5678:2300::/50

   Initially, R2 will get 256 /64s, R3 will get 48 /64s, R4 will get 32 
   /64s and R5 will get 16 /64s.

        3FFE:1234:5678:0000::/50
        ------------------------
        3FFE:1234:5678:0000::/49        I2
        3FFE:1234:5678:1000::/49        free
        3FFE:1234:5678:2000::/49        I1 + I3
        3FFE:1234:5678:3000::/49        free
        .....                           ...
        3FFE:1234:5678:F000::/49        free
        3FFE:1234:5678:0000::/49
        ------------------------
        3FFE:1234:5678:0000::/64        interfaces of R2
        .....                           ...
        3FFE:1234:5678:00FF::/64        interfaces of R2
        3FFE:1234:5678:0100::/64        reserved for R2

        .....                           ...
        3FFE:1234:5678:02FF::/64        reserved for R2
        3FFE:1234:5678:0300::/64        free
        .....                           ...

        3FFE:1234:5678:2000::/49
        ------------------------
        3FFE:1234:5678:2000::/50        I1
        3FFE:1234:5678:2100::/50        reserved for I1
        3FFE:1234:5678:2200::/50        reserved for I1
        3FFE:1234:5678:2300::/50        I3
        3FFE:1234:5678:2400::/50        reserved for I3
        3FFE:1234:5678:2500::/50        reserved for I3
        3FFE:1234:5678:2600::/50        free
        .....                           ...
        3FFE:1234:5678:2F00::/50        free


        3FFE:1234:5678:2000::/50
        ------------------------
        3FFE:1234:5678:2000::/64        interfaces of R3
        .....                           ...
        3FFE:1234:5678:202F::/64        interfaces of R3
        3FFE:1234:5678:2030::/64        reserved for R3
        .....                           ...
        3FFE:1234:5678:204F::/64        reserved for R3

        3FFE:1234:5678:2050::/64        interfaces of R4
        .....                           ...
        3FFE:1234:5678:206F::/64        interfaces of R4
        3FFE:1234:5678:2070::/64        reserved for R4
        .....                           ...
        3FFE:1234:5678:209F::/64        reserved for R4
        3FFE:1234:5678:20A0::/64        free
        .....                           ...
        3FFE:1234:5678:20FF::/64        free


        3FFE:1234:5678:2300::/50
        ------------------------
        3FFE:1234:5678:2300::/64        interfaces of R5
        .....                           ...
        3FFE:1234:5678:230F::/64        interfaces of R5
        3FFE:1234:5678:2310::/64        reserved for R5
        .....                           ...
        3FFE:1234:5678:231F::/64        reserved for R5
        3FFE:1234:5678:2320::/64        free
        .....                           ...
        3FFE:1234:5678:23FF::/64        free





Appendix B. IPv6 and DNS

B.1 Forward mapping
   
   A host's 128 bit IPv6 address can be stored with an AAAA record. 
   For example: 

   $ORIGIN ipv6.surfnet.nl.
   ...
   zesbot         IN   AAAA   3FFE:0604:0000:0001:02C0:4FFF:FEC6:9CC7

   This is similar to the use of the A record in IPv4, for example:

   $ORIGIN ipv6.surfnet.nl.
   ...
   zesbot         IN   A      192.87.110.60

   Note that both A and AAAA records for a given zone are stored in 
   the same DNS data file.
   
   If a node has more than one IPv6 address it must have more than one
   AAAA record. For example: 
   
   $ORIGIN ipv6.surfnet.nl.
   ...
   amsterdam9     IN   AAAA   3FFE:0600:8000:0000::0001
                  IN   AAAA   3FFE:0600:8000:0000::0005
                  IN   AAAA   3FFE:0600:8000:0000::0009
                  IN   AAAA   3FFE:0600:8000:0000::000D
   
   A new record type, A6, is being defined to map a domain 
   name to an IPv6 address, containing a reference to a "prefix" 
   [DNSLOOKUP]. The aim of the A6 record is to facilitate network 
   renumbering and multihoming. Domains employing the A6 record for 
   IPv6 addresses can have automatically generated AAAA records to ease
   transition. After the A6 records are widely deployed it is expected
   that the AAAA records are no longer needed.
   
B.2 Reverse mapping
   
   IPv4 uses the "in-addr.arpa" domain for the reverse mapping. An
   IPv4 address is represented as a name in the in-addr.arpa domain by 
   a sequence of bytes, written as decimal digits, separated by dots
   with the suffix ".in-addr.arpa". The sequence of bytes is encoded in
   reverse order, i.e. the low-order bytes is encoded first, followed 
   by the next low-order bytes and so on. For example the IPv4 address
   192.87.110.60 is represented as a name in the in-addr.arpa domain as:

   60.110.87.192.in-addr.arpa.

   This name is stored in a DNS data file as follows:

   $ORIGIN 110.87.192.in-addr.arpa.
   ...
   60               IN   PTR   zesbot.ipv6.surfnet.nl. 

   For IPv6 addresses the special domain "ip6.int" is defined to look 
   up a record given an IPv6 address. The process works exactly the 
   same as with IPv4. Except that an IPv6 address is represented by
   nibbles, written as hexadecimal digits, separated by dots. For
   example the IPv6 address 3FFE:0604:0000:0001:02C0:4FFF:FEC6:9CC7 
   is represented as a name in the ip6.int domain as:

7.c.c.9.6.c.e.f.f.f.f.4.0.c.2.0.1.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.4.0.6.0.e.f.f.3.ip6.int.

   This name is stored in the a DNS data file as follows (assuming
   a /64 prefix):

   $ORIGIN 1.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.4.0.6.0.e.f.f.3.ip6.int.
   ...
   7.c.c.9.6.c.e.f.f.f.f.4.0.c.2.0   IN   PTR   zesbot.ipv6.surfnet.nl.

   Note that the IPv4 and IPv6 reverse mappings are stored in different
   DNS data files.
   
B.3 Implementations
   
   Most DNS implementations will be able to deal with the reverse
   mapping as used with IPv6 addresses. AAAA record is implemented
   in recent DNS implementations and support for A6 record [DNSLOOKUP]
   or binary labels [RFC2673] is implemented in the most recent ones.

   Note that although these DNS servers implement extensions to support 
   the use of IPv6 addresses they are not necessarily IPv6 applications
   themselves, some use IPv4 transport.

   For IPv6 only nodes, an IPv6 resolver and an IPv6 DNS server
   are crucial.



Appendix C. IPv6 routing issues

   To exchange reachability information routing protocols are used.
   There are two types of routing protocols, the intra-domain (IGP) and
   inter-domain (EGP) routing protocols. In the IPv4 world commonly
   used IGPs are RIP, OSPF and IS-IS and the EGP that is used is
   mostly BGP4. Besides the use of routing protocols, static routing can
   also be used.

   Routing protocols have been adapted to handle IPv6 routing
   information. RIP (RIPng) [RFC2080, RFC2081], BGP4 (BGP4+)
   [RFC2283, BGP4-IPV6] and OSPF [RFC2740] have IPv6 extensions
   defined.

   On the core of the 6bone, BGP4+ is mandated. More information
   about 6bone routing guidelines can be found in [RFC2772].


