

enum WG                                                        C. Sharp 
Internet Draft                                      Cisco Systems, Inc. 
Document: draft-sharp-enum-cc-registration-00.txt          August, 2001 
Category: Informational                                                 
    
    
 Criteria and procedures for registering domains corresponding to E.164 
                       Country Codes in e164.arpa 
    
    
Status of this Memo 
    
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of [RFC2026].  
    
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of 
   six months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
   documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts 
   as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in 
   progress."  
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt  
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
    
    
    
    
Abstract 
    
   This document describes criteria and procedures for registering 
   domains corresponding to E.164 Country Codes in e164.arpa as defined 
   in RFC2916.    
    
    
1.      Conventions used in this document 
    
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in 
   this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119]. 
    
   References are given in ACM-style and are indicated by brackets in 
   the document. 
    
   When capitalized, the term "Network" refers to Internationally 
   interconnected physical nodes and operational systems operated and 
   maintained by one or more Recognized Operating Agencies (ROAs) to 
   provide public telecommunications services. Private networks are not 
  
Sharp                Informational-February, 2002                    1 
               draft-sharp-enum-cc-registration-00.txt   August, 2001 
 
 
   included in this definition. Note that the use of capital "N" in 
   Networks indicates that this definition applies. 
 
   The final ô.ö of DNS names (e.g., e164.arpa.) is not included in 
   host names to which this document refers and is understood to exist. 
   Any mention of Country Code in this document is assumed to mean a 
   Country Code as defined in Recommendation E.164 unless otherwise 
   specified.   
    
   Any mention of domain in this document is assumed to mean DNS domain 
   unless otherwise specified.   
    
   Any mention of zone in this document is assumed to mean DNS zone 
   unless otherwise specified.   
    
   Any mention of registry in this document is assumed to mean DNS 
   registry unless otherwise specified. 
    
   Any mention of registrar in this document is assumed to mean DNS 
   registrar unless otherwise specified. 
    
   Any mention of register in this document is assumed to mean DNS 
   register unless otherwise specified. 
    
   The registry operating the DNS for the e164.arpa domain is hereafter 
   referred to as the Registry.   
    
   The registrar for e164.arpa is hereafter referred to as the 
   Registrar.  Although this document refers to the Registrar as if it 
   were separate from the Registry, they could both be operated by the 
   same organization. 
    
   The applicant for registering a domain associated with a Country 
   Code in e164.arpa is hereafter referred to as the Registrant. 
   The designated expert referred to in clause 4 of RFC2916 will 
   hereafter be referred to as the Internet Engineering Steering Group 
   (IESG) Designated Expert. 
    
   The term ôassigneeö in this document applies to the assignee of the 
   Country Code as defined in E.164.1 or an entity or organization 
   designated by the assignee.  For E.164 Country Codes for geographic 
   areas the assignee normally is the ITU Member state, but other 
   procedures might also be applicable. 
    
   The information entered into the DNS is a domain name, not an E.164 
   number or Country Code.  When referring to the information entered 
   into DNS, this document uses the term Country Code domain to refer 
   to the domain name created from the transformation defined in 
   RFC2916 as applied to a Country Code.  Similarly, a Country Code 
   zone refers to a zone corresponding to a Country Code domain. 
    
    
    
  
Sharp                Informational-February, 2002                    2 
               draft-sharp-enum-cc-registration-00.txt   August, 2001 
 
 
2.      Scope 
    
   This document describes the procedures and criteria for the 
   registration of Domain Name System (DNS) domains corresponding to 
   E.164 [E164] Country Codes (or Country Codes plus Identification 
   Codes in the case of Networks) in the e164.arpa subtree of DNS as 
   described in [RFC2916].   The Internet Architecture Board (IAB) has 
   designated the registry for e164.arpa (hereafter referred to as the 
   Registry) to be RIPE-NCC ( http://www.ripe.net/).  This document 
   defines procedures by which the assignee of an E.164 Country Code 
   (or Country Code plus Identification Codes in the case of Networks) 
   registers a Country Code domain (or Country Code plus Identification 
   Codes in the case of Networks) in e164.arpa. 
    
   Resolution 20 [RESOLUTION20] of the World Telecommunication 
   Standards Assembly 2000 (WTSA 2000) provides guidance on the 
   assignment of international numbering and addressing resources in 
   ITU-T.  As described in Recommendation E.164.1 [E164-1], the ITU-T 
   TSB assigns and reclaims E.164 Country Codes for geographic areas, 
   global services and for Networks in consultation with the relevant 
   Study Group.  It is also responsible for the assignment and 
   reclamation of Identification Codes (ICs) for Networks.  Similarly, 
   the registrar  for registering Country Code domains into e164.arpa 
   (hereafter referred to as the Registrar) collects the necessary 
   information for registering a Country Code domain in DNS, ensures 
   that the criteria for registration (as defined in this document) are 
   met, and then passes the information to the Registry for entry into 
   DNS. 
    
   The registration of sub-domains within the Country Code domain is 
   the responsibility of the registrant of the Country Code domain.  
    
   This document does not define procedures for operation of the Domain 
   Name System (DNS).    Normal DNS operation is expected to apply to 
   domains registered via procedures defined in this document. 
    
    
3.      Terms and definitions  
    
   Register     The database holding all the information needed by the 
   Domain Name System for e164.arpa. 
    
   Registrant   Entity, e.g., the assignee of the E.164 Country Code,  
   that wants to register a domain name in a DNS zone.  An entity with 
   rights to the use of a domain name within the parent name space, 
   e.g., e164.arpa.  
    
   Registrar    An entity that registers names with the registry on 
   behalf of registrants.  The registrar acts, from an registrant 
   perspective, as a proxy for the registry and, from the registry 
   perspective, as a proxy for the registrant.   
    
  
Sharp                Informational-February, 2002                    3 
               draft-sharp-enum-cc-registration-00.txt   August, 2001 
 
 
   Registry     The organization that operates the register for 
   e164.arpa.  There is only one registry per DNS zone.  
    
   zone A zone is a point of delegation in the DNS tree. It contains 
   all names from a certain point downward except those for which other 
   zones are authoritative. A zone is the part of a DNS domain for 
   which the register contains information and for which the name 
   server is authoritative.   
    
   zone cut     The point in a DNS tree at which a zone begins.  A zone 
   cut can be made at any "." in the DNS tree. 
    
    
4.      Abbreviations and Acronyms 
    
   DNS          Domain Name System 
   CC           Country Code 
   IC           Identification Code 
   IAB          Internet Architecture Board  
   IANA         Internet Assigned Numbers Authority 
   IESG         Internet Engineering Steering Group 
   IETF         Internet Engineering Task Force 
   ITU          International Telecommunication Union 
   ITU-T        International Telecommunication Union - 
                Telecommunication Standardization Sector 
   ISOC         Internet Society 
   NDC          National Destination Code 
   RIPE-NCC     R‰seaux IP Europ‰ens - Network Coordination Centre 
   TSB          Telecommunication Standardization Bureau 
    
    
5.      General Principles 
    
   This section describes general principles for registering Country 
   Code domains in e164.arpa. 
    
   Procedures for operation of the Domain Name System (DNS) are outside 
   the scope of this document.  The contribution only defines criteria 
   and procedures for registering Country Code domains in e164.arpa 
   except where indicated. 
    
   Authority for registering a Country Code domain in e164.arpa is 
   retained by the assignee of the Country Code.  The assignee MAY 
   assign administrative responsibility for a Country Code to another 
   party. 
    
   Country Code resources that are designated as "spare" or "test" will 
   normally not be registered.   
    
   The application process normally will have three sequential stages: 
     1. Application: The Registrant will submit an application to the 
        Registrar to register its Country Code domain in e164.arpa.  
  
Sharp                Informational-February, 2002                    4 
               draft-sharp-enum-cc-registration-00.txt   August, 2001 
 
 
        The application can also include information for delegating the 
        Country Code zone to a separate registry; 
     2. Authorization:  The Registrar authorizes the Registrant to 
        register the Country Code domain and screens the information 
        submitted for correctness. 
     3. Registration:  The Registrar submits to the Registry the 
        information needed for registering the Country Code domain in 
        e164.arpa.  The Registry verifies that the information needed 
        for correct operation of the DNS is included and enters the 
        information submitted into the DNS. 
    
   In general, registration of sub-domains within the Country Code 
   domain (and subsequent delegation of sub-zones within the Country 
   Code zone) is the responsibility of the Registrant of that Country 
   Code domain. 
    
   Geographic areas:  In case of multiple countries sharing a Country 
   Code, the domain registration MAY be handled below the country code 
   level (e.g., CC+NDC) or an agreement might need to be reached 
   between the countries affected.  Registration of sub-domains is a 
   (multi-) national matter.   
    
   Global services:  Registration of sub-domains of Country Code 
   domains for Global Services depends on the definition of and the 
   number format for the global service.  The registration will be 
   managed by the Registrant for the Country Code domain.  For Country 
   Codes for Global Services defined by ITU-T, a service-specific 
   supplement might need to be developed describing how registrations 
   will be handled for that service.   
    
   Networks:  Registration of domains corresponding to Country Codes 
   for Networks is done on the basis of the Country Code plus 
   Identification Code (CC+IC).  This is referred to as a CC+IC domain.  
   Authority for registering a CC+IC domain is retained by the assignee 
   of the CC+IC.  Registration of sub-domains and delegation of zones 
   within the CC+IC domain is the purview of the Registrant of the 
   CC+IC domain and is outside the scope of this document.   
    
   Others:   ITU-T might define other types of Country Code.  Unless 
   otherwise specified, the registration of domains and delegation of 
   zones within a Country Code domain is managed by the Registrant for 
   the Country Code domain and is outside the scope of this document. 
    
   The Registrar will consider each application for registration of a 
   Country Code domain or CC+IC domain on an individual basis and on 
   its own merits. 
    
   The Registrar maintains the right, at any time during the 
   application process, to request from the Registrant additional 
   information considered necessary to validate an application.  The 
   Registrar reserves the right to audit the information provided in 
   the application. 
    
  
Sharp                Informational-February, 2002                    5 
               draft-sharp-enum-cc-registration-00.txt   August, 2001 
 
 
   The Registrant MUST inform the Registrar when any of the conditions 
   under which the registration was made are no longer applicable or 
   have changed. 
    
   Registrations are subject to revocation if not utilized in 
   conformance with the registration criteria.  
    
   If a Country Code or Country Code plus Identification Code is 
   reclaimed, the associated domain MUST be removed.  The Registrar 
   MUST notify the Registrant and the Registry that the Country Code 
   domain is to be removed from DNS.  The Registry MUST notify the 
   Administrative and Technical contacts as defined in the DNS 
   information (see clause 8) and MUST remove the associated domain 
   from DNS as described in the procedures. 
    
    
6.      General Operation for Registration of Country Code Domains 
    
    
   This clause describes the common criteria and procedures for 
   registration of Country Code domains in e164.arpa.  Criteria and 
   procedures specific to a particular type of Country Code are 
   described in the clause for that Country Code type. 
    
    
6.1.    Criteria  
    
6.1.1   Registration 
    
   The Registrant MUST be the assignee (or entity designated by the 
   assignee to register the information) of the Country Code (as per 
   E.164.1) corresponding to the domain for which registration is 
   requested. 
    
   The registration MUST be for the Country Code assigned to the 
   Registrant. 
    
   The Registrant MUST provide the following information: 
    
   Domain Name Requested (e.g., 6.4.e164.arpa) 
    
        This element contains the fully qualified domain name of the 
        domain to be created.  The domain name MUST be formatted as 
        defined in RFC2916 and based on the RegistrantÆs Country Code.  
        The format of this information might depend on the type of 
        Country Code. 
         
   Administrative Contact  
    
        The Registry uses this information to contact the organization 
        responsible for this DNS domain for administrative issues. 
         
  
Sharp                Informational-February, 2002                    6 
               draft-sharp-enum-cc-registration-00.txt   August, 2001 
 
 
        Organization Name: 
         
        Address: 
         
                Street: 
                 
                City 
                 
                State/Province 
                 
                Postal Code 
                 
                Country 
         
        Contact person: 
         
        Phone: 
         
        Fax-no: 
         
        e-mail:  
    
   Technical Contact (in case different from administrative contact): 
    
        The Registry uses this information to contact the organization 
        responsible for this DNS domain for technical issues. 
         
        Organization Name: 
         
        Address: 
         
                Street: 
                 
                City 
                 
                State/Province 
                 
                Postal Code 
                 
                Country 
         
        Contact person: 
         
        Phone: 
         
        Fax-no: 
         
        e-mail: 
    
   Billing Contact (in case different from administrative contact): 
    
        The Registry uses this information to contact the organization 
        responsible for this DNS domain for billing issues. 
  
Sharp                Informational-February, 2002                    7 
               draft-sharp-enum-cc-registration-00.txt   August, 2001 
 
 
         
        Organization Name: 
         
        Address: 
         
                Street: 
                 
                City 
                 
                State/Province 
                 
                Postal Code 
                 
                Country 
         
        Contact person: 
         
        Phone: 
         
        Fax-no: 
         
        e-mail: 
    
   Domain Name Server information:   
    
        This information MUST include the fully qualified domain name 
        and the IP address(es) for each name server containing the 
        records for this zone.  The Registrar or Registry MAY reject IP 
        addresses that have not been allocated for public use by 
        Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA) 
        (http://www.iana.org).  The IP address(es) can be either an 
        IPv4 or IPv6 address. 
    
   In the case of Registrants that wish to register domains below the 
   Country Code level (e.g., CC+NDC), special arrangements MAY be made 
   with the Registrar and Registry.  However, the above criteria apply 
   to each registration.  The Domain Name Requested MUST include the 
   fully qualified domain name (e.g., ô9.1.9.1.e164.arpaö for area code 
   919 in Country Code 1) for the requested domain. 
    
   The Domain Name Servers identified in the application MUST be 
   operational and reachable by the Registry.   
    
6.1.2.  Modification 
    
   The Registrant can modify the information for the registration 
   (e.g., contact info or name servers) other than the Domain Name 
   Requested without reapplying. 
    
6.1.3.  Removal 
    
   A Country Code domain can be removed upon the following conditions: 
    
  
Sharp                Informational-February, 2002                    8 
               draft-sharp-enum-cc-registration-00.txt   August, 2001 
 
 
     . A Country Code is reclaimed as per E.164.1. 
     . Upon request from the Registrant. 
     . RegistrantÆs system acts in a way that endangers the operation 
        of the DNS or Internet and Registrant does not rectify the 
        problem in a reasonable period of time. 
     . Registrant otherwise abrogates the terms of agreement or 
        acceptable use policy for the Registry and does not rectify the 
        problem in a reasonable period of time. 
    
    
6.2.    Procedures  
    
6.2.1   Registration 
    
   The Registrant initiates the application process by submitting a 
   written or electronic request to the Registrar.  Examples of 
   electronic include: 
   *    email to the Registrar 
   *    Secure Web site 
    
   Proprietary information SHOULD be indicated so that it will not be 
   published with non-proprietary information. 
    
   The application MUST meet the criteria defined in clause 8.1.1. 
    
    
   It is the responsibility of the Registrar to: 
    
   *    Communicate with the Registrant when necessary; 
   *    Consult with the appropriate organizations or entities to 
   resolve any issues associated with the application process 
    
   The Registrar ensures that the criteria in clause 8.1.1 have been 
   met. 
    
   If information is missing or if there are editorial or 
   administrative errors (e.g., missing or incorrect contact 
   information), the Registrar (or Registry) communicates with the 
   Registrant to correct the information. 
    
   If necessary, the Registrar MAY consult with the appropriate 
   organization or entity regarding any issues concerning the 
   application.  Consultation might be needed in the following cases: 
    
   *    If there is a question as to whether the Registrant is allowed 
   to register the Country Code domain.   
   *    If there is a problem with the Domain Name Requested. 
   *    If there is a problem with the Host Name and/or IP address 
   provided for the name servers that cannot be resolved by the 
   Registrar or Registry. 
    
   The Registrar SHOULD ensure that consultation occurs without causing 
   unnecessary delay in the application process. A reply from the 
  
Sharp                Informational-February, 2002                    9 
               draft-sharp-enum-cc-registration-00.txt   August, 2001 
 
 
   consultant organization or entity SHOULD normally be given to the 
   Registrar within one month of the consultation. Where problems are 
   identified, the consultant organization or entity SHOULD advise the 
   Registrar to that effect as soon as possible.   
    
   Where problems are identified or an application is rejected, the 
   Registrar SHOULD promptly advise the Registrant. Then the Registrar 
   SHOULD consult with the consultant organization or entity and the 
   Registrant to achieve issue resolution. When communicating with the 
   Registrant to resolve the issue, the Registrar SHOULD propose a 
   specific issue resolution, if possible. 
    
   If the application meets the criteria described in clause, the 
   Registrar MUST submit the information to the Registry for inclusion 
   in the DNS within one month of receipt of the application.    
    
   If the Registry identifies problems with the domain registration 
   information, it communicates with the Registrar to correct the 
   problem.  This might involve consultation with the appropriate 
   organization or entity as defined above.  If the Registry identifies 
   missing information, incorrect administrative information or name 
   server information it communicates with the Registrant to collect 
   the needed information.  Once all the information is correct and 
   complete, the Registry enters the domain information into the DNS 
   within one week. 
    
6.2.2   Modification 
    
   To modify registration information other than the Domain Name 
   Requested, the Registrant contacts the Registry with the new 
   information.  The Registrant and Registry work together to update 
   the DNS with the new information.  The Registrant also MUST notify 
   the Registrar of the new information.  The Registry SHOULD verify 
   the new information before modifying the DNS.  If there are problems 
   with the new information, the appropriate organization or entity MAY 
   be consulted as described in clause 8.2.1. 
    
   To modify the Domain Name Requested, the Registrant MUST first ask 
   to remove the domain name and apply for a new one using the 
   procedures in clause 8.2.1. 
    
6.2.3.  Removal 
    
   When a Country Code is reclaimed as per Recommendation E.164.1, the 
   Registrar notifies the Registry to remove the Country Code domain 
   from the DNS.  The Registrar also notifies the Registrant.  When the 
   Registry receives the notification for removal it removes the 
   Country Code domain from the DNS. The Registry also notifies the 
   Administrative and Technical Contact for the Registrant. 
    
   Upon request of the Registrant, the Registry removes the Country 
   Code domain from DNS.  The Registry notifies the Registrant upon 
   completion of removal of the Country Code domain. 
  
Sharp                Informational-February, 2002                   10 
               draft-sharp-enum-cc-registration-00.txt   August, 2001 
 
 
    
   If the Registrant acts in a way that violates any terms of agreement 
   between the Registry and Registrant or violates the acceptable use 
   policy, the Registry notifies the Registrar and Registrant.  The 
   Registry, Registrar and Registrant will attempt to work out the 
   problem, including consultation with the appropriate organization or 
   entity if needed.  If the problem cannot be resolved, the Registry 
   and Registrar will remove the Country Code domain and will notify 
   the Registrant of the action with the reason for the action. 
    
6.3.    Flow Chart for Country Code Domain Registration 
    
   Figure 1 illustrates the steps in the registration procedure. The 
   chart is for clarity only.  In case of differences between the flow 
   diagram and the text, the text takes precedence.  
    
    
 
  
Sharp                Informational-February, 2002                   11 
               draft-sharp-enum-cc-registration-00.txt   August, 2001 
 
 
                   +------------------+ 
                   |Registrar Receives| 
   +-------------->|Application       | 
   |               +-------+----------+ 
   |                       | 
   |                       v 
   |                     ------ 
   |                   /Criteria\  Yes 
   |                  <          >-------------+ 
   |                   \  Met?  /              | 
   |                    ---+---                v 
   |                   No  |<----------+  +----------+ 
   |                       v           |  |Notify    | 
   |                    ----------     |  |Registrant| 
   |            Yes    /          \    |  +----+-----+ 
   |        +---------<Consultation>   |       | 
   |        |          \Required  /    |       v 
   |        v           ----+---       |  +------------------+ 
   |  +---------------+     |          |  |Registry gets data| 
   |  |Evaluate within|     |No        |  |from Registrar    | 
   |  |1 month        |     |          |  +------+-----------+ 
   |  +------+--------+     |          |         | 
   |         |              |          |         v 
   |         |              |          |      --------- 
   |         +------------->|          | No  / Domain   \ 
   |                        v          +----< registry   > 
   |              +------------------+       \info valid/ 
   |              |Registrar notifies|        ---+------ 
   |              |registrant and    |           | 
   |              |proposes issue    |       Yes |<-----------+ 
   |              |resolution        |           v            | 
   |              +--------+---------+        -------         | 
   |                       |                 /Enough \ No  +--+-------+ 
   |                   ----+-----           <  data   >--->|Contact   | 
   |             Yes  /Application\          \for DNS/     |Registrant| 
   +-----------------< Resubmitted >          -------      +----------+ 
                      \           /              |Yes 
                       ----+------               v 
                           |No            +--------------+ 
                           v              | Register name| 
                   +--------------+       | in DNS within| 
                   | Application  |       | one week     | 
                   | Denied       |       +--------------+ 
                   +--------------+ 
    
   Figure 1 - Procedures for the registration of Country Code domains  
    
    
7.      Country codes for geographic areas 
    
   This clause provides specific information on the process by which 
   the Registrar registers Country Code domains for geographic areas.  
  
Sharp                Informational-February, 2002                   12 
               draft-sharp-enum-cc-registration-00.txt   August, 2001 
 
 
   The general criteria and procedures defined in clause 8 apply unless 
   otherwise specified in this clause. 
    
7.1.    Criteria  
    
   There are no additional criteria. 
    
7.1.1.  Procedures  
    
   There are no additional procedures. 
    
8.      Country codes for global services 
    
   This clause provides specific information on the process for 
   registering domains corresponding to Country Codes for global 
   services.  The criteria and procedures are as defined in clause 8 
   unless otherwise specified in this clause. 
    
   Some global services might not be easily mapped to a domain name as 
   defined in RFC2916.  In these cases, special criteria and procedures 
   might need to be defined further.  However, since this affects 
   domains below the Country Code level, it SHOULD not affect the 
   procedures for registering Country Code domains. 
    
8.1.    Criteria  
    
8.1.1.  Registration 
    
   The global service and its numbering format MUST be defined.  The 
   Registrant MUST identify the global service for which the Country 
   Code domain is requested (e.g., by citing the ITU Recommendation 
   defining the service). 
    
   A registry for the domain associated with the global service has 
   been designated and is operational. 
    
8.1.2.  Modification 
    
   No further criteria for modification are defined. 
    
8.1.3.  Removal 
    
   No further criteria for removal are defined. 
    
8.2.    Procedures  
    
   No further procedures are defined. 
    
    
9.      Country codes and associated identification codes for Networks  
    
   This clause provides specific information on the process by which 
   the Registrar registers domains corresponding to international E.164 
  
Sharp                Informational-February, 2002                   13 
               draft-sharp-enum-cc-registration-00.txt   August, 2001 
 
 
   resources assigned to Networks.  Criteria and procedures defined in 
   clause 8 apply unless otherwise specified in this clause. 
    
   The E.164 resources assigned to Networks consist of a three-digit 
   shared Country Code (CC) followed by a two-digit Identification Code 
   (IC).  This is referred to as CC+IC. 
    
   Throughout this clause, it is assumed that the Registrant is either 
   a network operator or a group of network operators.   
    
9.1.    Criteria 
    
9.1.1.  Registration 
    
   The Registrant MUST be the assignee of the CC+IC for which the 
   registration is requested. 
    
   In the Domain Name Requested, the Registrant MUST provide a fully 
   qualified domain name based on the CC+IC assigned to it.  For 
   example, if the Country Code is +882 and the Identification Code for 
   the assignee is 99, then the Domain Name Requested is 
   9.9.2.8.8.e164.arpa.   
    
9.1.2.  Modification 
    
   The criteria described in clause 8 apply except they apply to the 
   Country Code plus Identification Code. 
    
9.1.3.  Removal  
    
   The criteria described in clause 8 apply except they apply to the 
   Country Code plus Identification Code.  An additional criteria 
   sufficient for removal of a CC+IC domain is if the Identification 
   Code is reclaimed and not the Country Code.  
    
9.2.    Procedures  
    
9.2.1.  Registration 
    
   The procedures described in clause 8 are used except they apply to 
   the Country Code plus Identification Code. 
    
9.2.2.  Modification 
    
   The procedures described in clause 8 are used except they apply to 
   the Country Code plus Identification Code. 
    
9.2.3.  Removal  
    
   The procedures described in clause 8 are used except they apply to 
   the Country Code plus Identification Code. 
    
  
Sharp                Informational-February, 2002                   14 
               draft-sharp-enum-cc-registration-00.txt   August, 2001 
 
 
   If the Identification Code for a particular Network is reclaimed, 
   the  corresponding CC+IC domain is removed.  No other CC+IC domain 
   is removed.  Notification is performed as described in clause 8. 
    
    
10.     Appeals process 
    
    
   Specific procedures in addition to those specified in clause 8 for 
   appealing registration denial are for further study. 
    
    
11.     Security Considerations 
    
   This document describes criteria and procedures for registering 
   domain names in DNS.  Any security issues related to registering 
   domain names in DNS apply to this document. 
    
   In addition, since the domain names are derived from E.164 Country 
   Codes, there is an additional security consideration for ensuring 
   that Country Code domains are not registered to the wrong entity or 
   that the name server information is changed without the approval of 
   the registrant.  The security mechanisms for this are mostly 
   administrative and political. 
    
    
12.     References 
    
    
   All Recommendations and other references are subject to revision.  A 
   list of the currently valid ITU-T Recommendations is regularly 
   published and is available at http://www.itu.int/itudoc/itu-
   t/rec/index.html.  The RFC Index 
   (http://www.ietf.org/iesg/1rfc_index.txt) contains the latest 
   versions and updates to the IETF RFCs. 
    
   [RFC1034]    Mockapetris, P., "Domain names - concepts and 
   facilities", STD 13, RFC 1034, November 1987. 
    
   [RFC1035]    Mockapetris, P., "Domain names - implementation and 
   specification", STD 13, RFC 1035, November 1987. 
    
   [RFC2119]    Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate 
   Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997. 
    
   [RFC2026]    Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 
   3", BCP 9, RFC 2026, October 1996.  
    
   [E164]       ITU-T Recommendation E.164, The international public 
   telecommunication numbering plan. 
    
  
Sharp                Informational-February, 2002                   15 
               draft-sharp-enum-cc-registration-00.txt   August, 2001 
 
 
   [E164-1]     ITU-T Recommendation E.164.1,  Criteria and procedures 
   for the reservation, assignment, and reclamation of E.164 country 
   codes and associated Identification Codes (ICs) 
    
   [RFC2916]    Faltstrom, P., "E.164 and DNS", RFC2916, September 2000 
    
   [RFC1591]    Postel, J., "Domain Name System Structure and 
   Delegation", RFC1591, March 1994. 
    
   [RFC3026]    Blane, R., "Liaison to IETF/ISOC on ENUM", IETF 
   RFC3026,  
    
   [EPP-CONTACT]        Hollenbeck, S, "Extensible Provisioning 
   Protocol Contact Mapping", draft-ietf-provreg-epp-contact-02.txt, 
   work in progress 
    
   [DN-DEF]     Rader, R., "Domain Name and Related Definitions",  
   draft-ietf-provreg-dn-defn-01, work in progress 
    
   [REG-EXP]    Faltstrom, P. "Explanation of the registry/registrar 
   concept", draft-faltstrom-registry-registrar-00.txt, work in 
   progress 
    
   [RESOLUTION20]       ITU World Telecommunications Standards Assembly 
   Resolution 20, "Procedures for allocation and management of 
   international numbering resources", October 2000. 
    
    
13.     Acknowledgments 
    
   Thanks to Patrik Faltstrom for being patient.  Thanks to Andy 
   Gallant and Joakim Stralmark for their constructive feedback. Thanks 
   to the people in ITU-T Study Group 2 who developed E.164 and 
   E.164.1. Most of all, thanks to all the people who have already 
   worked out most of the details of registering domain names in DNS 
   which, after all, is all this is.  
    
    
14.     Author's Address 
    
   Chip Sharp 
   Cisco Systems, Inc. 
   7025 Kit Creek Road 
   RTP, NC 27709 USA 
   tel:+1 (919) 392-3121 
   mailto:chsharp@cisco.com 
    
    
  
Sharp                Informational-February, 2002                   16 
               draft-sharp-enum-cc-registration-00.txt   August, 2001 
 
 
Full Copyright Statement 
    
   "Copyright (C) The Internet Society (date). All Rights Reserved. 
   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published 
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any 
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph 
   are included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this 
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for 
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be 
   followed, or as required to translate it into 
    
    
  
Sharp                Informational-February, 2002                   17 