
 Internet Draft                                       J. Wiljakka (ed.) 
 Document: draft-ietf-v6ops-3gpp-analysis-10.txt                  Nokia 
 Expires: November 2004                                                 
                                                                        
                                                               May 2004 
  
                Analysis on IPv6 Transition in 3GPP Networks 
  
 Status of this Memo 
     
    By submitting this Internet-Draft, I certify that any applicable 
    patent or other IPR claims of which I am aware have been disclosed, 
    and any of which I become aware will be disclosed, in accordance 
    with RFC 3668. 
     
    Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
    Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
    other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
    Drafts. 
     
    Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
    months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
    documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts 
    as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in 
    progress." 
     
    The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at  
         http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt  
    The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at  
         http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.  
         
 Abstract  
     
    This document analyzes the transition to IPv6 in Third Generation 
    Partnership Project (3GPP) packet networks. These networks are 
    based on General Packet Radio Service (GPRS) technology, and the 
    radio network architecture is based on Global System for Mobile 
    Communications (GSM), or Universal Mobile Telecommunications System 
    (UMTS) / Wideband Code Division Multiple Access (WCDMA) technology. 
     
    The focus is on analyzing different transition scenarios, 
    applicable transition mechanisms and finding solutions for those 
    transition scenarios. In these scenarios, the User Equipment (UE) 
    connects to other nodes, e.g. in the Internet, and IPv6/IPv4 
    transition mechanisms are needed. 
      



  
  
 Wiljakka, Editor        Expires: November 2004                [Page 1] 
           Analysis on IPv6 Transition in 3GPP Networks        May 2004 
  
  
 Table of Contents 
     
    1. Introduction..................................................2 
       1.1 Scope of this Document....................................3 
       1.2 Abbreviations.............................................4 
       1.3 Terminology...............................................4 
    2. Transition Mechanisms and DNS Guidelines......................5 
       2.1 Dual Stack................................................5 
       2.2 Tunneling.................................................5 
       2.3 Protocol Translators......................................6 
       2.4 DNS Guidelines for IPv4/IPv6 Transition...................6 
    3. GPRS Transition Scenarios.....................................6 
       3.1 Dual Stack UE Connecting to IPv4 and IPv6 Nodes...........7 
       3.2 IPv6 UE Connecting to an IPv6 Node through an IPv4 Network
        .............................................................8 
       3.3 IPv4 UE Connecting to an IPv4 Node through an IPv6 Network
        ............................................................10 
       3.4 IPv6 UE Connecting to an IPv4 Node.......................10 
       3.5 IPv4 UE Connecting to an IPv6 Node.......................11 
    4. IMS Transition Scenarios.....................................12 
       4.1 UE Connecting to a Node in an IPv4 Network through IMS...12 
       4.2 Two IPv6 IMS Connected via an IPv4 Network...............14 
    5. About 3GPP UE IPv4/IPv6 Configuration........................14 
    6. Summary and Recommendations..................................15 
    7. Security Considerations......................................16 
    8. References...................................................16 
       8.1 Normative................................................16 
       8.2 Informative..............................................17 
    9. Contributors.................................................19 
    10. Authors and Acknowledgements................................19 
    11. Editor's Contact Information................................20 
    12. Intellectual Property Statement.............................20 
    13. Copyright...................................................20 
       Appendix A...................................................21 
  
 1. Introduction 
     
    This document describes and analyzes the process of transition to 
    IPv6 in Third Generation Partnership Project (3GPP) General Packet 
    Radio Service (GPRS) packet networks, in which the radio network 
    architecture is based on Global System for Mobile Communications 
    (GSM), or Universal Mobile Telecommunications System (UMTS) / 
    Wideband Code Division Multiple Access (WCDMA) technology. 
     
    This document analyzes the transition scenarios that may come up in 
    the deployment phase of IPv6 in 3GPP packet  data networks. 
     


  
  
 Wiljakka, Editor        Expires: November 2004                [Page 2] 
           Analysis on IPv6 Transition in 3GPP Networks        May 2004 
  
  
    The 3GPP network architecture is described in [RFC3314], and 
    relevant transition scenarios are documented in [RFC3574]. The 
    reader of this specification should be familiar with the material 
    presented in these documents.  
     
    The scenarios analyzed in this document are divided into two 
    categories: general-purpose packet service scenarios, referred to 
    as GPRS scenarios in this document, and IP Multimedia Subsystem 
    (IMS) scenarios, which include Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) 
    considerations. 
     
    GPRS scenarios are the following: 
       - Dual Stack UE connecting to IPv4 and IPv6 nodes  
       - IPv6 UE connecting to an IPv6 node through an IPv4 network 
       - IPv4 UE connecting to an IPv4 node through an IPv6 network 
       - IPv6 UE connecting to an IPv4 node 
       - IPv4 UE connecting to an IPv6 node 
  
    IMS scenarios are the following: 
       - UE connecting to a node in an IPv4 network through IMS 
       - Two IPv6 IMS connected via an IPv4 network 
     
    The focus is on analyzing different transition scenarios, 
    applicable transition mechanisms and finding solutions for those 
    transition scenarios. In the scenarios, the User Equipment (UE) 
    connects to nodes in other networks, e.g. in the Internet and 
    IPv6/IPv4 transition mechanisms are needed. 
         
 1.1 Scope of this Document 
     
    The scope of this document is to analyze the possible transition 
    scenarios in the 3GPP defined GPRS network where a UE connects to, 
    or is contacted from, another node on the Internet. The document 
    covers scenarios with and without the use of the SIP-based IP 
    Multimedia Core Network Subsystem (IMS). This document does not 
    focus on radio interface-specific issues; both 3GPP Second and 
    Third Generation radio network architectures (GSM, EDGE and 
    UMTS/WCDMA) will be covered by this analysis. 
     
    The 3GPP2 architecture is similar to 3GPP in many ways, but differs 
    in enough details that this document does not include these 
    variations in its analysis. 
     
    The transition mechanisms specified by the IETF Ngtrans and v6ops 
    Working Groups shall be used. This memo shall not specify any new 
    transition mechanisms, but only documents the need for new ones (if 
    appropriate). 
     

  
  
 Wiljakka, Editor        Expires: November 2004                [Page 3] 
           Analysis on IPv6 Transition in 3GPP Networks        May 2004 
  
  
 1.2 Abbreviations 
     
    2G          Second Generation Mobile Telecommunications, for 
                 example GSM and GPRS technologies.  
    3G          Third Generation Mobile Telecommunications, for example  
                 UMTS technology. 
    3GPP        Third Generation Partnership Project  
    ALG         Application Level Gateway 
    APN         Access Point Name. The APN is a logical name referring  
                 to a GGSN and an external network. 
    CSCF        Call Session Control Function (in 3GPP Release 5 IMS) 
    DNS         Domain Name System 
    GGSN        Gateway GPRS Support Node (default router for 3GPP  
                 User Equipment) 
    GPRS        General Packet Radio Service 
    GSM         Global System for Mobile Communications  
    HLR         Home Location Register 
    IMS         IP Multimedia (Core Network) Subsystem, 3GPP Release 5 
                 IPv6-only part of the network 
    ISP         Internet Service Provider 
    NAT         Network Address Translator 
    NAPT-PT     Network Address Port Translation - Protocol Translation 
    NAT-PT      Network Address Translation - Protocol Translation 
    PCO-IE      Protocol Configuration Options Information Element 
    PDP         Packet Data Protocol 
    PPP         Point-to-Point Protocol 
    SGSN        Serving GPRS Support Node 
    SIIT        Stateless IP/ICMP Translation Algorithm 
    SIP         Session Initiation Protocol 
    UE          User Equipment, for example a UMTS mobile handset 
    UMTS        Universal Mobile Telecommunications System 
    WCDMA       Wideband Code Division Multiple Access 
     
 1.3 Terminology 
     
    Some terms used in 3GPP transition scenarios and analysis documents 
    are briefly defined here. 
     
    Dual Stack UE  Dual Stack UE is a 3GPP mobile handset having both 
                   IPv4 and IPv6 stacks. It is capable of activating 
                   both IPv4 and IPv6 Packet Data Protocol (PDP) 
                   contexts. Dual stack UE may be capable of tunneling. 
     
    IPv6 UE        IPv6 UE is an IPv6-only 3GPP mobile handset. It is 
                   only capable of activating IPv6 PDP contexts. 
     
    IPv4 UE        IPv4 UE is an IPv4-only 3GPP mobile handset. It is 
                   only capable of activating IPv4 PDP contexts. 
     
  
  
 Wiljakka, Editor        Expires: November 2004                [Page 4] 
           Analysis on IPv6 Transition in 3GPP Networks        May 2004 
  
  
    IPv4 node      IPv4 node is here defined to be IPv4 capable node 
                   the UE is communicating with. The IPv4 node can 
                   be, for example, an application server or another 
                   UE. 
     
    IPv6 node      IPv6 node is here defined to be IPv6 capable node 
                   the UE is communicating with. The IPv6 node can 
                   be, for example, an application server or another 
                   UE. 
     
    PDP Context    Packet Data Protocol (PDP) Context is a connection 
                   between the UE and the GGSN, over which the packets 
                   are transferred. There are currently three PDP 
                   Types: IPv4, IPv6 and PPP. 
     
 2. Transition Mechanisms and DNS Guidelines 
     
    This chapter briefly introduces these IETF IPv4/IPv6 transition 
    mechanisms: 
     
    -  dual IPv4/IPv6 stack [RFC2893-bis] 
    -  tunneling [RFC2893-bis] 
    -  protocol translators [RFC 2766], [RFC2765]    
     
    In addition, DNS recommendations are given. The applicability of 
    different transition mechanisms to 3GPP networks is discussed in 
    chapters 3 and 4. 
  
 2.1 Dual Stack 
     
    The dual IPv4/IPv6 stack is specified in [RFC2893-bis]. If we 
    consider the 3GPP GPRS core network, dual stack implementation in 
    the Gateway GPRS Support Node (GGSN) enables support for IPv4 and 
    IPv6 PDP contexts. UEs with dual stack and public (global) IP 
    addresses can typically access both IPv4 and IPv6 services without 
    additional translators in the network. However, it is good to 
    remember that private IPv4 addresses and NATs have been used and 
    will be used in mobile networks. Public/global IP addresses are 
    also needed for peer-to-peer services: the node needs a 
    public/global IP address that is visible to other nodes. 
     
 2.2 Tunneling 
     
    Tunneling is a transition mechanism that requires dual IPv4/IPv6 
    stack functionality in the encapsulating and decapsulating nodes. 
    Basic tunneling alternatives are IPv6-in-IPv4 and IPv4-in-IPv6. 
     
    Tunneling can be static or dynamic. Static (configured) tunnels are 
    fixed IPv6 links over IPv4, and they are specified in [RFC2893-
  
  
 Wiljakka, Editor        Expires: November 2004                [Page 5] 
           Analysis on IPv6 Transition in 3GPP Networks        May 2004 
  
  
    bis]. Dynamic (automatic) tunnels are virtual IPv6 links over IPv4 
    where the tunnel endpoints are not configured, i.e. the links are 
    created dynamically. 
     
 2.3 Protocol Translators 
     
    A translator can be defined as an intermediate component between a 
    native IPv4 node and a native IPv6 node to enable direct 
    communication between them without requiring any modifications to 
    the end nodes. 
     
    Header conversion is a translation mechanism. In header conversion, 
    IPv6 packet headers are converted to IPv4 packet headers, or vice 
    versa, and checksums are adjusted or recalculated if necessary. 
    NAT-PT (Network Address Translator / Protocol Translator) [RFC2766] 
    using Stateless IP/ICMP Translation [RFC2765] is an example of such 
    a mechanism. 
     
    Translators may be needed in some cases when the communicating 
    nodes do not share the same IP version; in others, it may be 
    possible to avoid such communication altogether. Translation can 
    take place at the network layer (using NAT-like techniques), the 
    transport layer (using a TCP/UDP proxy) or the application layer 
    (using application relays). 
     
 2.4 DNS Guidelines for IPv4/IPv6 Transition 
     
    To avoid the DNS name space from fragmenting into parts where some 
    parts of DNS are only visible using IPv4 (or IPv6) transport, the 
    recommendation (as of this writing) is to always keep at least one 
    authoritative server IPv4-enabled, and to ensure that recursive DNS 
    servers support IPv4. See DNS IPv6 transport guidelines [DNStrans] 
    for more information. 
     
 3. GPRS Transition Scenarios 
     
    This section discusses the scenarios that might occur when a GPRS 
    UE contacts services or other nodes, e.g. a web server in the 
    Internet. 
     
    The following scenarios described by [RFC3574] are analyzed here. 
    In all of the scenarios, the UE is part of a network where there is 
    at least one router of the same IP version, i.e. the GGSN, and the 
    UE is connecting to a node in a different network. 
             
    1) Dual Stack UE connecting to IPv4 and IPv6 nodes  
    2) IPv6 UE connecting to an IPv6 node through an IPv4 network  
    3) IPv4 UE connecting to an IPv4 node through an IPv6 network  
    4) IPv6 UE connecting to an IPv4 node 
  
  
 Wiljakka, Editor        Expires: November 2004                [Page 6] 
           Analysis on IPv6 Transition in 3GPP Networks        May 2004 
  
  
    5) IPv4 UE connecting to an IPv6 node 
          
 3.1 Dual Stack UE Connecting to IPv4 and IPv6 Nodes 
     
    In this scenario, the dual stack UE is capable of communicating 
    with both IPv4 and IPv6 nodes.  
     
    It is recommended to activate an IPv6 PDP context when 
    communicating with an IPv6 peer node and an IPv4 PDP context when 
    communicating with an IPv4 peer node. If the 3GPP network supports 
    both IPv4 and IPv6 PDP contexts, the UE activates the appropriate 
    PDP context depending on the type of application it has started or 
    depending on the address of the peer host it needs to communicate 
    with. The authors leave the PDP context activation policy to be 
    decided by UE implementers, application developers and operators. 
    One discussed possibility is to activate both IPv4 and IPv6 types 
    of PDP contexts in advance, because activation of a PDP context 
    usually takes some time. However, that probably isn't good usage of 
    network resources. Generally speaking, IPv6 PDP contexts should be 
    preferred even if that meant IPv6-in-IPv4 tunneling would be needed 
    in the network (see section 3.2 for more details). Note that this 
    is transparent to the UE. 
     
    Although the UE is dual-stack, the UE may find itself attached to a 
    3GPP network in which the Serving GPRS Support Node (SGSN), the 
    GGSN, and the Home Location Register (HLR) support IPv4 PDP 
    contexts, but do not support IPv6 PDP contexts. This may happen in 
    early phases of IPv6 deployment, or because the UE has "roamed" 
    from a 3GPP network that supports IPv6 to one that does not. If the 
    3GPP network does not support IPv6 PDP contexts, and an application 
    on the UE needs to communicate with an IPv6(-only) node, the UE may 
    activate an IPv4 PDP context and encapsulate IPv6 packets in IPv4 
    packets using a tunneling mechanism. 
     
    The tunneling mechanism may require public IPv4 addresses, but 
    there are tunneling mechanisms and deployment scenarios in which 
    private IPv4 addresses may be used; for instance, if the tunnel 
    endpoints are in the same private domain, or the tunneling 
    mechanism works through IPv4 NAT. 
     
    One deployment scenario uses a laptop computer and a 3GPP UE as a 
    modem. IPv6 packets are encapsulated in IPv4 packets in the laptop 
    computer and an IPv4 PDP context is activated. The tunneling 
    mechanism depends on the laptop computer’s support of tunneling 
    mechanisms. Another deployment scenario is performing IPv6-in-IPv4 
    tunneling in the UE itself and activating an IPv4 PDP context. 
     
    Closer details for an applicable tunneling mechanism are not 
    analyzed in this document. However, a simple host-to-router 
  
  
 Wiljakka, Editor        Expires: November 2004                [Page 7] 
           Analysis on IPv6 Transition in 3GPP Networks        May 2004 
  
  
    (automatic) tunneling mechanism may be a good fit. There is not yet 
    consensus on the right approach, and proposed mechanisms so far 
    include [ISATAP] and [STEP]. Especially ISATAP has had some support 
    in the wg. However, further work is needed to find out the 
    requirements for the scenario and to specify the mechanism. 
     
    This document strongly recommends the 3GPP operators to deploy 
    basic IPv6 support in their GPRS networks. That makes it possible 
    to lessen the transition effects in the UEs. 
     
    As a general guideline, IPv6 communication is preferred to IPv4 
    communication going through IPv4 NATs to the same dual stack peer 
    node. 
     
    Public IPv4 addresses are often a scarce resource for the operator 
    and usually it is not possible for a UE to have a public IPv4 
    address (continuously) allocated for its use. Use of private IPv4 
    addresses means use of NATs when communicating with a peer node 
    outside the operator's network. In large networks, NAT systems can 
    become very complex, expensive and difficult to maintain. 
     
 3.2 IPv6 UE Connecting to an IPv6 Node through an IPv4 Network 
     
    The best solution for this scenario is obtained with tunneling, 
    i.e. IPv6-in-IPv4 tunneling is a requirement. An IPv6 PDP context 
    is activated between the UE and the GGSN. Tunneling is handled in 
    the network, because IPv6 UE does not have the dual stack 
    functionality needed for tunneling. The encapsulating node can be 
    the GGSN, the edge router between the border of the operator's IPv6 
    network and the public Internet, or any other dual stack node 
    within the operator's IP network. The encapsulation (uplink) and 
    decapsulation (downlink) can be handled by the same network 
    element. Typically the tunneling handled by the network elements is 
    transparent to the UEs and IP traffic looks like native IPv6 
    traffic to them. For the applications and transport protocols, 
    tunneling enables end-to-end IPv6 connectivity. 
     
    IPv6-in-IPv4 tunnels between IPv6 islands can be either static or 
    dynamic. The selection of the type of tunneling mechanism is a 
    policy decision for the operator / ISP deployment scenario and only 
    generic recommendations can be given in this document. 
     
    The following subsections are focused on the usage of different 
    tunneling mechanisms when the peer node is in the operator's 
    network or outside the operator's network. The authors note that 
    where the actual 3GPP network ends and which parts of the network 
    belong to the ISP(s) also depends on the deployment scenario. The 
    authors are not commenting how many ISP functions the 3GPP operator 
    should perform. However, many 3GPP operators are ISPs of some sort 
  
  
 Wiljakka, Editor        Expires: November 2004                [Page 8] 
           Analysis on IPv6 Transition in 3GPP Networks        May 2004 
  
  
    themselves. ISP networks' transition to IPv6 is analyzed in [ISP-
    sa]. 

 3.2.1 Tunneling inside the 3GPP Operator's Network 
     
    GPRS operators today have typically deployed IPv4 backbone 
    networks. IPv6 backbones can be considered quite rare in the first 
    phases of the transition. 
     
    In initial IPv6 deployment, where a small number of IPv6-in-IPv4 
    tunnels are required to connect the IPv6 islands over the 3GPP 
    operator's IPv4 network, manually configured tunnels can be used. 
    In a 3GPP network, one IPv6 island can contain the GGSN while 
    another island can contain the operator's IPv6 application servers. 
    However, manually configured tunnels can be an administrative 
    burden when the number of islands and therefore tunnels rises. In 
    that case, upgrading parts of the backbone to dual stack may be the 
    simplest choice. The administrative burden could also be mitigated 
    by using automated management tools. 
     
    Connection redundancy should also be noted as an important 
    requirement in 3GPP networks. Static tunnels alone don't provide a 
    routing recovery solution for all scenarios where an IPv6 route 
    goes down. However, they can provide an adequate solution depending 
    on the design of the network and the presence of other router 
    redundancy mechanisms, such as the use of IPv6 routing protocols. 

 3.2.2 Tunneling outside the 3GPP Operator's Network 
     
    This subsection includes the case in which the peer node is outside 
    the operator's network. In that case, IPv6-in-IPv4 tunneling can be 
    necessary to obtain IPv6 connectivity and reach other IPv6 nodes. 
    In general, configured tunneling can be recommended. 
     
    Tunnel starting point can be in the operator's network depending on 
    how far the 3GPP operator has come in implementing IPv6. If the 
    3GPP operator has not deployed IPv6 in its backbone, the 
    encapsulating node can be the GGSN. If the 3GPP operator has 
    deployed IPv6 in its backbone but the upstream ISP does not provide 
    IPv6 connectivity, the encapsulating node could be the 3GPP 
    operator's border router.  
     
    The case is pretty straightforward if the upstream ISP provides 
    IPv6 connectivity to the Internet and the operator's backbone 
    network supports IPv6. Then the 3GPP operator does not have to 
    configure any tunnels, since the upstream ISP will take care of 
    routing IPv6 packets. If the upstream ISP does not provide IPv6 
    connectivity, an IPv6-in-IPv4 tunnel should be configured e.g. from 
  
  
 Wiljakka, Editor        Expires: November 2004                [Page 9] 
           Analysis on IPv6 Transition in 3GPP Networks        May 2004 
  
  
    the border router to a dual stack border gateway operated by 
    another ISP which is offering IPv6 connectivity. 
     
 3.3 IPv4 UE Connecting to an IPv4 Node through an IPv6 Network 
       
    3GPP networks are expected to support both IPv4 and IPv6 for a long 
    time, on the UE-GGSN link and between the GGSN and external 
    networks. For this scenario, it is useful to split the end-to-end 
    IPv4 UE to IPv4 node communication into UE-to-GGSN and GGSN-to-
    v4NODE. This allows an IPv4-only UE to use an IPv4 link (an IPv4 
    PDP context) to connect to the GGSN without communicating over an 
    IPv6 network. 
     
    Regarding the GGSN-to-v4NODE communication, typically the transport 
    network between the GGSN and external networks will support only 
    IPv4 in the early stages and migrate to dual stack, since these 
    networks are already deployed. Therefore it is not envisaged that 
    tunneling of IPv4-in-IPv6 will be required from the GGSN to 
    external IPv4 networks either. In the longer run, 3GPP operators 
    may choose to phase out IPv4 UEs and the IPv4 transport network. 
    This would leave only IPv6 UEs.  
     
    Therefore, overall, the transition scenario involving an IPv4 UE 
    communicating with an IPv4 peer through an IPv6 network is not 
    considered very likely in 3GPP networks. 
     
 3.4 IPv6 UE Connecting to an IPv4 Node 
     
    Generally speaking, IPv6-only UEs may be easier to manage, but that 
    would require all services to be used over IPv6, and the universal 
    deployment of IPv6 probably isn’t realistic in the near future. 
    Dual stack implementation requires management of both IPv4 and IPv6 
    networks and one approach is that "legacy" applications keep using 
    IPv4 for the foreseeable future and new applications requiring end-
    to-end connectivity (for example, peer-to-peer services) use IPv6. 
    As a general guideline, IPv6-only UEs are not recommended in the 
    early phases of transition until the IPv6 deployment has become so 
    prevalent that direct communication with IPv4(-only) nodes will be 
    the exception, and not the rule. It is assumed that IPv4 will 
    remain useful for quite a long time, so in general, dual-stack 
    implementation in the UE can be recommended. This recommendation 
    naturally includes manufacturing dual-stack UEs instead of IPv4-
    only UEs. 
     
    However, if there is a need to connect to an IPv4(-only) node from 
    an IPv6-only UE, it is recommended to use specific translation and 
    proxying techniques; generic IP protocol translation is not 
    recommended. There are three main ways for IPv6(-only) nodes to 

  
  
 Wiljakka, Editor        Expires: November 2004               [Page 10] 
           Analysis on IPv6 Transition in 3GPP Networks        May 2004 
  
  
    communicate with IPv4(-only) nodes (excluding avoiding such 
    communication in the first place): 
     
       1. the use of generic-purpose translator (e.g. NAT-PT [RFC2766]) 
         in the local network (not recommended as a general solution), 
     
       2. the use of specific-purpose protocol relays (e.g., IPv6<->IPv4 
         TCP relay configured for a couple of ports only [RFC3142]) or 
         application proxies (e.g., HTTP proxy, SMTP relay) in the 
         local network, or 
     
       3. the use of specific-purpose mechanisms (as described above in 
         2) in the foreign network; these are indistinguishable from 
         the IPv6-enabled services from the IPv6 UE's perspective, and 
         not discussed further here. 
     
    For many applications, application proxies can be appropriate (e.g. 
    HTTP proxies, SMTP relays, etc.). Such application proxies will not 
    be transparent to the UE. Hence, a flexible mechanism with minimal 
    manual intervention should be used to configure these proxies on 
    IPv6 UEs. Application proxies can be placed, for example, on the 
    GGSN external interface ("Gi"), or inside the service network. 
     
    The authors note that [NATPTappl] discusses the applicability of 
    NAT-PT. The problems related to NAT-PT usage in 3GPP networks are 
    documented in appendix A. 
     
 3.5 IPv4 UE Connecting to an IPv6 Node 
     
    The legacy IPv4 nodes are typically nodes that support the 
    applications that are popular today in the IPv4 Internet: mostly e-
    mail and web-browsing. These applications will, of course, be 
    supported in the future IPv6 Internet. However, the legacy IPv4 UEs 
    are not going to be updated to support future applications. As 
    these applications are designed for IPv6, and to use the advantages 
    of newer platforms, the legacy IPv4 nodes will not be able to take 
    advantage of them. Thus, they will continue to support legacy 
    services. 
     
    Taking the above into account, the traffic to and from the legacy 
    IPv4 UE is restricted to a few applications. These applications 
    already mostly rely on proxies or local servers to communicate 
    between private address space networks and the Internet. The same 
    methods and technology can be used for IPv4 to IPv6 transition. 
     




  
  
 Wiljakka, Editor        Expires: November 2004               [Page 11] 
           Analysis on IPv6 Transition in 3GPP Networks        May 2004 
  
  
 4. IMS Transition Scenarios 
     
    As IMS is exclusively IPv6, the number of possible transition 
    scenarios is reduced dramatically. The possible IMS scenarios are 
    listed below and analyzed in sections 4.1 and 4.2. 
             
       1) UE connecting to a node in an IPv4 network through IMS 
       2) Two IPv6 IMS connected via an IPv4 network 
     
    For DNS recommendations, we refer to section 2.4. As DNS traffic is 
    not directly related to the IMS functionality, the recommendations 
    are not in contradiction with the IPv6-only nature of the IMS. 
  
 4.1 UE Connecting to a Node in an IPv4 Network through IMS 
     
    This scenario occurs when an IMS UE (IPv6) connects to a node in 
    the IPv4 Internet through the IMS, or vice versa. This happens when 
    the other node is a part of a different system than 3GPP, e.g. a 
    fixed PC, with only IPv4 capabilities. 
     
    Over time, users will upgrade the legacy IPv4 nodes to dual-stack, 
    often by replacing the entire node, eliminating this particular 
    problem in that specific deployment. 
     
    Still, it is difficult to estimate how many non-upgradeable legacy 
    IPv4 nodes need to communicate with the IMS UEs. It is assumed that 
    the solution described here is used for limited cases, in which 
    communications with a small number of legacy IPv4 SIP equipment are 
    needed. 
     
    As the IMS is exclusively IPv6 [3GPP 23.221], for many of the 
    applications in the IMS, some kind of translators may need to 
    be used in the communication between the IPv6 IMS and the legacy 
    IPv4 hosts in cases where these legacy IPv4 hosts cannot be 
    upgraded to support IPv6. 
     
    This section gives a brief analysis of the IMS interworking issues, 
    and presents a high level view of SIP within the IMS. The authors 
    recommend that a detailed solution for the general SIP/SDP/media 
    IPv4/IPv6 transition problem will be specified as soon as possible 
    as a task within the SIP WGs in the IETF. 
       
    As control (or signaling) and user (or data) traffic are separated 
    in SIP calls, and thus, the IMS, the transition of IMS traffic from 
    IPv6 to IPv4 must be handled at two levels: 
     
       1. Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) [RFC3261], and Session 
         Description Protocol (SDP) [RFC2327] [RFC3266] (Mm-interface)  
          
  
  
 Wiljakka, Editor        Expires: November 2004               [Page 12] 
           Analysis on IPv6 Transition in 3GPP Networks        May 2004 
  
  
       2. the user data traffic (Mb-interface)  
     
    SIP carries an SDP body containing the addressing and other 
    parameters for establishing the user data traffic (the media). 
     
    Figure 1 shows a signaling edge for SIP and SDP, a dual stack SIP 
    proxy at the border between the 3GPP IPv6-only IMS and the IPv4 
    systems. 
     
    In a possible approach, this edge could contain a SIP ALG, which 
    would change the IP addresses transported in the SIP messages and 
    the SDP payload of those messages to the appropriate  version. This 
    approach would have the drawback (like other SDP rewriting 
    solutions) of impacting authentication mechanisms that may be 
    needed for other purposes. Moreover, this approach would not take 
    advantage of SIP's ability to use proxy routing, nor of SDP's 
    ability to carry multiple alternative addresses. These intrinsic 
    features of SIP and SDP require a more detailed analysis, but they 
    could yield benefits. The SIP ALG approach requires NAT-PT (with 
    the issues described in Appendix A), because the IMS-side IPv6 
    addresses must be assigned IPv4 addresses for reachability from the 
    legacy IPv4 side shown in Figure 1. The approach based on intrinsic 
    SIP proxy routing would not require assignment of temporary IPv4 
    addresses to the IPv6 IMS endpoints; instead they would be reached 
    via an IPv4-side address of a SIP proxy acting for them. This SIP 
    proxy would be doing normal SIP processing. 
         
    On the user data transport level, the analysis raises other issues: 
    the IMS data is time-sensitive, so NAT-PT IPv6-IPv4 protocol 
    translation (with the scalability concerns raised in Appendix A) 
    may look simplest, but needs a skeptical look. Alternatives include 
    routing to a transcoder, whose task is to terminate an IPv6 stream 
    and start an IPv4 stream.  Again, this requires a more detailed 
    analysis. 
     
    For each of the protocols, there has to be interoperability for DNS 
    queries; see section 2.4 for details. 
       
     










  
  
 Wiljakka, Editor        Expires: November 2004               [Page 13] 
           Analysis on IPv6 Transition in 3GPP Networks        May 2004 
  
  
          +-------------------------------+ +------------+ 
          |                      +------+ | | +--------+ | 
          |                      |S-CSCF|---| |SIP edge| |\ 
       |  |                      +------+ | | +--------+ | \ -------- 
     +-|+ |                       /       | |     |      |  |        | 
     |  | | +------+        +------+      | |     +      |   -|    |- 
     |  |-|-|P-CSCF|--------|I-CSCF|      | |     |      |    | () | 
     |  |   +------+        +------+      | |+----------+| /  ------ 
     |  |-----------------------------------||  [ALG?]  ||/ 
     +--+ |            IPv6               | |+----------+|     IPv4 
      UE  |                               | |Interworking| 
          |  IP Multimedia CN Subsystem   | |Unit        | 
          +-------------------------------+ +------------+ 
        
               Figure 1: UE using IMS to contact a legacy phone  
              
    Figure 1 shows a generic SIP signaling edge - an ALG-like 
    replacement of the IPv6 addresses with IPv4 addresses using limited 
    subsets of NAT-PT [RFC2766]. This is a possible approach, but 
    exploiting SIP's proxy routing to allow the dual homed SIP edge to 
    make the address change without a translator could be a promising 
    alternative without the scaling problems of NAT-PT. 
     
 4.2 Two IPv6 IMS Connected via an IPv4 Network 
     
    At the early stages of IMS deployment, there may be cases where two 
    IMS islands are separated by an IPv4 network such as the legacy 
    Internet. Here both the UEs and the IMS islands are IPv6-only. 
    However, the IPv6 islands are not connected natively with IPv6. 
     
    In this scenario, the end-to-end SIP connections are based on IPv6. 
    The only issue is to make connection between two IPv6-only IMS 
    islands over IPv4 network. This scenario is closely related to GPRS 
    scenario represented in section 3.2. and similar tunneling 
    solutions are applicable also in this scenario. 
     
 5. About 3GPP UE IPv4/IPv6 Configuration 
     
    This informative section aims to give a brief overview on the 
    configuration needed in the UE in order to access IP based 
    services. There can also be other application specific settings in 
    the UE that are not described here. 
     
    UE configuration is required in order to access IPv6 or IPv4 based 
    services. The GGSN Access Point has to be defined when using, for 
    example, the web browsing application. One possibility is to use 
    over the air configuration [OMA-CP] to configure the GPRS settings. 
    The user can, for example, visit the operator WWW page and 
    subscribe the GPRS Access Point settings to his/her UE and receive 
  
  
 Wiljakka, Editor        Expires: November 2004               [Page 14] 
           Analysis on IPv6 Transition in 3GPP Networks        May 2004 
  
  
    the settings via Short Message Service (SMS). After the user has 
    accepted the settings and a PDP context has been activated, he/she 
    can start browsing. The Access Point settings can also be typed in 
    manually or be pre-configured by the operator or the UE 
    manufacturer. 
     
    DNS server addresses typically also need to be configured in the 
    UE. In the case of IPv4 type PDP context, the (IPv4) DNS server 
    addresses can be received in the PDP context activation (a control 
    plane mechanism). A similar mechanism is also available for IPv6: 
    so-called Protocol Configuration Options Information Element (PCO-
    IE) specified by the 3GPP [3GPP-24.008]. It is also possible to use 
    [RFC3736] (or [RFC3315]) and [RFC3646] for receiving DNS server 
    addresses. Active IETF work on DNS discovery mechanisms is ongoing 
    and might result in other mechanisms becoming available over time. 
    The DNS server addresses can also be received over the air (using 
    SMS) [OMA-CP], or typed in manually in the UE. 
     
    When accessing IMS services, the UE needs to know the Proxy-Call 
    Session Control Function (P-CSCF) IPv6 address. Either a 3GPP-
    specific PCO-IE mechanism or a DHCPv6-based mechanism ([RFC3736] 
    and [RFC3319]) can be used. Manual configuration or configuration 
    over the air is also possible. IMS subscriber authentication and 
    registration to the IMS and SIP integrity protection are not 
    discussed here. 
     
 6. Summary and Recommendations 
     
    This document has analyzed five GPRS and two IMS IPv6 transition 
    scenarios. Numerous 3GPP networks are using private IPv4 addresses 
    today, and introducing IPv6 is an important thing. The two first 
    GPRS scenarios and both IMS scenarios are seen the most relevant. 
    The authors summarize some main recommendations here: 
       - Dual-stack UEs are recommended instead of IPv4-only or IPv6-
         only UEs. It is important to take care that the applications 
         in the UEs support IPv6. IPv6-only UEs can become feasible 
         when IPv6 is widely deployed in the networks, and most 
         services work on IPv6. 
       - It is recommended to activate an IPv6 PDP context when 
         communicating with an IPv6 peer node and an IPv4 PDP context 
         when communicating with an IPv4 peer node. 
       - IPv6 communication is preferred to IPv4 communication going 
         through IPv4 NATs to the same dual stack peer node. 
       - This document strongly recommends the 3GPP operators to deploy 
         basic IPv6 support in their GPRS networks as soon as possible. 
         That makes it possible to lessen the transition effects in the 
         UEs. 
       - A tunneling mechanism in the UE may be needed during the early 
         phases of the IPv6 transition process. A lightweight, 
  
  
 Wiljakka, Editor        Expires: November 2004               [Page 15] 
           Analysis on IPv6 Transition in 3GPP Networks        May 2004 
  
  
         automatic tunneling mechanism should be standardized in the 
         IETF. 
       - Tunneling mechanisms can be used in 3GPP networks, and only 
         generic recommendations are given in this document. More 
         details can be found, for example, in [ISP-sa]. 
       - We recommend that a detailed solution for the general 
         SIP/SDP/media IPv4/IPv6 transition problem will be specified 
         as soon as possible as a task within the SIP WGs in the IETF. 
     
 7. Security Considerations  
     
    Deploying IPv6 has some generic security considerations one should 
    be aware of [V6SEC]; however, these are not specific to 3GPP 
    transition, and are therefore out of the scope of this memo. 
     
    This memo recommends the use of a relatively small number of 
    techniques. Each technique has its own security considerations, 
    including: 
     
       - native upstream access or tunneling by the 3GPP network 
          operator, 
       - use of routing protocols to ensure redundancy, 
       - use of locally-deployed specific-purpose protocol relays and  
          application proxies to reach IPv4(-only) nodes from IPv6-only 
          UEs, or 
       - a specific mechanism for SIP signalling and media translation 
     
    The threats of configured tunneling are described in [RFC2893-bis]. 
    Attacks against routing protocols are described in the respective 
    documents and in general in [ROUTESEC].  Threats related to 
    protocol relays have been described in [RFC3142].  The security 
    properties of SIP internetworking are to be specified when the 
    mechanism is specified. 
     
    In particular, this memo does not recommend the following technique 
    which has security issues, not further analyzed here: 
     
       - NAT-PT or other translator as a general-purpose transition 
          mechanism 
       
 8. References 
              
 8.1 Normative 
     
    [RFC2663] Srisuresh, P., Holdrege, M.: IP Network Address 
    Translator (NAT) Terminology and Considerations, August 1999. 
     
    [RFC2765] Nordmark, E.: Stateless IP/ICMP Translation Algorithm 
    (SIIT), February 2000. 
  
  
 Wiljakka, Editor        Expires: November 2004               [Page 16] 
           Analysis on IPv6 Transition in 3GPP Networks        May 2004 
  
  
     
    [RFC2766] Tsirtsis, G., Srisuresh, P.: Network Address Translation 
    - Protocol Translation (NAT-PT), February 2000.  
     
    [RFC3261] Rosenberg, J., et al.: SIP: Session Initiation Protocol, 
    June 2002. 
     
    [RFC3574] Soininen, J. (editor): Transition Scenarios for 3GPP 
    Networks, August 2003. 
     
    [RFC3667] Bradner, S.: IETF Rights in Contributions, February 2004. 
     
    [RFC3668] Bradner, S.: Intellectual Property Rights in IETF 
    Technology, February 2004. 
     
    [RFC2893-bis] Nordmark, E. and Gilligan, R. E.: "Basic Transition 
    Mechanisms for IPv6 Hosts and Routers", January 2004, draft-ietf-
    v6ops-mech-v2-02.txt, work in progress. 
     
    [3GPP-23.060] 3GPP TS 23.060 V5.4.0, "General Packet Radio Service 
    (GPRS); Service description; Stage 2 (Release 5)", December 2002.  
     
    [3GPP 23.221] 3GPP TS 23.221 V5.7.0, "Architectural requirements 
    (Release 5)", December 2002. 
          
    [3GPP-23.228] 3GPP TS 23.228 V5.7.0, "IP Multimedia Subsystem 
    (IMS); Stage 2 (Release 5)", December 2002. 
     
    [3GPP 24.228] 3GPP TS 24.228 V5.3.0, "Signalling flows for the IP 
    multimedia call control based on SIP and SDP; Stage 3 (Release 5)", 
    December 2002. 
     
    [3GPP 24.229] 3GPP TS 24.229 V5.3.0, "IP Multimedia Call Control 
    Protocol based on SIP and SDP; Stage 3 (Release 5)", December 2002. 
     
 8.2 Informative 
     
    [RFC2327] Handley, M., Jacobson, V.: SDP: Session Description 
    Protocol, April 1998. 
     
    [RFC3142] Hagino, J., Yamamoto, K.: An IPv6-to-IPv4 Transport Relay 
    Translator, June 2001. 
     
    [RFC3266] Olson, S., Camarillo, G., Roach, A. B.: Support for IPv6 
    in Session Description Protocol (SDP), June 2002. 
     
    [RFC3314] Wasserman, M. (editor): Recommendations for IPv6 in 3GPP 
    Standards, September 2002. 
     
  
  
 Wiljakka, Editor        Expires: November 2004               [Page 17] 
           Analysis on IPv6 Transition in 3GPP Networks        May 2004 
  
  
    [RFC3315] Droms, R. et al.: Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol for 
    IPv6 (DHCPv6), July 2003. 
     
    [RFC3319] Schulzrinne, H., Volz, B.: Dynamic Host Configuration 
    Protocol (DHCPv6) Options for Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) 
    Servers, July 2003. 
     
    [RFC3646] Droms, R. (ed.): DNS Configuration options for DHCPv6, 
    December 2003. 
     
    [RFC3736] Droms, R.: Stateless Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol 
    (DHCP) Service for IPv6, April 2004. 
     
    [DNStrans] Durand, A. and Ihren, J.: "DNS IPv6 transport 
    operational guidelines", March 2004, draft-ietf-dnsop-ipv6-
    transport-guidelines-02.txt, work in progress. 
     
    [ISATAP] Templin, F., Gleeson, T., Talwar, M. and Thaler, D.: 
    "Intra-Site Automatic Tunnel Addressing Protocol (ISATAP)", April 
    2004, draft-ietf-ngtrans-isatap-21.txt, work in progress. 
     
    [ISP-sa] Lind, M., Ksinant, V., Park, D. and Baudot, A.: "Scenarios 
    and Analysis for Introducing IPv6 into ISP Networks", April 2004, 
    draft-ietf-v6ops-isp-scenarios-analysis-02.txt, work in progress. 
     
    [NATPTappl] Satapati, S., Sivakumar, S., Barany, P., Okazaki, S. 
    and Wang, H.: "NAT-PT Applicability", October 2003, draft-satapati-
    v6ops-natpt-applicability-00.txt, work in progress. 
     
    [ROUTESEC] Barbir, A., Murphy, S. and Yang, Y.: "Generic Threats to 
    Routing Protocols", April 2004, draft-ietf-rpsec-routing-threats-
    06.txt, work in progress. 
     
    [STEP] Savola, P.: "Simple IPv6-in-IPv4 Tunnel Establishment 
    Procedure (STEP)", January 2004, draft-savola-v6ops-conftun-setup-
    02.txt, work in progress. 
     
    [V6SEC] Savola, P.: "IPv6 Transition/Co-existence Security 
    Considerations", February 2004, draft-savola-v6ops-security-
    overview-02.txt, work in progress. 
     
    [3GPP-24.008] 3GPP TS 24.008 V5.8.0, "Mobile radio interface Layer 
    3 specification; Core network protocols; Stage 3 (Release 5)", June 
    2003. 
     
    [OMA-CP] OMA Client Provisioning: Provisioning Architecture 
    Overview Version 1.1, OMA-WAP-ProvArch-v1_1-20021112-C, Open Mobile 
    Alliance, 12-Nov-2002. 
     
  
  
 Wiljakka, Editor        Expires: November 2004               [Page 18] 
           Analysis on IPv6 Transition in 3GPP Networks        May 2004 
  
  
 9. Contributors 
     
    Pekka Savola has contributed both text and his IPv6 experience to 
    this document. He has provided a large number of helpful comments 
    on the v6ops mailing list. Allison Mankin has contributed text for 
    IMS Scenario 1 (section 4.1). 
     
 10. Authors and Acknowledgements 
     
    This document is written by: 
  
       Alain Durand, Sun Microsystems  
       <Alain.Durand@sun.com> 
  
       Karim El-Malki, Ericsson Radio Systems 
       <Karim.El-Malki@era.ericsson.se> 
     
       Niall Richard Murphy, Enigma Consulting Limited 
       <niallm@enigma.ie> 
     
       Hugh Shieh, AT&T Wireless  
       <hugh.shieh@attws.com> 
     
       Jonne Soininen, Nokia 
       <jonne.soininen@nokia.com> 
       
       Hesham Soliman, Flarion 
       <h.soliman@flarion.com> 
     
       Margaret Wasserman, ThingMagic 
       <margaret@thingmagic.com> 
     
       Juha Wiljakka, Nokia 
       <juha.wiljakka@nokia.com> 
     
     
    The authors would like to give special thanks to Spencer Dawkins 
    for proofreading.  
     
    The authors would like to thank Heikki Almay, Gabor Bajko, Ajay 
    Jain, Jarkko Jouppi, David Kessens, Ivan Laloux, Allison Mankin, 
    Jasminko Mulahusic, Janne Rinne, Andreas Schmid, Pedro Serna, Fred 
    Templin, Anand Thakur and Rod Van Meter for their valuable input. 
     





  
  
 Wiljakka, Editor        Expires: November 2004               [Page 19] 
           Analysis on IPv6 Transition in 3GPP Networks        May 2004 
  
  
 11. Editor's Contact Information 
  
    Comments or questions regarding this document should be sent to the 
    v6ops mailing list or directly to the document editor: 
     
    Juha Wiljakka  
    Nokia 
    Visiokatu 3                    Phone:  +358 7180 48372 
    FIN-33720 TAMPERE, Finland     Email:  juha.wiljakka@nokia.com 
     
 12. Intellectual Property Statement 
     
    The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
    Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed 
    to pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described 
    in this document or the extent to which any license under such 
    rights might or might not be available; nor does it represent that 
    it has made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  
    Information on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC 
    documents can be found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 
     
    Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
    assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
    attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use 
    of such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
    specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository 
    at http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 
     
    The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
    copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
    rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
    this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at ietf-
    ipr@ietf.org. 
     
 13. Copyright 
     
    The following copyright notice is copied from [RFC3667], Section 
    5.4. It describes the applicable copyright for this document. 
     
    Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004). This document is subject 
    to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and 
    except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights. 
     
    This document and the information contained herein are provided on 
    an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE 
    REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND 
    THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, 
    EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT 
    THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR 
  
  
 Wiljakka, Editor        Expires: November 2004               [Page 20] 
           Analysis on IPv6 Transition in 3GPP Networks        May 2004 
  
  
    ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A 
    PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
  
  
 Appendix A - On the Use of Generic Translators in the 3GPP Networks 
  
    This appendix lists mainly 3GPP-specific arguments about generic 
    translators, even though the use of generic translators is 
    discouraged.  The section may be removed in future versions of the 
    memo. 
     
    Due to the significant lack of IPv4 addresses in some domains, port 
    multiplexing is likely to be a necessary feature for translators 
    (i.e. NAPT-PT). If NAPT-PT is used, it needs to be placed on the 
    GGSN external (Gi) interface, typically separate from the GGSN. 
    NAPT-PT can be installed, for example, on the edge of the 
    operator's network and the public Internet. NAPT-PT will intercept 
    DNS requests and other applications that include IP addresses in 
    their payloads, translate the IP header (and payload for some 
    applications if necessary) and forward packets through its IPv4 
    interface. 
     
    NAPT-PT introduces limitations that are expected to be magnified 
    within the 3GPP architecture. Some of these limitations are listed 
    below (notice that most of them are also relevant for IPv4 NAT). 
    [NATPTappl] discusses the applicability of NAT-PT in more detail. 
     
       1. NAPT-PT is a single point of failure for all ongoing 
         connections. 
          
       2. There are additional forwarding delays due to further 
         processing, when compared to normal IP forwarding. 
          
       3. There are problems with source address selection due to the 
         inclusion of a DNS ALG on the same node [NATPT-DNS]. 
          
       4. NAPT-PT does not work (without application level gateways) for 
         applications that embed  IP addresses in their payload. 
          
       5. NAPT-PT breaks DNSSEC. 
          
       6. NAPT-PT does not scale very well in large networks.  
     
    3GPP networks are expected to handle a very large number of 
    subscribers on a single GGSN (default router). Each GGSN is 
    expected to handle hundreds of thousands of connections. 
    Furthermore, high reliability is expected for 3GPP networks. 
    Consequently, a single point of failure on the GGSN external 
    interface would raise concerns on the overall network reliability. 
  
  
 Wiljakka, Editor        Expires: November 2004               [Page 21] 
           Analysis on IPv6 Transition in 3GPP Networks        May 2004 
  
  
    In addition, IPv6 users are expected to use delay-sensitive 
    applications provided by IMS. Hence, there is a need to minimize 
    forwarding delays within the IP backbone. Furthermore, due to the 
    unprecedented number of connections handled by the default routers 
    (GGSN) in 3GPP networks, a network design that forces traffic to go 
    through a single node at the edge of the network (typical NAPT-PT 
    configuration) is not likely to scale. Translation mechanisms 
    should allow for multiple translators, for load sharing and 
    redundancy purposes.  
     
    To minimize the problems associated with NAPT-PT, the following 
    actions can be recommended:  
     
      1. Separate the DNS ALG from the NAPT-PT node (in the "IPv6 to 
         IPv4" case). 
          
      2. Ensure (if possible) that NAPT-PT does not become a single 
         point of failure. 
          
      3. Allow for load sharing between different translators. That is, 
         it should be possible for different connections to go through 
         different translators. Note that load sharing alone does not 
         prevent NAPT-PT from becoming a single point of failure. 
     

























  
  
 Wiljakka, Editor        Expires: November 2004               [Page 22] 

