
              
              
          IPS 
          Internet Draft  
          draft-ietf-ips-iscsi-name-disc-00.txt  
          Draft Title: iSCSI Naming and Discovery                                     
                                                         
                                 
    
                                                    Mark Bakke   
                                                    Cisco   
                                                                     
                                                    Joe Czap   
                                                    IBM   
                                                                                     
                                                    Jim Hafner   
                                                    IBM   
                                                                                     
                                                    Howard Hall   
                                                    Pirus   
                                                                                     
                                                    Jack Harwood   
                                                    EMC   
                                                                                     
                                                    John Hufferd   
                                                    IBM   
                                                                                     
                                                    Yaron Klein   
                                                    Sanrad   
                                                                                     
                                                    Lawrence Lamers   
                                                    San Valley Systems   
                                                          
                                                    Todd Sperry 
                                                     Adaptec 
                                                                                     
                                                    Joshua Tseng   
                                                    Nishan   
                                                                                     
                                                    Kaladhar Voruganti   
                                                    IBM   
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                     
    draft-ietf-ips-iscsi-name-disc-00.           February, 2001   
            Expires August 2001                                                       
               
       iSCSI Naming and Discovery   
               
            Status of this Memo   
               
                  
     
   Voruganti  iSCSI Naming and Discovery  February 2001               1 

                    Using Microsoft Word to create       February 2001 
                      Internet Drafts and RFC's 
    
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 except that the right to 
   produce derivative works is not granted. Internet-Drafts are working 
   documents of the Internet Engineering.Task Force (IETF), its areas, 
   and its working groups. Note that other groups may also distribute 
   working documents as Internet-Drafts. Internet-Drafts are draft 
   documents valid for a maximum of six months and may be updated, 
   replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any time. It is 
   inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts as reference material or to 
   cite them other than as "work in progress." The list of current 
   Internet-Drafts can be accessed at http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-
   abstracts.txt    
                
    
              
              
              
              iSCSI Naming and Discovery        February 2000  
               
               
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.   
                  
                  
                  
   Comments   
   Comments should be sent to the ips mailing list (ips@ece.cmu.edu) or 
   to kaladhar@us.ibm.com   
              
              
             
   1. Abstract  
              
            
   This document describes both the  iSCSI [7] naming and discovery 
   requirements, and the details of these mechanisms.
   The  requirements presented in this document have been 
   agreed to by the members of  the iSCSI naming and discovery team. 
   This document complements the iSCSI IETF  draft. Flexibility is the 
   key guiding principle behind both the naming and discovery designs.
   That is, an effort has been made to satisfy the needs of both 
   small  isolated environments, as well as large environments 
   requiring secure/scalable solutions.  
              
   This document has been organized into the following sections: 
   a) Section 3 presents the naming requirements. It discusses the 
   concept of a world wide unique identifer (WWUI).  
   b) Section 4 discusses the discovery requirements.  
   c) Section 5 presents Storage Name Server (SNS) requirements.  
   d) Section 6 presents the details of iSNS protocol. iSNS 
   meets the requirements of SNS. The protocols identified in section 
   6, which are used by iSNS, MUST also be supported by any iSCSI 
   compliant SNS protocol. 
   e) Section 7 briefly lists some other discovery protocols. 
     
   Voruganti iSCSI Naming and Discovery - Expires August 2001        2 

  
    
   f) Section 8 briefly discusses the security implications on the 
   discovery mechanism.  
   g) Appendix A describes the different hardware and software 
   components with whom the initiator and target WWUIs can be 
   associated. 
   h) Appendix B contains examples on how the WWUIs are to be used in 
   iSCSI Login commands. 
   i) Appendix C contains a taxonomy of iSCSI proxy and firewall 
   concepts. This taxonomy helps to evaluate the behavior of the 
   discovery mechanism when dealing with proxies and firewalls. 
                 
              
              
             
   2. Conventions used in this document  
              
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",  
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in  
   this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119.  
              
              
             
   3. Naming Requirements   
             
   In order for an iSCSI initiator to connect to an iSCSI target, the 
   initiator  needs to provide information about the Network Entity 
   object, Portal Object and  the target Storage Node object. The 
   details of these three iSCSI objects are as  follows:  
              
   a) Network Entity Object  
   The Network Entity object represents a device or gateway that is 
   accessible from  the IP network. This device or gateway may support 
   one or more initiators or  targets that are either internal to the 
   storage device or accessible through a  network behind the gateway. 
   Each initiator or target is represented by subordinate Storage Node 
   objects.                   
   b) Portal Object         
   The Portal object is a port through which access to any Storage Node  
   object within the Network Entity object can be obtained. A Network 
   Entity object  must have one or more Portal objects, each of which is 
   usable by Storage Node  objects contained in that Network Entity 
   object to gain access to the IP network. The Portal object is 
   identified by its IP address and Port number.  
   c) Storage Node Object  
   The Storage Node object defines an individual iSCSI initiator or 
   target. There may be one or more Storage Node objects within the 
   Network Entity object. A Storage Node object is identified by its 
   world wide unique identifier (WWUI). There is a requirement to have 
   the ability to generate world wide unique identifiers (WWUIs) for 
   both iSCSI initiators and targets. However, it is not mandatory for 
   the initiators and targets to use WWUIs because a globally unique 
   identifier might not be required in some simple, isolated iSCSI 
   configurations. WWUIs are useful because in some cases (e.g. when 
     
   Voruganti iSCSI Naming and Discovery - Expires August 2001        3 

                    
   DHCP services [6] are used etc), the combination of IP address and 
   port number [6] cannot uniquely identify an initiator or a target.  
              
   There is a default Storage Node object present at every target 
   network entity that can be accessed without specifying the WWUI. 
   However, if there are multiple iSCSI target Storage Nodes that are 
   serviced by a single Network Entity and  Portal objects, then it is 
   necessary for the initiator to specify the target  Storage Node WWUI 
   to uniquely identify the target storage node. An alias string could 
   also be associated with a target storage node. The target alias helps 
   an organization to associate their own semantic meaning with the 
   target alias string. However, the target alias string is not a 
   substitute for the target WWUI.  
                       
   3.1 World Wide Unique Identifier 
    
   The WWUI uniquely identifies iSCSI initiators and targets. The 
   initiator WWUI corresponds to the logical operating system on which 
   the initiator is running, and the target WWUI corresponds to the 
   target Storage Node entity. 
    
   A WWUI really names a logical software entity, and is not generally 
   tied to a port or other hardware that can be changed.  For instance, 
   an initiator WWUI should name the iSCSI initiator driver, and not 
   a particular NIC or HBA card.  When multiple NICs are used, they 
   should generally all present the same WWUI to the targets, since 
   they are really to the same entity.  In most operating systems, the 
   named entity is the operating system image.  Most hosts will have a 
   single OS running; some of the really big ones could have multiples. 
    
   A target WWUI should similarly not be tied to hardware interfaces 
   that can be changed.  A WWUI should identify the logical target, 
   and must be the same for the target regardless of the physical port 
   on which it is addressed.  This gives iSCSI initiators an easy way 
   to determine that two targets it has discovered are really two paths 
   to the same target.   
    
   The iSCSI WWUI is designed to fulfill the functional requirements 
   for Uniform Resource Names (URN) [RFC1737].  Among these requirements 
   are that the WWUI must have a global scope, independent of address 
   or location, and that it be persistent and globally unique.  It must 
   be extensible, and scale with the use of naming authorities.  The 
   encoding of the WWUI should be transcribable by a human, as well as 
   be machine-readable.  There are other requirements as well; please 
   read RFC1737 (only 5 pages) for definitions of these requirements. 
    
   The WWUI may be displayed by user interfaces, but is generally 
   uninterpreted and used as an opaque, case-insensitive string for 
   comparison with other WWUI values. 
    
   A WWUI is text-based.  This was done for the following reasons: 
    
     - A text-based identifier is transcribable, and is easier to 
     
   Voruganti iSCSI Naming and Discovery - Expires August 2001        4 

         
       differentiate when looking at a user interface, or while 
       debugging problems with iSCSI login and discovery. 
    
     - WWUIs are only used during login and discovery phases, so the 
       overhead does not get in the way of the data path. 
    
     - The iSCSI protocol communicates these via text strings anyway, 
       so it "fits in" easily. 
    
   A WWUI consists of three parts: a type designator, followed by a 
   naming authority, with the remaining format designated by the naming 
   authority itself, subject to the following requirements. 
    
   A WWUI can be any Unicode character string with the following 
   properties: 
      - it is in Normalization Form C (see Unicode Standard Annex #15, 
        "Unicode Normalization Forms" at 
         http://www.unicode.org/unicode/reports/15) 
      - it contains only the ASCII dash character ('-'=U+002d) or the 
        ASCII dot character ('.'=U+002e) or is in one of the following 
   Unicode 
        General Categories: 
          a) Lu (Letter, Uppercase) 
          b) Ll (Letter, Lowercase) 
          c) Lt (Letter, Titlecase) 
          d) Lm (Letter, Modifier) 
          e) Lo (Letter, Other) 
          f) Nd (Number, Decimal Digit) 
          g) Nl (Number, Letter) 
          h) No (Number, Other) 
      - when encoded in UTF-8, it is no more than 255 bytes 
    
   In particular, white space, punctuation (except as noted), marks and 
   symbols are not allowed. 
    
   When included in Text or Login messages, a WWUI SHALL be formatted in 
   UTF-8 form. 
    
   For the purposes of comparison, computing hash values, or anything 
   else that operates on a WWUI, the WWUI must first be converted to 
   lower-case in a locale-independent manner (case-folding) per the 
   rules described in Unicode Technical Report #21, "Case Mappings", 
   section 2.3 "Caseless Matching" (see 
   "http://www.unicode.org/unicode/reports/tr21"). 
    
   When inserting a WWUI into a URI format to be used as either a URL 
   or a URN, the following transformations should take place.  The WWUI 
   should be first converted to a UTF-8 string.  Then the rules of RFC 
   2396 (excluded characters) and RFC 2732 (re-allowed characters) SHALL 
   be applied to convert this byte string into an allowable URI ASCII 
   string. This process is invertable so there is no loss of 
   information.  The format for an iSCSI URN is specified in [20]. 
    
     
   Voruganti iSCSI Naming and Discovery - Expires August 2001        5 

 
    
   Since there are different types of naming authorities, there are 
   different types of WWUIs to make use of them.  Each WWUI is 
   prefixed with a short type designator string that indicates the 
   type of naming authority being used. 
    
   Here are the type designator strings that may currently be used: 
    
         iscsi      - Not unique; indicates a "canonical" target or 
                      initiator. 
         iscsi.     - Naming authority is a reverse DNS name 
         eui.       - Remainder of the string is an EUI-64 address. 
         oui.       - Naming authority is a 24-bit Organizationally 
                      Unique Identifier. 
         dns.       - A format tied to a particular DNS address as 
                      a naming authority. 
    
   The creation of additional type designator strings must be done 
   via the IETF IPS working group.  Use of type strings not listed 
   here is not allowed, as they cannot be guaranteed to be unique. 
    
   The use of the naming authority means that WWUIs can be assigned by 
   virtually any uniqueness scheme that can be devised by OS vendors, 
   driver or iSCSI NIC vendors, device vendors, gateway vendors, and 
   even the customer. 
    
   The WWUI scheme's use of naming authorities is designed to fulfill 
   RFC 1737 "Functional Requirements for Uniform Resource Names". 
   A WWUI can be incorporated into a Uniform Resource Name (URN) by 
   methods shown later in this document. 
    
   Type "iscsi" 
    
     This type does not specify a real WWUI; it is used during login 
     as a default or canonical WWUI. 
    
     Example WWUI: 
    
       iscsi 
    
     This type does not use a naming authority, and so is not a real 
     WWUI.  Every device allowing target connections will support this 
     as a default target, so it is not world-wide unique.  Every device 
     supporting the "iscsi" WWUI should also support an actual WWUI of 
     one of the other three types. 
    
   Type "iscsi." (reverse DNS naming authority format) 
    
     This WWUI type can be used by either a manufacturer, end user, 
     or service provider.  This naming authority is handy especially 
     when an end user or service provider wishes to provide the WWUI 
     for a target.  These customers all own DNS domains; the same is 
     not true for OUI, SCSI Vendor ID, or any of the other assigned 
     identifiers that could be used as a naming authority. 
     
   Voruganti iSCSI Naming and Discovery - Expires August 2001        6 

 
    
     The Text WWUI string is defined as follows: 
    
     After the "iscsi.", the string starts with a backwards domain 
     name specifying the Naming Authority, using dots as separators, 
     just as in a regular domain name.  It's backwards, since it is 
     not really used as a fully qualified host name; only the necessary 
     top levels need by used. 
    
     Basically, everything after the backwards domain name, followed 
     by another dot ".", can be assigned as needed by the owner of 
     the domain name. 
    
     Here is an example Text WWUI string: 
    
        iscsi.com.acme.diskarrays.sn.a8675309 
    
     Where: 
    
        "iscsi" defines that the Naming Authirity is in the DNS string. 
    
        "com.acme" defines the Naming Authority.  The owner of the DNS 
        name "acme.com" has the sole right of use of this name within 
        a WWUI, as well as the responsibility to keep the remainder of 
        the WWUI unique.  In this case, acme.com happens to manufacture 
        disk arrays. 
    
        "diskarrays" was picked arbitrarily by acme.com to use to 
        identify the disk arrays they manufacture.  Another product 
        that ACME makes might use a different name, and have their 
        own namespace independent of the disk array group. 
    
        "sn" was picked by the disk array group of Acme to show that 
        what follows is a serial number.  They could have just assumed 
        that all WWUIs are based on serial numbers, but they thought 
        that perhaps later products might be better identified by 
        something else.  Adding "sn" was a future-proof measure. 
    
        "a8675309" is the serial number of the disk array, uniquely 
        identifying it from all other arrays. 
    
     Please note that WWUI is NOT an address - even though it uses a DNS 
     name, this is for the naming authority only; it is not an address 
     used to discover anything. 
    
     Note that we could have used the SCSI Vendor ID as a naming 
     authority.  However, some large customers and service providers 
     may wish to use their own identification scheme, rather than 
     that provided by the manufacturer.  These customers would not 
     likely have a registered Vendor ID, but the domain name we 
     used is ubiquitous, and seemed more appropriate. 
    
     Further examples of DNS WWUIs are given at the end of this 
     
   Voruganti iSCSI Naming and Discovery - Expires August 2001        7 

  
    
     document. 
    
    
   Type "eui." (IEEE EUI format) 
    
     The IEEE WWUI might be used when a manufacturer is already 
     basing unique identifiers on World-Wide Names as defined in 
     the SCSI SPC-2 specification. 
    
     It may also be used by a gateway representing a Fibre Channel 
     or SCSI device that is already adequately identified using a 
     world-wide name. 
    
     The format is "eui." followed by 16 hex digits. 
    
     Example WWUI: 
    
       eui.02004567A425678D 
    
    
   Type "oui." (Organizationally Unique Identifier) 
    
     The format is "oui.", followed by 6 hex digits specifying the 
   naming authority's OUI, followed by whatever format the naming 
   authority wishes to use. 
    
     Example WWUI: 
    
       oui.04205A.08940593B45A 
       oui.04205A.diskserialnumber.4G521AZ 
    
   Type "dns." (DNS Address used as a naming authority) 
    
     This format may be used to provide a very localized naming 
   authority by adding a fully qualified domain name (FQDN) after the 
   "dns.".  This format may be used when generating WWUIs that will not 
   change locations, since it includes the host name of the target 
   within its format. 
    
     The format is "dns.", followed by the FQDN of the entity providing 
     the name, followed by whatever format the naming authority wishes 
     to use. 
    
     An advantage of this format is that an address may be extracted 
     from it without querying a name server. 
    
     CAUTION: This format includes an address, and therefore does not 
     fulfill the global name space requirement for a Uniform Resource 
     Name (URN).  Please consider whether one of the other formats 
     is appropriate before using this one. 
    
    
   Initiator and Target Requirements for WWUI support: 
     
   Voruganti iSCSI Naming and Discovery - Expires August 2001        8 

 
    
     Each initiator and target implementation must support the use 
     of a WWUI. 
    
     The initiator MUST send an InitiatorWWUI and a TargetWWUI as text 
     fields within the login request.  If the initiator does not have or 
     support a WWUI, it must send an InitiatorWWUI of "iscsi".  If the 
     initiator is logging in to the canonical (default) target, it must 
     specify a TargetWWUI of "iscsi".  Note that if an InitiatorWWUI 
     of "iscsi" is used, the initiator stands the risk that it will be 
     excluded from accessing some of all of its targets. 
    
     An initiator MAY send an InitiatorAlias as a text field within its 
     login request.  The target may use this as an informational field 
     only; it must not be used for unique identification or 
   authentication purposes. 
    
     The target MUST send a TargetWWUI as a text field within its login 
     response.  Unless the initiator specified the TargetWWUI "iscsi" 
     in the request, this TargetWWUI MUST match that specified by the 
     initiator.  If the initiator had specified a TargetWWUI of "iscsi", 
     this TargetWWUI should be the actual WWUI of the target, or can 
     be returned as "iscsi" if either the target is just a canonical 
     target used for the SendTargets command, or if the target does 
     not have a WWUI. 
    
     The target MAY send a TargetAlias as a text field within its login 
     response.  The initiator may use this as an informational field 
     only; it must not be used for unique identification or 
   authentication purposes. 
    
     Initiators and targets shall support the receipt of WWUIs of up to 
   the maximum length.  If configuration of the initiator or target WWUI 
   is allowed, the implementation shall support the maximum length. 
    
     In their user interfaces, both shall support, at a minimum, the 
     display of the ASCII characters within the WWUI UTF-8 string.  If 
   the other characters are unsupported, they may be displayed with 
   escape codes as specified in [RFC 2396]. 
    
    
   3.2 Alias String 
    
   The alias string is a UTF-8 text string that may be used as an 
   additional descriptive name for an initiator and target.  This 
   may not be used to identify a target or initiator during login, 
   and does not have to follow the uniqueness or other requirments 
   of the WWUI.  The alias strings are communicated between the 
   initiator and target at login, and can be displayed by a user 
   interface on either end, helping the user tell at a glance whether 
   the initiators and/or targets at the other end appear to be 
   correct.  The alias must NOT be used to identify, address, or 
   authenticate initiators and targets. 
     
   Voruganti iSCSI Naming and Discovery - Expires August 2001        9 

  
    
   The alias is a variable length string, between 0 and 255 characters, 
   and is terminated with at least one NULL (0x00) character.  No 
   other structure is imposed upon this string. 
    
   3.2.1 Purpose of an Alias 
    
     Initiators and targets are uniquely identified by a World-Wide 
     Unique Identifier (WWUI).  These identifiers may be assigned by 
     a hardware or software manufacturer, a service provider, or even 
     the customer.  Although these identifiers are nominally human- 
     readable, they are likely be be assigned from a point of view 
     different from that of the other side of the connection.  For 
     instance, a target WWUI for a disk array may be built from the 
     array's serial number, and some sort of internal target ID. 
     Although this would still be human-readable and transcribable, 
     it offers little assurance to someone at a user interface who 
     would like to see "at-a-glance" whether this target is really 
     the correct one. 
    
     The use of an alias helps solve that problem.  An alias is 
     simply a descriptive name that can be assigned to an initiator 
     or target, that is independent of the WWUI, and does not have 
     to be unique.  Since it is not unique, the alias must be used 
     in a purely informational way.  It may not be used to specify 
     a target at login, or used during authentication.  It is not used 
     in place of the old iscsi "path" concept; WWUI is used there 
     instead. 
    
     Both targets and initiators may have aliases. 
    
   3.2.2 Target Alias 
    
     To show the utility of an alias, here is an example using an 
     alias for an iSCSI target. 
    
     Imagine sitting at a desktop station that is using some iSCSI 
     devices over a network.  The user requires another iSCSI disk, 
     and calls the storage services person (internal or external), 
     giving any authentication information that the storage device 
     will require for the host.  The services person allocates a 
     new target for the host, and sends the WWUI for the new target, 
     and probably an address, back to the user.  The user then adds 
     this WWUI to the configuration file on the host, and discovers 
     the new device. 
    
     Without an alias, a user managing an iSCSI host would click 
     on some sort of "show targets" button to show the targets to 
     which the host is currently connected. 
    
     +--Connected-To-These-Targets---------------------- 
     | 
     |  WWUI 
     
   Voruganti iSCSI Naming and Discovery - Expires August 2001       10 

 
    
     | 
     |  com.acme.sn.5551212.target.450 
     |  com.acme.sn.5551212.target.489 
     |  com.acme.sn.8675309 
     | 
     +-------------------------------------------------- 
    
     In the above example, the user sees a collection of WWUIs, but 
     with no real description of what they are for.  They will, of 
     course, map to a system-dependent device file or drive letter, 
     but it's not easy looking at numbers quickly to see if everything 
     is there. 
    
     If a more intelligent target configures an alias for each target, 
     perhaps at the time the target was allocated to the host, a more 
     descriptive name can be given.  This alias is sent back to the 
     initiator as part of the login or sendTargets responses, for use 
     in a display such as this.  The new display might look like: 
    
     +--Connected-To-These-Targets---------------------- 
     | 
     |  Alias          WWUI 
     | 
     |  Oracle 1       com.acme.sn.5551212.target.450 
     |  Local Disk     com.acme.sn.5551212.target.489 
     |  Exchange 2     com.acme.sn.8675309 
     | 
     +-------------------------------------------------- 
    
     This would give the user a better idea of what's really there. 
    
     In general, flexible, configured aliases will probably be 
     supported by larger storage subsystems and configurable gateways. 
     Simpler devices will likely not keep configuration data 
     around for things such as an alias.  The TargetAlias string 
     could be either left unsupported (not given to the initiator 
     during login) or could be returned as whatever the "next best 
     thing" that the target has that might better describe it. 
     Since it does not have to be unique, it could even return 
     SCSI inquiry string data. 
    
     Note that if a simple initiator does not wish to keep or display 
     alias information, it can be simply ignored in the login or 
     sendTargets responses. 
    
   3.2.3 Initiator Alias 
    
     An initiator alias can be used in the same manner as a target 
     alias.  An initiator would send the alias in a login request, 
     when it sends its WWUI.  The alias is not used for authentication, 
     but may be kept with the session information for display through 
     a management GUI or command-line interface (for a more complex 
     subsystem or gateway), or through the iSCSI MIB. 
     
   Voruganti iSCSI Naming and Discovery - Expires August 2001       11 


    
     Note that a simple target can just ignore the Initiator Alias 
     if it has no management interface on which to display it. 
    
     Usually just the hostname would be sufficient for an initiator 
   alias, but a custom alias could be configured for the sake of the 
   service provider if needed.  Even better would be a description of 
   what the machine was used for, such as "Exchange Server 1", or "User 
   Web Server". 
    
     Here's an example showing a list of sessions on a target device. 
     For this display, the targets are using an internal target number, 
     which is a fictional field that has purely internal significance. 
    
     +--Connected-To-These-Initiators------------------- 
     | 
     |  Target   Initiator WWUI 
     | 
     |  450      com.sw.cd.12345678-OEM-456 
     |  451      com.os.hostid.A598B45C 
     |  309      com.sw.cd.87654321-OEM-259 
     | 
     +-------------------------------------------------- 
    
     And with the initiator alias displayed: 
    
     +--Connected-To-These-Initiators------------------- 
     | 
     |  Target   Alias                Initiator WWUI 
     | 
     |  450      Web Server 4         com.sw.cd.12345678-OEM-456 
     |  451      scsigate.yours.com   com.os.hostid.A598B45C 
     |  309      Exchange Server      com.sw.cd.87654321-OEM-259 
     | 
     +-------------------------------------------------- 
    
     This gives the storage administrator a better idea of who is 
     connected to their targets.  Of course, one could always do 
     a reverse DNS lookup of the incoming IP address to determine 
     a host name, but simpler devices really don't do well with that 
     particular feature due to blocking problems, and it won't 
     always work if there is a firewall or iSCSI gateway involved. 
    
     Again, these are purely informational and optional. 
    
     Aliases are extremely easy to implement.  Targets just send 
     a TargetAlias whenever they send a TargetWWUI.  Initiators just 
     send an InitiatorAlias whenever they send an InitiatorWWUI. 
     If an alias is received that does not fit, or seems invalid 
     in any way, it is ignored. 
    
   4. iSCSI Discovery 
    
     
   Voruganti iSCSI Naming and Discovery - Expires August 2001       12 

  
    
   The goal of iSCSI discovery is to allow an initiator to find the 
   targets to which it has access (named by their WWUIs), and at least 
   one address at which each target may be accessed.  This should 
   generally be done using as little configuration as possible.  This 
   section defines the discovery mechanism only; no attempt is made 
   to specify central management of iSCSI devices within this document. 
    
   There are several methods that may be used to find targets and their 
   addresses, ranging from configuring a list of targets and addresses 
   on each initiator and doing no discovery at all, to configuring 
   nothing on each initiator, and allowing the initiator to discover 
   targets via multicast mechanisms. 
    
   An iSCSI initiator can discover iSCSI targets in these ways: 
    
   a. iSCSI targets are configured on the initiator. 
   b. The initiator queries iSCSI servers using the SendTargets command. 
   c. The initiator queries a storage name server, such as iSNS, for 
   targets. 
   d. The initiator uses the Service Location Protocol (SLP) to find 
      iSCSI targets, iSCSI servers, and storage name servers. 
    
    
   4.1 Configuring Target Information 
    
   The exact manner in which the target information is hard-coded at the 
   initiator is an implementation detail. The information could be 
   present in some persistent location (such as a file) that can be 
   accessed by the initiator. 
    
   Target discovery can be configured on an initiator in several ways: 
    
     - Full Target URL.  This includes the target's IP address or host 
       name, TCP port, and WWUI.  No further discovery is required to 
       contact this target. 
    
     - Target WWUI.  This includes only the target's WWUI, and contains 
       no address information.  The initiator must query SLP or a name 
       server to locate this target. 
    
     - Canonical Target WWUI.  This is just an iSCSI server's IP address 
       and TCP port, the canonical WWUI "iscsi".  The initiator must 
       connect to this address, log in to the canonical target, and 
   issue a SendTargets command to acquire the list of targets it can 
   use. 
    
     - Storage Name Server Address.  This is an address of a storage 
   name server, such as iSNS, that the initiator may query to find more 
       targets.  The information required to configure an initiator for 
   a storage name server is outside the scope of this document. 
    
   4.2 SendTargets Command 
    
     
   Voruganti iSCSI Naming and Discovery - Expires August 2001       13 

  
    
   An initiator may connect to an iSCSI address (IP address + TCP port) 
   and log in to the canonical target WWUI "iscsi".  The login process 
   for this target is identical to that of any other target.  If there 
   are no targets available that would provide access to the initiator's 
   WWUI, the target SHOULD reject the initiator's login to the canonical 
   target with the status code set to 0x42 "forbidden target". 
    
   Upon successful login to the "iscsi" target, the initiator may send 
   the text command "SendTargets", to retrieve a list of target WWUIs 
   to which it may attempt login. 
    
   The canonical target MUST support this command, and MUST return a 
   list of zero or more target WWUIs.  Each WWUI returned may include 
   zero or more TargetAddress fields, as well one optional TargetAlias 
   field.  If zero WWUIs are returned, the canonical target is unaware 
   of any targets  
   that are accessible by the initiator. 
    
   The command is sent by formatting an iSCSI Text Command, with the 
   Final (F) bit set to 1.  The first key in the command's text must 
   be 
    
     SendTargets= 
    
   No value is sent for the send-targets key, and no other keys are 
   sent. 
    
   The response to this command is a text response containing a 
   list of text keys.  Each target starts with one text key of the 
   form: 
    
     TargetWWUI=<target-wwui-goes-here> 
    
   It may then include zero or more address keys: 
    
     TargetAddress=<hostname-or-ipaddress>[:<tcp-port>] 
    
   It may then include the optional target alias key: 
    
     TargetAlias=<alias-string-goes-here> 
    
   This example is the SendTargets response from a single target, 
   that has no other interface ports, and does not support an alias: 
    
     TargetWWUI=com.acme.diskarray.sn.8675309 
    
   Note that all it really had to return in the simple case was the 
   WWUI.  It is assumed by the initiator that the IP address and TCP 
   port for this WWUI are the same as used on the current connection 
   to the canonical iSCSI target. 
    
   The next example has two internal iSCSI targets, each support via 
   two different ports with different IP addresses: 
     
   Voruganti iSCSI Naming and Discovery - Expires August 2001       14 

  
    
     TargetWWUI=com.acme.diskarray.sn.8675309 
     TargetAddress=10.1.0.45:3000 
     TargetAddress=10.1.1.45:3000 
     TargetAlias=Oracle disk four 
     TargetWWUI=com.acme.diskarray.sn.1234567 
     TargetAddress=10.1.0.45:3000 
     TargetAddress=10.1.1.45:3000 
     TargetAlias:Oracle disk five 
    
   Note that both targets share both addresses; the multiple addresses 
   are likely used to provide multi-path support.  The initiator may 
   connect to either targetWWUI on either address. 
    
   Also note that in the above example, a DNS host name could have 
   been returned instead of an IP address, and that an IPv6 addresses 
   (5 to 16 dotted-decimal numbers) could have been returned as well. 
    
   After obtaining a list of targets in this manner, an iSCSI initiator 
   may create new sessions to log in to the discovered targets.  The 
   initiator MAY keep the session to the canonical target open, and MAY 
   send subsequent SendTargets commands to discover new targets.  The 
   target MUST send any iSCSI-level async event notifications on this 
   session, to allow the initiator to discover new targets as they are 
   created. 
    
    
   4.2.1 Redirect Responses 
    
   If a target has moved, or if the iSCSI device logged in to has 
   knowledge of another address at which a target should be accessed, 
   it MAY return a redirect response by setting the iSCSI login status 
   to one of the 0x3x status codes, and returning at least one text 
   key with a new target address on which to find the target.  This 
   status terminates the session. 
    
   The initiator, upon receiving a redirect response, SHOULD either 
   abandon attempts to log in to the intended target, or attempt to 
   re-login to the target using one of the addresses provided. 
    
   A target might do this for load balancing or it might do this to 
   provide 
   multiple virtual targets through a simple initiator discovery 
   protocol. 
    
   The target's response includes the WWUI of the target, plus one 
   or more TargetAddress fields, as specified in the SendTargets 
   response. 
    
   Here's a simple example: 
    
            T->Login Response(status=3x) 
            TargetWWUI=iscsi.com.acme.diskarray.sn.999999 
     
   Voruganti iSCSI Naming and Discovery - Expires August 2001       15 


            TargetAddress=10.1.0.49:3000 
    
   In the above example, a new address exists for the target WWUI at 
   10.1.0.49, TCP port 3000.  If the TCP port was not specified, it 
   would use the default port (to be assigned by IANA). 
    
   Another example would include multiple addresses for a target, 
   perhaps 
   through multiple ports on a storage controller, or through multiple 
   gateways: 
    
            T->Login Response(status=3x) 
            TargetWWUI=iscsi.com.acme.diskarray.sn.999999 
            TargetAddress=10.2.30.100 
            TargetAddress=10.2.40.100:2301 
            TargetAddress=mystorage.mycompany.com 
    
   Note that the address may be either an IP address or DNS host name. 
   The first and third addresses to not include a TCP port; these would 
   use the default, IANA-assigned TCP port. 
    
   In any case, the TargetWWUI returned is identical to that requested 
   by the initiator in the initial Login Request.  The redirect status 
   is not used to change WWUIs; it is only used to move a WWUI from 
   one IP address and/or TCP port to another. 
    
    
    
   4.3 Initiator queries a Storage Name Server (SNS) 
    
   Discovery and management of iSCSI devices can be extended by the use 
   of Storage Name Servers (SNS).  The term "SNS" used in this document 
   should not be confused with the specific implementation used in 
   Fibre Channel; it is meant to be a generic term. 
    
   An SNS can add capabilities beyond discovery of iSCSI targets, but 
   for the purposes of this section it must at least provide a method of 
   discovering: 
    
   1. The addresses at which a particular WWUI may be found 
   2. A list of WWUIs and/or addresses to which the initiator has access 
    
   To make use of an SNS, an initiator must support a protocol that 
   provides SNS query facilities.  
    
   4.4 Initiator Uses the Service Location Protocol 
   A storage name server address may be either configured, or discovered 
   through SLP. 
    
   An initiator may use the Service Location Protocol, Version 2 (SLPv2) 
   to locate iSCSI targets, canonical targets, and storage name servers, 
   without having to configure their addresses.  SLP Version 1 is not 
   supported by iSCSI. 
     
   Voruganti iSCSI Naming and Discovery - Expires August 2001       16 

 
    
   The Service Location Protocol (SLP) is a standard protocol for 
   locating the addresses of resources on a network.  iSCSI targets, 
   canonical targets, and storage name servers may advertise themselves 
   to iSCSI initiators using SLP. 
    
   Three types of nodes participate in SLP discovery.  A User Agent (UA) 
   is the entity that wishes to discover resources.  In this case, the 
   UA is part of the iSCSI initiator.  A Service Agent (SA) is the 
   entity that wishes to be discovered.  In our case, the SA is part of 
   the iSCSI target, canonical target, or storage name server.  A third 
   entity, the 
   Directory Agent (DA) is an optional part of discovery.  If a DA is 
   present, it collects information about the Service Agents, and is 
   queried by the User Agents, to reduce the network load of all UAs 
   trying to discovery all SAs. 
    
   For true zero-configuration, SLP makes use of multicast to locate DAs 
   or SAs.  However, SLP is designed to use as little multicast traffic 
   as possible, and by using a DA, and configuring its address on each 
   initiator, will not require multicast at all. 
    
   The SLP Protocol is described in detail in [RFC2608]. 
    
   A target can register either its canonical target address, its 
   targets themselves, or both with SLP.  A storage name server can 
   register its address with SLP, or can also register its targets 
   with SLP, if desired. 
    
   Initiators can send the following service requests using SLP: 
    
   1. Locate all canonical targets ("iscsi") 
   2. Locate specific targets to which the initiator might have access 
   3. Locate a specific target by WWUI 
   4. Locate storage name servers 
    
   In addition, a storage name server can act as an initiator and make 
   use of SLP to discover targets and canonical targets for its own use. 
    
   If a specific target is found, the initiator may simply attempt to 
   log in to that target.  An initiator supporting a storage name 
   service may additionally query the SNS for more information on the 
   target before logging in.  Note that the same target may exist at 
   more than one address; it is the responsibility of the initiator to 
   ensure that the targets' WWUIs are compared, and that either only 
   one address is used, or that some form of multi-path software is 
   in place. 
    
   If a canonical target is found, the initiator may log in to the 
   canonical target, and issue a SendTargets command as described in 
   the previous section. 
    
   If a storage name server is found, and the initiator supports the 
     
   Voruganti iSCSI Naming and Discovery - Expires August 2001       17 

  
   use of this type of storage name server, the initiator may query 
   the SNS as described by its particular protocol specification. 
    
   In general, if an initiator supports an SNS, it should normally 
   not attempt to discover targets and canonical targets via SLP; it 
   should first attempt to discover the SNS itself, and query the SNS 
   for this information. 
    
   The choice of static configuration, SNS discovery or target storage 
   discovery protocols is a configuration choice of the initiator. 
    
   In summary, this discovery approach is flexible in that the 
   initiators have the freedom to select static configuration, a 
   multicast based discovery mechanism for small, isolated iSCSI 
   environments, or they can choose a scalable storage name server based 
   discovery mechanism for large iSCSI environments. 
    
   Additionally, targets and initiators may be configured to participate 
   or not participate in an SLP Scope, which allows the SLP discovery 
   environment to be contained within a smaller group. 
    
   The Service Location Protocol uses templates, registered with IANA, 
   to define the addresses and attributes that are communicated via 
   SLP.  The SLP templates implementation details are provided in [21] 
   draft-bakke-iscsi-SLP-template.00, but a brief summary is as follows: 
    
      Service:iscsi - A top-level abstract template, which is just a 
   name under which to place our other templates. 
    
      service:iscsi:target - A concrete target template, which defines 
   the addresses and attributes for iSCSI targets and canonical targets. 
    
      service:iscsi:name-service - A concrete target template, which 
   defines the addresses and attributes for storage name services. 
    
                    
   5.  Storage Name Server (SNS)  
    
   The following section describes requirements for any Storage Name 
   Server used to support iSCSI.  An example of a Storage Name Server is 
   the iSNS described in the draft document draft-ietf-ips-iSNS-00.txt 
   [8]. There potentially could be other protocols which also satisfy 
   SNS requirements.  
    
    
    
   5.1  Overview 
    
   A SNS shall be architected using a client-server paradigm, with a SNS 
   server predominantly serving a passive role. SNS clients actively 
   register and manipulate entity objects and their attributes in the 
   SNS server.  A SNS server MAY send asynchronous state change 
   notifications to registered SNS clients in response to an action by a 
     
   Voruganti iSCSI Naming and Discovery - Expires August 2001       18 

 
    
   SNS client.  Examples of SNS clients include initiators, targets, 
   management stations, and switches.  A SNS server can be hosted on a 
   target, switch, or stand-alone server. 
    
    
   5.2  Login Control and Discovery Domains 
   Discovery Domains (DD's) are logical groupings of iSCSI devices that 
   are allowed to "see" each other. SNS MUST support Discovery Domains 
   and Login control. SNS must provide SNS clients with the ability to  
   Enforce Discovery Domain configurations which may exist on a SNS 
   server.  Targets and management stations shall be able to register 
   (i.e., upload) Login Control and Discovery Domain configurations to 
   the SNS if authorized by the end user. Discovery Domains and Login 
   control supports two separate purposes: 
    
    
   5.2.1  Discovery Domain Partitions 
   A SNS SHALL support the ability to partition the storage network into 
   Separate "Discovery Domains".  A SNS shall not provide information if 
   the SNS client performing the query is not in a common Discovery 
   Domain (DD) as the SNS client that is the subject of the request.  
   This capability prevents an initiator from attempting an iSCSI login 
   to every single target in a large enterprise network, and is the 
   iSCSI equivalent of "Soft" zoning. 
    
    
   5.2.2  Login Control 
   Login access security which is specified in the iSCSI 
   Draft (Appendix A) [7] and may be implemented by the iSCSI target.  A 
   SNS shall support login control by storing a mapping of initiators 
   that are permitted to access each target.  Targets shall be able to 
   query the SNS for a list of initiators that are allowed login access.  
   This list shall include the key attribute (e.g., WWUI) used to 
   identify the initiator.  This capability is the iSCSI equivalent of 
   "Hard" zoning. 
    
    
   5.3    Object Model 
    
            A SNS MUST store the following objects and attributes: 
    
                Network Entity: 
                  -  Entity Identifier 
                  -  Management IP Address 
                  -  Entity Type (iSCSI) 
    
                Portal: 
                  -  IP Address 
                  -  TCP Port Number 
    
                Storage Node: 
                  -  WWUI 
                  -  Alias 
     
   Voruganti iSCSI Naming and Discovery - Expires August 2001       19 

 
    
                  -  Node Type (target or initiator or both) 
    
                Discovery Domain: 
                  -  DD symbolic name 
                  -  DD ID 
                  -  DD Member:  WWUI 
                  -  DD Member:  IP Address 
    
            A diagram of how the above objects are related is shown 
   below. 
    
   +----------------------------------------------------------------+ 
   |                         IP Network                             | 
   +------------+--------------------------------------+------------+ 
                |                                      | 
                |                                      | 
   +-----+------+------+-----+            +-----+------+------+-----+ 
   |     | PORTAL      |     |            |     | PORTAL      |     | 
   |     | -IP Addr 1  |     |            |     | -IP Addr 2  |     | 
   |     | -TCP Port 1 |     |            |     | -TCP Port 2 |     | 
   |     +-----+ +-----+     |            |     +-----+ +-----+     | 
   |           | |           |            |           | |           | 
   |           | |           |            |           | |           | 
   |  +--------+ +--------+  |            |   +-------+ +--------+  | 
   |  |                   |  |            |   |                  |  | 
   |  |  STORAGE NODE     |  |            |   |  STORAGE NODE    |  | 
   |  |  -WWUI            |  |            |   |   -WWUI          |  | 
   |  |  -Alias: "server1"|  |            |   |  Alias: "disk1"  |  | 
   |  |  -Type: initiator |  |            |   |   -Type: target  |  | 
   |  |                   |  |            |   |                  |  | 
   |  +-------------------+  |            |   +------------------+  | 
   |                         |            |                         | 
   |    NETWORK ENTITY       |            |    NETWORK ENTITY       | 
   |   -Entity ID (DNS):     |            |   -Entity ID (DNS):     | 
   |    "strg1.foo.com"      |            |    "strg2.bar.com"      | 
   |   -Type: iSCSI          |            |   -Type: iSCSI          | 
   |                         |            |                         | 
   +-------------------------+            +-------------------------+ 
    
            A DISCOVERY DOMAIN contains one or more NETWORK ENTITY, 
   PORTAL, 
   and/or STORAGE NODE,  objects.  Each NETWORK ENTITY object contains 
   one or more PORTAL objects, and one or more STORAGE NODE objects. 
    
    
   5.4  SNS Message Format Requirements 
   The SNS protocol SHALL  be TLV based. 
   TLV (TLV is already used in many networking protocols such as DHCP).  
   The SNS protocol shall allow manipulation of multiple objects and 
   attributes in a SNS server through a single message and response. 
    
    
   5.5  SNS Authentication Requirements 
     
   Voruganti iSCSI Naming and Discovery - Expires August 2001       20 

 
    
   The SNS protocol SHALL include optional authentication of SNS 
   protocol messages from SNS clients. The authentication mechanism will 
   allow for authentication of both client and server. 
    
    
   5.6 SNS Query and Registration Services Requirements 
   The SNS protocol allows initiators and targets to register themselves 
   at The SNS server. Initiators and targets can also query a SNS server 
   for information. For example, targets can register themselves at a 
   SNS server, and the initiators can query a SNS server about which 
   targets they can access. 
    
            During registration, the initiators and the targets must 
   provide the following information: 
            a) Portal object address (IP address and Port Number) 
            b) WWUI information 
            c) Storage node type 
    
            They could optionally also provide other information such 
   as: 
            a) Storage Entity ID 
            b) Alias string information 
            c) Registration for State Change Notification 
    
            If the Storage Entity ID is not provided in the initial 
   registration, then a SNS shall create a unique Entity ID for that 
   client, and the client shall use that Entity ID for all subsequent 
   queries and updates. 
            When querying address information in order to establish an 
   iSCSI connection, the query, as a minimum, should return the 
   following information: 
    
   a) Storage Entity IP address 
    
   The Portal Object IP address can be the same as the Storage Entity IP 
   address, and the Portal Object port number can be the (TBD) default 
   iSCSI port number. Furthermore, the WWUI of the target device can be 
   queried by issuing the  SendTarget command to the default canonical 
   iSCSI target present at the IP address and port number. 
    
   5.7  State Change Notification Requirements 
    
   Asynchronous notification (State Change Notifications):  A SNS must 
   be able to inform SNS clients of changes to its database, including 
   changes or modifications to Discovery Domain or login control 
   policies and the presence or absence of initiators and targets.  
   These changes may occur as a result of various events, including an 
   SNS client (e.g., a management workstation) actively changing the SNS 
   database, response or non-response to an SNS status inquiry message, 
   or a hardware interrupt delivered by a SNS host platform (such as a 
   switch). Asynchronous notification shall be delivered only to SNS 
   clients that register for the notification, and only for SNS clients 
   that are in the same Discovery Domain as the event. 
     
   Voruganti iSCSI Naming and Discovery - Expires August 2001       21 

 
    
    
   5.8  The SNS protocol SHALL be a lightweight protocol that can be 
   scaled down for implementation on switches and targets, or scaled up 
   for implementation on servers. 
    
    
   5.9  The SNS protocol SHALL meet the iSCSI boot requirements (see 
   draft-ietf-ips-iscsi-boot-00.txt). 
    
    
   6.   iSNS - Internet Storage Name Service 
    
   iSNS is a name service protocol which can be used for discovery and 
   management of iSCSI devices.  The iSNS protocol is described in the  
   document draft-ietf-ips-iSNS-01.txt, and meets the requirements of 
   section 5 of this document.  The following section describe how iSNS 
   is used to support iSCSI devices. 
    
   6.1  iSCSI Requirements for iSNS 
    
   iSNS MAY be used to fulfill iSCSI Naming and Discovery Requirements. 
   Section 5.1 of the iSNS document lists specific implementation and 
   usage requirements for iSCSI.  Sections 5.2 and 5.3 are applicable to 
   non-iSCSI protocols, and do NOT have to be implemented to support 
   iSCSI.  The remaining sections of the iSNS document provide important 
   background and protocol format information which are generally 
   applicable to an iSNS implementation that supports iSCSI.  One 
   exception is the RqstDmnID and RlsDmnID commands, which are used to 
   support Fibre Channel and iFCP fabrics. 
    
   6.2  Summary of iSNS Features & Capabilities 
    
   The following are a summary of iSNS capabilities used to support 
   iSCSI: 
    
   6.2.1   iSNS Registration Service 
   iSNS allows iSCSI devices to register their identity and attributes 
   in the iSNS database.  Multiple attributes can be registered in a 
   single message. This allows management stations to directly manage 
   large numbers of iSCSI devices by accessing the iSNS as a single, 
   consolidated information repository. 
    
   6.2.2   Discovery Domains (DD's) 
   iSNS organizes iSCSI devices into logical groups.  This accomplishes 
   two primary purposes:  1)  it limits the targets visible to each 
   initiator to the more relevant and appropriate subset of devices in 
   the entire storage network universe;  2)  it eases administration by 
   partitioning storage devices into smaller, more manageable groups. 
    
   6.2.3   iSCSI Device Query Service 
     
   Voruganti iSCSI Naming and Discovery - Expires August 2001       22 

 
   iSNS responds to queries from iSCSI devices requesting information 
   about other iSCSI devices residing in a common Discovery Domain.  
   Multiple attributes can be queried for in a single message. 
    
   6.2.4   State Change Notification (SCN's) 
   A network event, such as removal of another device from a common 
   Discovery Domain, will cause the iSNS to send an asynchronous 
   notification message of the event to iSCSI devices that have 
   registered for such a notification. 
    
   6.2.5   Distribution and Retrieval of Public Key Certificates 
   iSNS provides a convenient mechanism to distribute X.509 Public Key 
   certificates.  These certificates can be used to set up TLS or IPSec 
   security associations for authenticating and/or encrypting storage 
   traffic, as well as for the Public Key authentication method in the 
   iSCSI login process.  iSCSI devices can upload their own Public Key 
   Certificates, allowing other iSCSI devices in their Discovery Domain 
   to retrieve them. 
    
   6.2.6   Entity Status Inquiry (ESI) 
   iSNS provides a polling service to detect the removal or loss of 
   connectivity to iSNS clients.  iSCSI devices that register for ESI 
   will receive an inquiry message from the iSNS server at regular time 
   intervals. If the iSCSI device does not respond to three consecutive 
   ESI messages, the iSNS server will determine that the iSCSI device is 
   no longer available. Appropriate SCN messages will be sent to 
   affected devices in the Discovery Domain. 
    
   6.2.7   Event Logging 
    
   iSNS provides an SCN Event Bitmap attribute for each iSCSI device 
   allowing a management client to learn the last State Change 
   Notification event to occur to that device.  The Timestamp attribute 
   records the precise time of the latest SCN event. 
    
   6.2.8   Name Service Heartbeat 
   iSNS provides a regular local subnet broadcast that allows iSCSI 
   devices in the local network to passively listen for and learn the IP 
   address of the iSNS server. 
    
   6.2.9   Network Time Service 
   iSNS provides an optional network time service allowing iSCSI devices 
   to synchronize their time to the clock used by the iSNS. 
    
   6.3  iSCSI Attributes Supported by iSNS 
    
   The following attributes are supported by the iSNS protocol.  
   Attributes indicated in the "REQUIRED TO IMPLEMENT" column MUST be 
   supported by a server compliant with the iSNS protocol.  Attributes 
   indicated in the "REQUIRED TO USE" column MUST have values stored for 
   an iSCSI device registered in the iSNS server. 
    
                                               REQUIRED     REQUIRED 
     
   Voruganti iSCSI Naming and Discovery - Expires August 2001       23 

 
    
   Object                Attribute           to Implement    to Use 
   ------                ---------           ------------   -------- 
   NETWORK ENTITY     Entity Identifier            *           * 
                      Entity Type                  *           * 
                      Management IP Address 
                      ESI Interval                 * 
                      Timestamp                    * 
                      Entity Certificate           * 
                      SCN Event Bitmap             * 
                      ESI TCP/UDP Port             *           * 
    
   PORTAL             IP Address                   *           * 
                      TCP/UDP Port                 *           * 
                      Portal Symbolic Name         * 
    
   STORAGE NODE       WWUI                         *           * 
                      Node Type                    *           * 
                      Alias/Symbolic Node Name     * 
                      Node Certificate             * 
    
   DISCOVERY DOMAIN   DD_ID                        *           * 
                      DD_Symbolic Name             * 
                      DD Member (Entity ID)        * 
                      DD_Member (WWUI)             *           * 
                      DD_Member (IP Address)       * 
    
   6.4   iSNS Message Summary 
    
   The following messages are used by iSNS to support iSCSI devices.  
   Messages listed in the "REQUIRED TO IMPLEMENT" column MUST be 
   supported in the iSNS server.  Messages listed in the "REQUIRED TO 
   USE" column MUST be supported in the iSCSI device using iSNS. 
    
                                                     REQUIRED TO: 
      Message Description    Abbreviation  Func_ID  Implement  Use 
      -------------------    ------------  -------  ---------  --- 
   Register Dev Attr Req     RegDevAttr    0x0001       *       * 
   Dev Attr Query Request    DevAttrQry    0x0002       *       * 
   Dev Get Next Request      DevGetNext    0x0003       * 
   Deregister Dev Request    DeregDev      0x0004       *       * 
   SCN Register Request      SCNReg        0x0005       * 
   SCN Deregister Request    SCNDereg      0x0006       * 
   SCN Event                 SCNEvent      0x0007       * 
   State Change Notification SCN           0x0008       * 
   Register DD               RegDD         0x0009       *       * 
   Deregister DD             DeregDD       0x000A       *       * 
   Register Dev in DD        RegDevDD      0x000B       *       * 
   Deregister Dev in DD      DeregDevDD    0x000C       *       * 
   Entity Status Inquiry     ESI           0x000D       * 
   Name Service Heartbeat    Heartbeat     0x000E 
   NOT USED                                0x000F 
   Request Network Time      RqstTime      0x0010 
   NOT USED                                0x0011-0x0012 
     
   Voruganti iSCSI Naming and Discovery - Expires August 2001       24 

  
    
   RESERVED                                0x0013-0x8000 
    
   The following are iSNSP response messages used in support of iSCSI: 
    
                                                     REQUIRED TO: 
   Response Message Desc     Abbreviation  Func_ID  Implement  Use 
   ---------------------     ------------  -------  ---------  --- 
   Register Dev Attr Rsp     RegDevRsp     0x8001       *       * 
   Dev Attr Query Resp       DevAttrQryRsp 0x8002       *       * 
   Dev Get Next Resp         DevGetNextRsp 0x8003       * 
   Deregister Dev Resp       DeregDevRsp   0x8004       *       * 
   SCN Register Resp         SCNRegRsp     0x8005       * 
   SCN Deregister Resp       SCNDeregRsp   0x8006       * 
   SCN Event Resp            SCNEventRsp   0x8007       * 
   SCN Response              SCNRsp        0x8008       * 
   Register DD Resp          RegDDRsp      0x8009       *       * 
   Deregister DD Resp        DeregDDRsp    0x800A       *       * 
   Register Dev in DD Resp   RegDevDDRsp   0x800B       *       * 
   Deregister Dev in DD Resp DeregDevDDRsp 0x800C       *       * 
   Entity Stat Inquiry Resp  ESIRsp        0x800D       * 
   NOT USED                                0x800E-0x800F 
   Request Net Time Resp     RqstTimeRsp   0x8010 
   NOT USED                                0x8011-0x8012 
   RESERVED                                0x8013-0xFFFF 
    
    
    
    
              
             
              
             
   7) Related Work  
   Jini [1], and PnP [2] and are two other discovery protocols that were 
   evaluated as potential iSCSI discovery protocol candidates, but iSCSI 
   uses SLP broadcast discovery mechanism. SLP is an IETF approved 
   protocol which helps iSCSI to realize the broadcast discovery 
   functionality present in Jini and PnP. 
    
   8) Security 
      The iSCSI initiators and targets must have a secure way of 
   interacting with each other. Hence, once a target or name server is 
   discovered, authentication and authorization are handled by either 
   the iSCSI protocol, or by the name server's protocol. It is the 
   responsibility of the providers of these services to ensure that an 
   inappropriately advertised or discovered service does not compromise 
   their security. 
            
    
   8. Appendix A: iSCSI WWUI Notes 
    Some WWUI Examples for Targets 
    
   - Assign to a target based on controller serial number 
     
   Voruganti iSCSI Naming and Discovery - Expires August 2001       25 

 
    
     iscsi.com.acme.diskarray.sn.8675309 
    
     See the ASCII WWUI example above for discussion. 
    
   - Assign to a target based on serial number and logical target alias 
    
     iscsi.com.acme.diskarray.sn.8675309.oracle_database_1 
    
     Where oracle_database_1 might be a target alias assigned by a user. 
    
     This would be useful for a controller that can present 
     different logical targets to different hosts. 
    
     Obviously, any naming authority may come up with its own 
     scheme and hierarchy for these names, and be just as valid. 
    
     A target WWUI should NEVER be assigned based on interface 
     hardware, or other hardware that can be swapped and moved to other 
     devices. 
    
   Some WWUI Examples for Initiators 
    
   - Assign to the OS image by fully qualified host name 
    
       iscsi.com.osvendor.dns.com.customer1.host_four 
    
       Note the use of two FQDNs - that of the naming 
       authority and also that of the host that is being 
       named.  This can cause problems, due to limitations 
       imposed on the size of the WWUI. 
    
       ( write in what to do about this ) 
    
   - Assign to the OS image by OS install serial number 
    
       iscsi.com.osvendor.newos5.12345-OEM-0067890-23456 
    
       Note that this breaks if an install CD is used more 
       than once.  Depending on the O/S vendor's philosophy, 
       this might be a feature. 
    
   - Assign to the OS image by a service provider 
    
       iscsi.com.mydisk.users.mbakke05657 
    
       Note that this could also be assigned to a particular 
       iSCSI address if more than one service provider is used. 
    
   Using Initiator and Target WWUI During Login 
    
     Some examples. 
    
     
   Voruganti iSCSI Naming and Discovery - Expires August 2001       26 

 
    
   1. Login to a known target WWUI; initiator supports WWUI. 
    
      I->Login Request 
         InitiatorWWUI= iscsi.com.os.hostid.34567890 
         InitiatorAlias= myhost 
         TargetWWUI= iscsi.com.acme.diskarray.sn.8675309 
            . 
            .  text/login commands flow here during authentication phase 
            . 
      T->Login Response 
         TargetWWUI= iscsi.com.acme.diskarray.sn.8675309 
         TargetAlias= foo 
    
   2. Login to an unknown target WWUI; initiator supports WWUI. 
    
      This only works if there is a single WWUI at the IP address 
      and TCP port to which the initiator has connected. 
    
      I->Login Request 
         InitiatorWWUI= iscsi.com.os.hostid.34567890 
         InitiatorAlias= myhost 
         TargetWWUI= iscsi 
            . 
            .  text/login commands flow here during authentication phase 
            . 
      T->Login Response 
         TargetWWUI= iscsi.com.acme.diskarray.sn.8675309 
         TargetAlias= 8675309 
    
   3. Login to a canonical target, for the SendTargets command. 
    
      I->Login Request 
         InitiatorWWUI= iscsi.com.os.hostid.34567890 
         InitiatorAlias= myhost 
         TargetWWUI= iscsi 
            . 
            .  text/login commands flow here during authentication phase 
            . 
      T->Login Response 
         TargetWWUI= iscsi 
    
      Since the target returned a WWUI of "iscsi", the initiator will 
      now use the SendTargets text command to find out which target 
   WWUIs 
      are actually supported at this address.  It will then create 
      new connections for each target, and do the login scenario shown 
      in example 1. 
    
      [ What if this is a really simple device with no WWUI, and no 
        SendTargets?  At this point, the initiator could just be logged 
        in and start doing stuff, but what's the rule it should use 
        to know that?  Or is it silly not to have a WWUI, since even a 
        single disk or tape drive will have something to make one out 
     
   Voruganti iSCSI Naming and Discovery - Expires August 2001       27 

   
    
        of? ] 
    
    
   Answers to Potentially Frequently Asked Questions 
    
    What happens if an Initiator WWUI is not unique? 
    
     - Targets will authenticate both as same entity 
     - Targets will believe that one initiator is using 
       them via different network interfaces. 
     - Initiators may end up sharing a device by 
       accident. 
    
    
    
   Appendix B: iSCSI Login Scenarios 
   B.1. Introduction 
    
   The Initiator WWUI MUST always be sent during login.  As a target may 
   use the Initiator WWUI as part of its access control mechanism, an 
   initiator that does not send its WWUI stands the risk that it will be 
   excluded from accessing some or all of its targets. 
    
   The target WWUI MUST be sent in the login phase (with the exception 
   that the key-word iscsi can replace unknown target). This can enable 
   the distinction between several (virtual of physical) storage 
   entities in the device. 
    
   The WWUIs MUST be sent in the Login Request message, establishing the 
   login session (together with the other login parameters). The WWUIs 
   MUST be in text command format - UTF-8 coded as described in chapter 
   3. 
    
   The target MUST response to the login request with the appropriate 
   status. The status codes are defined in the iSCSI draft [7]. 
    
   B.2. Request Format 
    
   The requests and responses are in key:value format. When more than 
   one Value is required, a comma separator is used, i.e., 
   key=value1,value2,..valuen. 
    
   The key words are: 
    
   +-----------------------------------------+ 
   |  Key             |    Description       | 
   +------------------+----------------------+ 
   |  InitiatorWWUI   |    Initiator's WWUI  | 
   |  TargetWWUI      |    Target's WWUI     | 
   |  TargetAlias     |    Target's Alias    | 
   |  InitiatorAlias  |    Initiator's Alias | 
   |  TargetAddress   |    Target IP:Port    | 
   +-----------------------------------------+ 
     
   Voruganti iSCSI Naming and Discovery - Expires August 2001       28 

   
    
    
   In the Login Request command, the initiator uses the keys and the 
   appropriate WWUI as values. For example: 
    
   I->Login Request 
        InitiatorWWUI= iscsi.com.os.hostid.34567890 
        InitiatorAlias= myhost 
        TargetWWUI= iscsi.com.acme.diskarray.sn.8675309 
    
   Here, both initiator and target WWUI are presented. Other parameters 
   (security, negotiation) MAY be added. 
    
   In the following example, only the initiator's WWUI is presented (the 
   key-word iscsi is used): 
    
   I->Login Request 
        InitiatorWWUI= iscsi.com.os.hostid.34567890 
        TargetWWUI= iscsi 
    
   Other parameters (security, negotiation) MAY be added. 
    
   B.3. Response Format 
    
   The response to the login request can be to accept the request, to 
   reject it or to proceed for further processing (authentication). This 
   status should be reflected on the response message. 
    
   B.4. Examples 
    
   B.4.1 Successful login, known target: 
    
   I->Login Request 
      InitiatorWWUI= iscsi.com.os.hostid.34567890 
      InitiatorAlias= myhost 
      TargetWWUI= iscsi.com.acme.diskarray.sn.8675309 
    
   If no further process is needed: 
    
   T->Login Response ("login accept 00", F set) 
      TargetWWUI= iscsi.com.acme.diskarray.sn.8675309 
      TargetAlias= foo 
    
   Or, if more authentication and/or negotiation is required: 
    
   T->Login Response ("challenge 20", F clear) 
       . 
       . authentication/negotiation 
       . 
   T->Login Response ("login accept", F set) 
      TargetWWUI= iscsi.com.acme.diskarray.sn.8675309 
      TargetAlias= foo 
    
   In this case, target WWUI is specified in the request. The response  
     
   Voruganti iSCSI Naming and Discovery - Expires August 2001       29 

  
    
   Reflects the WWUIs, indicating successful login. Target Alias MAY be 
   presented. 
    
   B.4.2 Successful login, unknown target: 
    
   I->Login Request 
      InitiatorWWUI= iscsi.com.os.hostid.34567890 
      InitiatorAlias= myhost 
      TargetWWUI= iscsi 
       . 
       . authentication/negotiation 
       . 
   T->Login Response ("login accept", F set) 
      TargetWWUI= iscsi.com.acme.diskarray.sn.8675309 
      TargetAlias= foo 
    
   If there is a single WWUI at the IP address and TCP port to which the 
   initiator has connected, this will work.  The target returns its WWUI 
   so the initiator can keep it for future use. 
    
   Note that in the case of partial response, the target WWUI is 
   reflected Only after the authentication process. 
    
   B.4.3 Login to a canonical target, for the SendTargets command. 
    
   The initiator MUST use the key word iscsi as target's WWUI: 
    
   I->Login Request 
      InitiatorWWUI= iscsi.com.os.hostid.34567890 
      InitiatorAlias= myhost 
      TargetWWUI= iscsi 
       . 
       . authentication/negotiation 
       . 
   T->Login Response ("login accept", F set) 
      TargetWWUI= iscsi 
    
   Since the target returned a WWUI of "iscsi", the initiator MAY now 
   use the SendTargets text command to find out which target WWUIs are 
   actually supported at this address. It will then create new 
   connections for each target, and do the login scenario shown in 
   A.4.1. 
    
   B.4.4 Redirection 
    
   If a target has moved, or is accessible only via a proxy, the target 
   may respond with one of several redirection status codes, along with 
   one or more TargetAddress fields specifying the new location(s) of 
   the target. 
    
   Note that a "moving target" is not changing its identity, or WWUI. It 
   is only changing its address.  A target returning a redirect status 
     
   Voruganti iSCSI Naming and Discovery - Expires August 2001       30 

       
    
   SHOULD also include one or more TargetAddress fields specifying the 
   new locations of the target. 
    
   For example, if the target moved temporarily: 
    
   I->Login Request 
      InitiatorWWUI= iscsi.com.os.hostid.34567890 
      InitiatorAlias= myhost 
      TargetWWUI= iscsi.com.acme.diskarray.sn.8675309 
       . 
       . authentication/negotiation 
       . 
     T->Login Response ("Target moved temporarily 31", F set) 
      TargetWWUI= iscsi.com.acme.diskarray.sn.8675309 
      TargetAddress= 10.1.40.50:384 
      TargetAddress= storage1.mydata.com 
    
   (The same goes for the permanent move - code 32). Note that if TCP 
   port is not specified, the canonical port is assumed. 
    
   The login response terminates the session and the initiator SHOULD 
   start a new login session with the forwarded target. Further 
   parameters MAY be reflected on other key=value pairs. 
    
   Or, if a proxy is required for this target: 
    
   I->Login Request 
      InitiatorWWUI= iscsi.com.os.hostid.34567890 
      InitiatorAlias= myhost 
      TargetWWUI= iscsi.com.acme.diskarray.sn.8675309 
       . 
       . authentication/negotiation 
       . 
   T->Login Response ("Proxy required 33", F set) 
      TargetWWUI= iscsi.com.acme.diskarray.sn.8675309 
      TargetAddress= 10.1.40.50:384 
    
   If more than one proxy exist, their addresses can be reflected in a 
   list format. 
    
   B.4.5 Login fail 
    
   In case of login failure - forbidden target, unauthorized initiator 
   and so on, the target terminates the session. 
    
   I->Login Request 
      InitiatorWWUI= iscsi.com.os.hostid.34567890 
      TargetWWUI= iscsi.com.acme.diskarray.sn.8675309 
   T->Login Response ("forbidden target 42", F set) 
    
   In this example, the initiator is not allowed on the required target. 
   The initiator SHOULD terminate the login session and MAY try 
   connecting to another target. 
     
   Voruganti iSCSI Naming and Discovery - Expires August 2001       31 

    
    
    
   I->Login Request 
      InitiatorWWUI= iscsi.com.os.hostid.34567890 
      TargetWWUI= iscsi.com.acme.diskarray.sn.8675309 
   T->Login Response ("Target removed 44", F set) 
    
   In this case the target has been removed. In contrast with codes 31 
   and 32 (in B.4.4), no redirection information is supplied. 
    
   I->Login Request 
      InitiatorWWUI= iscsi.com.os.hostid.34567890 
      TargetWWUI= iscsi.com.acme.diskarray.sn.8675309 
   T->Login Response ("Target Conflict 45", F set) 
    
   Here, the target is busy with another initiator and cannot handle 
   another one. The initiator MAY try again later. This can be the case 
   of simple devices that can handle one device or the target has 
   reached the limit of its initiators' capacity. In contrast to the 
   previous examples, this rejection is temporary. 
    
   I->Login Request 
      InitiatorWWUI= iscsi.com.os.hostid.34567890 
      TargetWWUI= iscsi.com.acme.diskarray.sn.8675309 
   T->Login Response ("Target removed 44", F set) 
    
   Here, the target has been removed. The initiator SHOULD terminate the 
   login session. It MAY query the SNS for the new location of the 
   target. (This should apply for the case when the target was not found 
   - code 44). 
    
   In any case of the 4x and 5x class, there is no WWUI reflection on 
   the Login response. However, detailed messages can be carried on 
   other key=value pairs. 
     
   B.4.6 Proxy Login 
    
   When the initiator logs to a target via an (iSCSI) proxy, the 
   following procedure is applied: 
    
   The initiator connects to the proxy's port and sends a login request 
   of the destination target's WWUI and address: 
    
   I->Login Request 
      InitiatorWWUI= iscsi.com.os.hostid.34567890 
      TargetWWUI= iscsi.com.acme.diskarray.sn.8675309 
      TargetAddress= 10.1.30.75:240 
    
   Using the TargetAddress key saves the discovery process of the 
   target. The proxy logs into the required target with the initiator's 
   WWUI. The results of the login are reflected back to the initiator. 
    
   Note that a transparent (iSCSI) proxy does not have a WWUI of its 
   own. 
     
   Voruganti iSCSI Naming and Discovery - Expires August 2001       32 

   
    
    
   Appendix C: iSCSI Proxies and Firewalls Taxonomy 
     
    
     iSCSI has been designed to allow SCSI initiators and targets 
     to communicate over an arbitrary network.  This, making some 
     assumptions about authentication and security, means that in 
     theory, the whole internet could be used as one giant storage 
     network. 
    
     However, there are many access and scaling problems that would 
     come up when this is attempted. 
    
     1. Most iSCSI targets are only meant to be accessed by one or 
        a few initiators.  Discovering everything would be silly. 
    
     2. The initiator and target may be owned by separate entities, 
        each with their own directory services, authentication, and 
        other schemes.  An iSCSI-aware proxy may be required to 
        map between these things. 
    
     3. Many environments use non-routable IP addresses, such as the 
        10. network. 
    
     For these and other reasons, various types of firewalls and proxies 
     will be deployed for iSCSI, similar in nature to those already 
     handling protocols such as HTTP and FTP. 
    
   1. Port Redirector 
    
     A port redirector is a stateless device that is not aware of iSCSI. 
     It is used to do Network Address Translation (NAT), which can map 
   IP addresses between routable and non-routable domains, as well as 
   map TCP ports.  While devices providing these capabilities can often 
     filter based on IP addresses and TCP ports, they generally do not 
     provide meaningful security, and are used instead to resolve 
   internal network routing issues. 
    
     Since it is entirely possible that these devices are used as 
     routers and/or aggregators between a firewall and an iSCSI 
     initiator or target, iSCSI connections must be operable through 
     them. 
    
     Effects on iSCSI: 
    
     - iSCSI-level data integrity checks must not include information 
       from the TCP or IP headers, as these may be changed in between 
       the initiator and target. 
    
     - iSCSI messages that specify a particular initiator or target, 
       such as login requests and third party requests, should specify 
       the initiator or target in a location-independent manner. 
       This is accomplished using the WWUI. 
     
   Voruganti iSCSI Naming and Discovery - Expires August 2001       33 

      
    
   2. SOCKS server 
    
     A SOCKS server can be used to map TCP connections from one network 
     domain to another.  It is aware of the state of each TCP 
   connection. 
    
     The SOCKS server provides authenticated firewall traversal for 
     applications that are not firewall-aware.  Conceptually, SOCKS is 
     a "shim-layer" that exists between the application (i.e., iSCSI) 
     and TCP. 
    
     To use SOCKS, the iSCSI initiator must be modified to use the 
     encapsulation routines in the SOCKS library.  The initiator 
     the opens up a TCP connection to the SOCKS server, typically on 
     the canonical SOCKS port 1080.  A subnegotiation then occurs, 
     during which the initiator is either authenticated or denied 
     the connection request.  If authenticated, the SOCKS server then 
     opens a TCP connection to the iSCSI target using addressing 
     information sent to it by the initiator in the SOCKS shim.  The 
     SOCKS server then forwards iSCSI commands, data, and responses 
     between the iSCSI initiator and target. 
    
     Use of the SOCKS server requires special modifications to the 
     iSCSI initiator.  No modifications are required to the iSCSI 
   target. 
    
     As a SOCKS server can map most of the addresses and information 
     contained within the IP and TCP headers, including sequence 
   numbers, its effects on iSCSI are identical to those in the port 
   redirector. 
    
   3. iSCSI Proxy 
    
     An iSCSI proxy is similar to proxies available in HTTP. 
     The initiator is aware of the actual addresses of the targets, 
     but instead of connecting to the addresses, connects instead 
     to a proxy's address.  The proxy, in turn, connects to the 
     actual targets.  This is similar to the HTTP/1.1 proxy, where 
     the client passes the entire URL (including IP and TCP address) 
     to the proxy, rather than just the path name. 
    
     An iSCSI proxy can provide some good iSCSI-level access 
     control and other functionality, while adding fairly light 
     configuration responsibilities. 
    
     Effects on iSCSI: 
    
     - When logging in to a target at a proxy address instead of the 
       actual address, the target should include the TargetAddress (IP 
       address and TCP port) of the target, in addition to its WWUI.  
   Note, however, that this directly conflicts with the statement made 
       regarding NAT firewalls.  Since the WWUI is enough to uniquely 
     
   Voruganti iSCSI Naming and Discovery - Expires August 2001       34 

     
       identify an iSCSI device, the TargetAddress must then be used by 
   the proxy as a hint on where to find the WWUI, and not as the final 
       authority. 
    
     - This is beginning to be covered in the iSCSI specification. 
    
     Having the address passed with the WWUI would allow an iSCSI 
     proxy to exist without extra configuration or name services. 
     Using this type of proxy can eliminate the need to implement SOCKS. 
    
   4. SCSI gateway 
    
     This gateway presents logical targets (WWUIs) to the initiators, 
   and maps them to real iSCSI targets as it chooses.  The initiator 
   sees this gateway as a real iSCSI target, and is unaware of any proxy 
   or gateway behavior.  The gateway may manufacture its own WWUIs, or 
   use those provided by the real devices.  This type of gateway is used 
   to represent parallel SCSI, Fibre Channel, SSA, or other devices as 
   iSCSI devices. 
    
     Nearly any capability that could be imagined is possible with this 
     type of gateway, but it may require more configuration than an 
     iSCSI proxy. 
    
     Effects on iSCSI: 
    
     - Since the initiator is unaware of any addresses beyond the 
       gateway, the gateway's own address is for all practial 
       purposes the real address of a target.  Only the WWUI needs 
       to be passed.  This is already done in iSCSI, so there are 
       no further requirements to support SCSI gateways. 
    
   5. Stateful Inspection Firewall (stealth iSCSI firewall) 
    
      The Stealth model would exist as an iSCSI-aware firewall, that 
      is invisible to the initiator, but provides capabilities found 
      in the iSCSI proxy. 
    
      Effects on iSCSI: 
    
      - Since this is invisible, I don't think there are any 
        additional requirements on the iSCSI protocol for this 
        one. 
    
      This one is more difficult in some ways to implement, simply 
      because it has to be part of a standard firewall product, 
      rather than part of an iSCSI-type product.  For this reason, 
      I would not expect to see these implemented for a while. 
    
      Also note that this type of firewall is only effective 
      in the outbound direction (allowing an initiator behind the 
     
   Voruganti iSCSI Naming and Discovery - Expires August 2001       35 

      February 2001 
                  
      firewall to connect to an outside target), unless the iSCSI target 
   is located in a DMZ.  It does not provide adequate security 
   otherwise. 
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
              
              
            8. References  
   [1] Edwards, K., "Core Jini: In Depth: Discovery", Prentice Hall, 
   1999. 
     
   [2] John, R., "UPnP, Jini and Salutation- A look at some popular      
   coordination frameworks for future networked devices", 
   http://www.cswl.com/whiteppr/tech/upnp.html", June 17, 1999.  
              
   [3] http://www.srvloc.org  
              
   [4] Freed, N., "Behavior of and Requirements for Internet Firewalls",  
            RFC 2979, October 2000.  
   [5] ANSI/IEEE Std 802-1990, Name: IEEE Standards for Local and  
            Metropolitan Area Networks: Overview and Architecture  
              
   [6] Kessler, G. and Shepard, S., "A Primer On Internet and TCP/IP 
   Tools  
   and Utilities", RFC 2151, June 1997.  
              
   [7] Satran, J., Sapuntzakis, C., Wakeley, M., Von Stamwitz, P., 
   Haagens, R., Zeidner, E., Dalle Ore, L., Klein, Y., "iSCSI",  
   draft-ietf-ips-iscsi-00.txt, February, 2000.  
              
   [8] Gibbons, K., Tseng, J. and Monia, C., "iSNS Internet Storage Name  
   Service", draft-tseng-ips-isns-00.txt, October 2000.  
              
   [9] RFC 1737, "Functional Requirements for Uniform Resource Names". 
              
   [10] RFC 1035, "Domain Names - Implementation and Specification". 
   OUI - "IEEE OUI and Company_Id Assignments", 
   http://standards.ieee.org/regauth/oui/index.shtml 
   [11]EUI - "Guidelines for 64-bit Global Identifier (EUI-64) 
    Registration Authority        
   http://standards.ieee.org/regauth/oui/tutorials/EUI64.html 
    
   [12] RFC 2396, "Uniform Resource Identifiers". 
   [13] RFC 2276, "Architectural Principles of URN Resolution". 
    
   [14] RFC 2483, "URI Resolution Services". 
    
     
   Voruganti iSCSI Naming and Discovery - Expires August 2001       36 

 
    
   [15] RFC 2141, "URN Syntax". 
    
   [16] RFC 2611, "URN Namespace Definition Mechanisms". 
            
   [17] RFC 2608, SLP Version 2. 
   [18] RFC 2610, DHCP Options for the Service Location Protocol. 
    
   [19] P. Sarkar et al, "A Standard for Bootstrapping Clients using the  
   iSCSI Protocol", draft-ietf-ips-iscsi-boot-01. 
   [20] M. Bakke et al, "A URN Namespace for iSCSI World-Wide Unique 
   Identifiers", draft-bakke-iscsi-wwui-urn-00 February 2001. 
   [21] M. Bakke et al,Finding iSCSI Targets and Name Servers using 
   SLP, draft-bakke-iscsi-SLP-template.00.  
    
        
              
            6. Contact Author   
            Kaladhar Voruganti   
            650 Harry Road   
            IBM Almaden Research   
            San Jose, CA   
            USA   
            Email: kaladhar@us.ibm.com   
                
            Voruganti            Internet Draft Expires August 2001        
              
              
         iSCSI Naming and Discovery        February 2001  
               
               
               
               
               
               
   "Copyright (C) The Internet Society (date). All Rights Reserved. This   
   document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
   others,  and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 
   or assist  in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published 
   and distributed,in whole or in part, without restriction of any kind, 
   provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are 
   included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this 
   document itself may not be modified in any way, Full Copyright 
   Statement such as by removing the copyright notice or references to 
   the Internet Society or other Internet organizations, except as 
   needed for the purpose of developing Internet standards in which case 
   the procedures for copyrights defined in the Internet Standards 
   process must be followed, or as required to translate it into 
   languages other than  English.   
               
   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be    
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.   
               
   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an   
     
   Voruganti iSCSI Naming and Discovery - Expires August 2001       37 

  
   "As IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING   
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED , INCLUDING   
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION 
   HEREIN   
   WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF 
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE"   
    
               
            Expires August 2001   
               
     Voruganti  iSCSI Naming and Discovery Draft Expires August 2001   
    
    
    
     
   Voruganti iSCSI Naming and Discovery - Expires August 2001       38 
