







Provider Provisioned VPN WG                            Ananth Nagarajan
Internet Draft                                                   Sprint
draft-ietf-ppvpn-as-vr-00.txt
Expiration Date: February 2003                         Junichi Sumimoto
                                                       Muneyoshi Suzuki
                                                        NTT Corporation

                                                            Paul Knight
                                                        Nortel Networks

                                                      Benson Schliesser
                                                  SAVVIS Communications


                                                            August 2002



Applicability Statement for Virtual Router-based Layer 3 PPVPN approaches


Status of this Memo



      This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
      all provisions of Section 10 of RFC 2026 ([RFC-2026]).

      Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
      Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that
      other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

      Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
      months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents
      at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
      material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

      The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
      http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

      The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
      http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.



Nagarajan et al                                                 [Page 1]





Internet Draft        draft-ietf-ppvpn-as-vr-00.txt           August 2002


      This document is submitted to the IETF's Provider Provisioned Virtual
      Private Network (ppvpn) working group. Comments should be addressed
      to WG's mailing list at ppvpn@ppvpn.francetelecom.com. The charter
      may be found at http://www.ietf.org/html.charters/ppvpn-charter.html

      Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2000). All Rights Reserved.
      Distribution of this memo is unlimited.





      Abstract

      This document is an applicability statement for Layer 3 Provider
      Provisioned VPNs (L3 PPVPNs) that is based on Virtual Router (VR)
      approaches. This document describes how VR-based approaches meet
      the key requirements that are outlined in the PPVPN Applicability
      Statements Guideline document.




1. Summary for Sub-IP area

      This document is an output of the design team formed to develop
      applicability statements for Layer 3 PPVPNs in the PPVPN working
      group.  As such this work fits within the scope of the PPVPN
      working group.  This document discusses the applicability of
      virtual router-based approaches for Layer 3 PPVPNs.
















Nagarajan et al                                                 [Page 2]





Internet Draft        draft-ietf-ppvpn-as-vr-00.txt           August 2002


2. Introduction

      The virtual router concept for L3 PPVPNs was first introduced in
      [COREVPN].  This was generalized in [PPVPNVR].  A number of
      autodiscovery mechanisms can be used with this approach to L3 PPVPNs,
      and [COREVPN] represents one such approach using IP multicast. Based
      on the taxonomy of PPVPNs described in [FRAMEWORK], Virtual Router
      based approaches are classified as PE-based Layer 3 PPVPNs.


   VR-based PPVPNs are used in the following situations:

   - The customer wishes to outsource the maintenance and management of
   inter-site VPN connectivity to the Service Provider (SP).

   - The SP desires to provide VPN service without upgrading its core
   network to support any specific technology (e.g., MPLS), i.e., the SP
   can provide a Layer 3 VPN service over an existing IP routed or Layer
   2 switched core network.

   - The customer is not aware of the topology or mechanisms used in the
   SP core network and is responsible for routing between customer
   routers, which is independent of the routing used in the SP core.
   Only the customer-facing sides of the PE devices in the SP network
   are visible to the customer.

   - The customer primarily sends IP traffic across the VPN, but may
   also send non-IP traffic, provided these traffic types are supported
   by the tunneling technologies used.  It should be noted that the
   support of Layer 2 VPNs using VR-based mechanisms is outside the
   scope of this document.

      This document describes how Virtual Router based approaches satisfy
      key requirements and metrics identified in the PPVPN Applicability
      Statements Guideline document [ASGUIDE].  These requirements are a
      subset of the requirements listed in the PPVPN Service Requirements
      document [REQTS].  This document is based on the guidelines
      specified in [ASGUIDE].









Nagarajan et al                                                 [Page 3]





Internet Draft        draft-ietf-ppvpn-as-vr-00.txt           August 2002


3. SP Provisioning Model

   Virtual Routers (VR) have similar properties to physical routers,
   except that they are instantiated on a single PE device.  VPNs are
   constructed via tunnels connecting VR pairs across the service
   provider backbone network. Per-VR routing protocol instantiations
   are run to distribute VPN reachability information.  VPN membership
   information distribution is treated separately, and is achieved via
   sharing a VPN-ID, for example [RFC2685], between VRs that are members
   of a specific VPN.  This separation of reachability and membership
   distribution functions is one of the key differences between the VR
   model and the "piggy-backing" models such as [RFC2547bis].  In
   [RFC2547bis], both reachability and membership information is
   distributed via BGP extensions between PE devices, on a per-VPN
   basis. The detailed VR model is described in [PPVPNVR].


3.1. Auto Discovery

   In the VR-based PPVPNS, various auto discovery mechanisms are
   supported.  VPN discovery can be achieved through directory servers,
   explicit configuration via a management platform, using multicast
   [COREVPN] or by piggybacking VPN membership and topology information
   via routing protocols such as BGP [VPN-BGP]. A combination of these
   mechanisms may also be used on a PE. For example, for some VPNs
   topology discovery is done only through a management platform. For
   others, dynamic topology discovery is achieved using existing routing
   protocol.  BGP-based auto-discovery is described in [VPN-BGP], and is
   used for membership, toplogy and reachability discovery.

   It is important to note that, for the VR architecture, the auto-
   discovery mechanism is only used to automatically exchange control
   VPN information between VRs. It is not intended for piggybacking VPN
   private reachability information onto the backbone routing instance.






Nagarajan et al                                                 [Page 4]





Internet Draft        draft-ietf-ppvpn-as-vr-00.txt           August 2002


4. Supported Topology and Traffic Types

   VR-based PPVPNs can be constructed using either MPLS tunnels in the
   core network or IP tunnels (GRE, IP-in-IP, L2TP, IPSec), or Layer 2
   connections such as ATM or Frame Relay.  The choice of the tunneling
   mechanism may impact other properties of the VPN itself, including
   scalability, manageability, QoS, security etc.   For example, the
   use of IPSec tunnels for encryption may impact forwarding performance
   as a result of sophisticated encryption mechanisms, and therefore
   impact the number of routes per VPN, the number of VPNs per PE, etc.
   Tunnels are created on a per-VPN basis.  For transport across the
   network, a number of  these tunnels  may be aggregated and carried
   within a PE-PE tunnel.   The topology of the VPN is not strictly defined.
   It may be any arbitrary topology, including full-mesh, and arbitrary
   partial-mesh.




5. Isolated exchange of routing and data information

   By definition of a Virtual Private Network, the details of its
   addressing, topology, connectivity, and reachability as well as the
   data that it transports are implicitly considered to be private, and
   should therefore be isolated from other networks, including others
   that may be supported with the PPVPN infrastructure. [FRAMEWORK]



5.1. Isolation of routing information (constrained distribution of
      reachability information)

      In a PPVPN, routing is provisioned and managed by the SP, who is
      responsible for maintaining isolation between networks except as
      explicitly intended by the VPN owner.

      The VR model of PPVPNs provides for isolation by instantiating



Nagarajan et al                                                 [Page 5]




Internet Draft        draft-ietf-ppvpn-as-vr-00.txt           August 2002


      multiple Virtual Routers (VR) on a single physical platform to
      support multiple VPNs. [PPVPNVR] Each VR has its own interfaces,
      routing tables, forwarding tables, and routing protocol instances.
      This provides for isolated topology, addressing, and reachability
      for the VPN.

      Addressing and Reachability includes the assignment, discovery, and
      distribution of source and/or destination information for the PPVPN.
      The isolation of this information implies that other networks,
      including other VPNs and the Internet, will have no visibility into
      the PPVPN except as explicitly configured.

      Routing information carried between VRs is carried in the same
      context/plane as data itself, and is therefore segregated from the
      underlying backbone infrastructure by the same mechanisms that
      segregate data between VPNs.

      This model supports arbitrary routing architectures, including
      support for back-door links or other potentially unique routing
      architecture requirements.  The support for arbitrary routing
      architectures, however, is accompanied by scalability and
      management issues.  These issues are discussed later in this
      document.

      In the VR approach, virtual routers are connected to the CEs through
      local links, and to each other across the backbone through tunneling
      services provided by the service provider across the backbone. All
      data traffic within the VR-based VPN is isolated from non-VPN traffic
      by these mechanisms.




5.2. Isolation of data

      Data for different VPNs in the VR model is segregated through the use
      of different link-layer connections or tunnels over a common SP
      backbone. [PPVPNVR] Examples of such tunnels include GRE, L2TP,
      IPSec, MPLS or Layer 2 connections such as ATM or Frame Relay.  It



Nagarajan et al                                                 [Page 6]





Internet Draft        draft-ietf-ppvpn-as-vr-00.txt           August 2002


      should be noted that this isolation can be impacted by
      misconfiguration.


6. Access Control and Authentication

   CE-PE authentication has not been specified for VR-based VPNs and is
   for further study.  The customer must provide appropriate mechanisms
   for CE-PE authentication.

   In order for VR-based PPVPNs to support confidentiality, integrity,
   authentication, and replay attack prevention, mechanisms such as
   IPsec may be used as tunneling mechanism or used over VPN tunnels.
   Even with the use of IPsec, the security level offered is dependent
   on the scope of the IPsec security: encrypting on a CE-to-CE basis
   (as in CE-based VPNs) will offer a higher level of protection than
   encrypting on a PE-to-PE basis (as in PE-based VPNs).  Policy-based
   security and access control mechanisms or firewalls may be used
   between sites in the same VPN.  These can be implemented on the PE
   router, or on the CE.


7. Security


7.1. Protection of user data

   As described above, end-to-end (CE-to-CE) IPSec may be used to
   protect user data.  SPs may choose to provide CE-based IPSec as a
   value added service.  If the SP core network is also part of the
   public Internet, the SP may choose to provide PE-to-PE IPSec as the
   tunneling mechanism between VRs.

   If inter-SP VPNs are to be provided, IPSec tunnels may be used.  The
   impact on QoS and SLAs in this case will have to be studied.

   In general, user data is protected via the inherent isolation
   provided by the inter-VR tunnels.  Varying levels of security of user
   data may be provided based on the type of tunnel that is used.









Nagarajan et al                                                 [Page 7]





Internet Draft        draft-ietf-ppvpn-as-vr-00.txt           August 2002


7.2. SP Security Measures

   In general, the SP should ensure that non-VPN traffic does not
   accidentally or maliciously enter a VPN.  As such, the PE and P
   devices should be protected against intrusion or denial of service
   attacks.  VR routing sessions must be authenticated.  If BGP is used
   as an auto- discovery mechanism between VRs, it should be further
   authenticated using mechanisms such as TCP MD5.  Filtering of data
   entering the PE should be performed in order to prevent the
   acceptance of unauthorized packets from  customers or other SPs into
   that PE.


8. Addressing

   Virtual routers may provide any or all of the services which are
   provided by a physical router, including Network Address Translation
   (NAT), packet filtering, etc.  These VR capabilities can simplify the
   process of joining previously independent site networks, which may
   have overlapping address spaces.  NAT can be used to satisfy intra-
   VPN non-unique addressing requirements. This facilitates the
   construction of short-term or ad-hoc VPNS.  It should be noted,
   however, that NAT has accompanying scaling problems, and other
   mechanisms are needed to ensure proper routing updates, when two
   sites share the same routing domain.

   Non-unique and private customer addresses may be supported by using
   encapsulation within the tunneling mechanisms employed between VR
   pairs (e.g., GRE, IP-in-IP etc.).  As such, support for private
   addressing as specified in [RFC1918] allows for non-unique addresses
   between different VPNs.















Nagarajan et al                                                 [Page 8]





Internet Draft        draft-ietf-ppvpn-as-vr-00.txt           August 2002


9. Interoperability and Interworking

   Interoperability and Interworking of VR-based VPNs with other L3
   PPVPN mechanisms such as 2547bis is for further study.  Since VRs
   provide all IP router functionalities, various VR-based solutions
   interwork and interoperate to the extent that IP networks
   interoperate and interwork.


10. Network Access


10.1. Physical and Link Layer Topology

   VR-based mechanisms do not affect the choice of physical and link
   layer technologies or topologies.


10.2. Temporary Access

   Temporary access for a dial-up user to a VR can be provided via PPP
   and AAA, using a Remote Access Server.  Other access mechanisms such
   as IPSec can also be used.  Thus, it is possible provide login and
   password based access to a VR-based VPN from an authorized user
   connected to the Internet.


10.3. Access Connectivity

   Multi-homing of CEs to multiple VRs (within the same or different
   PEs) is supported.  The PEs (and consequently the VRs) may belong to
   different SPs.  In the case where multihoming of CEs is across
   different SPs, care should be taken during traffic sharing across the
   SPs. For example, traffic from a single ingress PE should not be
   split in this case.

   Load sharing based on IGP or other traffic engineering mechanisms
   used in the SP core are naturally supported by VR-based VPNs.













Nagarajan et al                                                 [Page 9]





Internet Draft        draft-ietf-ppvpn-as-vr-00.txt           August 2002


11. Service Access


11.1. Internet Access

   Simultaneous VPN and Internet Access can be supported via various
   mechanisms.  A specific VR may be assigned as a default VR that is
   connected to the Internet.   If a single VR is to be used to carry a
   customer's VPN as well as Internet traffic, Internet traffic can be
   distinguished from VPN traffic by associating a default VPN-ID with
   Internet traffic and pointing it to a default route to the Internet.
   This default route to the Internet need not be direct, but may
   instead point to a firewall or other security device which may use
   different interfaces for VPN access and Internet access.


11.2. Hosting, ASP, other services

   All of the above "external" services can be supported by associating
   a separate address for every service that is not being used within
   the VPN.  If a single server (for example, a web hosting server) is
   used to provide a particular service to all VPNs, NAT may be used to
   provide a unique address for clients to access that particular
   service.  NAT can be performed either at the customer site or can be
   integrated into the PE.  The scaling impacts of adding NAT to the PE
   will have to be considered.


12. SP Routing

   VR-based PPVPNs do not impose any additional requirements on the IGP
   used in the service provider core network.  However, the PE must
   implement the IGP used in the customer VPN. The VR-based VPNs can use
   the core routing protocols or may use different routing protocols
   between VRs than the core network.

   Fault handling is a specific problem when the timers used for the VR-
   to-VR routing peering are shorter than the timers used for the
   routing peering within the service provider(s) network. In this case
   a single failure within a service provider network may look like a
   collection of un-correlated failures in the VPN.

   Moreover, since a VR doesn't really "know" what causes the failure,
   the VR may react to such a failure by re-routing along some other



Nagarajan et al                                                [Page 10]





Internet Draft        draft-ietf-ppvpn-as-vr-00.txt           August 2002


   tunnel, while this other tunnel may be also affected by the same
   failure. As a result, this would slow down routing convergence
   within the VPN.

   To avoid the problems mentioned above one may consider making the
   timers used for the VR-to-VR peering longer than the timers used for
   the routing peering within the service provider network (so that
   failures within the service provider network would be "invisible" to
   the VR-VR tunnels).  But that has its own set of problems.  While
   this may be possible to accomplish within a single routing domain
   (one needs to appropriately set the IGP timers within the domain),
   doing this in a network that includes more than one routing domain
   may be difficult (as timers include both IGP and BGP timers, and
   moreover, timers include IGP timers in several routing domains).
   Another consequence of making the timers used for the VR-to-VR
   peering over the tunnels longer than the timers used for the routing
   peering within the service provider network is that it would increase
   the amount of traffic that will be "black holed" in the case of VR
   failures.


12.1. Core router awareness of mechanisms used

   Since tunnels are established between VR pairs, the core router (P
   router) does not have any information of the mechanisms used to
   construct the VPN.  If MPLS is the tunneling mechanism that is used
   between the VRs, the core routers may have to be MPLS enabled in
   order to leverage the benefits of MPLS tunnels (e.g., traffic
   engineering).  As such, while the core routers are not aware of VPN-
   specific information, they should support requirements to meet
   relevant SLAs. (e.g., for guaranteed QoS, the core routers may need
   to support appropriate QoS mechanisms).











Nagarajan et al                                                [Page 11]





Internet Draft        draft-ietf-ppvpn-as-vr-00.txt           August 2002


13. Migration impacts

   As VR approach makes use of standard routing protocols without any
   extensions, any CE using the VR approach can access a PE similar to
   the way it would access another CE router in a private network using
   leased lines.  Key design considerations include:

      - The PEs will introduce extra router hops

      - If the VR-VR backbone routing protocol differs from the sites, then
      IGP metric implications should be carefully evaluated.  This would be
      particularly true for multihomed VPN sites.

   Also, since the VR approach does not depend on the backbone
   architecture in terms of routing protocols, a VR-based L3 PPVPN can
   be offered on a service provider core network without the need for
   specific core technologies.  For example, the core network does not
   need specific mechanisms like MPLS to be implemented on the P
   routers.  Similarly, if the core network is a Layer 2 network based
   on ATM or Frame Relay, VR-based VPNs can still be constructed.

   It should be noted, however, that core network mechanisms would
   determine the overall properties and services that may be provided
   over the VPN.  For example, in order to support customer QoS SLAs,
   the core network should be robustly engineered or should support QoS
   mechanisms, in addition to SLA marking at the PE.

   Thus, while migration impacts in the case of basic VPN functionality
   using VR are minimal from the customers' or providers' point of view,
   appropriate core mechanisms may be necessary for certain services.













Nagarajan et al                                                [Page 12]





Internet Draft        draft-ietf-ppvpn-as-vr-00.txt           August 2002


14. Scalability

   PE-based PPVPNs have better scalability than CE-based PPVPNs, because
   the total number of VPN tunnels that need to be managed are far fewer
   in the service provider backbone, than between CEs.  Addition of a
   new CE in a CE-based PPVPN would require O(N^2) tunnels to be set up
   where N represents the total number of CEs.  In comparison, addition
   of a new CE for a specific customer, in the case of a PE-based PPVPN,
   would simply require an additional connection between the new CE and
   the PE, because inter-PE tunnels already exist per VPN.

   VR is a technology for implementing logical routing instances in a PE
   device. A PE device may contain more than one VR and a VR supports
   one VPN. Therefore, scalability of a VR and conventional physical
   router are basically the same, e.g., if different routing protocols
   are used for customer and network sides of a VR or physical router,
   the load is increased compared with the case when the same protocols
   are used.  However, the scalability depends on the theoretical limits
   on address space, routing protocols, etc., within a single VPN.

   The major factor contributing to scalability constraint in the VR
   approach is the number of VRs which can be supported by a PE. This is
   because, the number of VRs in a PE device is equal to the number of
   VPNs which are supported by the PE.

   Resources used by a VR instance include memory and processor
   resources, used to support VPN tunnel mechanisms, routing protocol
   instances, route tables, interface management, etc.  The extent to
   which these resources are utilized impact scalability.

   Much of the resource utilization for a given VPN will be affected by
   the topology of the VPN. For instance, a VPN with a full-mesh
   topology will require that VRs have more peers for the VPN tunneling



Nagarajan et al                                                [Page 13]





Internet Draft        draft-ietf-ppvpn-as-vr-00.txt           August 2002


   mechanism, for routing protocol adjacencies, for security protocols,
   and etc., while a hub-and-spoke model will constrain the resources
   required for 'spoke' PE routers.

   From a VR perspective, scalability also depends on whether the same
   routing protocols are used between VRs as in the backbone network.
   If the inter-VR routing protocols are different from the backbone IGP,
   the scaling and management impacts for configuring routing protocols
   on a per-VR basis may be significant.  For example, it may be
   necessary to maintain OSPF databases for the entire customer VPN
   topology, as opposed to maintaining information for only directly
   connected customer sites.  Additionally, the customer IGP may need to
   maintain information about the entire VR topology.  Other concerns
   include routing loop avoidance, route dedistribution, etc. Thus,
   while the VR model allows separate routing protocols between
   customers and between VRs than the backbone IGP, this flexibility is
   accompanied by scalability concerns.  Mechanisms such as OSPF areas
   may be used to circumvent such scaling issues.



15. QoS/SLA

   VR-based PPVPNs support any kind of QoS that the core network and the
   tunneling mechanism used support.

   QoS mechanisms developed for physical routers can be used with VRs,
   on a per-VR basis. e.g., classification, policing, drop policies,
   traffic shaping and scheduling/bandwidth reservation. The
   architecture allows separate quality of service engineering of the
   VPNs and the backbone.

   VR-based VPNs can utilize different quality of service mechanisms.
   QoS mechanisms developed for physical routers can be used with VRs,
   on a per-VR basis. e.g. classification, policing,  drop policies,
   traffic shaping and scheduling/bandwidth reservation. The
   architecture allows separate quality of service engineering of the



Nagarajan et al                                                [Page 14]




Internet Draft        draft-ietf-ppvpn-as-vr-00.txt           August 2002


   VPNs and the backbone.  However, the tunneling mechanisms themselves
   should support relevant QoS mechanisms.



15.1. SLA Monitoring

   VR-based VPNs can implement a variety of methods to monitor
   compliance with Service Level Agreements.  Since the links between
   VRs make use of tunnels across the underlying backbone network, the
   SLA monitoring capabilities of the backbone network can be used to
   monitor the performance of the inter-VR links.  Performance to SLA
   requirements within the PEs hosting the VRs is typically monitored
   via internal processes to ensure compliance from end to end.  In
   addition, either the service provider or the VPN customer can use all
   existing SLA tracking tools (round trip time measurement, traceroute
   mapping, etc.) within the VR-based VPN.



16. Management


16.1. SP Management

   [Note: This section will be completed in following versions of
   this draft]


16.2. Customer Management

   The SP may choose to manage the customer site (i.e., the CE devices)
   for added revenue.  If the SP uses a centralized customer management
   system, care should be taken to uniquely identify various CEs
   belonging to different VPNs, so that CE devices from different VPNs
   do not reach each other.

   The customer may desire to have access to the PE device for
   monitoring purposes (e.g., ping, traceroute).  Providing such access
   is at the discretion of the SP.

   Traffic statistics in order to prove SLAs to customers may be
   provided on a periodic basis.  Other statistics that can show



Nagarajan et al                                                [Page 15]





Internet Draft        draft-ietf-ppvpn-as-vr-00.txt           August 2002


   enhanced SP capabilities, including protection against Denial of
   Service attacks, failure etc., can be provided to the customer.



17. Security considerations

   There are no additional security considerations besides those
   already addressed in the document.



18. Acknowledgments

   The authors of this draft would like to acknowledge the suggestions
   and comments received from the entire Layer 3 Applicability Statement
   Design Team formed in the PPVPN working group.  Besides the authors,
   the members of the design team include Marco Carugi, Eric Rosen,
   Jeremy De Clercq, Luyuan Fang, Dave McDysan, Cliff Wang, Olivier
   Paridaens, Tom Nadeau, Yakov Rekhter and Rick Wilder.



19. REFERENCES

      [PPVPNVR] Ould-Brahim, H., et al., "Network based IP VPN Architecture
      using Virtual Routers", work in progress.

      [ASGUIDE] Sumimoto, J., et al., "Guidelines of Applicability
      Statements for PPVPNs," work in progress.

      [FRAMEWORK] R. Callon, et al., "A Framework for Layer 3 Provider
      Provisioned Virtual Private Networks," work in progress.

      [REQTS] McDysan, D., et al., "Service requirements for Layer 3
      Provider Provisioned Virtual Private Networks", work in progress.

      [RFC2764] Gleeson, B., et al., "A Framework for IP Based Virtual
      Private Networks", RFC 2764, February 2000.

      [RFC1918] Rekhter, Y. et al., "Address Allocation for Private
      Internets," RFC 1918, February 1996.

      [RFC2685] Fox B., et al, "Virtual Private Networks Identifier", RFC



Nagarajan et al                                                [Page 16]





Internet Draft        draft-ietf-ppvpn-as-vr-00.txt           August 2002


      2685, September 1999.

      [RFC2026] Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision
      3", RFC   2026, October 1996.

      [COREVPN] Muthukrishnan, K., Malis, A., "Core MPLS IP VPN
      Architecture", work in progress.

      [RFC2547bis] Rosen E., et al, "BGP/MPLS VPNs", work in progress.

      [VPN-BGP] Ould-Brahim, H., et al, "Using BGP as an Auto-Discovery
      Mechanism for Network-based VPNs", work in progress.







































Nagarajan et al                                                [Page 17]





Internet Draft        draft-ietf-ppvpn-as-vr-00.txt           August 2002


20. Authors' Addresses


      Ananth Nagarajan
      Sprint
      6220 Sprint Parkway
      Overland Park, KS 66251
      E-mail: ananth.nagarajan@mail.sprint.com

      Muneyoshi Suzuki
      Junichi Sumimoto
      NTT Information Sharing Platform Labs.
      3-9-11, Midori-cho,
      Musashino-shi, Tokyo 180-8585, Japan
      Email: suzuki.muneyoshi@lab.ntt.co.jp
      Email: sumimoto.junichi@lab.ntt.co.jp

      Paul Knight
      Nortel Networks
      600 Technology Park Drive
      Billerica, MA 01821
      E-mail: paknight@nortelnetworks.com

      Benson Schliesser
      SAVVIS Communications
      717 Office Parkway
      St. Louis, MO 63141
      Phone: +1-314-468-7036
      Email: bensons@savvis.net






















Nagarajan et al                                                [Page 18]





Internet Draft        draft-ietf-ppvpn-as-vr-00.txt           August 2002


21. Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002).  All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
























Nagarajan et al                                                [Page 19]




