Network Working Group                                         C. Groves 
Internet Draft                                           NTEC Australia 
Intended status: BCP                                             Y. Lin 
Expires: March 2008                                              Huawei 
                                                        October 2, 2007 
                                                          
 
                                      
               H.248/MEGACO Package Registration Procedures 
                    draft-groves-megaco-pkgereg-00.txt 


Status of this Memo 

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that       
   any applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is       
   aware have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she       
   becomes aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of       
   BCP 79. 

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html 

   This Internet-Draft will expire on March 2, 2007. 

Copyright Notice 

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007). 

Abstract 

   This document updates the H.248/MEGACO IANA Package Registration 
   procedures in order to better describe the Package registration 
   process and to provide a more formal review and feedback process. 

 
 
 
Groves                  Expires March 2, 2008                  [Page 1] 

Internet-Draft     Package Registration Procedures       September 2007 
    

Conventions used in this document 

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [RFC2119]. 

Table of Contents 

    
   1. Introduction...................................................2 
   2. Updated Package Registration Procedures........................4 
   3. Formal Syntax..................................................6 
   4. Security Considerations........................................6 
   5. IANA Considerations............................................6 
      5.1. New IANA Package Registration Text........................7 
   6. Acknowledgments................................................9 
   7. References....................................................10 
      7.1. Normative References.....................................10 
      7.2. Informative References...................................10 
   Author's Addresses...............................................10 
   Intellectual Property Statement..................................10 
   Disclaimer of Validity...........................................11 
    
1. Introduction 

   Since the initial development of H.248/MEGACO a number of 
   organizations have made use of the H.248/MEGACO protocol Package 
   mechanism in order to allow a certain function to be controlled by 
   H.248/MEGACO. The H.248/MEGACO package mechanism was in part 
   introduced to allow organizations who had an in depth knowledge in a 
   particular functional area to independently produce a package on this 
   functionality. This acknowledged the fact that neither the IETF 
   MEGACO Working Group nor the ITU-T Study Group 16 possessed in depth 
   knowledge in all areas. Whilst this approach has been successful in 
   the number and range of packages produced, in some cases these 
   Packages were/are not fully aligned with H.248/MEGACO principles. 
   Once a Package has been published and registered it is problematic to 
   rectify any issues.  

   The introduction of problems/inconsistencies was in part caused by 
   the fact that the Packages were not fully reviewed by H.248/MEGACO 
   experts. In fact the IANA H.248/MEGACO registration process did not 
   actually specify that an in depth review should take place.  

   The current H.248/MEGACO Package registration process was defined 
   when ITU-T Study Group 16 and the IETF Megaco Working Groups were 
   both active in Megaco/H.248 standardization and produced nearly all 
 
 
Groves                  Expires March 2, 2008                  [Page 2] 

Internet-Draft     Package Registration Procedures       September 2007 
    

   the registered Packages. Packages were reviewed in the IETF MEGACO 
   Working Group and the Working Group chair was the IANA technical 
   expert in charge of the review of the requests for H.248 Package 
   registration. This meant that H.248 Packages under went an informal 
   review before being registered. However this has changed. 

   The current situation is that now the IETF Megaco working group is 
   disbanded and new H.248/MEGACO development occurs through Question 3 
   of ITU-T Study Group 16 only (not withstanding email discussion on 
   the IETF MEGACO mailing list). This move to ITU-T defined 
   recommendations is discussed in [obsol3525]. 

   Given this situation, it is appropriate that the H.248/Package 
   Package definition and IANA registration rules are updated to 
   introduce a formal review step before the Package registration 
   process is completed and ideally before the Package is published. 
   This process would only be applicable to public Packages. 

   As part of the Package development process Package developers are 
   encouraged to send their Package for review to the ITU-T Study Group 
   Question Rapporteur responsible for the H.248 sub-series (Question 3 
   of Study Group 16 at the time of writing). When registering the 
   Package with IANA, package developers are required to send a copy of 
   the package for review by the IANA appointed expert. It is 
   recommended to register the Package before final approval by the 
   group in question in order to solicit feedback on the quality of 
   their Package. Where ever possible this review will be done in 
   conjunction with other H.248/MEGACO experts (e.g. in Q.3/16 and/or 
   the MEGACO mailing list).  

   The existing IANA Package registration process is a two step process. 
   When Packages are first registered they receive the status of "In 
   Progress (IP)". This allows Package developers to request a PackageID 
   before the document is fully approved. When the document is approved 
   then a change of status to "Final", may be requested. The new 
   procedure introduces the step that the IANA expert is consulted 
   before a change of status is made. If the Package has been reviewed 
   and is acceptable then the status may be changed to "Final". However 
   if the package has not been provided for review or it has outstanding 
   comments then the status shall remain at "IP".     

   The goal of the updated text is to define a process that provides a 
   timely technical review of packages to ensure that H.248/MEGACO 
   packages are of good quality and minimize duplication. 



 
 
Groves                  Expires March 2, 2008                  [Page 3] 

Internet-Draft     Package Registration Procedures       September 2007 
    

2. Updated Package Registration Procedures 

   Amendment 1 to ITU-T Recommendation H.248.1v3 introduces the new 
   H.248 Package registration procedures in clause 14. These new 
   procedures are detailed below: 

   14 IANA considerations 

   14.1  Packages 

   The following considerations shall be met to register a package with 
   IANA: 

   1) A unique string name, unique serial number and version number is 
   registered for each package. The string name is used as the PackageID 
   for text encoding. The serial number is used as the PackageID for 
   with binary encoding. Serial Numbers 0x8000 to 0xFFFF are reserved 
   for private use. Serial number 0 is reserved. The unique string name 
   and unique serial number may be requested by the package requestor or 
   assigned by IANA. 

   2) The package requestor shall provide a contact name, email and 
   postal addresses for that contact shall be specified. The contact 
   information shall be updated by the defining organization as 
   necessary. 

   3) The package requestor shall provide a reference to a document that 
   describes the package, which should be public:  

      The document shall specify the version of the package that it 
   describes. 

      If the document is public, it should be located on a public web 
   server and should have a stable URL. The site should provide a 
   mechanism to provide comments and appropriate responses should be 
   returned. 

      If the document is not public, it must be made available for 
   review at the time of the application. 

   4) IANA shall ensure that packages registered by other than 
   recognized standards bodies shall have a minimum package name length 
   of 8 characters. 

   5) IANA shall ensure that package names are allocated on a first 
   come-first served if all other conditions are met. 

 
 
Groves                  Expires March 2, 2008                  [Page 4] 

Internet-Draft     Package Registration Procedures       September 2007 
    

   If the above five criteria are met then IANA shall register the 
   following information in the registry as described below: 

   1. Binary ID (or serial number) 

   2. Text ID 

   3. Package version 

   4. Extension information - Binary ID and package version 

   5. Status - IP ("In Progress") or Final. "In Progress" indicates that 
   the package has not been fully reviewed and approved therefore may 
   contain errors or may not be consistent with H.248 principles. 
   "Final" indicates that the Package has been reviewed and approved and 
   is stable. 

   6. Package name, Reference and Contact information 

   The documenting text does not have to be publicly available at the 
   time of the registration request, however the text shall be provided 
   for review at the time of application. IANA shall register new 
   packages with a status of "IP".  Package requestors are encouraged to 
   request registration as early as practicable in the design process, 
   to reserve a binary ID.  Binary IDs shall be published in the 
   document defining the package. 

   Package requestors for non-private packages under development shall 
   send the package text to IANA. This should occur as soon as 
   practicable after the rough draft of the definition is completed and 
   at least before the package is approved in order to ensure the 
   package is consistent with H.248 methodologies and package design 
   principles. The IANA shall forward the Package to the IANA Expert for 
   review. During the review the input package will be compared to the 
   Package template for completeness, as well as being compared against 
   protocol syntax and procedures. It will be compared against existing 
   work to see that it doesn't duplicate existing functionality. The 
   Expert reviewer would then work towards a resolution of any issues 
   with the Package requestor. The IANA Expert may complete the review 
   in consultation with other H.248 experts (i.e. Question 3 of ITU-T 
   Study Group 16). If the package is deemed suitable, the IANA Expert 
   shall issue a statement indicating approval, copied to IANA. 

   Once the package is complete, IANA shall be notified of the 
   completion of the package by the group developing the package.  Upon 
   receipt of this notification, IANA shall update the registration 
   details.  IANA should notify the IANA Expert, and if the Package has 
 
 
Groves                  Expires March 2, 2008                  [Page 5] 

Internet-Draft     Package Registration Procedures       September 2007 
    

   been reviewed and the comments addressed the status of the package 
   shall be set to "Final". Otherwise the status should remain as "In 
   progress". In either case, IANA shall notify the group developing the 
   package of the outcome of the status update. 
    

   If the IANA Expert responds to IANA's update notification with an 
   approval indication, IANA shall update the status to "Final".  If the 
   ITU-T responds that the package has not been reviewed, or was deemed 
   unsuitable, IANA shall alter the status back to "IP".  In either 
   case, IANA shall notify the developing group of the update. 

   A package shall not be set to status "Final" without the express 
   approval of the IANA Expert.  

3. Formal Syntax 

   The following syntax specification uses the augmented Backus-Naur 
   Form (BNF) as described in RFC-4234 [RFC4234]. 

   Text encoded PackageIDs shall conform to the "PackageName" encoding 
   in H.248.1 [H248Amm1] Annex B. Repeated below for convienience: 

      PackageName    = NAME 

      NAME           = ALPHA *63(ALPHA / DIGIT / "_") 

   Note: A digit is not allowed as the first character of a package 
   name. 

4. Security Considerations 

   Updating the IANA H.248/MEGACO package registration procedures has no 
   additional security implications. Security for the H.248/MEGACO 
   protocol is discussed in H.248.1 section 10. Requestors for public 
   packages for a particular standards development organization must be 
   authorized by that organization to request a Package registration.  

5. IANA Considerations 

   This document describes an updated package registration procedure. 
   RFC-2434 [RFC2434] has been considered in making the updates. This 
   document does not alter the tabular package, error code and service 
   change reason information at: http://www.iana.org/assignments/megaco-
   h248 . As such only a change to the header information on packages is 
   required.  

 
 
Groves                  Expires March 2, 2008                  [Page 6] 

Internet-Draft     Package Registration Procedures       September 2007 
    

5.1. Appointment of the IANA H.248/MEGACO Expert 

   The IANA shall remain responsible for allocating the H.248/MEGACO 
   expert. It is recommended that this person be involved in ongoing 
   H.248/MEGACO development. As such it is recommended that 
   identification of the IANA expert be done in consultation with the 
   ITU-T Study Group/Question responsible for the H.248 sub-series of 
   Recommendations. Q.3/16 at the time of writing. 

5.2. New IANA Package Registration Text 

   The IANA will assign a serial number to each package meeting the 
   conditions of registration (except for an update of an existing 
   package, which retains the serial number of the package it is 
   updating), in consecutive order of registration. 

   The following considerations shall be met to register a package with 
   the IANA: 

   1) A unique string name, unique serial number and version number is 
   registered for each package. The string name is used as the PackageID 
   for text encoding. The serial number is used as the PackageID for 
   binary encoding. Public packages MUST be given serial numbers in the 
   range 0x0001 to 0x7fff.  Private packages MUST be given serial 
   numbers in the range 0x8000 to 0xffff. Serial number 0 is reserved. 
   The unique string name and unique serial number may be requested by 
   the package requestor or assigned by the IANA. 

   2) The package requestor shall provide a contact name, email and 
   postal addresses for that contact shall be specified. The contact 
   information shall be updated by the defining organization as 
   necessary. 

   3) The package requestor shall provide a reference to a document that 
   describes the package, which should be public:  

      a) The document shall specify the version of the package that it 
   describes. 

      b) If the document is public, it should be located on a public web 
   server and should have a stable URL. The site should provide a 
   mechanism to provide comments and appropriate responses should be 
   returned. 

      c)If the document is not public, it must be made available for 
   review at the time of the application. 

 
 
Groves                  Expires March 2, 2008                  [Page 7] 

Internet-Draft     Package Registration Procedures       September 2007 
    

   4) The IANA shall ensure that packages registered by other than 
   recognized standards bodies shall have a minimum package name length 
   of 8 characters. 

   5) The IANA shall ensure that package names are allocated on a first 
   come-first served if all other conditions are met. 

   If the above five criteria are met then the IANA shall register the 
   following information in the registry as described below: 

   1. Binary ID (or serial number) 

   2. Text ID - See RFCXXXX (Editor's note please insert the ID of this 
   document) section 3 for the syntax. 

   3. Package version 

   4. Extension information - Binary ID and package version 

   5. Status* - IP ("In Progress") or Final. 

   6. Package name, Reference and Contact information 

   Status - "In Progress" indicates that the package has not been fully 
   reviewed and approved therefore may contain errors or may not be 
   consistent with H.248 principles. "Final" indicates that the Package 
   has been reviewed and approved and is stable. 

   The documenting text does not have to be publicly available at the 
   time of the registration request, however the text shall be provided 
   available for review at the time of application. IANA shall register 
   new packages with a status of "IP".  Package requestors are 
   encouraged to request registration as early as practicable in the 
   design process, to reserve a binary ID.  Binary IDs shall be 
   published in the document defining the package. 

   Package requestors for non-private packages under development shall 
   send the package text to IANA. This should occur as soon as 
   practicable after the rough draft of the definition is completed and 
   at least before the package is approved in order to ensure the 
   package is consistent with H.248 methodologies and package design 
   principles. The IANA shall forward the Package to the IANA Expert for 
   review. During the review the input package will be compared to the 
   Package template for completeness, as well as being compared against 
   protocol syntax and procedures. It will be compared against existing 
   work to see that it doesn't duplicate existing functionality. The 
   Expert reviewer would then work towards a resolution of any issues 
 
 
Groves                  Expires March 2, 2008                  [Page 8] 

Internet-Draft     Package Registration Procedures       September 2007 
    

   with the Package requestor. The IANA Expert may complete the review 
   in consultation with other H.248 experts (i.e. Question 3 of ITU-T 
   Study Group 16). If the package is deemed suitable, the IANA Expert 
   shall issue a statement indicating approval, copied to IANA. 

   H.248.1 Amendment 1 [H248Amm1] section 14 and RFCxxxx (Editor's 
   note:a reference to this document) section 2.contain details of this 
   review procedure  

   IANA will maintain the currency and public availability of the 
   tabulation of public and private packages.  Packages will be listed 
   in increasing order of serial number.  Updates to packages will be 
   listed in increasing order of version number. 

6. Acknowledgments 

   This document was prepared using 2-Word-v2.0.template.dot. 






























 
 
Groves                  Expires March 2, 2008                  [Page 9] 

Internet-Draft     Package Registration Procedures       September 2007 
    

7. References 

7.1. Normative References 

   [RFC2119] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate 
             Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997. 

   [RFC4234] Crocker, D. and Overell, P.(Editors), "Augmented BNF for 
             Syntax Specifications: ABNF", RFC 4234, October 2005. 

   [H248Amm1]  International Telecommunication Union, "Gateway control 
             protocol: Version 3", Amendment 1 to ITU-T Recommendation 
             H.248.1, July 2007. 

7.2. Informative References 

   [obsol3525] Taylor, T., "Reclassification of RFC 3525 to Historic", 
             draft-taylor-megaco-obsol3525-01.txt, May 2007. 

   [RFC2434] Narten, T. and Alvestrand, H., "Guidelines for Writing an 
             IANA Considerations Section in RFCs", BCP26, RFC 2434, 
             October 1998. 

    

Author's Addresses 

   Christian Groves 
   NTEC Australia  
   Newport, Victoria 
   Australia 
       
   Email: Christian.Groves@nteczone.com 
 

   Yangbo Lin 
   Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd. 
   Shenzhen, Guangdong 
   P. R. China  
   Email: linyangbo@huawei.com 
 

Intellectual Property Statement 

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to 
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in 
 
 
Groves                  Expires March 2, 2008                 [Page 10] 

Internet-Draft     Package Registration Procedures       September 2007 
    

   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights 
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has 
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information 
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be 
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of 
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at 
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org. 

Disclaimer of Validity 

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an 
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS 
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND 
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS 
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF 
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED 
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 

Copyright Statement 

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007). 

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions 
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors 
   retain all their rights. 

Acknowledgment 

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the 
   Internet Society. 

    




 
 
Groves                  Expires March 2, 2008                 [Page 11] 

