Internet Engineering Task Force          Jieyun (Jessica) Yu
INTERNET DRAFT                                  Lianghwa Jou
Expires in January, 2001                      Abbie Matthews
                                            Vijay Srinivasan
                                       CoSine Communications
                                                  July, 2000



         Criteria for Evaluating VPN Implementation Mechanisms
                      draft-yu-vpn-criteria-00.txt



Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt. The list of Internet-
   Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

Abstract

   A variety of mechanisms for implementing Virtual Private Network
   (VPN) utilizing public IP network infrastructure have been proposed
   in [1,2,3,4] and more may be emerging. This document attempts to
   identify a set of criteria for evaluating such mechanisms. The
   criteria could be used by IETF for evaluating a VPN proposal before
   advancing it to standard track or by VPN Service Providers or
   enterprise network administrators for choosing which mechanism to use
   in order to implement their desired VPN networks. The mechanisms this
   criteria addresses are exclusively for implementing IP based VPNs, as
   oppose to non-IP based ones, such as Frame Relay based VPNs, etc.

1. Introduction




Yu, et al.                                                      [Page 1]





Internet Draft       draft-yu-vpn-criteria-00.txt            July, 2000


   A Virtual Private Network (VPN), in general, can be described as an
   emulated private communication infrastructure utilizing shared
   communication facilities. It is usually built by utilizing public
   Internet infrastructure or ISP backbone network. VPN is a cost-
   effective alternative for enterprises conducting internal private
   communications involving geographically diverse sites.

   A variety of mechanisms for implementing VPN utilizing public IP
   network infrastructure have been proposed [1,2,3,4] and more may be
   emerging. This document attempts to identify a set of criteria for
   evaluating such mechanisms. The criteria could be used by IETF for
   evaluating a VPN proposal before advancing it to standard track or by
   VPN Service Providers or enterprise network administrators for
   choosing which mechanism to use in order to implement their desired
   VPN networks.

   It is worthy noting that the mechanisms this set of criteria
   addresses are exclusively for implementing IP based VPNs as oppose to
   non-IP based ones, such as Frame Relay or ATM based VPNs.

2. Basic Criteria

   The very basic criteria of VPN are virtual and private. By Virtual,
   we mean, the network has no correspondent physical network, rather is
   an emulated infrastructure utilizing underlying public network
   infrastructure. By Private, we mean, access to such network is
   restricted only to a defined set of entities and the data transmitted
   across the VPN should not be read by outside of the network.

   In order to be characterized as a VPN implementation mechanism, a
   mechanism must provide a means of implementing VPNs with these two
   basic characteristics.

3. Other Criteria for Evaluating VPN Implementation Mechanisms

   The basic components of a VPN implementation mechanism should include
   mechanisms for a) membership identification, verification and
   dissemination; b) Intra-VPN routing and routing interaction between
   VPN and its underlying network(s); and c) forwarding. With these
   basic components in mind, a VPN implementation mechanism can be
   evaluated, in general, with the following aspects:

              o Security
              o Architecture
              o Manageability
              o Scalability
              o Feature support




Yu, et al.                                                      [Page 2]





Internet Draft       draft-yu-vpn-criteria-00.txt            July, 2000


   It is worthy noting that with security criteria, different degree of
   requirement may vary with respect to different VPNs. For example,
   while it is an absolute requirement for some VPNs to encrypt data
   transmitted over the VPN, it may not be top consideration for others.
   Therefore, specific requirement of a particular VPN should be taken
   into consideration when such evaluation is taking place.

3.1. Security

   A VPN implementation mechanism should provide means for data security
   and network security.

3.1.1.  Data Security

   Data security includes data integrity, data confidentiality and data
   origin authentication.

   o Data integrity

   One of the security concerns is that data could be altered or
   tampered while transmitted across the Internet. A VPN mechanism needs
   to provide mechanisms to ensure the integrity of data exchanged
   within the VPN.

   o Data confidentiality

   A VPN mechanism should provide means for ensuring that no
   unauthorized party reading or copy the VPN private data while
   transmitting across the underlying public network. An example of such
   mechanism is data encryption.

   o Data origin authentication

   A VPN mechanism should provide ways for authenticate the origin of
   data to ensure that the source of the data is what it claims to be.

3.1.2. VPN Network Security

   VPN network security provides the ability to guarantee that only
   approved recipients receive the VPN's routing information and data.

   o Site authorization and authentication

   A VPN will suffer from undesirable security consequences when an
   unauthorized site becomes part of the VPN network. To ensure a secure
   VPN network, a VPN implementation mechanism should provide means of
   establishing connections only with the authorized entities (sites) in
   the initial VPN construction process as well as in the



Yu, et al.                                                      [Page 3]





Internet Draft       draft-yu-vpn-criteria-00.txt            July, 2000


   reconfiguration process. To achieve the goal, a form of site
   authentication prior to establishment of the connection is required
   and should be provided.

   o Access control

   Access control involves policy of who can access the VPN network.
   Access control mechanism should be provided by a VPN implementation
   mechanism to restrict access thus to protect the privacy of the VPN
   network.

   o Routing Security

   The goal of achieving routing security in a VPN is to prevent routers
   of a VPN from interaction with unauthorized entities, to prevent
   routes to VPN destinations from leaking to undesired entities, and to
   avoid introducing undesired routing information to taint the VPN
   routing information base.

   o VPN Isolation

   Certain VPN implementation mechanism provides capability of
   supporting multiple VPNs utilizing the same set of devices (e.g. Edge
   routers of a provider network.) Mechanisms, such as separate
   forwarding table for each VPN on the device, must be provided to
   prevent unintended traffic from one VPN entering another to ensure
   privacy and security of the VPNs.

3.2. Architecture

3.2.1. Flexible Topology

   A set of virtual links between sites belong to a VPN constitutes the
   topology of the VPN network. A virtual link can be realized via the
   construction of a tunnel such as IPsec VPN mechanism [2] or via
   establishing direct routes as with BGP4/MPLS VPN mechanism [1].

   Based on its requirement, an enterprise may desire the topology of
   its VPN network as full-mesh, partial-mesh or hub-and-spoken. A VPN
   implementation mechanism should be flexible to allow constructing VPN
   topology based on the requirement accordingly.

3.2.2. Hierarchy

   Different architecture may result in different scalability of its
   correspondent VPN. For example, provider network-based VPN
   architecture allows a provider edge router to connect many customer
   premises equipment (CPE) routers in a region. The topology mesh will



Yu, et al.                                                      [Page 4]





Internet Draft       draft-yu-vpn-criteria-00.txt            July, 2000


   be built among the Provider Edge routers. This architecture scales
   better than CPE based VPN where the tunnel meshes are formed among
   the CPE routers which has a lot more in numbers for large VPNs. In
   addition, by introducing this hierarchy, configuration and management
   complexity will be moved to a smaller set of Provider Edge routers
   rather than large amount of CPE devices.

   Therefore, it is desirable for a VPN implementation mechanism to
   provide means for building VPN with hierarchy.

3.2.3. Independency

   Although a VPN is a virtual infrastructure built on top of public
   network infrastructure, maintaining as much independence from its
   underlying network infrastructure as possible yields many advantages.
   The advantages include fault isolation and operation transparency,
   which would improve the stability of both VPN network as well as the
   underlying network(s).

3.2.3.1. Backbone Technology Independence

   An enterprise VPN network may span across multiple ISP network
   domains. Two VPNs with different ISP network as underlying
   infrastructure may need to merge into one VPN due to event such as
   corporate merge. To facilitate the interconnection, it is desirable
   that a VPN implementation mechanism be independent of underlying
   network or backbone technology. It should avoid assuming or requiring
   ISPs running certain protocols other than IP protocol.

   For those VPNs that only cross one ISP network (which is the most
   cases in today's implementation), this criterion is of less concern.

3.2.3.2. Addressing Independence

   A VPN mechanism should not require the binding of IP address space of
   the VPN to its underlying IP network. In another word, the IP
   addresses assigned within a VPN network should be independent of that
   assigned in its underlying IP network/backbone.

   By assigning separate IP address space from its underlying network, a
   VPN administrator is able to manage IP address within the VPN
   independently since he/she is able to add, change and remove IP
   addresses without coordinating with the administrator of the
   underlying IP network.

   By not tying VPN's IP address space with a particular underlying
   network, the VPN can migrate to other underlying IP network without
   changing the IP address, making such migration easier.



Yu, et al.                                                      [Page 5]





Internet Draft       draft-yu-vpn-criteria-00.txt            July, 2000


   By using independent IP address space from its underlying network, a
   VPN is able to use private IP address space. Using private IP address
   space helps conserving scarce IPv4 address space.

   It also makes it feasible for the use of overlapping IP address space
   for VPNs that do not have common sites. This again will make the use
   of private IP address space feasible.

3.2.3.3. Routing Independence

   Overall, routing of a VPN can be viewed as composed of two parts: a)
   obtaining routing knowledge to reach the private destinations
   (prefixes reachable within the VPN.) and b) obtaining routing
   information to VPN sites reachable via the underlying public network.
   While for b), VPN routers have to participant the routing of the
   underlying network, for a) they do not have to. That is, routing
   technology used for reachability within a VPN can be completely
   independent from that of the underlying network.

   Having an independent routing system will enhance VPN network
   security and minimize unnecessary outages due to routing instability
   in the underlying network and vice versa. Routing associated outages
   or instability in the VPN layer, caused by for example misbehaving
   routing software or mis-configurations, will not impact the routing
   and/or the stability in its underlying network. In addition, VPN
   prefixes will not need to be advertised to the underlying public
   network's routing table, which enhances the security of the VPN. Not
   leaking VPN prefixes in the underlying network also reduces routes in
   the underlying network, hence improving routing scalability of the
   underlying provider network.

   A VPN implementation mechanism should allow as much independent
   routing of VPN from its underlying network as possible. Mechanism
   should be provided to avoid the propagation of internal prefixes of a
   VPN to its underlying network(s).

3.2.4. Extendibility

   A VPN mechanism should allow easy extension of the VPNs while still
   maintain the same level of privacy and security.

3.2.4.1. Extend to multiple provider's domains

   Extending a VPN to different provider's domains requires that the VPN
   mechanism assuming no uniform technology of the underlying network
   infrastructure. The only common technology can be assumed is IP in
   the underlying networks




Yu, et al.                                                      [Page 6]





Internet Draft       draft-yu-vpn-criteria-00.txt            July, 2000


3.2.4.2. Extend to Remote Dialup Users

   Remote access or dialup is an essential part of enterprise networks
   which usually adopting VPN solution for its Intranet. Therefore, a
   VPN implementation mechanism should support this functionality.

3.2.4.3. Interconnection VPNs

   There are many reasons why VPNs would need to be interconnected. For
   example, the merge of two corporate would create a need for such
   interconnection. A VPN implementation mechanism should make such
   interconnection possible. It is also desirable that same mechanism
   can be used for both inter-VPN and intra-VPN connection to avoid
   introducing complexity in operation and management.

3.2.5. Redundancy

   A VPN implementation mechanism should avoid relying on a central
   system for operations such as routing or management. Such system will
   introduce single point of failure, performance bottleneck and/or
   capacity bottleneck such as routing table capacity.

3.2.6. Operation Transparency

   Even though a VPN utilizes the underlying network for its
   communication, logically, the two are separate networks. A VPN
   implementation mechanism should help minimize the dependence and
   interference between the two networks to optimize the performance.
   Due to this reason, operation transparency of VPN from underlying
   network is extremely desirable. Maximize the independency of a VPN
   from its underlying network as described in section 3.2.3 is a key to
   achieve operation transparency.

   Operation transparency includes the following aspects:

   o Technology change to either network will make the least impact on
   the other

   o VPN network administrators should be able to configure or
   reconfigure the VPN without involving the administrators of the
   underlying network

   A category of VPN service model involves the administrator of the
   underlying network also operate the VPN to which it provides service
   due to service outsourcing arrangement. The above requirement may be
   adjusted accordingly.

3.3. Manageability



Yu, et al.                                                      [Page 7]





Internet Draft       draft-yu-vpn-criteria-00.txt            July, 2000


   The management of a VPN typically involves membership, policy and
   security management. Reducing management complexity and manual
   configuration will reduce network outages due to misconfiguration and
   mismanagement. It is, therefore, desirable that VPN implementation
   mechanisms facilitate the manageability of VPNs. We will exam the
   management issues in the following aspects:

3.3.1. Membership Management

   The key of building a VPN is to identify and disseminate members
   belong to the VPN so connections can be established among the members
   to form a virtual private communication network or reconstruction of
   a VPN after its establishment. This information will have to be
   configured or distributed to the VPN routers. It can be achieved by
   manually configured all related information on the routers, install
   all such information in a central repository and distributed to VPN
   routers in a automated fashion, or propagate such information via
   piggybacking in routing protocols as discussed in [2].

   Regardless of what method chosen, it should keep manual management of
   such information to the minimum, both in terms of establishment of
   VPN or maintenance of VPN in terms of adding or deleting sites in a
   VPN.

3.3.2. Access Management

   Due to the private nature of VPNs in general, access of the networks
   needs to be restricted and controlled. Access policies need to be
   configured to the routers and in addition, need to be properly
   maintained. Again, it's desirable that a VPN implementation requires
   minimum manual management of policy information.

3.3.3. Key Management

   For those VPNs with strong requirement of security and privacy,
   security keys are used for the purpose of authentication and
   encryption. Therefore, key management becomes an essential part of
   the VPN management. Key management involves creation, exchange and
   maintenance of keys. VPN implementation should select mechanisms
   which meets the security requirement but also manageable.

3.3.4. Management Boundaries

   Being able to identify problem quickly will no doubt enhance the
   availability of a network. It can be critical to enterprises rely on
   VPN for mission critical tasks. It is desirable that administrative
   and management boundaries can be clearly defined. Building a VPN as
   much independent as possible to its underlying network(s) as



Yu, et al.                                                      [Page 8]





Internet Draft       draft-yu-vpn-criteria-00.txt            July, 2000


   described in section 3.2.3. Will help achieving the goal.

3.4. Scalability

   A VPN can grow as large as to include hundreds of sites. Thus VPN
   implementation mechanism should be able to scalable to build such a
   large VPN network. This requires that the complexity of setup,
   operation and management associated with a VPN does not increase
   dramatically with the size of the VPN (e.g. number of VPN sites)
   built with the mechanism.

3.4.1. Architecture Scalability

   Different architecture would have immense impact on the scalability
   of the VPN networks. For example, provider network based VPN
   architecture scales much better than CPE based VPN architecture due
   to the introduction of hierarchy thus removing the complexity of
   configuration and management on large number of routers involved as
   pointed out in section 3.2.2. in this document.

   Allowing same set of devices (such as provider's Edge routers) to
   support multiple VPNs is a scalable means for a VPN Service Provider
   to provider large number of VPNs in its network.

   When evaluating a VPN implementation mechanism, one need to consider
   if the mechanism allows the implementation of VPN with architectures
   that are more scalable.

3.4.2. Management Scalability

   The key to a scalable VPN management is to minimize the manual tasks
   in terms of configuration and maintenance of membership information
   and policy information. A VPN implementation mechanism should provide
   means of reducing manual tasks to minimum.

3.4.3. Routing Scalability

   A large VPN network would have the same routing complexity than that
   of a regular non-virtual network. Therefore, routing scalability
   issues facing non-virtual large networks as described in [5] also
   applies to routing in large VPN networks. A VPN implementation
   mechanism should not be an obstacle for implementing scalable routing
   in the VPNs.

   It is desirable that VPN prefixes do not propagate to the public
   network infrastructure, not only for security reason but also for
   scalable routing table management reason. A VPN implementation
   mechanism must not rely on public network routing system to carry



Yu, et al.                                                      [Page 9]





Internet Draft       draft-yu-vpn-criteria-00.txt            July, 2000


   private VPN prefixes.

3.5. Feature Support

   A VPN mechanism should not restrict VPN from supporting features
   desired by an enterprise network. Examples of such features
   including: QoS, Multicast and Multi-protocol support.

4. Conclusion

   Aside from privacy and security, independence of a VPN from its
   underlying network infrastructure is also a key criterion for
   evaluating VPN mechanisms. In fact, when such independency is
   achieved, it will improve the manageability of the VPN, which is also
   a very important criterion.

5. Security Considerations

   Security is an essential part of VPN implementation mechanisms.
   Sections in this document are devoted to discussion of security
   considerations.

6. References

   [1] Rosen, et al, "BGP/MPLS VPNs", May 2000, Work in progress

   [2] Gleeson, et al, "A Framework for IP Based Virtual Private
   Networks", February 2000, RFC2764

   [3] H. Ould-Brahim, B. Gleeson, "Network based IP VPN Architecture
   Using Virtual Routers", March 2000, Work in progress

   [4] K. Muthukrishnan, A., Malis, "A Core MPLS IP VPN Architecture",
   May 2000, Work in progress

   [5] J. Yu. "Scalable Routing Design Principles", Mar 2000, Work in
   progress

7. Author Information

   Jieyun (Jessica) Yu
   CoSine Communications
   jyy@cosinecom.com

   Lianghwa Jou
   CoSine Communications
   ljou@cosinecom.com




Yu, et al.                                                     [Page 10]





Internet Draft       draft-yu-vpn-criteria-00.txt            July, 2000


   Abbie Matthews
   CoSine Communications
   amatthews@cosinecom.com

   Vijay Srinivasan
   CoSine Communications
   vsrinivasan@cosinecom.com












































Yu, et al.                                                     [Page 11]


