
   MPLS Working Group                                 Peter Ashwood-Smith 
   Internet Draft                                     Bilel Jamoussi 
   Expiration Date: November 2003                     Don Fedyk  
   Standards Track                                    Darek Skalecki 
                                                      Nortel Networks 
                                                                            
                                                      June 2003 

      Improving Topology Data Base Accuracy with Label Switched Path 
        Feedback in Constraint Based Label Distribution Protocol 
    
                     draft-ietf-mpls-te-feed-06.txt 



Status of this Memo 
     
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.  
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.  
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
   at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."  
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt  
    
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
Abstract 

   One key component of traffic engineering is a concept known as 
   constraint based routing. In constraint based routing a topology 
   database is maintained on all participating nodes. This database 
   contains a complete list of all the links in the network that 
   participate in traffic engineering and for each of these links a set 
   of constraints, which those links can meet. Bandwidth, for example, 
   is one essential constraint. Since the bandwidth available changes 
   as new LSPs are established and terminated the topology database 
   will develop inconsistencies with respect to the real network. It is 
   not possible to increase the flooding rates arbitrarily to keep the 
   database discrepancies from growing. A new mechanism is proposed 
   whereby a source node can learn about the successes or failures of 
   its path selections by receiving feedback from the paths it is 
 
Ashwood-Smith, et. al.                                        [Page 1] 
Internet Draft      LSP Feedback with CR-LDP             June, 2003 


   attempting. This information is most valuable in failure scenarios 
   but is beneficial during other path setup functions as well. This 
   fed back information can be incorporated into subsequent route 
   computations, which greatly improves the accuracy of the overall 
   routing solution by significantly reducing the database 
   discrepancies. 
    
    
Table of Contents 
    
   1.0 Introduction and Description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2 
   2.0 Adding feedback TLVs to CR-LDP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6 
      2.1 Bandwidth directionality considerations.  . . . . . . . 6 
   3.0 Link Feedback TLV. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7 
      3.1 Link feedback TLV Description . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7 
      3.2 Local Interface IP Address Subtypes . . . . . . . . . . 8 
      3.3 Remote Interface IP Address Subtypes . . . . . . . . .. 8 
      3.4 Unreserved Bandwidth Sub Type. . . . . . . . . . .  . . 8 
   4.0 Detailed Procedures. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9 
   5.0 IGP Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .10 
   6.0 Future Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .11 
   7.0 RSVP-TE Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .11  
   8.0 Intellectual Property Considerations . . . . . . . . . . .11 
   9.0 Security Considerations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .11 
   10.0 IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .11 
   11.0 Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . .11 
   12.0 Normative References. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .12 
   13.0 Informative References. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .12 
   14.0 Authors Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .12  
     
    

1.0 Introduction and Description 

   Because the network is a distributed system, it is necessary to have 
   a mechanism to advertise information about links to all nodes in the 
   network [IS-IS], [OSPF].  A node can then build a topology map of 
   the network.  This information is required to be as up-to-date as 
   possible for accurate traffic engineered paths.  Information about 
   link or node failures must be rapidly propagated through the network 
   so that recovery can be initiated. Other information about links 
   that may be useful for reasons of quality of service includes 
   parameters such as available bandwidth, and delay. The information 
   in this topology database is often out of date with respect to the 
   real network. Available bandwidth is the most critical of these 
   attributes and it can drift substantially with respect to reality 
   due to the low frequency of link state updates that can be sustained 
   in a very large topology. The deviation in the topology database 
   available bandwidth is referred to as being optimistic if the 
   database shows more available bandwidth than there really is, or 

Ashwood-Smith, et. al.       June  2003                  [Page 2] 
Internet Draft      LSP Feedback with CR-LDP             June, 2003 


   pessimistic if the topology database shows less bandwidth than there 
   really is. This distinction is important to enable an efficient 
   algorithm to deal with optimistic databases without resorting to 
   shorter flooding intervals. 
    
   One of the major problems for a constraint based routing system is 
   dealing with changing constraints. Obviously, since bandwidth is one 
   of the essential constraints, dealing with the rapid changes in 
   reserved bandwidth poses some interesting challenges. In smaller 
   networks, one can resort to higher frequency flooding but this 
   obviously does not scale. The feedback mechanism is particularly 
   useful in the case of link or node failures where the rapid change 
   and notification of resource change is crucial to the restoration 
   time. Feedback is work conserving in this case since the 
   availability of feedback information minimizes the extra burden of 
   dealing with out of date topology and resource information.    
    
   The basic approach is to add to the signaling protocol the ability 
   to piggyback actual link bandwidth availability information at every 
   link that the signaling traverses. This is done as part of the 
   reverse messaging on success or failure (mapping, release, withdraw 
   or notification). What this means is that every time signaling 
   messages flow backwards toward a source to tell it of the success, 
   failure or termination of a request, that message contains a 
   detailed slice of bandwidth availability information for the exact 
   path that the message has followed. This slice of reservation 
   information, which is very up to date, is received by the source 
   node and attached to the source node's topology database prior to 
   making any further source route computations. The result is that the 
   source node's topology database will tend to stay synchronized with 
   the slices of the network through which it is establishing paths. 
   This is nothing more than learning from successes and failures and 
   represents an intelligent alternative to either waiting for floods 
   or introducing non-determinism (guessing) into the source 
   algorithms. It is important to note that the fed-back data is never 
   re-flooded. It simply overrides flooded information for the purpose 
   of route computation until a superceding flood or fed-back value 
   arrives. As such, it is not actually inserted into a topology 
   database, most likely it simply is linked to that database as an 
   override used only by source route computations. Also the inclusion 
   of feedback information is optional. At a minimum the blocked or 
   failed link is required but if processing resources are scarce the 
   additional feedback at other hops is optional. 
    
   Operating a constraint based routing system without such feedback is 
   inefficient at best since a source node will continue to give out 
   incorrect route over and over again until it gets an IGP update. 
   This could be minutes away and as a result the worst case blocking 
   time for a new route is the minimum repeatable flooding interval 
   (often several minutes in big networks). Alternatives to feedback 
   mechanisms involve adding some non-determinism (randomness) to the 

Ashwood-Smith, et. al.       June  2003                  [Page 3] 
Internet Draft      LSP Feedback with CR-LDP             June, 2003 


   routing algorithm in the hopes that it will stumble onto a path that 
   works. These sorts of approaches are seen in ATM dynamic routing 
   systems, which do not have these forms of feedback. 
    
   In order to get a good understanding of how the feedback works, 
   imagine a network with precisely one path (with sufficient 
   unreserved bandwidth) available from the source to the destination. 
   Further, imagine that the topology database at the source is 
   significantly out of date with respect to the real network in that 
   the source topology database sees sufficient bandwidth available on 
   many different routes to the destination. This is termed being 
   optimistic with respect to the network since the source thinks that 
   more bandwidth is available than there really is.   
    
   When such an optimistic source selects its first path it will likely 
   contain links that do not in reality have sufficient unreserved 
   bandwidth. Therefore, the path is only established up to the link 
   that does not have sufficient bandwidth. A notification message is 
   formatted that contains the actual unreserved bandwidth for this 
   blocking link which flows back toward the source, collapsing the 
   partially created path as it goes. In addition, at every link that 
   this notification traverses, the current unreserved bandwidth 
   information for each corresponding link is appended to the vector of 
   unreserved bandwidth along the path. In this manner, an accurate 
   view of the slice through the network traversed is constructed. 
   Eventually this message arrives back at the source node, where the 
   vector is taken and used to temporarily override the topology 
   database for route computations. This node has just learned from its 
   mistake and is now slightly less optimistic with respect to the real 
   network conditions.  
    
   Path selection can be attempted again but this time the node will 
   not make the same mistake it made the previous time. The link in 
   question, at which rejection occurred the first time, will not even 
   be eligible this time around, so a source route computation is 
   guaranteed to produce a different path (or none). The same procedure 
   may be repeated as many times as is necessary, each time learning 
   from its mistakes, until eventually no paths remain in the source 
   topology to the destination, or a path is found that works. This 
   tendency to converge either to a solution or determine that there is 
   no solution is an important property of a routing system (it 
   actually behaves a lot like a depth first search). This property is 
   not present with flooding mechanisms alone since the source node 
   must randomly hunt, or continually make the same mistakes, or abort 
   until the next flood arrives.  
    
   In addition to feeding back bandwidth on failure, feedback on 
   success is recommended. This has important consequences on our 
   ability to spread load or to spill over to new links as existing 
   links fill. It is true that spilling over to new links does not 
   require feedback on success since a node could simply wait for a 

Ashwood-Smith, et. al.       June  2003                  [Page 4] 
Internet Draft      LSP Feedback with CR-LDP             June, 2003 


   feedback on failure, but better load spreading can be achieved 
   earlier.  
    
   Finally, when a path is torn down the release/withdraw messages also 
   contain bandwidth information that can be fed back to override the 
   source topology database. This is very important during failure 
   scenarios where the links required for rerouting the path share 
   common sub-segments with the failed path. Without the feedback, the 
   common sub-segments may not indicate sufficient available bandwidth 
   until an LSA flood is received which may mean many seconds without a 
   connection. With feedback at least the database is up to date with 
   respect to available bandwidth up to the point of failure in the 
   path. Also since failure involves many paths tearing down and re-
   establishing this is the time that it is most critical to have an 
   accurate view.  
    
   When preemption is being employed it is also extremely important 
   that the topology database inconsistencies be small. If not, high 
   setup priority LSPs may unnecessarily preempt lower holding priority 
   LSPs to obtain bandwidth that, had they had a more up to date view 
   of unreserved bandwidth, they would have been able to find 
   elsewhere. Since preempted LSPs may in turn preempt other LSPs in a 
   domino like effect, the results of such database inconsistencies can 
   have wide reaching ripple like impacts. These feedback mechanisms 
   help reduce these occurrences significantly. 
    
   There are a number of network conditions where feedback shows its 
   value. One can think of a constraint-based network as being in one 
   of three conditions. The first is called ramp-up, this is when the 
   rate of arriving reservations exceeds the rate of departing 
   reservations. The second is called steady state, this is when the 
   rate of arriving reservations is about the same as the rate of 
   departing reservations. Finally, the ramp-down condition is that 
   which has a greater rate of departing reservations than arriving 
   reservations.  
    
   These three network conditions show distinctly different types of 
   error in the topology databases. In particular an optimistic view of 
   available bandwidth by a source node is characteristic of the ramp-
   up condition of a network. A pessimistic view of available bandwidth 
   by a source node is characteristic of the ramp-down condition of a 
   network. If one plots the average error in the topology databases 
   with respect to the real network for the three different network 
   conditions, one will see the error slowly go positive during ramp 
   up, slowly go negative during ramp down, and drift slowly around 0 
   for the steady condition. The effect of flooding on this plot is to 
   periodically snap the error back to 0 at flooding intervals. The 
   effect of the feedback algorithm is to bring an optimistic error 
   back to zero without having to wait for the flood interval. On 
   average then, the feedback algorithm tends to halve the absolute 
   error, keeping it mostly negative or pessimistic. This makes sense 

Ashwood-Smith, et. al.       June  2003                  [Page 5] 
Internet Draft      LSP Feedback with CR-LDP             June, 2003 


   since a routing system will never give paths to links that it thinks 
   do not have resources and as a result its pessimistic view of the 
   world stays that way until it gets a flood.  This relieves the IGP 
   updates of the most urgent requirement of flooding when bandwidth is 
   consumed. Availability of new bandwidth occurs when paths are 
   released or new links become available.  Floods already accompany 
   new links. Significant releases of bandwidth can be broadcast at 
   relatively low frequencies in the order of several minutes with 
   little operational impact. 
    
    
2.0 Adding feedback TLVs to CR-LDP 

   Two new TLVs are optionally added to the CR-LDP mapping, 
   notification, and withdraw messages. There may be an arbitrary 
   number of these TLV in any order or position in the message. It is 
   recommended that they be placed such that they can be read and 
   applied to override the topology database by scanning the message 
   forwards and walking the topology database from the point where the 
   last link feedback TLV left off.  
    
   Each TLV consists of the eight unreserved bandwidth values for each 
   holding priority 0 through 7 as IEEE floating-point numbers (the 
   units are unidirectional bytes per second). Following this are the 
   IP addresses of the two ends of the interface. Two TLVs are 
   possible, one for IPV4 and one for IPV6 addressing of the link. 
    
   Note: the feedback TLVs may also optionally be included in query or 
   query-reply messages in response to bandwidth update queries from an 
   LER. Details of this mechanism are provided in [QUERY]. 
    
2.1 Bandwidth directionality considerations 
    
   The order of the two addresses in the feedback TLV implies the 
   direction in which the bandwidth is available. For example if the 
   local address is A and the remote address is B the bandwidth is 
   unreserved in the A to B direction. 
    
   It is possible for an implementation to provide both the A to B 
   direction and the B to A direction as part of the same feedback 
   message. This is done by simply including a TLV with A, B as the 
   addresses of the link and a different TLV with B, A as the addresses 
   of the link. Should CR-LDP evolve to be able to support bi-
   directional traffic flow and reservations, it is expected that bi-
   directional feedback would also be implemented via this mechanism. 
    






Ashwood-Smith, et. al.       June  2003                  [Page 6] 
Internet Draft      LSP Feedback with CR-LDP             June, 2003 









3.0 Link Feedback TLV 

    
   The Feedback payload consists of one or more nested 
   Type/Length/Value (TLV) triplets for extensibility.  The format of 
   each TLV is: 
    
   0                   1                   2                   3 
   0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+ 
   |              Type             |             Length            | 
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+ 
   |                            Value...                           | 
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+ 
    
   The Length field defines the length of the value portion in octets 
   (thus a TLV with no value portion would have a length of zero).  The 
   TLV is padded to four-octet alignment;  padding is not included in 
   the length field (so a three octet value would have a length of 
   three, but the total size of the TLV would be eight octets).  Nested 
   TLVs are also 32-bit aligned.  Unrecognized types are ignored. 
    
3.1 Link feedback TLV Description  

   0                   1                   2                   3 
   0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+ 
   |U|F|          TBD IANA         |      Length                   | 
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+ 
   |                            Sub TLVs                           | 
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+ 
    
   This document introduces essentially one Feedback TLV. There may be 
   multiple instances of the Feedback TLV in a CR-LDP message, one for 
   each different links along the path. Due to the current format that 
   TE extension documents organize TE information the feedback TLV has 
   sub TLVs. This allows the information to conform to the current TE 
   conventions and allows options for additional future feedback 
   elements. The formats are derived from the TE extensions TLVs for 
   IS-IS [IS-IS] and OSPF [OSPF]. 
    
   U bit 
   Unknown TLV bit must be set to 1.  As with all CR-LDP messages, upon 
   receipt of an unknown TLV, if U is if U is set (=1), the unknown TLV 

Ashwood-Smith, et. al.       June  2003                  [Page 7] 
Internet Draft      LSP Feedback with CR-LDP             June, 2003 


   is silently ignored and the rest of the message is processed as if 
   the unknown TLV did not exist.    
    
   F bit 
   Forward unknown TLV bit must be set to 1.  This bit applies only 
   when the U bit is set and the CR-LDP message containing the unknown 
   TLV is to be forwarded.  If F is set (=1), the unknown TLV is 
   forwarded with the containing message.   
       
   The following sub TLVs for the Feedback TLV are defined: 
    
   1 - Local interface IP address (IPv4) 
   2 - Remote interface IP address (IPv4) 
   3 - Local interface IP address (IPv6) 
   4 - Remote interface IP address (IPv6) 
   5 - Unreserved bandwidth  
    
   This document defines the sub types. The code points are to be 
   assigned by IANA.  
    
3.2 Local Interface IP Address Sub Types 
    
   The Local Interface IP Address sub-TLV specifies the IP address(es) 
   of the interface corresponding to this link. Normally there will 
   only be one address.  If there are multiple 
   local addresses on the link, they are all listed in this sub-TLV. 
    
   The Local Interface IPv4 Address sub-TLV is TLV type 1, and is 4N 
   octets in length, where N is the number of local addresses. 
    
   The Local Interface IPv6 Address sub-TLV is TLV type 3, and is 16N 
   octets in length, where N is the number of local addresses. 
    
    
3.3 Remote Interface IP Address Sub Types 
    
   The Remote Interface IP Address sub-TLV specifies the IP address(es) 
   of the neighbor's interface corresponding to this link.  This and 
   the local address are used to discern multiple parallel links 
   between systems.  
    
   The Remote Interface IPv4 Address sub-TLV is TLV type 2, and is 4N 
   octets in length, where N is the number of neighbor addresses. 
    
   The Remote Interface IPv6 Address sub-TLV is TLV type 4, and is 16N 
   octets in length, where N is the number of neighbor addresses. 
    
3.4 Unreserved Bandwidth Sub Type 
    
   The Unreserved Bandwidth sub-TLV specifies the amount of bandwidth 


Ashwood-Smith, et. al.       June  2003                  [Page 8] 
Internet Draft      LSP Feedback with CR-LDP             June, 2003 


   not yet reserved at each of the eight priority levels, in IEEE 
   floating point format.  The values correspond to the bandwidth that 
   can be reserved with a setup priority of 0 through 7, arranged in 
   increasing order with priority 0 occurring at the start of the sub- 
   TLV, and priority 7 at the end of the sub-TLV. The units are bytes 
   per second. 
    
   The Unreserved Bandwidth sub-TLV is TLV type 5, and is 32 octets in 
   length. 
    
    
      
4.0 Detailed Procedures 

   On receipt of a withdraw, notification, query-reply, or mapping 
   message pertaining to a request made by CR-LDP (as opposed to LDP), 
   a feedback TLV of the appropriate format for the interface over 
   which the message was received is inserted into the message before 
   forwarding it back to the source of the request. The interface's 
   local and remote interface address in the appropriate format are 
   placed in the TLV. 
   The eight bandwidth values are filled in with the outgoing bandwidth 
   available on this interface for each of the eight holding priorities 
   in bytes per second.  
    
   On receipt of a CR-LDP request message, which cannot be satisfied, a 
   notification message is formatted normally. The Feedback TLV with 
   the local and remote interface address in the appropriate format and 
   the eight bandwidth values are filled in with the outgoing bandwidth 
   available on this interface for each of the eight holding priorities 
   in bytes per second. 
    
   On receipt of a CR-LDP request message which has been satisfied and 
   which results in a mapping being generated. No feedback TLV is added 
   since the previous node will insert the proper TLV when it receives 
   the reverse flowing mapping. 
    
   When an LDP session goes down either because of a link failure, 
   TCP/IP timeout, keep alive timeout, adjacency timeout etc. Other LDP 
   sessions in the module must generate either notification, withdraw 
   or release messages for LSPs that traversed the LDP in question. In 
   the case that the LSP was created by CR-LDP and that a withdraw or 
   notification is about to be generated, LDP will insert a feedback 
   TLV for the interface which just went down that contains 0's for all 
   the bandwidth values and attach to it the proper interface 
   addresses. Where LDP FT procedures [RFC3479] are in use, LSPs that 
   are protected by FT procedures should not be torn down until after 
   session reestablishment has failed.  During LDP re-establishment 
   time new connections may be queued and delayed for the re-
   establishment time.  If signaling delay is undesirable feedback may 

Ashwood-Smith, et. al.       June  2003                  [Page 9] 
Internet Draft      LSP Feedback with CR-LDP             June, 2003 


   be used to report zero bandwidth. In this case, if LDP is 
   successfully re-established a Link LSA should be triggered if 
   sufficient amount bandwidth is available.  
    
    
   When the LDP session that originated a CR-LDP label request receives 
   a mapping that contains feedback TLV's it is recommended that these 
   bandwidth values supersede the corresponding values in the node's 
   topology database for source route computations. Doing so permits 
   this node to immediately synchronize its topology with respect to 
   the real bandwidth reservations along the path that was just 
   established.  
    
   When the LDP session that originated a CR-LDP label request receives 
   a notification that contains feedback TLV's it is recommended that 
   these bandwidth values supersede the corresponding values in the 
   node's topology database for source route computations. Doing so 
   permits this node to immediately synchronize its topology with 
   respect to the real bandwidth reservations along the path that just 
   failed to establish. The source node may then re-compute a path 
   knowing that the computation will take into account the failure if 
   it was caused by the topology database being in error with respect 
   to the real network state. 
    
5.0 IGP considerations 
    
   Implementations MUST NOT permit bandwidth information learned by 
   this feedback mechanism to be re-flooded via IS-IS, OSPF or any 
   other IGP. The bandwidth information learned via these feedback 
   mechanisms is to be used ONLY for source route computations on the 
   nodes that are directly on the path that fed back the bandwidth. 
   Normally only the source node of the LSP, or perhaps intermediate 
   gateway nodes will use this information. It is however permitted for 
   intermediate nodes that are forwarding this feedback information to 
   store it for their own local source route computations.  
   There is a possibility of a race condition between the bandwidth 
   information that is received via feedback and that, which is 
   received via a normal IGP flood. While there may be a discrepancy 
   between the two, both are within a few 100 milliseconds of being 
   correct. Solutions to allow us to determine which information is 
   most up to date (say by adding a sequence number) do not add any 
   significant benefit. Constraint based, source routed systems will 
   always have errors in the local topology database with respect to 
   the real network. These errors can be reduced through reduced 
   flooding intervals, path following feedback and selective flooding 
   but realistically the errors cannot be reduced below the second or 
   so range. As a result propagation delay order race conditions are 
   noise with respect to the average expected errors. An implementation 
   SHOULD therefore consider the most recently received update (IGP or 
   feedback) as being the most up to date. 
    

Ashwood-Smith, et. al.       June  2003                  [Page 10] 
Internet Draft      LSP Feedback with CR-LDP             June, 2003 


6.0 Future considerations 
    
   Constraint based routing systems such as CR-LDP will in the future 
   offer other forms of constraint than simply reserved bandwidth. 
   Actual utilization levels, current congestion levels, number of 
   discrete channels/wavelengths available etc. are all possible 
   constraints that change rapidly and which must be taken into 
   consideration when computing a route. It is expected that this 
   mechanism will be used to feedback these and other new forms of link 
   constraining data.  

7.0 RSVP-TE consideration 
    
   Nothing precludes the use of such feedback mechanisms with a similar 
   TLV structure in the RSVP-TE Resv and other reverse flowing messages 
   although repeatedly applying unchanged feedback should be avoided. 
   This could be accomplished by a simple rule that only permits 
   feedback information on the original RESV, not on subsequent 
   refreshes. This document only covers the CR-LDP protocol.  
    
8.0 Intellectual Property Consideration 

   The IETF has been notified of intellectual property rights claimed 
   in regard to some or all of the specification contained in this 
   document.  For more information consult the online list of claimed 
   rights. 
    
9.0 Security Considerations 
    
   This document covers an additional data structure, a TLV to an 
   existing LDP message. Therefore the security aspects of this are the 
   same as a LDP. CR-LDP inherits the same security mechanism described 
   in Section 4.0 of [RFC3032] to protect against the introduction of 
   spoofed TCP segments into LDP session connection streams. 
    
10.0 IANA Considerations 
    
   The Feedback TLV as well as Types for sub-TLVs in a Feedback TLV are 
   to be registered with IANA. 
    
   [RFC3212] defines the CR-LDP TLV name space.  This memo requires 
   assignment of one TLV Type from that range. 
    
   Also, sub-Types of a Feedback TLV need to be assigned by IANA. The 
   types from 6 to 32767 are by expert review controlled by IANA. The 
   types 32768 to 65535 are reserved for private use.  
    
    
11.0 Acknowledgments 

Ashwood-Smith, et. al.       June  2003                  [Page 11] 
Internet Draft      LSP Feedback with CR-LDP             June, 2003 


    
   The authors would like to thank Keith Dysart for his guidance and 
   Jerzy Miernik for helping implement these concepts and bringing them 
   to life. The authors' would like to acknowledge Dave Allan for his 
   comments and suggestions.  
    
12.0 Normative References 
    
   [RFC3212] Jamoussi, B. et al., "Constraint-Based LSP Setup using 
   LDP", RFC 3212, January 2002. 
    
   [RCF3032] Andersson, L. et al., "LDP Specification", RFC 3032, 
   January 2001. 
    
   [IS-IS] Li, T., Smit, H., "Extensions to IS-IS for traffic 
   engineering", Internet Draft, draft-ietf-isis-traffic-04.txt, 
   December 2001. 
    
   [OSPF] Katz,D., Yeung, D., Kompella, K., " Traffic Engineering 
   Extensions to OSPF Version 2," draft-katz-yeung-ospf-traffic-08.txt, 
   September 2002. 
    
13.0 Informative References 
    
    
   [QUERY] Ashwood-Smith, P., Paraschiv, A., " Multi Protocol Label 
   Switching Label Distribution Protocol Query Message Description 
   ", Internet Draft, draft-anto-ldp-query-08.txt, June 2003. 
    
   [RFC3479] Farrel, A et al., " Fault Tolerance for the Label 
   Distribution Protocol (LDP)", RFC 3479, February 2003   
    
14.0 Author's Addresses 
       
   Peter Ashwood-Smith               Bilel Jamoussi 
   Nortel Networks Corp.             Nortel Networks Corp. 
   P.O. Box 3511 Station C,          600 Technology Park Drive 
   Ottawa, ON K1Y 4H7                Billerica, MA 01821 
   Canada                            USA 
   Phone: +1 613-763-4534            phone: +1 978-288-4506 
   petera@nortelnetworks.com         jamoussi@nortelnetworks.com 
                                      
   Darek Skalecki                    Don Fedyk 
   Nortel Networks Corp.             Nortel Networks Corp. 
   P.O. Box 3511 Station C,          600 Technology Park Drive 
   Ottawa, On K1Y 4H7                Billerica, MA 01821 
   Canada                            USA 
   Phone: +1 613-765-2252            Phone: +1 978-288-3041 
   dareks@nortelnetworks.com         dwfedyk@nortelnetworks.com 
                                      
    

Ashwood-Smith, et. al.       June  2003                  [Page 12] 
Internet Draft      LSP Feedback with CR-LDP             June, 2003 


Full Copyright Statement 

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society 2003. All Rights Reserved. This 
   document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published 
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any 
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph 
   are included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this 
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for 
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be 
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than 
   English. 
    
   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be 
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns. 

































Ashwood-Smith, et. al.       June  2003                  [Page 13] 
