


Network Working Group                                          S. Bryant
Internet-Draft                                                  M. Shand
Intended status: Informational                             Cisco Systems
Expires: May 3, 2009                                    October 30, 2008


                 Applicability of Loop-free Convergence
                 draft-bryant-shand-lf-applicability-06

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on May 3, 2009.

Abstract

   This draft describes the applicability of loop free convergence
   technologies to a number of network applications.













Bryant & Shand             Expires May 3, 2009                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft   Applicability of Loop-free Convergence     October 2008


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Applicability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     2.1.  Component Failure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     2.2.  Component Repair  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
     2.3.  Managing withdrawal of a component  . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
     2.4.  Managing Insertion of a Component . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
     2.5.  Managing Change of a Link Cost  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
     2.6.  External Cost Change  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
     2.7.  MPLS Applicability  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
     2.8.  Routing Vector and Path Vector Convergence  . . . . . . . . 6
   3.  IANA considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   4.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   5.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements  . . . . . . . . . . 9


































Bryant & Shand             Expires May 3, 2009                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft   Applicability of Loop-free Convergence     October 2008


1.  Introduction

   When there is a change to the network topology (due to the failure or
   restoration of a link or router, or as a result of management action)
   the routers need to converge on a common view of the new topology,
   and the paths to be used for forwarding traffic to each destination.
   During this process, referred to as a routing transition, packet
   delivery between certain source/destination pairs may be disrupted.
   This occurs due to the time it takes for the topology change to be
   propagated around the network together with the time it takes each
   individual router to determine and then update the forwarding
   information base (FIB) for the affected destinations.  During this
   transition, packets may be lost due to the continuing attempts to use
   the failed component, and/or due to forwarding loops.  Forwarding
   loops arise due to the inconsistent FIBs that occur as a result of
   the difference in time taken by routers to execute the transition
   process.  This is a problem that occurs in both IP networks and MPLS
   networks that use LDP [RFC5036] as the label switched path (LSP)
   signaling protocol.

   The service failures caused by routing transitions are largely hidden
   by higher-level protocols that retransmit the lost data.  However new
   Internet services are emerging which are more sensitive to the packet
   disruption that occurs during a transition.  To make the transition
   transparent to their users, these services require a short routing
   transition.  Ideally, routing transitions would be completed in zero
   time with no packet loss.

   Regardless of how optimally the mechanisms involved have been
   designed and implemented, it is inevitable that a routing transition
   will take some minimum interval that is greater than zero.  This has
   led to the development of a TE fast-reroute mechanism for MPLS
   [RFC4090].  Alternative mechanisms that might be deployed in an MPLS
   network and mechanisms that may be used in an IP network are work in
   progress in the IETF [I-D.ietf-rtgwg-ipfrr-framework] .  Any repair
   mechanism may however be disrupted by the formation of micro-loops
   during the period between the time when the failure is announced, and
   the time when all FIBs have been updated to reflect the new topology.

   This disruptive effect of micro-loops led the IP fast re-route
   designers to develop mechanisms to control the re-convergence of
   networks in order to prevent disruption of the repair and collateral
   damage to other traffic in the network
   [I-D.bryant-shand-lf-conv-frmwk],
   [I-D.ietf-rtgwg-microloop-analysis].

   The purpose of this note is to draw the attention of the IETF
   community to the more general nature of the micro-looping problem,



Bryant & Shand             Expires May 3, 2009                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft   Applicability of Loop-free Convergence     October 2008


   and the wider applicability of loop-free convergence technology.


2.  Applicability

   Loop free convergence strategies are applicable to any problem in
   which inconsistency in the FIB causes the formation of micro-loops.

   For example, the convergence of a network following:

      1) Component failure.

      2) Component repair.

      3) Managing withdrawal of a component.

      4) Managing insertion or a component.

      5) Management change of link cost (either positive or negative).

      6) External cost change, for example change of external gateway as
      a result of a BGP change.

      7) A shared risk link group (SRLG) failure.

   In each case, a component may be a link or a router.

2.1.  Component Failure

   When fast-reroute is used to provide the temporary repair of a failed
   component, the use of a loop-free convergence mechanism enables the
   re-convergence of the network to be performed without additional
   packet loss caused by starvation or micro-looping.

   The need for loop-free convergence was first appreciated during the
   design of IP fast reroute.  However the mechanism is also applicable
   to the case where an MPLS-TE tunnel is used to provide a link or node
   repair within an MPLS network where LDP is used to distribute labels.

   Except in special circumstances, controlled convergence in the
   presence of component failure should only be used when a temporary
   repair is available.  This is because controlled convergence is
   always slower than uncontrolled (traditional) convergence, and would
   result in an extended period of traffic lost as a result of the
   failure if there were no other means of delivering the traffic.






Bryant & Shand             Expires May 3, 2009                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft   Applicability of Loop-free Convergence     October 2008


2.2.  Component Repair

   Micro-loops may form when a component is (re)introduced into a
   network.  All of the known loop-free convergence methods are capable
   of avoiding such micro-loops.  It is not necessary to employ any
   repair mechanism to take advantage of this facility, because the new
   component may be used to provide connectivity before its presence is
   made known to the rest of the network.

2.3.  Managing withdrawal of a component

   From the perspective of the routing protocol, management withdrawal
   of a component is indistinguishable from an unexpected component
   failure, and will be subject to the same micro-loops.  The network
   will therefore benefit from the use of a micro-loop prevention
   mechanism.

   Unlike the failure case, the component being withdrawn may be used to
   forward packets during the transition, and therefore no repair
   mechanism is needed.

   Unlike the case of component failure or repair, management withdrawal
   of a component is normally not time critical.  Consideration may
   therefore be given to the use of the incremental cost change loop-
   free convergence mechanism.  This mechanism was discarded as a
   candidate in the case of fast re-route because of its slow time to
   converge, however it is a mechanism that is backwards compatible with
   existing routers and may therefore be of use in this application.
   Note that unlike any of the other mechanism described here, this
   technique can be used without modification to ANY router in the
   network.

2.4.  Managing Insertion of a Component

   From the perspective of the routing protocol, management insertion of
   a component is indistinguishable from component repair, and will be
   subject to the same micro-loops.  The network will therefore benefit
   from the use of a micro-loop prevention mechanism.  No repair
   mechanism is needed and it is not normally time critical.

2.5.  Managing Change of a Link Cost

   Component failure and component repair are extreme examples of cost
   change.  Micro-loops may also form when a link cost is changed (in
   either direction) during the process of network re-configuration.
   The use of a loop-free convergence technique prevents the formation
   of micro-loops during this otherwise benign process.  No repair
   mechanism is needed in this case, because the link is still available



Bryant & Shand             Expires May 3, 2009                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft   Applicability of Loop-free Convergence     October 2008


   for use.

2.6.   External Cost Change

   An external cost change can result in a change to the preferred
   external route to a destination.  Micro-loops may form during the
   process of switching from the old border router to the new one.  The
   loop-free control of this change will prevent the loss of packets
   during this network transition.

2.7.  MPLS Applicability

   Where the network is an MPLS enabled network using the LDP protocol
   to learn labels, and fast re-route is provided through the use of
   single hop MPLS-TE tunnels protected by MPLS-TE fast reroute, micro
   loops may form during convergence.  Loop free convergence is
   therefore applicable to this network configuration.

2.8.   Routing Vector and Path Vector Convergence

   The work to date on controlled convergence has focused on link state
   IGPs.  The ability to control the convergence of routing vector and
   path vector routing protocols would also be useful tools in the
   management of the Internet.

   Routing vector convergence may be controlled by incrementally
   changing the link cost one unit at a time and waiting for the network
   to converge.  In link state routing protocols employing wide metrics
   such a solution would normally be considered as too slow to deploy,
   although recent work on optimizing the number of increments has
   significantly improved the convergence time.  In the case of distance
   vector routing protocols the much smaller maximum metric makes this
   more tractable, provided that is, the per metric change convergence
   time is considered acceptable.

   Similarly with path vector routing protocols the path length can be
   incrementally padded.  Since practical path vector routing protocols
   which use path length as an input to the routing decision are
   equivalent to using the hop count as a metric (i.e. the maximum per
   hop metric is one ,or in special cases a very small number) the
   number of increments needed is limited to the length of the path
   around the failure.  This property may make this a tractable
   approach.  [I-D.bryant-shand-lf-conv-frmwk] (Section 5.1), although
   the per change convergence time may still be a significant concern.







Bryant & Shand             Expires May 3, 2009                  [Page 6]

Internet-Draft   Applicability of Loop-free Convergence     October 2008


3.  IANA considerations

   There are no IANA considerations that arise from this draft.


4.  Security Considerations

   All micro-loop control mechanisms raise significant security issues
   which must be addressed in their detailed technical description.


5.  Informative References

   [I-D.bryant-shand-lf-conv-frmwk]
              Bryant, S. and M. Shand, "A Framework for Loop-free
              Convergence", draft-bryant-shand-lf-conv-frmwk-03 (work in
              progress), October 2006.

   [I-D.ietf-rtgwg-ipfrr-framework]
              Shand, M. and S. Bryant, "IP Fast Reroute Framework",
              draft-ietf-rtgwg-ipfrr-framework-08 (work in progress),
              February 2008.

   [I-D.ietf-rtgwg-microloop-analysis]
              Zinin, A., "Analysis and Minimization of Microloops in
              Link-state Routing Protocols",
              draft-ietf-rtgwg-microloop-analysis-01 (work in progress),
              October 2005.

   [RFC4090]  Pan, P., Swallow, G., and A. Atlas, "Fast Reroute
              Extensions to RSVP-TE for LSP Tunnels", RFC 4090,
              May 2005.

   [RFC5036]  Andersson, L., Minei, I., and B. Thomas, "LDP
              Specification", RFC 5036, October 2007.


Authors' Addresses

   Stewart Bryant
   Cisco Systems
   250, Longwater, Green Park,
   Reading  RG2 6GB, UK
   UK

   Email: stbryant@cisco.com





Bryant & Shand             Expires May 3, 2009                  [Page 7]

Internet-Draft   Applicability of Loop-free Convergence     October 2008


   Mike Shand
   Cisco Systems
   250, Longwater, Green Park,
   Reading  RG2 6GB, UK
   UK

   Email: mshand@cisco.com












































Bryant & Shand             Expires May 3, 2009                  [Page 8]

Internet-Draft   Applicability of Loop-free Convergence     October 2008


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.











Bryant & Shand             Expires May 3, 2009                  [Page 9]


