
INTERNET Draft                                       
Expires: August 2002                                Hesham Soliman, 
                                                    Mattias Pettersson 
                                                    Ericsson 
                                                     
                                      
 
 
                                      
            MObile Networks (MONET) problem statement and scope  
                  <draft-soliman-monet-statement-00.txt> 
    
Status of this memo 
    
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other 
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or cite them other than as "work in progress". 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/lid-abstracts.txt 
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html 
    
Abstract 
    
   This draft illustrates some of the problems that need to be addressed 
   in order to provide an optimal mobility management mechanism for 
   mobile networks consisting of a mobile router and a number of IPv6 
   hosts. The reader shall refer to a separate document[TERMINOLOGY] for 
   the terminology used in this draft, while a list of proposed 
   requirements can be found in [REQUIREMENTS] 
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Soliman & Pettersson     monet problem statement and scope      [Page 1]  


INTERNET-DRAFT                                             February 2002 
 
 
 
1. Introduction and motivation 
    
   The MObile Networks (MONET) problem stated in this document addresses 
   a network consisting of a Mobile Router (MR) with a number of devices 
   attached to it. Such network may change its attachment point within 
   the Internet due to physical mobility or changes in the topology.  
   The mechanisms required for handling such mobility are currently 
   lacking or non-existent within the IETF standards.  
   Some of these required mechanisms are mentioned in this draft to 
   illustrate the need for solutions. 
    
   Several mobility scenarios exist for mobile networks depending on the 
   size of the mobile network and its administrative charcteristics. 
   These scenarios are subdivided in this document. The commonalities 
   and differences between them are addressed. 
    
   The solutions for most of the MONET issues below are affected by:  
    
   - The size of the mobile network.  
   - The administrative characteristics of such MONETs. Ie. Whether MNNs  
     and MRs are administered/owned by the same entity. These   
     characteristics will affect the types of issues that need to be  
     solved and the level of trust that can be assumed. 
    
   The issues associated with each of the scenarios above are shown 
   below. For each issue some consideration of the two influences above 
   is mentioned. 
    
    
2. Types of Mobile Networks 
    
   This chapter will discuss two different types of mobile networks by 
   illustrating two categories: Monet IN The small (MINT) and (large 
   MONET). The reason for making this distinction, is the belief that in 
   most expected use cases such distinction would highlight the impacts 
   on mobility management and access control. It should be noted that 
   this is not to be interpreted as a desire to assume that certain uses 
   should only be associated to the monet size. The distinction based on 
   size is simply regarded as a starting point for understanding the 
   problem space. 
    
   It should be noted that solving the mobility problem for MNNs within 
   a monet, is not to part of the monet problem space. Other solutions 
   (e.g. MANET) can address this topic. The aim of this work is to solve 
   the mobility problem for the entire monet when considered as a single 
   unit moving within the topology. 
    
    
    
 
 
 
Soliman & Pettersson    monet problem statement                 [Page 2]  
 


INTERNET-DRAFT                                             February 2002 
 
 
    
2.1 Mobile networks In The Small (MINTs) 
 
   A MINT can be described as a single mobile IP-subnet attached to the 
   Internet via one of more MRs. A typical example for MINTs is a car or 
   a Personal Area Network (PAN) with a few devices connected to the 
   Internet via different access technologies and/or ISPs via one or 
   more MR. Several issues need to be considered to allow for MINTsÆ 
   scalable deployment. Some of these issues are listed below. 
    
2.2 Large MONETs  
    
   A large MONET can be defined as a network with one or several subnets 
   connected to the Internet via one or more MRs and providing access to 
   VMNs. Examples of such networks are IP networks on trains or ships. 
   In these networks, MRs and VMNs are typically administered by 
   different entities. 
    
3. Issues to be resolved 
 
 
3.1 Addressing 
 
   The addressing mechanism required for MONETs needs to be carefully 
   considered as it will affect some of the solutions for other issues 
   associated with MONETs. For instance, allowing every MNN to acquire a 
   topologically correct address would imply that the MNNs are aware of 
   their movement within the topology, hence affecting the mechanism 
   chosen for mobility management.  
   Several possibilities exist for address configuration for MRs and the 
   MNNs attached to it: 
    
   - Stateful address autoconfiguration [DHCPv6] 
   - Stateless address autoconfiguration [Multi-link subnets] and  
     [Automatic prefix delegation]  
   - IPv6 Router Renumbering 
    
   The first 2 mechanisms can be used to configure the MRs ONLY or the 
   entire subnet with topologically correct addresses. Such choice will 
   affect the mobility management solution. For instance changing an 
   MNNs address would require updating the CN and the HA. 
    
   The choice of the addressing mechanism will need to be made based on 
   the following factors: 
    
   - Scalability:  
     Can the chosen mechanism support a large number of MINTs ? This may   
     depend on the size of the æfixedÆ network to which a MINT is   
     attached.  
    
 
 
 
Soliman & Pettersson    monet problem statement                 [Page 3]  
 


INTERNET-DRAFT                                             February 2002 
 
 
    
   - Speed:  
     How much time is required for address autoconfiguration to be  
     completed ? Is it quick enough to support fast mobility ? 
    
   - Mobility Frequency 
    
   - Nested Mobility  
    
   - Impacts on the Mobility management model:  
     Does the chosen mechanism support the requirements for a scalable  
     and secure mobility management solution ? 
    
   - Multihoming:  
     Each MR may be connected to multiple ISPs, each potentially 
     providing different paths to the Internet. In addition, there may  
     be multiple MRs in the MINT. 
    
   - MINT definition: 
     How are nodes in the MINT defined to belong to the MINT? In case of 
     a wired MINT, it is physically defined. But a wireless MINT can  
     begin to interfere with other geographically close wireless nodes,  
     thus losing the definition of the MINT. A secure layer 2 is not 
     assumed in this document, however, a secure layer 2 would certainly  
     simplify this problem. 
 
3.2 Mobility management 
    
   This document assumes a MIP-based mobility management solution for 
   MONETs.  
   The current MIPv6 proposals provide limited levels of support for 
   MONETs. Some solutions for the mobility scenarios are proposed in 
   [HMIPv6] and [MONET]. However, some further investigation is needed 
   to see whether these solutions are sufficient for the different MONET 
   scenarios.  
   Specifically, issues related to route optimisation need to be 
   investigated further. [HMIPv6], [MOBRTR] and [MONET] provide 
   different approaches for mobility management. In [HMIPv6] MNNs 
   connected to MRs are aware of the MRs mobility, hence route 
   optimisation is performed by the MNNs. On the other hand, [MONET] 
   provides an extension to MIPv6 to allow MRs to send a prefix scoped 
   BU to re-direct traffic for the entire prefix on behalf of the MNNs. 
   [MOBRTR] assumes a bi-directional tunnel between the mobile router 
   and the HA, over which routing protocols are tunnelled. 
    
   In [HMIPv6], MNNs are aware of their mobility, while [MONET] and 
   [MOBRTR] hide the networkÆs mobility from the MNNs. 
    
   The choice of the Mobility management mechanism will depend on the 
   following factors: 
 
 
 
Soliman & Pettersson    monet problem statement                 [Page 4]  
 


INTERNET-DRAFT                                             February 2002 
 
 
    
   - The size of the network vs BW efficiency and speed of mobility:  
     Hiding the networkÆs mobility from the MNNs can reduce MIP  
     signalling (e.g. one BU from the MR to the HA instead of many).  
     What tradeoffs are needed to decide whether route optimisation   
    (additional signalling) should be used? How does the size of the  
     network in a wireless environment affect this decision? 
     How do we treat a large network on a fast train (frequent handovers  
     for many MNNs) compared to a MINT (eg. a PAN)? 
    
   - Security and authorisation issues: 
     BUs from MRs to CNs can cause some serious security threats for  
     unauthorised MRs. Currently there is no specified solution for this  
     problem. 
    
   - Routing Protocol Issues: 
 
     Shall MR of a MINT run a routing protocol ? What is the impact on 
     the routing protocol running in the visited network ? 
      
     Which protocol shall we run within large MONETs, how it interact 
     with routing protocols running in visited network 
    
3.4 Access control and security 
 
   This chapter discusses the issues associated with access control 
   within the Mobile Network. In this context, the spectrum of access 
   control covers the MR û AR (fixed default router), MN û MR, and MN û 
   MN relationships. Issues related to securing Neighbour Discovery may 
   also be related.  
    
3.4.1 Access control between AR and MR 
 
   The access network at the ISP/operator must allow the connection of 
   not only a single device but also a network behind that device. The  
   access network can perform ingress filtering, access control lists 
   etc. 
 
3.4.2 Access control between MR and VMNs in a large MONET 
 
   In the case of a large MONET providing Internet access for visiting 
   nodes (VMNs) such as the train or ship case, this access will 
   probably be controlled. 
   This problem is very similar to what UNAP is attempting to solve. 
 
 
 
3.4.3 Access control between nodes in a MINT 
 

 
 
 
Soliman & Pettersson    monet problem statement                 [Page 5]  
 


INTERNET-DRAFT                                             February 2002 
 
 
   Nodes in the MINT must trust each other. At least, MR must know who 
   are the nodes that uses it as access router to the Internet. This is 
   a question of who will pay for the packets. 
 
4. Acknowledgement 
    
   Thanks to Thierry Ernst for his detailed comments. We would like to 
   thank the monet æunofficial-BOFÆ members for their input on the monet 
   mailing list which led to having a more concrete problem scope.  
 
5. AuthorsÆ Addresses 
    
   Hesham Soliman and Mattias Pettersson 
   Ericsson Radio Systems AB. 
   Torshamnsgatan 23, Kista 16480, 
   Stockholm, Sweden. 
   E-mail: Hesham.Soliman@era.ericsson.se 
   E-mail: Mattias.Pettersson@era.ericsson.se 
    
6. References 
    
   [KEYWORDS]   S. Bradner, "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate 
                Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997. 
    
   [TERMINOLOGY] T. Ernst, "Network Mobility Support Terminology"  
                 draft-ernst-monet-terminology-00.txt 
                                      
   [REQUIREMENTS]T. Ernst, "Network Mobility Support    
                 Requirements" draft-ernst-monet-requirements-00.txt 
              Work in progress. 
                
   [HMIPv6]    H. Soliman, C. Castelluccia, K. ElMalki, L. Bellier,  
               ôHierarchical MIPv6 mobility managementö.  
               draft-ietf-mobileip-hmipv6-05.txt. Work in progress 
    
   [MONET]                    T. Ernst, L. Bellier, A. Olivereau, C. Castelluccia, H. 
              Lach, "Mobile Networks Support in Mobile IPv6(Prefix 
              Scope Binding Updates)" draft-ernst-mobileip-v6-network-
              02.txt, June 2001. Work in progress 
    
    
   [MOBRTR]    T.J. Kniveton, J. J. Malinen, V. Devarapalli and  
               C. E. Perkins, ôMobile router support in Mobile IPö 
               draft-kniveton-mobrtr-00.txt. Work in progress.  
    
    
    
   This Internet-Draft expires in August 2002. 
 

 
 
 
Soliman & Pettersson    monet problem statement                 [Page 6]  
 

