Network Working Group                                        W A Simpson
Internet Draft                                              [DayDreamer]
                                                               S Bradner
                                                    [Harvard University]
expires in six months                                          June 1999

          Internet Security Algorithms Applicability Statement
                      draft-simpson-des-as-01.txt

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet Draft, and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026, except that the right to
   produce derivative works is not granted.

   Internet Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its Areas, and its Working Groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet
   Drafts.

   Internet Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months, and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents
   at any time.  It is not appropriate to use Internet Drafts as
   reference material, or to cite them other than as "Work In Progress."

   The list of current Internet Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   To view the list of Internet Draft Shadow Directories, see
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   Distribution of this memo is unlimited.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) William Allen Simpson (1998-1999).  All Rights
   Reserved.

Abstract

   "The PPP DES Encryption Protocol" [RFC-2419], "The ESP DES-CBC Cipher
   Algorithm With Explicit IV" [RFC-2405], and "The ESP DES-CBC
   Transform" [RFC-1829] have been re-classified to Historic status, and
   implementation is Not Recommended.

Simpson, Bradner          expires in six months                 [Page i]
DRAFT               Security Algorithms Applicability          June 1999

   "The PPP Triple-DES Encryption Protocol (3DESE)" [RFC-2420] and "The
   ESP Triple-DES Transform" [RFC-xxxx] are now classified as mandatory
   to implement for Standards Track interoperability.

   This Applicability Statement provides the supporting motivation for
   that classification.  The primary reason is that DES alone provides
   insufficient strength for the protection of moderate value
   information for any length of time.

Simpson, Bradner          expires in six months                [Page ii]
DRAFT               Security Algorithms Applicability          June 1999

1.  Introduction

   The US Data Encryption Standard (DES) algorithm [FIPS-46] has had a
   long history of analysis since its adoption in 1977.  At the time of
   RFC-1829 publication in 1995, briefly citing the current analysis and
   describing known limitations, it was suggested that DES was not a
   good algorithm for the protection of moderate value information.
   However, the level of confidentiality provided by the use of DES in
   the Internet environment was considered greater than sending the
   datagrams as cleartext.

   Recently, RSA Data Security has issued a series of challenges to
   demonstrate the current effectiveness of various algorithms and key
   lengths.  Each challenge has a shorter time for completion.

   The first DES challenge of January, 1997, was solved in 140 days (on
   June 17, 1997), after searching only 25% of the key space.  On
   average, half of the key space can be expected to be searched.  Much
   of the time was spent organizing competing volunteer efforts.  The
   hidden message was "Strong cryptography makes the world a safer
   place."

   The DES challenge of January, 1998, was solved in 40 days (on
   February 23, 1998), after searching over 88% of the key space using
   tens of thousands of Internet hosts in their spare time.  The hidden
   message was "Many hands make light work."

   The DES challenge of July 13, 1998, was solved on July 16, 1998,
   after only 2.5 days (56 hours)!  The winner was a single purpose
   built machine, "Deep Crack", sponsored by Electronic Frontier
   Foundation (EFF) [EFF98].  The hidden message was "It's time for
   those 128-, 192-, and 256-bit keys."

   This demonstrated that the cost of deploying and maintaining Internet
   firewalls and Virtual Private Networks can easily exceed the cost of
   recovering DES protected confidential data.  For protection against
   governmental or industrial espionage, the use of DES in the Internet
   environment no longer has any cost benefit over sending the datagrams
   as cleartext.

   The DES challenge of January 19, 1999, was solved in only 22 hours
   and 15 minutes!  The winner was the EFF "Deep Crack" working together
   with the distributed volunteer network.  The hidden message was "See
   you in Rome (second AES Conference, March 22-23, 1999)."

   The Advanced Encryption Standard (AES) initiative proposes replacing
   the obsolete 56-bit DES with one or more algorithms using encryption
   keys of at least 128-bits.

Simpson, Bradner          expires in six months                 [Page 1]
DRAFT               Security Algorithms Applicability          June 1999

2.  Problems

   DES has a number of problems that restrict its usability in the
   global Internet.

2.1.  Key Length

   Even at the time of DES publication, the analytic community
   questioned the DES 56-bit key length as insufficient for long-term
   use [DH77].  In 1987, the US National Security Administration raised
   objections to re-certifying DES as a US Federal Information
   Processing Standard [SB88].  Never-the-less, after much discussion,
   DES was re-certified [FIPS46-1], and again in 1993.

   The DES certification expires in 1998, and the US has begun a public
   process, the Advanced Encryption Standard (AES) initiative, for
   evaluating replacements with longer key lengths.  This successor
   requires 128-, 192-, and 256-bit key lengths.

   Numerous studies have predicted the work factor of various key
   lengths, and the trade-offs between cost, memory, and time.  See
   [Schneier95, Chapter 7], which recommends a minimum of 112-bit keys,
   and shows that 128-bit keys would be immune to parallel computation
   by conventional computer equipment and recovery of 256-bit keys might
   be limited by the energy available in the solar system.

   The most recent analysis for symmetric keys [BDRSSTW96] empirically
   estimated that a minimum of 75-bit keys would be required in the
   short-term, and strongly recommends a minimum of 90-bit keys for
   future long-term standards.  Correspondence with some of those
   authors has indicated that these estimates should rise a few bits to
   reflect subsequent increases in computational power.

   Taking these recommendations together yields a range of 80-bit keys
   for short term use, 128-bit keys for longer term use, and 256-bit
   keys as standards evolve.

Simpson, Bradner          expires in six months                 [Page 2]
DRAFT               Security Algorithms Applicability          June 1999

2.2.  Recovery Time

   Shortly after DES publication, the analytic community predicted a
   purpose-built DES cracking machine could be built for 10 to 20
   million US Dollars that would recover a key within 1 to 2 days [DH77,
   Hellman79, Diffie81].  More recently, [Weiner94] sketched the design
   of a DES cracking machine for 1 million US Dollars that would recover
   a key in an average of 3.5 hours.  These costs were within the reach
   of most governments and large organizations.  Anecdotal evidence
   suggests that some governments may have built such a machine.

   The progression of the RSA challenges anticipated that the
   distributed software network could finish the third challenge in 10
   days.  A recent paper [BDRSSTW96] estimated that a relatively
   inexpensive "off-the-shelf technology" 300 thousand US Dollar DES
   cracking machine would recover a key in an average of 19 days.

   It turns out that these estimates were too high.  The EFF was able to
   build an operating DES cracking machine for under 250 thousand US
   Dollars [EFF98].  The device, known as "Deep Crack", completed the
   DES challenge in only 2.5 days.  This level of expenditure is well
   within the reach of even small organizations, and the EFF effort has
   shown that the curve of cost versus time has advanced more rapidly
   than had been predicted.

   It has been suggested that DES might still be useful for short-lived
   data.  This assumption is unwarranted.  Adversaries with relatively
   small budgets will soon have the capability to recover 56-bit keys in
   hours or minutes.  Well-financed adversaries have or will soon have
   the capability to recover any DES key within seconds.

2.3.  Value

   The specifications for the EFF DES cracking machine have been
   published [EFF98].  Additional machines can be built for the same or
   lower cost.  Assuming that a DES cracking machine has a useful
   service lifetime of 3 or more years, the amortized cost of recovering
   any single key is less than 1,200 US Dollars.  This is significantly
   less than the value of common consumer transactions.

   Morever, the cost of deploying and maintaining Internet firewalls and
   Virtual Private Networks utilizing long-term manually configured DES
   keys is considerably greater than 1,200 US Dollars per key.

   Furthermore, confidential communications and archival data of any
   significant value that was protected by DES have become a ripe target
   for key recovery.  It is frequently impractical to convert the

Simpson, Bradner          expires in six months                 [Page 3]
DRAFT               Security Algorithms Applicability          June 1999

   archival data to a more robust algorithm.  There can be no assurance
   that all DES copies have been destroyed, and that none have been
   intercepted or compromised.

   There is no comparative advantage, and significant economic
   disadvantage, in continuing to use the single-DES algorithm.  A
   number of other algorithms are likely to provide significantly higher
   protection for valuable information, at a cost very close to that of
   DES.

3.  Conclusions and Recommendations

   Currently deployed equipment using DES should be eliminated, or
   upgraded to a more robust algorithm and key length.

   Existing data depending upon DES for confidentiality should be
   considered potentially compromised.

   Key lengths less than 80 bits are not acceptable for use in future
   standards and not recommended for use in the Internet for protecting
   short-lived Internet data.  Communication protocols with less
   strength must not be advanced on the Internet Standards Track.

   Key lengths less than 128 bits are not recommended for protecting
   long-lived Internet data.  Message and storage protocols with less
   strength should not be advanced on the Internet Standards Track.

   "The PPP DES Encryption Protocol" [RFC-2419], "The ESP DES-CBC Cipher
   Algorithm With Explicit IV" [RFC-2405], and "The ESP DES-CBC
   Transform" [RFC-1829] have been re-classified to Historic status, and
   implementation is Not Recommended.

   "The PPP Triple-DES Encryption Protocol (3DESE)" [RFC-2420] and "The
   ESP Triple-DES Transform" [RFC-xxxx] are now classified as mandatory
   to implement for Standards Track interoperability.

Simpson, Bradner          expires in six months                 [Page 4]
DRAFT               Security Algorithms Applicability          June 1999

Security Considerations

   Security issues are the topic of this entire document.

   Users need to understand that the quality of the security provided
   depends completely on the strength of the algorithm, the correctness
   of that algorithm's implementation, the security of the Security
   Association management mechanism and its implementation, the strength
   of the key [CN94], and upon the correctness of the implementations in
   all of the participating nodes.

History

   On July 20, 1998, William Allen Simpson, with the concurrance of
   Perry Metzger and Phil Karn, asked that their DES encryption Proposed
   Standard [RFC-1829], and the related PPP DES encryption Proposed
   Standard [RFC-1619], be declared Historic (removed from the Standards
   Track), and recommended DESX and Triple-DES as interim Proposed
   Standards until the selection of AES.  With the assistance of Scott
   Bradner, this Applicability Statement was written to reflect the
   recommendation.

   Instead, the IESG approved RFC-2405 and RFC-2419 for publication as
   Proposed Standards in November and September, 1998, respectively.

   On March 18, 1999, the Security Area Advisory Group overwhelmingly
   approved removal of DES from the Standards Track, and recommended
   Triple-DES as mandatory to implement.  This Applicability Statement
   was updated to reflect the recommendation.

Acknowledgements

   John Gilmore provided useful critiques of earlier versions of this
   document.

Simpson, Bradner          expires in six months                 [Page 5]
DRAFT               Security Algorithms Applicability          June 1999

References

   [BDRSSTW96] Blaze, M., Diffie, W., Rivest, R., Schneier, B.,
               Shimomura, T., Thompson, E., and Weiner, M., "Minimal Key
               Lengths for Symmetric Ciphers to Provide Adequate
               Commercial Security",
               ftp://ftp.research.att.com/dist/mab/keylength, January
               1996.

   [CN94]      Carroll, J.M., and Nudiati, S., "On Weak Keys and Weak
               Data: Foiling the Two Nemeses", Cryptologia, Vol. 18 No.
               23 pp. 253-280, July 1994.

   [DH77]      Diffie, W., and Hellman, M.E., "Exhaustive Cryptanalysis
               of the NBS Data Encryption Standard", Computer, v 10 n 6,
               June 1977.

   [Diffie81]  Diffie, W., "Cryptographic Technology: Fifteen Year
               Forecast", BNR Inc., January 1981.

   [EFF98]     Electronic Frontier Foundation, Gilmore, J., Editor,
               "Cracking DES: Secrets of Encryption Research, Wiretap
               Politics, and Chip Design", O'Reilly and Associates, July
               1998.

   [FIPS-46]   US National Bureau of Standards, "Data Encryption
               Standard", Federal Information Processing Standard (FIPS)
               Publication 46, January 1977.

   [FIPS-46-1] US National Bureau of Standards, "Data Encryption
               Standard", Federal Information Processing Standard (FIPS)
               Publication 46-1, January 1988.

   [Hellman79] Hellman, M.E., "DES Will Be Totally Insecure within Ten
               Years", IEEE Spectrum, v 16 n 7, July 1979.

   [RFC-1829]  Karn, P., Metzger, P., Simpson, W., "The ESP DES-CBC
               Transform", July 1995.

   [RFC-2405]  Madson, C., Doraswamy, N., "The ESP DES-CBC Cipher
               Algorithm With Explicit IV", November 1998.

   [RFC-2419]  Sklower, K., Meyer, G., "The PPP DES Encryption Protocol,
               Version 2 (DESE-bis)", September 1998.

   [RFC-2420]  Kummert, H., "The PPP Triple-DES Encryption Protocol
               (3DESE)", September 1998.

Simpson, Bradner          expires in six months                 [Page 6]
DRAFT               Security Algorithms Applicability          June 1999

   [RFC-xxxx]  Simpson, W., Metzger, P., Karn, P., Doraswamy, N., "The
               ESP Triple-DES Transform", Work In Progress, July 1998.

   [SB88]      Smid, M.E., and Branstad, D.K., "The Data Encryption
               Standard: Past and Future", Proceedings of the IEEE, v 76
               n 5, May 1988.

   [Schneier95]
               Schneier, B., "Applied Cryptography Second Edition", John
               Wiley & Sons, New York, NY, 1995.  ISBN 0-471-12845-7.

   [Weiner94]  Wiener, M.J., "Efficient DES Key Search", School of
               Computer Science, Carleton University, Ottawa, Canada,
               TR-244, May 1994.  Presented at the Rump Session of
               Crypto '93.

Contacts

   Comments about this document should be discussed on the ietf@ietf.org
   mailing list.

   Questions about this document can also be directed to:

      William Allen Simpson
      DayDreamer
      Computer Systems Consulting Services
      1384 Fontaine
      Madison Heights, Michigan  48071

          wsimpson@UMich.edu
          wsimpson@GreenDragon.com (preferred)

      Scott Bradner
      Harvard University
      1350 Mass Ave, Room 876
      Cambridge, Massachusetts  02138

         sob@harvard.edu

Simpson, Bradner          expires in six months                 [Page 7]
DRAFT               Security Algorithms Applicability          June 1999

Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) William Allen Simpson (1998-1999).  All Rights
   Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, except as required to
   translate it into languages other than English.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and the author(s) DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR
   IMPLIED, INCLUDING (BUT NOT LIMITED TO) ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Simpson, Bradner          expires in six months                 [Page 8]
