Network Working Group                                   Dan Li (Huawei) 
Internet Draft                                     Jianhua Gao (Huawei) 
                                             Arun Satyanarayana (Cisco) 
                                                                       
Intended Status: Informational 
Expires: November 19, 2008                                May 19, 2008 
 
                                      
           Description of the RSVP-TE Graceful Restart Procedures 


                  draft-ietf-ccamp-gr-description-03.txt 


Status of this Memo 

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any 
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware 
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes 
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79. 

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
   documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts 
   as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in 
   progress." 

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html 

Abstract 

   The Hello message for the Resource Reservation Protocol (RSVP) has 
   been defined to establish and maintain basic signaling node 
   adjacencies for Label Switching Routers (LSRs) participating in a 
   Multiprotocol Label Switching (MPLS) traffic engineered (TE) 
   network. The Hello message has been extended for use in Generalized 
   MPLS (GMPLS) network for state recovery of control channel or nodal 
   faults. 


 
 
 
Li, et. al.           Expires November 19, 2008               [Page 1] 

Internet-Draft    draft-ietf-ccamp-gr-description-03.txt   May 19, 2008 
    

   GMPLS protocol definitions for RSVP also allow a restarting node to 
   learn the label that it previously allocated for use on a Label 
   Switching Path (LSP). 

   Further RSVP protocol extensions have been defined to enable a 
   restarting node to recover full control plane state by exchanging 
   RSVP messages with its upstream and downstream neighbors.  

   This document provides an informational clarification of the 
   control plane procedures for a GMPLS network when there are 
   multiple node failures, and describes how full control plane state 
   can be recovered in different scenarios where the order in which 
   the nodes restart is different. 

   This document does not define any new processes or procedures. All 
   protocol mechanisms are already defined in the referenced documents. 

Table of Contents 

     
    1. Introduction.................................................3 
    2. Existing Procedures for Single Node Restart..................4 
    2.1. Procedures Defined in [RFC3473]............................4 
    2.2. Procedures Defined in [RFC5063]............................5 
    3. Multiple Node Restart Scenarios..............................5 
    4. RSVP State...................................................7 
    5. Procedures for Multiple Node Restart.........................7 
    5.1. Procedures for the Normal Node.............................7 
    5.2. Procedures for the Restarting Node.........................7 
    5.2.1. Procedures for Scenario 1................................8 
    5.2.2. Procedures for Scenario 2................................9 
    5.2.3. Procedures for Scenario 3...............................10 
    5.2.4. Procedures for Scenario 4...............................11 
    5.2.5. Procedures for Scenario 5...............................12 
    5.3. Consideration of Re-Use of Data Plane Resources...........12 
    5.4. Consideration of Management Plane Intervention............12 
    6. Clarification of Restarting Node Procedure..................13 
    7. Security Considerations.....................................14 
    8. IANA Considerations.........................................16 
    9. Acknowledgments.............................................16 
    10. References.................................................16 
    10.1. Normative References.....................................16 
    10.2. Informative References...................................16 
    11. Author's Addresses.........................................17 
    12. Full Copyright Statement...................................18 
    13. Intellectual Property Statement............................18 
     
 
 
Li, et. al.           Expires November 19, 2008               [Page 2] 

Internet-Draft    draft-ietf-ccamp-gr-description-03.txt   May 19, 2008 
    

1. Introduction 

   The Hello message for the Resource Reservation Protocol (RSVP) has 
   been defined to establish and maintain basic signaling node 
   adjacencies for Label Switching Routers (LSRs) participating in a 
   Multiprotocol Label Switching (MPLS) traffic engineered (TE) 
   network [RFC3209]. The Hello message has been extended for use in 
   Generalized MPLS (GMPLS) network for state recovery of control 
   channel or nodal faults through the exchange of the Restart 
   Capabilities object [RFC3473]. 

   GMPLS protocol definitions for RSVP [RFC3473] also allow a 
   restarting node to learn the label that it previously allocated for 
   use on a Label Switching Path (LSP) through the RECOVERY_LABEL 
   object carried on a Path message sent to a restarting node from its 
   upstream neighbor. 

   Further RSVP protocol extensions have been defined [RFC5063] to 
   perform graceful restart and to enable a restarting node to recover 
   full control plane state by exchanging RSVP messages with its 
   upstream and downstream neighbors. State previously transmitted to 
   the upstream neighbor (principally the downstream label) is 
   recovered from the upstream neighbor on a Path message (using the 
   RECOVERY_LABEL object as described in [RFC3473]). State previously 
   transmitted to the downstream neighbor (including the upstream 
   label, interface identifiers, and the explicit route) is recovered 
   from the downstream neighbor using a RecoveryPath message. 

   [RFC5063] also extends the Hello message to exchange information 
   about the ability to support the RecoveryPath message. 

   The examples and procedures in [RFC3473] and [RFC5063] focus on the 
   description of a single node restart when adjacent network nodes 
   are operative. Although the procedures are equally applicable to 
   multi-node restarts, no detailed explanation is provided. 

   This document provides an informational clarification of the 
   control plane procedures for a GMPLS network when there are 
   multiple node failures, and describes how full control plane state 
   can be recovered in different scenarios where the order in which 
   the nodes restart is different.  

   This document does not define any new processes or procedures. All 
   protocol mechanisms already defined in [RFC3473] and [RFC5063] are 
   definitive. 


 
 
Li, et. al.           Expires November 19, 2008               [Page 3] 

Internet-Draft    draft-ietf-ccamp-gr-description-03.txt   May 19, 2008 
    

2. Existing Procedures for Single Node Restart 

   This section documents for information the existing procedures 
   defined in [RFC3473] and [RFC5063]. Those documents are definitive, 
   and the description here is non-normative. It is provided for 
   informational clarification only. 

2.1. Procedures Defined in [RFC3473] 

   In the case of nodal faults, the procedures for the restarting node 
   and the procedures for the neighbor of a restarting node are 
   applied to the corresponding nodes. These procedures described in 
   [RFC3473] are summarized as follows: 

   For the Restarting Node: 

   1) Tells its neighbors that state recovery is supported using the 
   Hello message; 

   2) Recover its RSVP state with the help of a Path message received 
   from its upstream neighbor carrying the RECOVERY_LABEL object; 

   3) For bidirectional LSPs, the UPSTREAM_LABEL object on the received 
   Path message is used to recover the corresponding RSVP state; 

   4) If the corresponding forwarding state in the data plane does not 
   exist, the node treats this as a setup for a new LSP. If the 
   forwarding state in the data plane exists, the forwarding state is 
   bound to the LSP associated with the message, and related forwarding 
   state should be considered as valid and refreshed. In addition, if 
   the node is not the tail-end of the LSP, the incoming label on the 
   downstream interface is retrieved from the forwarding state on the 
   restarting node and set in the UPSTREAM_LABEL object in the Path 
   message sent to the downstream neighbor. 

   For the Neighbor of a restarting node: 

   1) Sends a Path message with RECOVERY_LABEL object containing a label 
   value corresponding to the label value received in the most recently 
   received corresponding Resv message;  

   2) Resumes refreshing Path state with the restarting node; 

   3) Resumes refreshing Resv state with the restarting node. 



 
 
Li, et. al.           Expires November 19, 2008               [Page 4] 

Internet-Draft    draft-ietf-ccamp-gr-description-03.txt   May 19, 2008 
    

2.2. Procedures Defined in [RFC5063] 

   A new message is introduced in [RFC5063] called the RecoveryPath 
   message. The message is sent by the downstream neighbor of a 
   restarting node to convey the contents of the last received Path 
   message back to the restarting node.  

   The restarting node will receive the Path message with the 
   RECOVERY_LABEL object from its upstream neighbor, and/or the 
   RecoveryPath message from its downstream neighbor. The full RSVP 
   state of the restarting node can be recovered from these two 
   messages. 

   The following state can be recovered from the received Path message: 

   o Upstream data interface (from RSVP_HOP object) 

   o Label on the upstream data interface (from RECOVERY_LABEL object) 

   o Upstream label for bidirectional LSP (from UPSTREAM_LABEL object) 

   The following state can be recovered from the received RecoveryPath 
   message: 

   o Downstream data interface (from RSVP_HOP object) 

   o Label on the downstream data interface (from RECOVERY_LABEL object) 

   o Upstream direction label for bidirectional LSP (from 
      UPSTREAM_LABEL object) 

   The other objects also can be recovered either from the regular 
   Path and Resv messages, or from the RecoveryPath message. 

3. Multiple Node Restart Scenarios 

   We define the following terms for the different node types: 

   Restarting - The node has restarted; communication with its 
   neighbor nodes is restored, its RSVP state is under recovery. 

   Delayed Restarting - The node has restarted, but the communication 
   with a neighbor node is interrupted (for example, the neighbor node 
   needs to restart). 

   Normal - The normal node is the fully operational neighbor of a 
   restarting or delayed restarting node. 
 
 
Li, et. al.           Expires November 19, 2008               [Page 5] 

Internet-Draft    draft-ietf-ccamp-gr-description-03.txt   May 19, 2008 
    

   There are five scenarios for multi-node restart. We will focus on 
   the different positions of a restarting node. As shown in Figure 1, 
   an LSP starts from Node A, traverses Nodes B and C, and ends at 
   Node D. 

          +-----+  Path  +-----+  Path  +-----+  Path  +-----+ 
          | PSB |------->| PSB |------->| PSB |------->| PSB | 
          |     |        |     |        |     |        |     | 
          | RSB |<-------| RSB |<-------| RSB |<-------| RSB | 
          +-----+  Resv  +-----+  Resv  +-----+  Resv  +-----+ 
          Node A         Node B         Node C         Node D    
                    Figure 1 Two neighbor nodes restart 

   1) A Restarting node with downstream Delayed Restarting node. For 
   example, in Figure 1, Nodes A and D are Normal nodes, Node B is a 
   Restarting node, and Node C is a Delayed Restarting node.  

   2) A Restarting node with upstream Delayed Restarting node. For 
   example, in Figure 1, Nodes A and D are Normal nodes, Node B is a 
   Delayed Restarting node, and Node C is a Restarting node. 

   3) A Restarting node with downstream and upstream Delayed Restarting 
   nodes. For example, in Figure 1, Node A is a Normal node, Nodes B and 
   D are Delayed Restarting nodes, and Node C is a Restarting node. 

   4) A Restarting Ingress node with downstream Delayed Restarting node. 
   For example, in Figure 1, Node A is a Restarting node, and Node B is 
   a Delayed Restarting node. Nodes C and D are Normal nodes. 

   5) A Restarting Egress node with upstream Delayed Restarting node. 
   For example, in Figure 1, Nodes A and B are Normal nodes, Node C is a 
   Delayed Restarting node, and Node D is a Restarting node. 

   If the communication between two nodes is interrupted, the upstream 
   node may think the downstream node is a Delayed Restarting node, or 
   vice versa. 

   Note that if multiple nodes which are not neighbors are restarted, 
   the restart Procedures could be applied as multiple separated 
   restart procedures which are exactly the same as the procedures 
   described in [RFC3473] and [RFC5063]. Therefore, these scenarios 
   are not described in this document. For example, in Figure 1, Node 
   A and Node C are normal nodes, and Node B and Node D are restarting 
   nodes, so Node B could be restarted through Node A and Node C, 
   meanwhile, Node D could be restarted through Node C separately.     


 
 
Li, et. al.           Expires November 19, 2008               [Page 6] 

Internet-Draft    draft-ietf-ccamp-gr-description-03.txt   May 19, 2008 
    

4. RSVP State 

   For each scenario, the RSVP state needs to be recovered at the 
   restarting nodes are Path State Block (PSB) and Resv State Block 
   (RSB), which are created when the node receives the corresponding 
   Path message and Resv message. 

   According to [RFC2209], how to construct the PSB and RSB is really 
   an implementation issue. In fact, there is no requirement to 
   maintain separate PSB and RSB data structures. And in GMPLS, there 
   is a much closer tie between Path and Resv state so it is possible 
   to combine the information into a single state block (the LSP state 
   block). On the other hand, if P2MP is supported, it may be 
   convenient to maintain separate upstream and downstream state. Note 
   that the PSB and RSB are not upstream and downstream state since 
   the PSB is responsible for receiving a Path from upstream and 
   sending a Path to downstream. 

   Regardless of how the RSVP state is implemented, on recovery there 
   are two logical pieces of state to be recovered and these 
   correspond to the PSB and RSB. 

5. Procedures for Multiple Node Restart 

   In this document, all the nodes are assumed to have the graceful 
   restart capabilities which are described in [RFC3473] and [RFC5063]. 

5.1. Procedures for the Normal Node 

   When the downstream Normal node detects its neighbor restarting, it 
   must send a RecoveryPath message for each LSP associated with the 
   restarting node for which it has previously sent a Resv message and 
   which has not been torn down. 

   When the upstream Normal node detects its neighbor restarting, it 
   must send a Path message with RECOVERY_LABEL object containing a 
   label value corresponding to the label value received in the most 
   recently received corresponding Resv message. 

   This document does not modify the procedures for the Normal node 
   which are described in [RFC3473] and [RFC5063]. 

5.2. Procedures for the Restarting Node 

   This document does not modify the procedures for the Restarting 
   node which are described in [RFC3473] and [RFC5063]. 

 
 
Li, et. al.           Expires November 19, 2008               [Page 7] 

Internet-Draft    draft-ietf-ccamp-gr-description-03.txt   May 19, 2008 
    

5.2.1. Procedures for Scenario 1 

   After the Restarting node restarts, it starts a Recovery Timer. Any 
   RSVP state that has not been resynchronized when the Recovery Timer 
   expires, should be cleared. 

   At the Restarting node (Node B in the example), full 
   resynchronization with the upstream neighbor (Node A) is possible 
   because Node A is a Normal node. The upstream Path information is 
   recovered from the Path message received from Node A. Node B also 
   recovers the upstream Resv information (that it had previously sent 
   to Node A) from the RECOVERY_LABEL object carried in the Path 
   message received from Node A, but, obviously, some information 
   (like the Recorded Route Object) will be missing from the new Resv 
   message generated by Node B, and can not be supplied until the 
   downstream Delayed Restarting node (Node C) restarts and sends a 
   Resv. 

   After the upstream Path information and upstream Resv information 
   has been recovered by Node B, the normal refresh procedure with the 
   upstream Node A should be started. 

   As per [RFC5063], the Restarting node (Node B) would normally 
   expect to receive a RecoveryPath message from its downstream 
   neighbor (Node C). It would use this to recover the downstream Path 
   information, and would subsequently send a Path message to its 
   downstream neighbor and receive a Resv message. But in this 
   scenario, because the downstream neighbor has not restarted yet, 
   Node B detects the communication with Node C is interrupted and 
   must wait before resynchronizing with its downstream neighbor. 

   In this case, the Restarting node (Node B) follows the procedures 
   in section 9.3 of [RFC3473] and may run a Restart Timer to wait for 
   the downstream neighbor (Node C) to restart. If its downstream 
   neighbor (Node C) has not restarted before the timer expires the 
   corresponding LSPs may be torn down according to local policy 
   [RFC3473]. Note, however, that the Restart Time value suggested in 
   [RFC3473] is based on the previous Hello message exchanged with the 
   node that has not restarted yet (Node C). Since this time value is 
   unlikely to be available to the restarting node (Node B), a 
   configured time value must be used if the timer is operated. 

   The RSVP state must be reconciled with the retained data plane 
   state if the cross-connect information can be retrieved from the 
   data plane. In the event of any mismatches, local policy will 
   dictate the action that must be taken which could include: 

 
 
Li, et. al.           Expires November 19, 2008               [Page 8] 

Internet-Draft    draft-ietf-ccamp-gr-description-03.txt   May 19, 2008 
    

   - reprogramming the data plane 

   - sending an alert to the management plane 

   - tearing down the control plane state for the LSP. 

   In the case that the Delayed Restarting node never comes back, and 
   where a Restart Timer is not used to automatically tear down LSPs, 
   the LSPs can be tidied up through the control plane using a 
   PathTear from the upstream node (Node A). Note that if Node C 
   restarts after this operation, the RecoveryPath message that it 
   sends to Node B will not be matched with any state on Node B and 
   will receive a PathTear as its response resulting in the teardown 
   of the LSP at all downstream nodes. 

5.2.2. Procedures for Scenario 2 

   In this case, the Restarting node (Node C) can recover full 
   downstream state from its downstream neighbor (Node D) which is a 
   Normal node. The downstream Path state can be recovered from the 
   RecoveryPath message which is sent by Node D. This allows Node C to 
   send a Path refresh message to Node D, and Node D will respond with 
   a Resv message from which Node C can reconstruct the downstream 
   Resv state.  

   After the downstream Path information and downstream Resv 
   information has been recovered in Node C, the normal refresh 
   procedure with downstream Node D should be started. 

   The Restarting node would normally expect to resynchronize with its 
   upstream neighbor to re-learn the upstream Path and Resv state, but 
   in this scenario, because the upstream neighbor (Node B) has not 
   restarted yet, the Restarting node (Node C) detects that the 
   communication with upstream neighbor (Node B) is interrupted. The 
   Restarting node (Node C) follows the procedures in section 9.3 of 
   [RFC3473] and may run a Restart Timer to wait the upstream neighbor 
   (Node B) to restart. If its upstream neighbor (Node B) has not 
   restarted before the Restart Timer expires, the corresponding LSPs 
   may be torn down according to local policy [RFC3473]. Note, however, 
   that the Restart Time value suggested in [RFC3473] is based on the 
   previous Hello message exchanged with the node that has not 
   restarted yet (Node B). Since this time value is unlikely to be 
   available to the restarting node (Node C), a configured time value 
   must be used if the timer is operated. 

   Note that no Resv message is sent to the upstream neighbor (Node B) 
   because it has not restarted.  
 
 
Li, et. al.           Expires November 19, 2008               [Page 9] 

Internet-Draft    draft-ietf-ccamp-gr-description-03.txt   May 19, 2008 
    

   The RSVP state must be reconciled with the retained data plane 
   state if the cross-connect information can be retrieved from the 
   data plane. 

   In the event of any mismatches, local policy will dictate the 
   action that must be taken which could include: 

   - reprogramming the data plane 

   - sending an alert to the management plane 

   - tearing down the control plane state for the LSP. 

   In the case that the Delayed Restarting node never comes back, and 
   where a Restart Timer is not used to automatically tear down LSPs, 
   the LSPs cannot be tidied up through the control plane using a 
   PathTear from the upstream node (Node A), because there is no 
   control plane connectivity to Node C from the upstream direction. 
   There are two possibilities in [RFC3473]:  

   - Management action may be taken at the Restarting node to tear the 
     LSP. This will result in the LSP being removed from Node C, and a 
     PathTear being sent downstream to Node D.  

   - Management action may be taken at any downstream node (for 
     example, Node D) resulting in a PathErr message with the 
     Path_State_Reomved flag set being sent to Node C to tear the LSP 
     state.  

   Note that if Node B restarts after this operation, the Path message 
   that it sends to Node C will not be matched with any state on Node 
   C and will be treated as a new Path message resulting in LSP setup. 
   Node C should use the labels carried in the Path message (in the 
   UPSTREAM_LABEL object and in the RECOVERY_LABEL object) to drive 
   its label allocation, but may use other labels according to normal 
   LSP setup rules. 

5.2.3. Procedures for Scenario 3 

   In this example, the Restarting node (Node C) is isolated. It's 
   upstream and downstream neighbors have not restarted. 

   The Restarting node (Node C) follows the procedures in section 9.3 
   of [RFC3473] and may run a Restart Timer for each of its neighbors 
   (Nodes B and D). If a neighbor has not restarted before its Restart 
   Timer expires, the corresponding LSPs may be torn down according to 
   local policy [RFC3473]. Note, however, that the Restart Time values 
 
 
Li, et. al.           Expires November 19, 2008              [Page 10] 

Internet-Draft    draft-ietf-ccamp-gr-description-03.txt   May 19, 2008 
    

   suggested in [RFC3473] are based on the previous Hello message 
   exchanged with the nodes that have not restarted yet. Since these 
   time values are unlikely to be available to the restarting node 
   (Node C), a configured time value must be used if the timer is 
   operated. 

   During the Recovery Time, if the upstream Delayed Restarting node 
   has restarted, the procedure for scenario 1 can be applied. 

   During the Recovery Time, if the downstream Delayed Restarting node 
   has restarted, the procedure for scenario 2 can be applied. 

   In the case that neither Delayed Restarting node ever comes back, 
   and where a Restart Timer is not used to automatically tear down 
   LSPs, management intervention is required to tidy up the control 
   plane and the data plane on the node that is waiting for the failed 
   device to restart. 

   If the downstream Delayed Restarting node restarts after the 
   cleanup of LSPs at Node C, the RecoveryPath message from Node D 
   will be responded with a PathTear message. If the upstream Delayed 
   Restarting node restarts after the cleanup of LSPs at Node C, the 
   Path message from Node B will be treated as a new LSP setup request, 
   but the setup will fail because Node D cannot be reached - Node C 
   will respond with a PathErr message. Since this happens to Node B 
   during its restart processing, it should follow the rules of 
   [RFC5063] and tear down the LSP. 

5.2.4. Procedures for Scenario 4 

   When the Ingress node (Node A) restarts, it does not know which 
   LSPs it caused to be created. Usually, however, this information is 
   retrieved from the management plane or from the configuration 
   requests stored in non-volatile form in the node in order to 
   recover the LSP state.  

   Furthermore, if the downstream node (Node B) is a Normal node, 
   according to the procedures in [RFC5063], the ingress will receive 
   a RecoveryPath message and will understand that it was the ingress 
   of the LSP. 

   However, in this scenario, the downstream node is a Delayed 
   Restarting node, so Node A must rely on the information from the 
   management plane or stored configuration, or it must wait for Node 
   B to restart. 


 
 
Li, et. al.           Expires November 19, 2008              [Page 11] 

Internet-Draft    draft-ietf-ccamp-gr-description-03.txt   May 19, 2008 
    

   In the event that Node B never restarts, management plane 
   intervention is needed at Node A to clean up any LSP control plane 
   state restored from the management plane or from local 
   configuration, and to release any data plane resources. 

5.2.5. Procedures for Scenario 5 

   In this scenario the Egress node (Node D) restarts, and its 
   upstream neighbor (Node C) has not restarted. In this case, the 
   Egress node may have no control plane state relating to the LSPs. 
   It has no downstream neighbor to help it, and no management plane 
   or configuration information, although there will be data plane 
   state for the LSP. The Egress node must simply wait until its 
   upstream neighbor restarts and gives it the information as Path 
   messages carrying RECOVERY_LABEL objects. 

5.3. Consideration of Re-Use of Data Plane Resources 

   Fundamental to the processes described above is an understanding 
   that data plane resources may remain in use (allocated and cross-
   connected) when control plane state has not been fully 
   resynchronized because some control plane nodes have not restarted. 

   It is assumed that these data plane resources might be carrying 
   traffic and should not be reconfigured except through application 
   of operator-configured policy, or as a direct result of operator 
   action. 

   In particular, new LSP setup requests from the control plane or the 
   management plane should not be allowed to use data plane resources 
   that are still in use. Specific action must first be taken to 
   release the resources. 

5.4. Consideration of Management Plane Intervention 

   The management plane must always retain the ability to control data 
   plane resources and to over-ride the control plane. In this context, 
   the management plane must always be able to release data plane 
   resources that were previously in place for use by control-plane 
   established LSPs. Further, the management plane must always be able 
   to instruct any control plane node to tear down any LSP. 

   Operators should be aware of the risks of misconnection that could 
   be caused by careless manipulation from the management plane of in-
   use data plane resources. 


 
 
Li, et. al.           Expires November 19, 2008              [Page 12] 

Internet-Draft    draft-ietf-ccamp-gr-description-03.txt   May 19, 2008 
    

6. Clarification of Restarting Node Procedure 

   According to the current graceful restart procedure [RFC3473], 
   after a node restarts its control plane, it needs its upstream node 
   to send PATH message with recovery label to synchronize its RSVP 
   state. If the restarted control plane becomes operational quickly, 
   the upstream node may not detect the restarting of downstream node 
   and therefore, may send a PATH message without recovery label 
   causing errors and unwanted connection deletion. 

     N1               N2 
     |                | 
     |                X (Restart start) 
     | HELLO          | 
     |--------------->| 
     |                | 
     | SRefresh       | 
     |--------------->| 
     |                | 
     | HELLO          | 
     |--------------->| 
     |                | 
     |                X (Restart complete) 
     | SRefresh       | 
     |--------------->| 
     | NACK           | 
     |<---------------| 
     | Path without   | 
     | recovery label | 
     |--------------->| 
     |                X (resoure allocation failed because the  
     |                |  resouces are in use) 
     |  PathErr       | 
     |<---------------| 
     |  PathTear      | 
     |--------------->| 
     X(LSP deletion)  X (LSP deletion) 
     |                | 
            Figure 2 Message flow for accidental LSP deletion 

   The sequence diagram above depicts one scenario where the LSP may 
   get deleted. 

   In this sequence N1 did not detect Hello failure and continues 
   sending SRefreshes which may get NACK'ed by N2 once restart 
   completes because there is no Path state corresponding to the 
   SRefresh message. This NACK causes a Path refresh message to be 
 
 
Li, et. al.           Expires November 19, 2008              [Page 13] 

Internet-Draft    draft-ietf-ccamp-gr-description-03.txt   May 19, 2008 
    

   generated but there is no RECOVERY_LABEL because N1 did not yet 
   detect that N2 has restarted as Hello exchanges have not yet 
   started. The Path message is treated as "new" and fails to allocate 
   the resources because they are still in use. This causes a PathErr 
   message to be generated which may lead to the tear down of the LSP. 

   To resolve the aforementioned problem, the following procedures 
   which are implicit in [RFC3473] and [RFC5063] should be followed. 
   These procedures work together with the recovery procedures 
   documented in [RFC3473]. Here, it is assumed that the restarting 
   node and the neighboring node(s) support Hello extension as 
   documented in [RFC3209] and recovery procedures documented in 
   [RFC3473]. 

   After a node restarts its control plane, it should ignore and 
   silently drop all RSVP-TE messages, except Hello messages, it 
   receives from any neighbor to which, no HELLO session has been 
   established. 

   The restarting node should follow [RFC3209] to establish Hello 
   sessions with its neighbors, after its control plane becomes 
   operational. 

   The restarting node resumes processing of RSVP-TE messages sent 
   from each neighbor to which the Hello session has been established. 

7. Security Considerations 

   This document clarifies the procedures defined in [RFC3473] and 
   [RFC5063] to be performed on RSVP agents that neighbor one or more 
   restarting RSVP agents. It does not introduce any new procedures 
   and, therefore, does not introduce any new security risks or issues. 

   In the case of the control plane in general, and the RSVP agent in 
   particular, where one or more nodes carrying one or more LSPs are 
   restarted due to external attacks, the procedures defined in 
   [RFC5063] and described in this document provide the ability for 
   the restarting RSVP agents to recover the RSVP state in each 
   restarting node corresponding to the LSPs, with the least possible 
   perturbation to the rest of the network. These procedures can be 
   considered to provide mechanisms by which the GMPLS network can 
   recover from physical attacks or from attacks on remotely 
   controlled power supplies. 

   The procedures described are such that, only the neighboring RSVP 
   agents should notice the restart of a node, and hence only they 
   need to perform additional processing. This allows for a network 
 
 
Li, et. al.           Expires November 19, 2008              [Page 14] 

Internet-Draft    draft-ietf-ccamp-gr-description-03.txt   May 19, 2008 
    

   with active LSPs to recover LSP state gracefully from an external 
   attack, without perturbing the data/forwarding plane state, and 
   without propagating the error condition in the control or data 
   plane. In other words, the effect of the restart (which might be 
   the result of an attack) does not spread into the network. 

   Note that concern has been expressed about the vulnerability of a 
   restarting node to false messages received from its neighbors. For 
   example, a restarting node might receive a false Path message with 
   a Recovery Label object from an upstream neighbor, or a false 
   RecoveryPath message from its downstream neighbor. This situation 
   might arise in one of four cases: 

   - The message is spoofed and does not come from the neighbor at all. 

   - The message has been modified as it was travelling from the 
   neighbor. 

   - The neighbor is defective and has generated a message in error. 

   - The neighbor has been subverted and has a "rogue" RSVP agent. 

   The first two cases may be handled using standard RSVP 
   authentication and integrity procedures [RFC3209], [RFC3473]. If 
   the operator is particularly worried, the control plane may be 
   operated using IPsec [RFC4301], [RFC4302], [RFC4835], [RFC4306], 
   and [RFC2411]. 

   Protection against defective or rogue RSVP implementations is 
   generally hard to impossible. Neighbor-to-neighbor authentication 
   and integrity validation is, by definition, ineffective in these 
   situations. For example, if a neighbor node sends a Resv during 
   normal LSP setup, and if that message carries a GENERALIZED_LABEL 
   object carrying an incorrect label value, then the receiving LSR 
   will use the supplied value and the LSP will be set up incorrectly. 
   Alternatively, if a Path message is modified by an upstream LSR to 
   change the destination and explicit route, there is no way for the 
   downstream LSR to detect this, and the LSP may be set up to the 
   wrong destination. Furthermore, the upstream LSR could disguise 
   this fact by modifying the recorded route reported in the Resv 
   message. Thus, these issues are in no way specific to the restart 
   case, do not cause any greater or different problems from the 
   normal case, and do not warrant specific security measure 
   applicable to restart scenarios. 



 
 
Li, et. al.           Expires November 19, 2008              [Page 15] 

Internet-Draft    draft-ietf-ccamp-gr-description-03.txt   May 19, 2008 
    

   Note that the RSVP POLICY_DATA object [RFC2205] provides a scope by 
   which secure end-to-end checks could be applied. However, very 
   little definition of the use of this object has been made to date. 

   See [MPLS-SEC] for a wider discussion of security in MPLS and GMPLS 
   networks. 

8. IANA Considerations 

   This document defines no new protocols or extensions and makes no 
   requests to IANA for registry management. 

9. Acknowledgments 

   We would like to thank Adrian Farrel, Dimitri Papadimitriou, and 
   Lou Berger for their useful comments. 

10. References 

10.1. Normative References 

[RFC2209] R. Braden, L. Zhang, "Resource ReSerVation Protocol (RSVP) 
           -- Version 1 Message Processing Rules", RFC 2209, September 
           1997. 

[RFC3209] Awduche, D., Berger, L., Gan, D., Li, T., Srinivasan, V., 
           and G. Swallow, "RSVP-TE: Extensions to RSVP for LSP 
           Tunnels", RFC 3209, December 2001. 

[RFC3473] Berger, L., "Generalized Multi-Protocol Label Switching 
           (GMPLS) Signaling Resource ReserVation Protocol-Traffic 
           Engineering (RSVP-TE) Extensions", RFC 3473, January 2003. 

[RFC5063] A. Satyanarayana, R. Rahman, "Extensions to GMPLS RSVP 
           Graceful Restart", RFC 5063, September 2007. 

10.2. Informative References 

[MPLS-SEC] Fang, L., "Security Framework for MPLS and GMPLS Networks", 
           draft-ietf-mpls-mpls-and-gmpls-security-framework, work in 
           progress. 

[RFC2205] Braden, R. (Ed.), Zhang, L., Berson, S., Herzog, S. and S. 
           Jamin, "Resource ReserVation Protocol -- Version 1 
           Functional Specification", RFC 2205, September 1997. 


 
 
Li, et. al.           Expires November 19, 2008              [Page 16] 

Internet-Draft    draft-ietf-ccamp-gr-description-03.txt   May 19, 2008 
    

[RFC2411] R. Thayer, N. Doraswamy, R. Glenn, "IP Security Document 
           Roadmap", RFC 2411, November 1998. 

[RFC4301] S. Kent, K. Seo, "Security Architecture for the Internet 
           Protocol", RFC 4301, December 2005. 

[RFC4302] S. Kent, "IP Authentication Header", RFC 4302, December 
           2005. 

[RFC4306] C. Kaufman, "Internet Key Exchange (IKEv2) Protocol", RFC 
           4306, December 2005. 

[RFC4835] V. Manral, "Cryptographic Algorithm Implementation 
           Requirements for Encapsulating Security Payload (ESP) and 
           Authentication Header (AH)", RFC 4835, April 2007. 

11. Author's Addresses 

   Dan Li 
   Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd. 
   F3-5-B R&D Center, Huawei Base, 
   Bantian, Longgang District 
   Shenzhen 518129, P.R.China  
   Phone: +86 755 28973237 
   Email: danli@huawei.com 
    

   Jianhua Gao 
   Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd. 
   F3-5-B R&D Center, Huawei Base, 
   Bantian, Longgang District 
   Shenzhen 518129, P.R.China  
   Phone: +86 755 28972902 
   Email: gjhhit@huawei.com 
    

   Arun Satyanarayana 
   Cisco Systems, Inc. 
   170 West Tasman Dr. 
   San Jose, CA  95134, USA 
   Phone: +1 408 853-3206 
   Email: asatyana@cisco.com 
    




 
 
Li, et. al.           Expires November 19, 2008              [Page 17] 

Internet-Draft    draft-ietf-ccamp-gr-description-03.txt   May 19, 2008 
    

   Snigdho C. Bardalai 
   Fujitsu Network Communications, Inc.  
   2801 Telecom Parkway,  
   Richardson, Texas 75082, USA  
   Phone: +1 972 479 2951  
   Email: snigdho.bardalai@us.fujitsu.com 
    

12. Full Copyright Statement 

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008). 

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions 
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors 
   retain all their rights. 

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on 
   an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE 
   REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE 
   IETF TRUST AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL 
   WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY 
   WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE 
   ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS 
   FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 

13. Intellectual Property Statement 

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed 
   to pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described 
   in this document or the extent to which any license under such 
   rights might or might not be available; nor does it represent that 
   it has made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  
   Information on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC 
   documents can be found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use 
   of such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository 
   at http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 

 
 
Li, et. al.           Expires November 19, 2008              [Page 18] 

Internet-Draft    draft-ietf-ccamp-gr-description-03.txt   May 19, 2008 
    

   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at 
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org. 

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet- 
   Drafts. 

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
   documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts 
   as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in 
   progress". 

    































 
 
Li, et. al.           Expires November 19, 2008              [Page 19] 

