

 
   Network Working Group                                                
   Internet Draft                                       Maria Napierala 
   Document: draft-mnapierala-mvpn-part-reqt-01.txt                AT&T 
   Expires: August 24 2008                             February 24 2008 
    
    
            Requirement for Multicast MPLS/BGP VPN Partitioning 
    
    
Status of this Memo 
    
   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any 
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware 
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes 
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79. 
    
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that  
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
 
    
Abstract 
 
   This document describes a requirement for Multicast IP VPN solutions 
   to allow the same multicast stream to flow simultaneously on 
   multiple inter-PE paths without duplicates being sent to receivers. 
   It is intended that existing and new solutions to MPLS/BGP Multicast 
   IP VPN's will support this requirement. 
 
 
Conventions used in this document 
    
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [i]. 
    

 
 
Napierala               Expires - August 2008                [Page 1] 
            Requirement for Multicast MPLS/BGP VPN Partitioning 
    
 
 
    
    
    
Table of Contents 
 
   1.   Introduction................................................2 
   2.   Terminology.................................................3 
   3.   General Requirement.........................................3 
   4.   Multicast VPN Partitioning..................................4 
      4.1  Support of Anycast Sourcing in MVPN......................5 
      4.2  Supporting Redundant P-Tunnels...........................6 
   5.   Preserving Customer Multicast Traffic Patterns..............7 
      5.1  Support of Source-Specific Host Reports in PIM-SM........8 
   6.   Support of PIM-Bidir in MVPN................................8 
      6.1  Preventing Packet Loops..................................9 
      6.2  Support of Source-Only Branches..........................9 
   7.   IANA Considerations........................................10 
   8.   Security Considerations....................................10 
   9.   References.................................................10 
   10.  Acknowledgments............................................11 
   11.  Author's Addresses.........................................11 
   12.  Intellectual Property Statement............................11 
   13.  Copyright Notice...........................................11 
 
    
1. Introduction 
    
   Multicast VPN (cf.[ii]) extends MPLS/BGP VPN services (cf.[iii]) by 
   enabling customers to run native IP multicast within their IP VPN's. 
   Multicast VPN's enabled customers to use applications that were 
   expensive or difficult, if not impossible, to operate in wide-area 
   network before (e.g., voice/video conferencing, stock quotes, large 
   file distribution). From VPN customer perspective there is no change 
   in the multicast operational model. Multicast distribution trees are 
   built in service provider network to carry VPN multicast traffic. 
   Those trees are essentially point-to-multipoint (P2MP) and 
   multipoint-to-multipoint (MP2MP) tunnels that encapsulate IP VPN 
   multicast packets for transport across provider's network. Throughout 
   this document whenever we refer to a VPN we mean MPLS/BGP IP VPN and 
   whenever we refer to an MVPN we mean MPLS/BGP Multicast IP VPN. 
 
   The generic requirements for IP multicast services within IP VPN's 
   are specified in [iv]. This document defines additional multicast VPN 
   requirements beyond those in [iv]. More precisely, it specifies the 
   need of VPN customers to have multiple parallel paths to a 
   Rendezvous Point or a multicast source across a service provider 
   network. The document formulates the generic aspects of this 

 
 
Napierala               Expires - August 2008                [Page 2] 
            Requirement for Multicast MPLS/BGP VPN Partitioning 
    
 
 
   requirement and states its specific issues that should be addressed 
   by MVPN solution.  
 
   It is expected that solutions that specify procedures and protocol 
   extensions for multicast in IP VPN's should satisfy this requirement. 
    
    
2. Terminology 
    
   In this document when we use the "C-" prefix when we refer to the VPN 
   customer multicast addresses and multicast trees. We will prefix VPN 
   customer multicast trees, sources, groups, Rendezvous Points (RP), 
   and PIM routes with "C-", as in: C-tree, C-S, C-G, C-RP, (C-*, C-G), 
   (C-S, C-G). When we use the "P-" prefix when we refer to provider's 
   multicast addresses and multicast trees/tunnels. We assume 
   familiarity with PIM protocol [v][vi][vii]. 
    
    
3. General Requirement 
 
   The MVPN solution MUST allow the same multicast traffic to flow 
   simultaneously on multiple trees across provider's network without 
   duplicate packets sent to customer receivers. The solution has to 
   allow for different downstream PE's to choose different upstream 
   PE's to customer RP or customer source. As a result, customer 
   multicast stream would be able to flow along multiple inter-PE trees 
   and simultaneously utilize multiple paths in redundant topology.  
    
   The lack of support of parallel paths for multicast traffic would 
   prevent different multicast VRF's of the same VPN to have different 
   routing policies and choose different paths to reach C-RP or the C-
   source. As a result it would break any kind of "anycast" sourcing of 
   a multicast stream in IP VPN, including Anycast RP operation by not 
   allowing multiple RP's to send traffic in parallel to their closest 
   receivers.  
 
   The solution MUST NOT result in creating duplicates to customer 
   receivers, except during routing transients. The amount of duplicates 
   during routing convergence should be minimized and should be 
   compatible to that of standard PIM operation. When preventing 
   duplicates to receivers, the solution MUST NOT waste provider's 
   network resources by discarding, at network egress, already 
   transmitted duplicate traffic. Only a single copy of any C-multicast 
   stream should reach any egress mVRF in a converged network. This 
   includes PIM-SM C-streams that are either flowing on C-shared tree 
   or C-shortest-path tree. An egress PE should receive a PIM-SM C-
   stream either from the C-RP or directly from the C-source but never 
   from both.  
 
 
Napierala               Expires - August 2008                [Page 3] 
            Requirement for Multicast MPLS/BGP VPN Partitioning 
    
 
 
   There are two exceptions to the requirement of not wasting 
   provider's network bandwidth and discarding duplicates at network 
   egress. One exception is when providing fast convergence for certain 
   multicast VPN traffic on failures in access or in provider's 
   network. This requirement is described in section 4.2. The other 
   exception is in case of aggregation of different C-streams on to the 
   same multicast distribution tree (i.e., P-tunnel) in provider's 
   network. These two exceptions should be implemented by MVPN solution 
   as optional behavior, based on provider's discretion.         
   In addition, these two exceptions apply only to traffic from anycast 
   sources/RP's but not to PIM-SM C-streams flowing on C-shared tree vs. 
   C-shortest-path tree. In other words, a PIM-SM C-stream should never 
   be delivered to an egress PE from both, the C-RP and directly from 
   the C-source.   
 
   These requirements SHOULD be supported for all tunnel technologies 
   and SHOULD work with all protocols used for multicast signaling among 
   PE's. However, it is desirable that the solution is "generic" i.e., 
   it is independent of multicast tunnel technology used by the service 
   provider. Independence from tunneling technology will allow 
   different transport methods to be used for different multicast 
   applications without overloading the transport technology itself. 
   This, in turn, will simplify provider's network maintenance 
   operations.  
    
   Moreover, the solution MUST NOT impose any restrictions on 
   customer's multicast routing or requirements on multicast service 
   offering. For example, it cannot require a customer to outsource its 
   RP functionality to the service provider or a service provider to 
   participate in customer's RP protocol by running MSDP with the 
   customer. 
 
   These requirements SHOULD be supported for the following PIM modes 
   in customer domain: PIM-SM [v], PIM-SSM [vii], and PIM-Bidir [vi]. 
   The MVPN procedures SHOULD support all Rendezvous Point solutions 
   currently used by customers. 
 
    
4. Multicast VPN Partitioning   
    
   Service providers might allow VPN sites to have specific routing 
   intelligence, giving the customers more granular control of their 
   routing in the VPN.  Site specific routing intelligence may include, 
   for example, route preference or denial of routes. A VPN customer may 
   partition its sites into groups that share the same routing policy. 
   How these routing policies are defined and how the customers control 
   their routing may differ among service providers and it is outside 
   the scope of this document.  
 
 
Napierala               Expires - August 2008                [Page 4] 
            Requirement for Multicast MPLS/BGP VPN Partitioning 
    
 
 
 
   An example where customers need more granular control of their 
   routing is in the selection of the Internet Gateway. Customers might 
   access the Internet from their branch sites utilizing a default route 
   or a summary route originating from their Internet Gateway site.  A 
   VPN might have multiple Internet Gateways. A customer may want to 
   control which sites can access each of the gateways based on delay, 
   application, security policy, etc.  
    
   More generally, enterprises and firms often want to segment their 
   VPN's by data center or hub locations in order to meet specific 
   performance, security, functionality, or application access 
   requirements.  
    
   Such partitioning of VPN's has been possible for unicast 
   transmission. It is a customer expectation that multicast traffic in 
   a VPN can be subject to similar partitioning by multicast source or 
   Rendezvous Point location. Lack of such solution can deteriorate 
   application's performance, introduce latencies and variable delays 
   that impact users and applications. Typically, large enterprises have 
   multiple data centers and would like multicast applications to be 
   simultaneously sourced from each data center to serve different sets 
   of branch locations. For example, real-time market data distribution 
   requires timely and simultaneous delivery to users. The differences 
   in propagation delay might introduce unacceptable timing differences 
   in the availability of data to users, and hence, unfairness in 
   business competition. Locating sources close to receivers and 
   partitioning of receivers by the source location is necessary in such 
   business critical real-time data feeds.  
   
   
 4.1 Support of Anycast Sourcing in MVPN 
 
   IP VPN customers might inject the same route(s) at different VPN 
   sites. These could be default or summary routes, or specific routes. 
   Those routes could be the routes to C-RPs or C-sources and they are 
   examples of "anycast" sourcing of multicast traffic in a VPN. The 
   "anycast" sourcing also includes dually connected C-sources or C-
   RP(A)'s.  
    
   Specifically, in Anycast RP, two or more RP's are configured with the 
   same IP address on loopback interfaces. IP routing automatically 
   selects the topologically closest RP for each source and receiver. 
   Anycast RP provides RP redundancy, fast RP failover, and load sharing 
   of registering sources. Anycast RP's are often used in large 
   enterprise networks. 
    

 
 
Napierala               Expires - August 2008                [Page 5] 
            Requirement for Multicast MPLS/BGP VPN Partitioning 
    
 
 
   Typically, large enterprises have multiple data centers where Anycast 
   RP's and sources of multicast traffic are located. Such customers 
   might require multicast applications to be simultaneously sourced 
   from each data center and delivered via corresponding Anycast RP's to 
   different sets of branch locations. The expected anycast addressing 
   behavior is that different PE's could choose different upstream PE's 
   as the next-hops to the customer RP or source. As we described in the 
   beginning of section 4 such partitioning of VPN by Rendezvous Point 
   and source location might be needed to assure required application 
   performance. Hence, the support for anycast sourcing in MVPN is 
   REQUIRED. 
    
   The MVPN solution SHOULD support Anycast C-RP in the following two 
   ways: based on provider's network IGP/routing cost or based on VPN 
   customer routing. IGP cost-based next-hop selection provides PIM-like 
   support of Anycast C-RP's, i.e., C-receivers join the closest Anycast 
   C-RP across provider's network. The other option is to leave it up to 
   the VPN routing policy to partition receivers by Anycast RP location. 
   This allows multicast VPN customer to define its own Anycast C-RP 
   selection, based on other criterion than the closest distance.  
    
    
 4.2 Supporting Redundant P-Tunnels 
    
   As was stated in section 3, while preventing duplicates to receivers 
   in converged network, the MPVN solution should not waste provider's 
   network resources by discarding, at network egress, already 
   transmitted duplicate traffic. The exception to the duplicate free 
   operation is when providing fast convergence for certain multicast 
   VPN traffic on failures in access or in provider's network. This is 
   required for applications that are not tolerant to packet loss. To 
   minimize multicast traffic disruption during failures, the solution 
   should provide a capability to pre-build redundant P-tunnels when an 
   mVRF has multiple paths to C-RP or C-source. In addition to "primary" 
   tunnel, a "secondary" or redundant P-tunnel could be triggered for C-
   Group or C-Source traffic. The primary P-tunnel should be based on 
   mVRF's best route to C-RP or C-source. The secondary P-tunnel should 
   be based on the next best route (or another equal cost path) to C-RP 
   or C-source. The redundant P-tunnel could function in a "warm-
   standby" or a "hot-standby" mode. In a "warm-standby" mode the 
   redundant P-tunnel should be triggered but the traffic should not be 
   forwarded to it from the ingress PE, the root of the tunnel. In a 
   "hot-standby" mode the traffic should be carried on both primary and 
   standby tunnels and allow duplicates to be received at egress PE's. 
   The egress PE's should accept the traffic only from either the 
   primary tunnel or from the secondary tunnel. If the best route to C-
   RP/C-Source exists that the traffic should be accepted from the 
   primary tunnel. If the best route to C-RP/C-route is withdrawn and 
 
 
Napierala               Expires - August 2008                [Page 6] 
            Requirement for Multicast MPLS/BGP VPN Partitioning 
    
 
 
   the secondary route exists then the traffic should be accepted from 
   the redundant tunnel. 
    
   Such a capability should be implemented as a per-tunnel configuration 
   option to service provider.         
 
 
5. Preserving Customer Multicast Traffic Patterns 
    
   PIM-SM has the capability for last-hop routers to switch to the 
   shortest-path tree if the traffic rate is above a configured SPT-
   threshold. By switching to SPT, the optimal path is used to deliver 
   the multicast traffic. Depending on the location of the source in 
   relation to the RP, switching to the SPT can significantly reduce 
   network latency. However, in networks with large numbers of senders, 
   SPT's can increase amount of state that must be kept in the routers. 
   A VPN customer might set SPT-threshold to a value higher than zero in 
   order to switch to SPT's only for sources that cross certain traffic 
   rate. This is done in order to alleviate RP from carrying too much 
   traffic while at the same time controlling the number of (S,G) states 
   created in the network. When a source traffic rate falls below the 
   specified SPT-threshold on the last hop CE, the source tree is 
   switched back to the shared tree. In fact, last-hop CE's might never 
   switch traffic to SPT's for certain multicast groups if SPT-threshold 
   of "infinity" is specified for those groups. 
   The MVPN solution should not affect this PIM-SM behavior. 
    
   In native PIM-SM mode the same multicast traffic does not necessarily 
   flow over a single tree but it can simultaneously flow on both shared 
   and shortest path trees, without duplicates being sent to receivers. 
   The MVPN solution SHOULD allow egress PE's (i.e., PE's with 
   receivers) receive a specific PIM-SM C-stream either via the C-RP or 
   directly from the C-source. As it was stated in section 3, a PIM-SM 
   C-stream should never be delivered to an egress PE from both the C-RP 
   and directly from the C-source.  
 
   Moreover, the MVPN solution should not base multicast routing 
   decisions on the provider's backbone internal infrastructure, like IP 
   addressing of PE routers. Rather the MVPN solution MUST preserve the 
   multicast routing policies as defined in customer's VPN. More 
   precisely, a multicast VRF with receivers of (C-*, C-G) or (C-S, C-G) 
   should receive multicast traffic from its best next-hop to C-RP or C-
   S, respectively. The only two exceptions to this requirement are: (1) 
   the existence of multiple equal cost paths to customer source or 
   customer RP, which forces the provider's network to impose a tie-
   breaker, and (2) the existence of a configuration knob that provides 
   an optional multicast behavior, based on provider's discretion (for 

 
 
Napierala               Expires - August 2008                [Page 7] 
            Requirement for Multicast MPLS/BGP VPN Partitioning 
    
 
 
   example, Anycast C-RP selection based on provider's network routing 
   cost). 
    
   In summary, the MVPN procedures should not alter customer's 
   multicast traffic patterns as defined by customer's PIM 
   infrastructure as well as by MVPN routing policies. More precisely, 
   MVPN solution MUST: 
   - preserve Anycast C-RP infrastructure, 
   - conform to customer's SPT-thresholds by  
        + not triggering unexpected (C-S, C-G) states in customer's     
          network 
        + supporting C-tree "switchback" from shortest path tree to  
          shared tree 
        + supporting dually connected C-receiver sites where shared tree  
          and shortest path tree diverge 
   - preserve shared trees in customer network if CE's do not switch  
     traffic to SPT's, by not triggering unexpected (C-S, C-G) states in  
     customer's network 
   - preserve multicast routing policies in customer's VPN. 
 
 
 5.1 Support of Source-Specific Host Reports in PIM-SM 
    
   PIM-SM [v] permits "a receiver to join a group and specify that it 
   only wants to receive traffic for a group if that traffic comes from 
   a particular source. If a receiver does this, and no other receiver 
   on the LAN requires all the traffic for the group, then the DR may 
   omit performing a (*,G) join to set up the shared tree, and instead 
   issue a source-specific (S,G) join only." 
    
   Such a behavior of PIM-SM means that any PE can receive Join (C-S, C-
   G) for a sparse mode group even if no PE has ever received Join (C-*, 
   C-G) in an MVPN. It also means that (as in PIM-SSM) source trees 
   might be triggered even for sources that are not active. The MVPN 
   solution SHOULD support source-specific host requests but it SHOULD 
   prevent useless S-PMSI creation for C-sources which are not active.  
 
 
6. Support of PIM-Bidir in MVPN  
    
   Many enterprises use multicast applications that scale or even 
   operate correctly only with PIM-Bidir [vi]. For example, financial 
   firms use a business critical "always on" VoIP conferencing (so 
   called "hoot-n-holler") to share market updates and trading orders. 
   PIM-Bidir is already deployed in many of these networks and its 
   support in MVPN context is REQUIRED. This is a change from MVPN 
   generic requirements document [iv] where PIM-Bidir support on PE-CE 
   interfaces is only recommended. 
 
 
Napierala               Expires - August 2008                [Page 8] 
            Requirement for Multicast MPLS/BGP VPN Partitioning 
    
 
 
 
 
 6.1 Preventing Packet Loops 
    
   In PIM-Bidir, the packet forwarding rules have been improved over 
   PIM-SM, allowing traffic to be passed up the shared tree toward the 
   RP Address (RPA). To avoid multicast packet looping, PIM-Bidir uses a 
   mechanism called the designated forwarder (DF) election, which 
   establishes a loop-free tree rooted at the RPA. Use of this method 
   ensures that only one copy of every packet will be sent to an RPA, 
   even if there are parallel equal cost paths to the RPA. To avoid 
   loops the DF election process enforces consistent view of the DF on 
   all routers on network segment, and during periods of ambiguity or 
   routing convergence the traffic forwarding is suspended.  
    
   The standard DF election procedure used in plain IP environments 
   would not yield the desired results in MVPN context. This is because 
   the DF election in MVPN would have to be based on the provider's 
   internal IP addressing of PE routers instead of on routing policy in 
   customer's VPN.   
 
   In MVPN context a Designated Forwarder for Bidir C-RPA is a PE 
   attached to C-RPA. Different mVRF's in a given MVPN might have 
   different best next-hop PE's to C-RPA due to different routing 
   policies or they might have temporarily different next-hop PE's to C-
   RPA due to routing transients. The MVPN solution for C-Bidir MUST 
   prevent multicast packet looping during routing convergence. The MVPN 
   solution for C-Bidir SHOULD NOT rely on all mVRF's in a given MVPN to 
   either have common routing view to C-RPA or to reach a common routing 
   view to C-RPA in time to prevent packet looping. Rather, a VPN has to 
   be treated as a collection of sets of multicast VRF's, each having 
   the same but distinct from other sets reachability information 
   towards C-RPA. Hence, resolving C-Bidir packet loops in MVPN 
   inevitably results in the ability to partition a VPN into disjoined 
   sets of VRF's, each having a distinct view of converged network. 
    
   As an option, the MVPN implementation of C-Bidir SHOULD allow to 
   ignore specific multicast routing policy in mVRF, and instead make 
   all PE's in a given MVPN choose the same next-hop PE to C-RPA. Among 
   all candidate next-hop PE's, the single chosen upstream PE to C-RPA 
   could be the PE with the highest IP address. This approach to C-Bidir 
   might be desirable to customers that do not want a permanent 
   splitting of their MVPN's into disjoined C-Bidir trees. 
 
    
 6.2 Support of Source-Only Branches 
    

 
 
Napierala               Expires - August 2008                [Page 9] 
            Requirement for Multicast MPLS/BGP VPN Partitioning 
    
 
 
   PIM-Bidir supports source-only branches i.e., branches that do not 
   lead to any receivers but that are used to forward packets traveling 
   upstream from sources towards the RPA. In plain IP PIM-Bidir it is up 
   to the implementation whether to maintain group state for source-only 
   branches [vi]. The MVPN solutions MUST assure that PE's on source-
   only branches of C-Bidir tree are able to send and receive inter-PE 
   MVPN traffic. In other words, PE's on source-only branches have to 
   be able to participate in P-tunnels triggered for C-Bidir trees. 
 
 
7. IANA Considerations 
    
   None. 
    
    
8. Security Considerations 
    
   To be supplied. 
    
    
9. References 
    
                     
      [i] Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3", 
      BCP 9, RFC 2026, October 1996. 
       
      [ii] E. Rosen, R. Aggarwal, "Multicast in MPLS/BGP IP VPNs", 
      draft-ietf-l3vpn-2547bis-mcast. Work in progress. 
       
      [iii] E. Rosen, E., Rekhter, Y., "BGP/MPLS IP Virtual Private 
      Networks (VPNs)", RFC 4364, February 2006. 
       
      [iv] T. Morin, Ed., "Requirements for Multicast in Layer 3 
      Provider-Provisioned Virtual Private Networks (PPVPNs)", RFC 
      4834, April 2007. 
       
      [v] B. Fenner et al., "Protocol Independent Multicast - Sparse 
      Mode (PIM-SM): Protocol Specification (Revised)", RFC 4601, 
      August 2006. 
       
      [vi] M. Handley, I. Kouvelas, T. Speakman, L. Vicisano, "Bi-
      directional Protocol Independent Multicast (Bidir-PIM)", RFC 
      5015, October 2007. 
       
      [vii] H. Holbrook, B. Cain, "Source-Specific Multicast for IP", 
      RFC 4607, August 2006. 
       

 
 
Napierala               Expires - August 2008               [Page 10] 
            Requirement for Multicast MPLS/BGP VPN Partitioning 
    
 
 
    
    
    
10.Acknowledgments 
    
   The author would like to thank Eric Rosen, Yakov Rekhter, and Ron 
   Bonica for their comments. 
    
11.Author's Addresses 
    
   Maria Napierala 
   AT&T Labs 
   200 Laurel Avenue, Middletown, NJ 07748 
   Email: mnapierala@att.com 
    
    
12.  Intellectual Property Statement 
    
   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to 
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in 
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights 
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has 
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information 
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be 
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 
    
   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of 
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 
    
   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at 
   ietfipr@ietf.org. 
    
    
13.  Copyright Notice 
 
   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008). 
    
   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions 
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors 
   retain all their rights. 
 
 
Napierala               Expires - August 2008               [Page 11] 
            Requirement for Multicast MPLS/BGP VPN Partitioning 
    
 
 
    
   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an 
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS 
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND 
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS 
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF 
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED 
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
 
 
 





































 
 
Napierala               Expires - August 2008               [Page 12] 
