



I2RS WG                                                  D. Migault, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                                J. Halpern
Intended status: Informational                                  Ericsson
Expires: April 4, 2016                                          S. Hares
                                                                  Huawei
                                                         October 2, 2015


                 I2RS Environment Security Requirements
              draft-mglt-i2rs-security-environment-reqs-01

Abstract

   This document provides environment security requirements for the I2RS
   architecture.  Environment security requirements are independent of
   the protocol used for I2RS.  As a result, the requirements provided
   in this document are intended to provide good security practise so
   I2RS can be securely deployed and operated.

   These security requirements are designated as environment security
   requirements as opposed to the protocol security requirements
   described in [I-D.ietf-i2rs-protocol-security-requirements].  The
   reason to have separate document is that protocol security
   requirements are intended to help the design of the I2RS protocol
   whether the environment requirements are rather intended for
   deployment or implementations.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 4, 2016.








Migault, et al.           Expires April 4, 2016                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft   I2RS Environment Security Requirements     October 2015


Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2015 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Terminology and Acronyms  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   3.  I2RS Plane Isolation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     3.1.  I2RS plane and management plane . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     3.2.  I2RS plane and forwarding plane . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     3.3.  I2RS plane and Control plane  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     3.4.  Recommendations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   4.  I2RS Access Control for routing system resources  . . . . . .   8
     4.1.  I2RS Access Control architecture  . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     4.2.  I2RS Agent Access Control policies  . . . . . . . . . . .  13
     4.3.  I2RS Client Access Control policies . . . . . . . . . . .  14
     4.4.  Application and Access Control policies . . . . . . . . .  15
   5.  I2RS Application Isolation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
     5.1.  Robustness toward programmability . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
     5.2.  Application Isolation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17
       5.2.1.  DoS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17
       5.2.2.  Application Control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17
   6.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  18
   7.  Privacy Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  18
   8.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  18
   9.  Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  18
   10. References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  18
     10.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  18
     10.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  18
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19

1.  Introduction

   This document provides environment security requirements for the I2RS
   architecture.  Environment security requirements are independent of
   the protocol used for I2RS.  As a result, the requirements provided



Migault, et al.           Expires April 4, 2016                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft   I2RS Environment Security Requirements     October 2015


   in this document are intended to provide good security practise so
   I2RS can be securely deployed and operated.

   These security requirements are designated as environment security
   requirements as opposed to the protocol security requirements
   described in [I-D.ietf-i2rs-protocol-security-requirements].  The
   reason to have separate document is that protocol security
   requirements are intended to help the design of the I2RS protocol
   whether the environment requirements are rather intended for
   deployment or implementations.

   Even though I2RS is mostly concerned by the interface between the
   I2RS Client and the I2RS Agent, the security recommendations must
   consider the entire I2RS architecture, specifying where security
   functions may be hosted, and what should be met so to address any new
   attack vectors exposed by deploying this architecture.  In other
   words, security has to be considered globally over the complete I2RS
   architecture and not only on the interfaces.

   I2RS architecture depicted in [I-D.ietf-i2rs-architecture] describes
   the I2RS components and their interactions to provide a programmatic
   interface for the routing system.  I2RS components as well as their
   interactions have not yet been considered in conventional routing
   systems.  As such it introduces a need to interface with the routing
   system designated as I2RS plane in this document.

   This document is built as follows.  Section 3 describes how the I2RS
   plane can be contained or isolated from existing management plane,
   control plane and forwarding plane.  The remaining sections of the
   document focuses on the security within the I2RS plane.  Section 4
   analyzes how the I2RS Access Control policies can be deployed
   throughout the I2RS plane in order to only grant access to the
   routing system resources to authorized components with the authorized
   privileges.  This also includes providing a robust communication
   system between the components.  Then, Section 5 details how I2RS
   keeps applications isolated one from another and do not affect the
   I2RS components.  Applications may be independent, with different
   scopes, owned by different tenants.  In addition, they modify the
   routing system that may be in an automatic way.

   The reader is expected to be familiar with the
   [I-D.ietf-i2rs-architecture].  The document provides a list of
   environment security requirements.  Motivations are placed before the
   requirements are announced.







Migault, et al.           Expires April 4, 2016                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft   I2RS Environment Security Requirements     October 2015


2.  Terminology and Acronyms

   - Environment Security Requirements :

   - I2RS plane :  The environment the I2RS process is running on.  It
         includes the Applications, the I2RS Client and the I2RS Agent.

   - I2RS user :  The user of the I2RS client software or system.

   - I2RS Access Control policies:  policies controlling access of the
         routing resources by Applications.  These policies are divided
         into policies applied by the I2RS Client regarding Applications
         and policies applied by the I2RS Agent regarding I2RS Clients.

   - I2RS Client Access Control policies :  The Access Control policies
         processed by the I2RS Client.

   - I2RS Agent Access Control policies :  The Access Control policies
         processed by the I2RS Agent.

3.  I2RS Plane Isolation

   Isolating the I2RS plane from other network plane, such as the
   control plane, is foundational to the security of the I2RS
   environment.  Clearly differentiating I2RS components from the rest
   of the network protects the I2RS components from vulnerabilities in
   other parts of the network, and protect other systems vital to the
   health of the network from vulnerabilities in the I2RS plane.
   Separating the I2RS plane from other network control and forwarding
   planes is similar to the best common practice of containerizing
   software into modules, and defense in depth in the larger world of
   network security.

   That said the I2RS plane cannot be considered as completely isolated
   from other planes, and interactions should be identified and
   controlled.  Follows a brief description on how the I2RS plane
   positions itself in regard to the other planes.  The description is
   indicative, and may not be exhaustive.

3.1.  I2RS plane and management plane

   The I2RS plane purpose is to provide a standard programmatic
   interface of the routing system resources to network oriented
   applications.  Control plane and forwarding planes are related to
   routing protocols, and I2RS is based on top of those.  The management
   plane is usually vendor specific, provides a broader control over the
   networking equipment such as system service.  Given its associated




Migault, et al.           Expires April 4, 2016                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft   I2RS Environment Security Requirements     October 2015


   privileges it is expected to be reserved to highly trusted users like
   network administrators.

   The I2RS plane and the management plane both interact with several
   common elements on forwarding and packet processing devices.
   [I-D.ietf-i2rs-architecture] describes several of these interaction
   points such as the local configuration, the static system state,
   routing, and signalling.  Because of this potential overlaps, a
   routing resource may be accessed by different means (APIs,
   applications) and different planes.  To keep these overlaps under
   control, one could either control the access to these resources with
   northbound APIs for example.  Northbound APIs are provided to limit
   the scope of the applications toward the routing resources.  In our
   case, the northbound API may be provided for the I2RS applications by
   the I2RS Client as well as to the management plane.  In case
   conflicting overlaps cannot be avoided, and routing resource can be
   accessed by both the management plane and the I2RS plane, then, they
   should be resolved in a deterministic way.

   On the northbound side, there must be clear protections against the
   I2RS system "infecting" the management system with bad information,
   or the management system "infecting" the I2RS system with bad
   information.  The primary protection in this space is going to need
   to be validation rules on the speed of information flow, value limits
   on the data presented, and other protections of this type.

   On the conflicting side/issues, there should be clear rules about
   which plan's commands win in the case of conflict in order to prevent
   attacks where the two systems can be forced to deadlock.

3.2.  I2RS plane and forwarding plane

   Applications hosted on I2RS Client belongs to the I2RS plane.  These
   Applications are hard to remain constrained into the I2RS plane, or
   even to limit their scope within the I2RS plane.

   Applications using I2RS are part of the I2RS plane but may also
   interact with other components outside the I2RS plane.  A common
   example may be an application uses I2RS to configure the network
   according to security or monitored events.  As these events are
   monitored on the forwarding plane and not the I2RS plane, the
   application breaks plane isolation.

   In addition, applications may communicate with multiple I2RS Clients;
   as such, any given application may have a broader view of the current
   and potential states of the network and the I2RS plane itself.
   Because of this, any individual application could be an effective
   attack vector against the operation of the network, the I2RS plane,



Migault, et al.           Expires April 4, 2016                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft   I2RS Environment Security Requirements     October 2015


   or any plane with which the I2RS plane interacts.  There is little
   the I2RS plane can do to validate applications with which it
   interacts, other than to provide some broad general validations
   against common misconfigurations or errors.  As with the separation
   between the management plane and the I2RS plane, this should
   minimally take the form of limits on information accepted, limits on
   the rate at which information is accepted, and rudimentary checks
   against intentionally formed routing loops or injecting information
   that would cause the control plane to fail to converge.  Other forms
   of protection may be necessary.

3.3.  I2RS plane and Control plane

   The network control plane consists of the processes and protocols
   that discover topology, advertise reachability, and determine the
   shortest path between any location on the network and any
   destination.  It is not anticipated there will be any interactions
   between the on-the-wire signalling used by the control plane.
   However, in some situations the I2RS system could modify information
   in the local databases of the control plane.  This is not normally
   recommended, as it can bypass the normal loop free, loop free
   alternate, and convergence properties of the control plane.  However,
   if the I2RS system does directly inject information into these
   tables, the I2RS system should ensure that loop free routing is
   preserved, including loop free alternates, tunnelled interfaces,
   virtual overlays, and other such constructions.  Any information
   injected into the control plane directly could cause the control
   plane to fail to converge, resulting in a complete network outage.

3.4.  Recommendations

   To isolate I2RS transactions from other planes, it is recommended
   that:

   REQ 1:  Application-to-routing system resources communications should
           use an isolated communication channel.  Various level of
           isolation can be considered.  The highest level of isolation
           may be provided by using a physically isolated network.
           Alternatives may also consider logical isolation; for example
           by using vLAN.  Eventually, in virtual environment that
           shares a common infrastructure, encryption, for example by
           using TLS or IPsec, may also be used as a way to enforce
           isolation.

   REQ 2:  The interface (like the IP address) used by the routing
           element to receive I2RS transactions should be a dedicated
           physical or logical interface.  As previously, mentioned a
           dedicated physical interface may contribute to a higher



Migault, et al.           Expires April 4, 2016                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft   I2RS Environment Security Requirements     October 2015


           isolation, however logical isolation be also be considered
           for example by using a dedicated IP address or a dedicated
           port.

   When the I2RS Agent performs an action on a routing element, the
   action is performed via process(es) associated to a system user . In
   a typical UNIX system, the user is designated with a user id (uid)
   and belong to groups designated by group ids (gid).  These users are
   dependent of the routing element's operation system and are
   designated I2RS System Users.  Some implementation may use a I2RS
   System User for the I2RS Agent that proxies the different I2RS
   Client, other implementations may use I2RS System User for each
   different I2RS Clients.

   REQ 3:  I2RS Agent should have permissions separate from any other
           entity (for example any internal system management processes
           or CLI processes).

   I2RS resource may be shared with the management plane and the control
   plane.  It is hardly possible to prevent interactions between the
   planes.  I2RS routing system resource management is limited to the
   I2RS plane.  As such, update of I2RS routing system outside of the
   I2RS plane may be remain unnoticed unless explicitly notified to the
   I2RS plane.  Such notification is expected to trigger synchronization
   of the I2RS resource state within each I2RS component.  This
   guarantees that I2RS resource are maintained in a coherent state
   among the I2RS plane.  In addition, depending on the I2RS resource
   that is updated as well as the origin of the modification performed,
   the I2RS Access Control policies may be impacted.  More especially, a
   I2RS Client is more likely to update an I2RS resources that has been
   updated by itself, then by the management plane for example.

   REQ 4:  I2RS plane should be informed when a routing system resource
           is modified by a user outside the I2RS plane access.  The
           notification is not expected to flood the I2RS plane.
           Instead, notification is expected to be provided to the I2RS
           components interacting, configuring or monitoring the routing
           system resource.  The notification is at least provided by
           the I2RS Agent to the various I2RS Client, but additional
           mechanisms might eventually be required so I2RS Client can
           relay the notification to the I2RS applications.  This is
           designated as "I2RS resource modified out of I2RS plane".
           This requirements is also described in section 7.6 of
           [I-D.ietf-i2rs-architecture] for the I2RS Client.  This
           document extends the requirement to the I2RS plane, in case
           future evolution of the I2RS plane.





Migault, et al.           Expires April 4, 2016                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft   I2RS Environment Security Requirements     October 2015


   REQ 5:  I2RS plane should define an "I2RS plane overwrite policy".
           Such policy defines how an I2RS is able to update and
           overwrite a resource set by a user outside the I2RS plane.
           Such hierarchy has been described in section 6.3 and 7.8 of
           [I-D.ietf-i2rs-architecture]

4.  I2RS Access Control for routing system resources

   This section provides recommendations on how I2RS Access Control
   policies associated to the routing system resources.  These policies
   only apply within the I2RS plane.  More especially, the policies are
   associated to the Applications, the I2RS Clients and the I2RS Agents,
   with their associated identity and roles.

   Note that the deployment of Applications, I2RS Client and I2RS Agent
   in a closed environment, should not be considered by default as a
   secure environment.  Even for closed environment access control
   policies should be carefully defined to be able to, in the future to
   carefully extend the I2RS plane to remote Applications or remote I2RS
   Clients.  As a result, this section always consider the case
   Applications and I2RS Client can be located locally, in a closed
   environment or distributed over open networks.

   Although [I-D.ietf-i2rs-protocol-security-requirements] provides
   security requirements of the transport and protocol between the I2RS
   Client and the I2RS Agent, this section is mostly focused on access
   control.

4.1.  I2RS Access Control architecture

   Applications access to routing system resource via numerous
   intermediaries nodes.  The application communicates with an I2RS
   Client.  In some cases, the I2RS Client is only associated to a
   single application, but the I2RS Client may also act as a broker.
   The I2RS Client, then, communicates with the I2RS Agent that may
   eventually access the resource.

   The I2RS Client broker approach provides scalability to the I2RS
   architecture as it avoids that each Application be registered to the
   I2RS Agent.  Similarly, the I2RS Access Control should be able to
   scale numerous applications.

   REQ 6:  I2RS Access Control should be performed through the whole
           I2RS plane.  It should not be enforced by the I2RS Agent only
           within the routing element.  Instead, the I2RS Client should
           enforce the I2RS Client Access Control against Applications
           and the I2RS Agent should enforce the I2RS Agent Access
           Control against the I2RS Clients.  Note that I2RS Client



Migault, et al.           Expires April 4, 2016                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft   I2RS Environment Security Requirements     October 2015


           Access Control is not in the scope of the I2RS architecture
           [I-D.ietf-i2rs-architecture], which exclusively focuses on
           the I2RS Agent Access Control.

   This results in a layered and hierarchical or multi-party I2RS Access
   Control.  An application will be able to access a routing system
   resource only if both the I2RS Client is granted access by the I2RS
   Agent and the application is granted access by the I2RS Client.

   REQ 7:  When an access request to a routing resource is refused by
           one party (the I2RS Client or the I2RS Agent), the initiator
           of the request (e.g the Application) as well as all
           intermediaries should indicate the reason the access has not
           been granted as well as the entity that has rejected the
           request.

   REQ 8:  In order to provide coherent Access Control policies enforced
           by multiple parties (e.g. the I2RS Client or the I2RS Agent),
           theses parties should trust each others, and communication
           between them should also be trusted, - that is should not
           introduce additional vector of attacks.

   In case the I2RS Client Access Control or the I2RS Agent Access
   Control does not grant access to a routing system resource, the
   Application should be able to determine whether its request has been
   rejected by the I2RS Client or the I2RS Agent as well as the reason
   that caused the reject.  More specifically, the I2RS Agent may reject
   the request because, for example, the I2RS Client is not an
   authorized I2RS Client, or because the I2RS Client does not not have
   enough privileges.  The I2RS Client should be notified of the reason
   that caused the reject by the I2RS Agent, and The I2RS Client should
   return a message to the Application, indicating the I2RS Client is
   not authorized or does not have enough privileges.  Similarly, if the
   I2RS Client does not grant the access to the Application, the I2RS
   Client should also inform the Application.  The error message
   returned should be for example: "Read failure: you do not have the
   read permission", "Write failure: you do not have write permission"
   or "Write failure: resource accessed by someone else".  This
   requirement has been written in a generic manner as it concerns
   various interactions: interactions between the application and the
   I2RS Client, interactions between the I2RS Client and the I2RS Agent.
   In the latest case, the requirement is part of the protocol security
   requirements addressed by
   [I-D.ietf-i2rs-protocol-security-requirements].

   Although [I-D.ietf-i2rs-protocol-security-requirements] is focused on
   transport security requirements between the I2RS Client and the I2RS




Migault, et al.           Expires April 4, 2016                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft   I2RS Environment Security Requirements     October 2015


   Agent, the similar requirements may apply between the Application and
   the I2RS Client for a remote Application.

   REQ 9:  I2RS Client or I2RS Agent SHOULD also be able to refuse a
           communication with an Application or an I2RS Client when the
           communication channel does not fulfill enough security
           requirements.  For example, the it should be able to reject
           messages over a communication channel that can be easily
           hijacked, like a clear text UDP channel.

   In order to limit the number of access request that result in an
   error, each Application or I2RS Client may be able to retrieve the
   I2RS Access Control policies that applies to it.  This subset of
   rules is designated as the "Individual I2RS Access Control policies".
   As these policies are subject to changes, a dynamic synchronization
   mechanism should be provided.  However, such mechanism may be
   implemented with different level of completeness and dynamicity of
   the Individual I2RS Access Control policies.  Caching requests that
   have been rejected may be one such variant.  It remains relatively
   easy to implement and may avoid the complete disclosure of the Access
   Control policies of the I2RS Agent.  In fact the relative disclosure
   of Access Control policies may leak confidential information in case
   of misconfiguration and should be balanced with the level of trust of
   the I2RS Client and the necessity of distributing the enforcement of
   the Access Control policies.

   REQ 10: The I2RS Client may be able to request for its I2RS Access
           Control subset policies to the I2RS Agent or cache requests
           that have been rejected by the I2RS Agent to limit forwarding
           unnecessary queries to the I2RS Agent.

   REQ 11: The I2RS Client may be able to be notified when its I2RS
           Access Control subset policies have been updated by the I2RS
           Agent.

   Similarly, for the Applications

   REQ 12: The Applications may be able to request for its I2RS Access
           Control subset policies, so to limit forwarding unnecessary
           queries to the I2RS Client.

   REQ 13: The Applications may be able to subscribe a service that
           provides notification when its I2RS Access Control subset
           policies have been updated.

   I2RS Access Control should be appropriately be balanced between the
   I2RS Client and the I2RS Agent.  I2RS Access Control should not




Migault, et al.           Expires April 4, 2016                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft   I2RS Environment Security Requirements     October 2015


   solely rely only on the I2RS Client or the I2RS Agent as illustrated
   below:

   - 1) I2RS Clients are dedicated to a single Application:   In this
         case, it is likely that I2RS Access Control is enforced only by
         the I2RS Agent, as the I2RS Client is likely to accept all
         access request of the application.  However, it is recommended
         that even in this case, I2RS Client Access Control is not based
         on an "Allow anything from application" policy, but instead the
         I2RS Client specifies accesses that are enabled.  In addition,
         the I2RS Client may sync its associated I2RS Access Control
         policies with the I2RS Agent to limit the number of refused
         access requests being sent to the I2RS Agent.  The I2RS Client
         is expected to balance pro and cons between sync its access
         control policies with the I2RS Agent and simply guessing the
         access request to the I2RS Agent.

   - 2) A single I2RS Client acts as a broker for all Applications:   In
         the case the I2RS Agent has a single I2RS Client.  Such
         architecture results in I2RS Client with high privileges, as it
         sums the privileges of all applications.  As end-to-end
         authentication is not provided between the Application and the
         I2RS Agent, if the I2RS Client becomes corrupted, it is
         possible for the malicious application escalates its privileges
         and make the I2RS Client perform some action on behalf of the
         application with more privileges.  This would not have been
         possible with end-to-end authentication.  In order to mitigate
         such attack, the I2RS Client that acts as a broker is expected
         to host application with an equivalent level of privileges.

   REQ 14: The I2RS Access Control should explicitly specify accesses
           that are granted.  More specifically, anything not explicitly
           granted -- the default rule-- should be denied.

   In addition to distribute the I2RS Access Control policies between
   I2RS Clients and I2RS Agents, I2RS Access Control policies can also
   be distributed within a set of I2RS Clients or a set of I2RS Agents.

   REQ 15: I2RS Clients should be distributed and act as brokers for
           Applications that share roughly similar permissions.  This
           avoids ending with over privileges I2RS Client compared to
           hosted applications and thus discourages applications to
           perform privilege escalation within an I2RS Client.

   REQ 16: I2RS Agents should be avoided being granted over privileges
           regarding to their authorized I2RS Client.  I2RS Agent should
           be shared by I2RS Client with roughly similar permissions.
           More explicitly, an I2RS Agent shared between I2RS Clients



Migault, et al.           Expires April 4, 2016                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft   I2RS Environment Security Requirements     October 2015


           that are only provided read access to the routing system
           resources does not need to perform any write access, and so
           should not be provided these accesses.  Suppose an I2RS
           Client requires write access to the resources.  It is not
           recommended to grant the I2RS Agent the write access in order
           to satisfy a unique I2RS Client.  Instead, the I2RS Client
           that requires write access should be connected to a I2RS
           Agent that is already shared by I2RS Client that requires a
           write access.

   Access Control policies enforcement should be monitored in order to
   detect violation of the policies or detect an attack.  Access Control
   policies enforcement may not be performed by the I2RS Client or the
   I2RS Agent as violation may require a more global view of the I2RS
   Access Control policies.  As a result, consistency check and
   mitigation may instead be performed by the management plane.
   However, I2RS Clients and I2RS Agents play a central role.

   REQ 17: I2RS Client and I2RS Agent should be able to log the various
           transaction they perform, as well as suspicious activities.
           These logs should be collected regularly and analyzed by
           functions that may be out of the I2RS plane.

   Access Control policies should be implemented so that they remain
   manageable in short and longer term.  This means the way they are
   managed today should be address future deployment and use of I2RS.

   REQ 18: Access Control should be managed in an automated way, that is
           granting or revoking an Application should not involve manual
           configuration over the I2RS plane - like all the I2RS
           Clients.

   REQ 19: Access Control should be scalable when the number of
           Application grows as well as when the number of I2RS Client
           increases.  A typical implementation of a local I2RS Client
           Access Control policies may result in creating manually a
           system user associated to each Application.  Such an approach
           is likely not to scale when the number of Applications
           increases or the number of I2RS Client increases.

   REQ 20: Access Control should be dynamically managed and easy to be
           updated.  Although the number of I2RS Clients is expected to
           be lower than the number of Application, as I2RS Agent
           provide access to the routing resource, it is of primary
           importance that an access can be granted or revoke in an
           efficient way.





Migault, et al.           Expires April 4, 2016                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft   I2RS Environment Security Requirements     October 2015


   REQ 21: I2RS Clients and I2RS Agents should be uniquely identified in
           the network to enable centralized management of the I2RS
           Access Control policies.

4.2.  I2RS Agent Access Control policies

   The I2RS Agent Access Control restricts the routing system resource
   access to authorized identities - possible access policies may be
   none, read or write.  The initiator of an access request to a routing
   resource is always an Application.  However, it remains challenging
   for the I2RS Agent to establish its access control policies based on
   the application that initiates the request.  First, when an I2RS
   Client acts as a broker, the I2RS Agent may not be able to
   authenticate the Application.  In that sense, the I2RS Agent relies
   on the capability of the I2RS Client to authenticate the Applications
   and apply the appropriated I2RS Client Access Control.  Then, an I2RS
   Agent may not uniquely identify a piece of software implementing an
   I2RS Client.  In fact, an I2RS Client may be provided multiple
   identities which can be associated to different roles or privileges.
   The I2RS Client is left responsible for using them appropriately
   according to the Application.  Finally, each I2RS Client may contact
   various I2RS Agent with different privileges and Access Control
   policies.

   This section provides recommendations on the I2RS Agent Access
   Control policies to keep I2RS Access Control coherent within the I2RS
   plane.

   REQ 22: I2RS Agent Access Control policies should be primarily based
           on the I2RS Clients as described in
           [I-D.ietf-i2rs-architecture].

   REQ 23: I2RS Agent Access Control policies may be based on the
           Application.  In this case the identity of the Application
           MUST be authenticated by the I2RS Agent, and the secondary
           identity used to tag the application as defined in
           [I-D.ietf-i2rs-architecture] should be considered cautiously.
           The tag may be used associated only to an authenticated I2RS
           Client that is known to authenticate its Application.

   The I2RS Agent Access Control policies may evolve over time as
   resource may also be updated outside the I2RS plane.  Similarly, a
   given resource may be accessed by multiple I2RS users within the I2RS
   plane.  Although this is considered as an error, depending on the
   I2RS Client that performed the update, the I2RS may accept or refuse
   to overwrite the routing system resource.





Migault, et al.           Expires April 4, 2016                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft   I2RS Environment Security Requirements     October 2015


   REQ 24: The I2RS Agent should know which identity (most likely system
           user) performed the latest update of the routing resource.
           This is true for an identity inside and outside the I2RS
           plane, so the I2RS Agent can appropriately perform an update
           according to the priorities associated to the requesting
           identity and the identity that last updated the resource.  On
           an environment perspective, the I2RS Agent MUST be aware when
           the resource has been modified outside the I2RS plane, as
           well as its priority associated towards the I2RS plane.
           Similar requirements exist for identities within the I2RS
           plane, but belongs to the protocol security requirements.

   REQ 25: the I2RS Agent should have a "I2RS Agent overwrite Policy"
           that indicates how identities can be prioritized.  This
           requirements is also described in section 7.6 of
           [I-D.ietf-i2rs-architecture].  Similar requirements exist for
           components within the I2RS plane, but belongs to the protocol
           security requirements.

4.3.  I2RS Client Access Control policies

   The I2RS Client Access Control policies are responsible for
   authenticating the application managing the privileges for the
   applications, and enforcing access control to resources by the
   applications.  As a result,

   REQ 26: I2RS Client should authenticate its applications.  If the
           I2RS Client acts as a broker and supports multiple
           Applications, it should authenticate each of them.
           Authentication of the application may used GSSAPI, Secure RPC
           mechanisms.

   REQ 27: I2RS Client should define Access Control policies associated
           to each applications.  An access to a routing resource by an
           Application should not be forwarded by the I2RS Client based
           on the I2RS Agent Access Control policies.  The I2RS Client
           should first check whether the Application has sufficient
           privileges, and if so send an access request to the I2RS
           Agent.  When an I2RS Client has multiple identities that are
           associated with different privileges.  The I2RS Client Access
           Control policies should specify the associated I2RS Client's
           identities, especially, when the I2RS Agent Access Control
           policies are changed for a given I2RS Client's identity.

   In case, no authentication mechanisms have being provided between the
   I2RS Client and the application, then I2RS Client may not act as
   broker, and be instead dedicated to a single application.  By doing
   so, application authentication may rely on the I2RS authentication



Migault, et al.           Expires April 4, 2016                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft   I2RS Environment Security Requirements     October 2015


   mechanisms between the I2RS Client and the I2RS Agent.  On the other
   hand, although this is not recommended, the I2RS Access Control
   policies is only enforced by the I2RS Agent.

4.4.  Application and Access Control policies

   Application does not enforce access control policies.  Instead these
   are enforced by the I2RS Clients and the I2RS Agents.  This section
   provides recommendations for Applications in order to ease I2RS
   Access Control by the I2RS Client and the I2RS Agent.

   As multiple ways may be used for an Application to communicate with
   its associated I2RS Client, it is not expected that all Applications
   use the same conventional identifier format across the I2RS plane.
   However, if all Applications are running on a dedicated system
   sharing an I2RS Client, it is expected each Application may uniquely
   identified, for example using different system users.

   REQ 28: Applications SHOULD be uniquely identified by their
           associated I2RS Clients

   The I2RS Client provides access to resource on its behalf and this
   access should only be granted for trusted applications, or
   Applications with an similar level of trust.  On the other hand, this
   does not prevent an I2RS Client to host a large number of
   Applications.  Similarly, an Application may also require to access
   multiple I2RS Clients depending on the resource to be accessed.  As
   I2RS Client are restricted for a subset of Applications,

   REQ 29: Each Application SHOULD be associated to a restricted number
           of I2RS Client

   REQ 30: Application SHOULD be provided means and methods to contact
           their associated I2RS Client.  If the I2RS Client belongs to
           the Application (as a module or a library for example), or
           when the Application runs into a dedicated system (like a
           container) with a I2RS Client, it is obvious which I2RS
           Client the Application is associated to.  On the other hand,
           Applications may also remotely access the I2RS Client.  In
           this case, the Application is expected to be provided some
           means to be able to retrieve the necessary information to
           contact its associated I2RS Client.  The IP address may not
           be appropriated in case renumbering occurs within the network
           or in case the traffic from Applications should be shared
           between multiple instances of a given I2RS Client.  In this
           case a FQDN may be preferred.





Migault, et al.           Expires April 4, 2016                [Page 15]

Internet-Draft   I2RS Environment Security Requirements     October 2015


5.  I2RS Application Isolation

   A key aspect of the I2RS architecture is the network oriented
   application.  As these application are supposed to be independent,
   controlled by independent and various tenants.  In addition to
   independent logic, these applications may be malicious.  Then, these
   applications introduce also programmability which results in fast
   network settings.

   The I2RS architecture should remain robust to these applications and
   make sure an application does not impact the other applications.
   This section discusses both security aspects related to
   programmability as well as application isolation in the I2RS
   architecture.

5.1.  Robustness toward programmability

   I2RS provides a programmatic interface in and out of the Internet
   routing system.  This feature, in addition to the global network view
   provided by the centralized architecture comes with a few advantages
   in term of security.

   The use of automation reduces configuration errors.  In addition,
   this interface enables fast network reconfiguration.  Agility
   provides a key advantage in term of deployment as side effect
   configuration may be easily addressed.  Finally, it also provides
   facilities to monitor and mitigate an attack when the network is
   under attack.

   On the other hand programmability also comes with a few drawbacks.
   First, applications can belong to multiple tenants with different
   objectives.  This absence of coordination may result in unstable
   routing configurations such as oscillations between network
   configurations, and creation of loops for example.  A typical example
   would be an application monitoring a state and changing its state.
   If another application performs the reverse operation, the routing
   system may become unstable.  Data and application isolation is
   expected to prevent such situations to happen, however, to guarantee
   the network stability, constant monitoring and error detection are
   recommended to be activated.

   REQ 31: The I2RS Agents should monitor constantly parts of the system
           for which I2RS Clients or Applications have provided
           requests.  It should also be able to detect I2RS Clients or
           Applications that lead the routing system in an unstable
           state.  Monitoring consists at least in logging events and
           eventually provide notifications or alerts to the management
           plane in case, something has been detected.  The management



Migault, et al.           Expires April 4, 2016                [Page 16]

Internet-Draft   I2RS Environment Security Requirements     October 2015


           plane is in charge of collecting the logs, the notifications
           and eventually to consider the appropriated actions.  A
           typical action may be the update of I2RS Access Control
           policies for example or re-configuring routing elements.

5.2.  Application Isolation

5.2.1.  DoS

   Requirements for robustness to Dos Attacks have been addressed in the
   Communication channel section [I-D.ietf-i2rs-architecture].

   The I2RS interface is used by application to interact with the
   routing states.  As the I2RS Agent is shared between multiple
   applications, one application can prevent an application by
   performing DoS or DDoS attacks on the I2RS Agent or on the network.
   DoS attack targeting the I2RS Agent would consist in providing
   requests that keep the I2RS Agent busy for a long time.  This may
   involve heavy computation by the I2RS Agent for example to blocking
   operations like disk access.  In addition, DoS attacks targeting the
   network may use specific commands like monitoring stream over the
   network.  Then, DoS attack may be also targeting the application
   directly by performing reflection attacks.  Such an attack could be
   performed by indicating the target application as the target for some
   information like the listing of the RIB.  Reflection may be performed
   at various levels and can be based on the use of UDP or at the
   service level like redirection of information to a specific
   repository.

   REQ 32: In order to prevent DoS, it is recommended the I2RS Agent
           controls the resources allocated to each I2RS Clients.  I2RS
           Client that acts as broker may not be protected as
           efficiently against these attacks unless they perform
           resource controls themselves of their hosted applications.

   REQ 33: I2RS Agent does not make response redirection possible unless
           the redirection is previously validated and agreed by the
           destination.

   REQ 34: avoid the use of underlying protocols that are not robust to
           reflection attacks.

5.2.2.  Application Control

   Requirements for Application Control have been addressed in the I2RS
   plane isolation as well as in the trusted Communication Channel
   sections.




Migault, et al.           Expires April 4, 2016                [Page 17]

Internet-Draft   I2RS Environment Security Requirements     October 2015


   Applications use the I2RS interface in order to update the routing
   system.  These updates may be driven by behavior on the forwarding
   plane or any external behaviors.  In this case, correlating
   observation to the I2RS traffic may enable to derive the application
   logic.  Once the application logic has been derived, a malicious
   application may generate traffic or any event in the network in order
   to activate the alternate application.

   REQ 35: Application logic should remain opaque to external listeners.
           Application logic may be partly hidden by encrypting the
           communication between the I2RS Client and the I2RS Agent.
           Additional ways to obfuscate the communications may involve
           sending random messages of various sizes.  Such strategies
           have to be balanced with network load.  Note that I2RS Client
           broker are more likely to hide the application logic compared
           to I2RS Client associated to a single application.

6.  Security Considerations

   The whole document is about security.

7.  Privacy Considerations

8.  IANA Considerations

9.  Acknowledgments

   A number of people provided a significant amount of helping comments
   and reviews.  Among them the authors would like to thank Russ White,
   Russ Housley, Thomas Nadeau, Juergen Schoenwaelder, Jeffrey Haas,
   Alia Atlas, Linda Dunbar

10.  References

10.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, DOI 10.17487/
              RFC2119, March 1997,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.

10.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.ietf-i2rs-architecture]
              Atlas, A., Halpern, J., Hares, S., Ward, D., and T.
              Nadeau, "An Architecture for the Interface to the Routing
              System", draft-ietf-i2rs-architecture-09 (work in
              progress), March 2015.



Migault, et al.           Expires April 4, 2016                [Page 18]

Internet-Draft   I2RS Environment Security Requirements     October 2015


   [I-D.ietf-i2rs-protocol-security-requirements]
              Hares, S., Migault, D., and J. Halpern, "I2RS Security
              Related Requirements", draft-ietf-i2rs-protocol-security-
              requirements-01 (work in progress), September 2015.

Authors' Addresses

   Daniel Migault (editor)
   Ericsson
   8400 boulevard Decarie
   Montreal, QC   H4P 2N2
   Canada

   Phone: +1 514-452-2160
   Email: daniel.migault@ericsson.com


   Joel Halpern
   Ericsson

   Email: Joel.Halpern@ericsson.com


   Susan Hares
   Huawei
   7453 Hickory Hill
   Saline, MI  48176
   USA

   Email: shares@ndzh.com





















Migault, et al.           Expires April 4, 2016                [Page 19]
