



ENUM                                                          R. Stastny
Internet-Draft                                                     Oefeg
Expires: April 22, 2006                                        L. Conroy
                                             Siemens Roke Manor Research
                                                                 J. Reid
                                                                DNS-MODA
                                                        October 19, 2005


                 IANA Registration for Enumservice VOID
                     <draft-ietf-enum-void-02.txt>

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 22, 2006.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).

Abstract

   This document registers the Enumservice 'void' using the URI schemes
   'mailto:' and 'http:' as per the IANA registration process defined in
   the ENUM specification, RFC3761.  This Enumservice may be used to
   indicate that the E.164 number (or E.164 number range) tied to the
   domain in which the enclosing NAPTR is published is not assigned for



Stastny, et al.          Expires April 22, 2006                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft     IANA VOID Enumservice Registration       October 2005


   communications service.  When such an indication is provided, an ENUM
   client can detect calls that will fail "early".


Table of Contents

   1.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  The Problem  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   4.  The Proposed Solution  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   5.  ENUM Service Registration - VOID . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   6.  Examples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   7.  Operational Guidance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   8.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   9.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   10. Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   11. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
     11.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
     11.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 19






























Stastny, et al.          Expires April 22, 2006                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft     IANA VOID Enumservice Registration       October 2005


1.  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in BCP 14, [1].














































Stastny, et al.          Expires April 22, 2006                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft     IANA VOID Enumservice Registration       October 2005


2.  Introduction

   The Circuit Switched Network (CSN) of which the Public Switched
   Telephone Network, Integrated Services Digital Network, and Public
   Land Mobile Network are part is designed to use E.164 numbers E.164
   [2] as native global addresses.  If a potential caller has an E.164
   number, then to place a call using this address he or she needs a way
   to pass the request either directly or indirectly to systems "in" the
   CSN for them to forward.

   ENUM has introduced a mechanism to find other contact addresses when
   given an E.164 number.  Thus, if the caller (or an agent somewhere in
   the call path) has access to the global DNS, they can use ENUM
   RFC3761 [3] to find alternative contacts to the E.164 number and
   place the call using whatever system was indicated in those contacts.

   However, ENUM entries may not exist for a given E.164 number for two
   reasons.  Either the assignee who is entitled to register an ENUM
   domain associated with the E.164 number they hold has chosen not to
   request this registration, or the number is not currently assigned
   for communications service.

   In either situation, the caller has no other information and so no
   alternative to placing the call via the system that uses E.164
   numbers as global identifiers; at present, this is the CSN.


























Stastny, et al.          Expires April 22, 2006                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft     IANA VOID Enumservice Registration       October 2005


3.  The Problem

   At present, from the ENUM client's perspective, two possibilities
   exist: there is an ENUM domain that potentially holds alternative
   contacts, or there is no ENUM domain, in which case a query on ENUM
   will return a DNS response showing 'no such domain' (NXDOMAIN, code
   3)[4].

   This latter response is ambiguous.  There are two potential reasons
   for the lack of an ENUM domain holding alternative contacts; either
   the assignee has chosen not to register the domain, or the E.164
   number is not assigned for communications service at present.

   If the number is assigned, then the caller can use the E.164 number
   to place the call via a network that uses such identifiers as global
   addresses (i.e. the CSN).  If however, there is no domain because the
   associated E.164 number is not assigned for communications service,
   then any attempt to place the call via the CSN will fail.

   What would be useful is a mechanism "between" a registration holding
   NAPTRs with URIs and the lack of a domain registration.  In this way,
   an entity who is responsible for E.164 numbers in a range can
   indicate that a particular number has not been assigned to anyone for
   communications service.  For example, if a communications service
   provider has been allocated responsibility for delivering calls to
   endpoints identified with E.164 numbers in a block, then they may
   have some numbers in that block that are currently unused.  These
   E.164 numbers are not used to terminate calls to end users.

   An originating user agent cannot differentiate this state from the
   one in which there is an end user as a number assignee, but that end
   user has have chosen not to "publish" other contacts.  In effect, it
   would be more useful if the originating end user could receive a
   response that states "there is no service via this number", as
   opposed to "there may be service via this number, but there are no
   alternative contacts available".

   In short, the issue is distinguishing between E.164 numbers that do
   not have corresponding ENUM entries but are supported via the PSTN
   and those E.164 numbers that are not terminated on the PSTN.  In this
   latter case lack of a NAPTR holding a destination URI really implies
   that there is no service at all for this telephone number.  For
   example, some number ranges have been allocated for service that is
   provided only via reference to an ENUM domain, and terminate on the
   Internet (i.e. these calls will terminate only at a VoIP end point).
   The fundamental problem is that there may be inconsistencies between
   the E.164 name space as it is understood by the National Regulatory
   Authority (NRA) and how that name space is represented in ENUM, as



Stastny, et al.          Expires April 22, 2006                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft     IANA VOID Enumservice Registration       October 2005


   service moves towards being provided in some cases only via non-PSTN
   access.  In effect, the PSTN may not have complete information and
   ENUM may be required to deliver a call, but the data stored in ENUM
   at present may be ambiguous.

   For applications such as an ENUM-aware VoIP/PSTN gateway, this
   presents a problem.  These would use ENUM to decide how to route or
   terminate a call.  A simple default configuration rule for such a
   gateway would probably be: "if the number called is not in ENUM or
   has no NAPTR records, dump the call to the PSTN".  Such a rule is
   likely to be the norm while most telephony traffic uses the public
   telephone network.  In other words, if the response from the DNS is
   that the number does not exist in ENUM, the gateway would try to
   terminate the call on the PSTN.

   This will not always work.  The number that was attempted may be in
   some range that cannot be terminated on the PSTN: a block assigned
   for VoIP and ENUM exclusively, and for which there is no PSTN
   termination, for example.  If a number in such a range had not been
   entered into ENUM, the DNS would return the expected NXDOMAIN or
   NOHOST response, causing the gateway to take its default action which
   would have undefined results.  Where a "not in service" number is
   within such a special number block, the typical action of a PSTN
   element will be to pass this on to a VoIP/PSTN gateway, where as just
   described another ENUM query may be used to determine call treatment:
   the result could be a processing "loop".

























Stastny, et al.          Expires April 22, 2006                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft     IANA VOID Enumservice Registration       October 2005


4.  The Proposed Solution

   We propose an explicit indication of this "number unassigned" state.
   This uses a NAPTR in the zone associated with an unassigned telephone
   number, or at least in the "enclosing" zone, with an Enumservice
   called VOID that should be taken as an assertion that the associated
   E.164 number is not assigned to an end user for communications
   service; it's an unused number.

   This NAPTR can also be used by a National Regulatory Authority (NRA)
   to indicate number blocks that it has reserved or has not allocated,
   or has not assigned to a service provider.

   It is a matter for individual Countries whether or not they will
   support (or require) information giving the identity of the current
   "owner" of an E.164 number within their responsibility to be made
   available via IRIS/WHOIS.  Thus it may not be possible to use these
   protocols to find out the entity responsible for a number or number
   range, particularly where that number or range is not currently "in
   use".

   For this reason, we propose that the VOID indication also includes a
   contact address (an email address or a web address) by which the
   authority responsible for this number (or range) can be contacted.

   This may not be the same entity as the one that maintains the DNS
   service for that "enclosing zone": often the NRA will sub-contract a
   Registry Operator to maintain the DNS, but it is the NRA who is the
   authority for the E.164 number range, not that Registry Operator.






















Stastny, et al.          Expires April 22, 2006                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft     IANA VOID Enumservice Registration       October 2005


5.  ENUM Service Registration - VOID

   Enumservice Name: "VOID"

   Enumservice Type: "void"

   Enumservice Subtypes: "mailto", "http", "https"

   URI Schemes: "mailto:", "http:", "https:"

   Functional Specification: The proposed solution in Section 4.

   Definition of expected action:

      If a NAPTR with this Enumservice is received, it indicates that
      the queried E.164 number is currently unassigned to an end user
      for communications service.

      The recipient SHOULD treat this response as if they had received a
      "number not in service" indication from a terminating network.

      Note that, whatever subtype exists for this Enumservice, the
      generated URI is not a potential target for any current call.
      This contact (mailto:[5], http:[6], or https:[7]) MUST NOT be used
      in normal call processing but only if there is a non-call related
      reason to contact the number holder or authority.

   Security considerations: see Section 8.

   Intended usage: COMMON

   Authors

      Lawrence Conroy, Richard Stastny, Jim Reid (for authors contact
      details see Authors' Addresses section).

   Any other information that the author deems interesting:

      There are three possible subtypes (each with an associated URI
      scheme).  In the first case, the subtype is "mailto" and has a
      generated URI scheme of "mailto:".  This can be used to hold an
      email address of the entity responsible for the unassigned number
      or number range (such as the NRA, or the Communications Service
      Provider or CSP to whom they have allocated a block of numbers, of
      which the current number is unused).

      The second case has a sub-type of "http" and has a generated URI
      scheme of "http:".  The last case has a sub-type of "https" and an



Stastny, et al.          Expires April 22, 2006                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft     IANA VOID Enumservice Registration       October 2005


      associated generated URI scheme of "https:".  In both these, the
      URI can be used to indicate a web site holding information on the
      number (or number range) associated with the domain holding this
      NAPTR.  They differ only in whether or not the URL "points to" a
      web site using either a standard or TLS-secured connection.

      Please see also Section 7 for a discussion on choices for where to
      provision the VOID NAPTR and its impact on "real world"
      performance.










































Stastny, et al.          Expires April 22, 2006                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft     IANA VOID Enumservice Registration       October 2005


6.  Examples

   1.  VOID:mailto

       $ORIGIN 0.6.9.2.3.6.1.4.4.e164.arpa.
       3.8.0 NAPTR 10 100 "u" "E2U+void:mailto"
       "!^.*$!mailto:num-drama-info@nra.cc.example!"

       This indicates that the controller of the number block
       +441632960xxx does not provide telephony service via the number
       +441632960083; it is not assigned to an end user.  Information on
       the status of this number may be obtainable by contacting the
       email address held in the regexp field.

   2.  VOID:http or VOID:https

       $ORIGIN 1.6.9.2.3.6.1.4.4.e164.arpa.
       4.8.0 NAPTR 10 100 "u" "E2U+void:http"
       "!^.*$!http:\/\/www.nra.cc.example\/drama-numbers\/index.html!"

       $ORIGIN 2.6.9.2.3.6.1.4.4.e164.arpa.
       4.8.0 NAPTR 10 100 "u" "E2U+void:https"
       "!^.*$!https:\/\/connect.nra.cc.example\/drama-numbers\/
       secure.html!"

       Both of these examples indicate that the controller of the number
       block +441632960xxx does not provide communication service via
       the number +441632960084; it is not assigned to an end user.
       Information on the status of this number may be obtained by
       making an HTTP connection to the web URL shown in the regexp
       field of the former example, or making a connection using TLS to
       the secure web URL held in the regexp field of the latter
       example.


















Stastny, et al.          Expires April 22, 2006                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft     IANA VOID Enumservice Registration       October 2005


7.  Operational Guidance

   There are two possible scenarios where this VOID NAPTR could be
   returned.  One is direct and the other is indirect.

   In the direct scenario, an ENUM lookup for a number explicitly
   returns the VOID NAPTR.  This could be done for a variety of reasons.
   The number could have been delegated to an end user who has chosen to
   insert this record: for instance it's in an ENUM or VoIP only number
   block and the end user's SIP gateway is out of service.  Another
   possibility is that a communications service provider inserts VOID
   NAPTRs for each of the numbers in the block that have not been
   assigned to end-users.  For these examples, the VOID NAPTR response
   indicates to the client that the number is known to ENUM but there
   are no communication end-points associated with it.  The client can
   then signal an error to the application or end user instead of then
   trying and failing to terminate the call on the PSTN, which would
   have been the typical behaviour of an ENUM-aware VoIP/PSTN gateway if
   the ENUM lookup had returned an NXDOMAIN or NOHOST response.

   For the indirect scenario, the client would make an additional DNS
   lookup following an NXDOMAIN or NOHOST reply to an ENUM lookup.
   NOHOST responses are returned when a name exists in the DNS, but not
   as the record type requested.  An NXDOMAIN reply from the DNS
   indicates that the name does not exist.  This could happen because
   the number has not been entered into ENUM or the client tried to
   lookup a number that was not valid in the prevailing numbering plan.
   In the case of a number in an ENUM or VoIP only number block, an
   NXDOMAIN response would indicate that the number had not been
   assigned to the end user.  However, the querying client may not know
   that this is within such a block, and so be unaware of this
   interpretation for its current query.  It would be undesirable for a
   gateway to then use a NOHOST or NXDOMAIN reply to dump the call to
   the PSTN.  The gateway could use information in that response for a
   second ENUM lookup and act on the data returned from that.

   NOHOST or NXDOMAIN replies from the DNS include the SOA record for
   the closest enclosing zone in the Authority Section of the response.
   See [4] & [8].  For an ENUM-only block, the closest enclosing zone
   could be the delegation for that block: 0.8.7.3.4.e164.arpa.  If the
   gateway looked up the non-existent domain
   0.9.8.7.6.5.4.3.2.1.0.8.7.3.4.e164.arpa, it would get an NXDOMAIN
   reply containing the SOA record for 0.8.7.3.4.e164.arpa.  The gateway
   could then perform an ENUM lookup for this name.  This second query
   could return a VOID NAPTR to indicate that the number cannot be
   terminated on the PSTN, and a suitable error message would be
   returned to the end user or application.  If this second lookup also
   returned an NXDOMAIN or NOHOST, the gateway could assume that the



Stastny, et al.          Expires April 22, 2006                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft     IANA VOID Enumservice Registration       October 2005


   number can be terminated successfully on the PSTN.

   In this second, indirect, case, clients would make two queries before
   being SURE of the correct approach to a call attempt.  The client
   would first query for the requested zone and receive an NXDOMAIN or
   NOHOST response, and then query the domain shown in the first
   response as being the authority for the target (the "enclosing
   zone").  It would not need to proceed further, but would in this case
   have submitted two queries before determining the appropriate action.
   This situation occurs only if no data at all has been entered into a
   zone associated with a telephone number.  An entry is instead only
   available in the enclosing zone associated with the number block.
   The indirect case ensures that the client always has a mechanism to
   determine the appropriate action, using only data retrieved from DNS.
   This approach succeeds, even where the number queried is invalid, and
   requiring no knowledge of the target numbering plan by the querying
   client.

   In the early stages of ENUM deployment, provisioning of the ENUM tree
   will be sparse.  Thus, if this approach were to be used as the
   default, many queries would have to use it, resulting in less
   efficient operation.  It is a fallback mechanism, and like all
   fallbacks, it should be the exception that ensures full coverage of
   all cases rather than the norm.

   In most scenarios, a block of telephone numbers will be assigned to a
   service provider, and that service provider will in turn allocate
   individual telephone numbers (or groups of numbers) for services
   provided to end customers.  Rather than just provisioning a single
   VOID NAPTR at the apex of the ENUM subtree associated with the number
   block it has been assigned, the service provider can provision a VOID
   NAPTR associated with each of the individual numbers (or groups of
   numbers) within the number block that are not currently used.  If the
   individual number is then assigned for service to an end customer,
   then the associated VOID NAPTR can be removed.

   Thus, it is recommended that a service provider that has been
   assigned a block of telephone numbers by its NRA should ensure that a
   VOID NAPTR is returned for ENUM queries on the telephone numbers
   within that block for which PSTN service is not provided.  This can
   be arranged by provisioning a VOID NAPTR associated with the Fully
   Qualified Domain Name associated with each of the individual
   telephone numbers within the block.

   Whilst it is perfectly possible to provision a single wildcard entry
   holding a VOID NAPTR to be returned for any query under the chosen
   sub-tree apex where there is no assignment within the associated
   number block, it is discouraged.  The use of wildcards has been shown



Stastny, et al.          Expires April 22, 2006                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft     IANA VOID Enumservice Registration       October 2005


   to be counter-intuitive and so prone to errors.  Provisioning
   individual VOID NAPTRs for each number within a block is preferable,
   as it maintains query efficiency whilst not being prone to subtle
   behavioural flaws.















































Stastny, et al.          Expires April 22, 2006                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft     IANA VOID Enumservice Registration       October 2005


8.  Security Considerations

   DNS does not make policy decisions about the records that it shares
   with an inquirer.  All DNS records must be assumed to be available to
   all inquirers at all times.  The information provided within an ENUM
   record set must therefore be considered to be open to the public.

   An analysis of threats specific to the dependence of ENUM on the DNS,
   and the applicability of DNSSEC [9] to these, is provided in [10].

   The specific issues applicable to this registration are:

   1.  by including an email address, the responsible authority is
       making this available globally.  They should expect that the
       published email address will be used to send unsolicited
       commercial email to them.

   2.  by publishing the email address, they expose the identity of the
       entity that has authority over this E.164 number (or range of
       numbers).  This may also be the case if a web URL is used.

   3.  by constructing a DNS response holding a VOID NAPTR, a third
       party could initiate a denial of service attack on the assignee
       of a number (or number range).  The recipient of a "spoofed"
       response would react by assuming that the associated E.164 number
       is not in service, so denying calls to that number.

























Stastny, et al.          Expires April 22, 2006                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft     IANA VOID Enumservice Registration       October 2005


9.  IANA Considerations

   This document requests registration of the "void" Enumservice with
   three sub-types (void:mailto, void:http and void:https) according to
   the guidelines and specifications in RFC 3761 [3] and the definitions
   in this document.













































Stastny, et al.          Expires April 22, 2006                [Page 15]

Internet-Draft     IANA VOID Enumservice Registration       October 2005


10.  Acknowledgments

   Thanks to Patrik Faltstrom, Michael Mealling an Peter Koch for their
   thorough feedback, and colleagues in ETSI TISPAN who helped to
   clarify VOID's operational features during the development of [11].














































Stastny, et al.          Expires April 22, 2006                [Page 16]

Internet-Draft     IANA VOID Enumservice Registration       October 2005


11.  References

11.1.  Normative References

   [1]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
        Levels", RFC 2119, BCP 14, March 1997.

   [2]  ITU-T, "The International Public Telecommunication Number Plan",
        Recommendation E.164, May 1997.

   [3]  Faltstrom, P. and M. Mealling, "The E.164 to Uniform Resource
        Identifiers (URI) Dynamic Delegation  Discovery System (DDDS)
        Application (ENUM)", RFC 3761, April 2004.

   [4]  Mockapetris, P., "DOMAIN NAMES - CONCEPTS AND FACILITIES",
        RFC 1034, November 1987.

   [5]  Hoffman, P., Masinter, L., and J. Zawinski, "The mailto URL
        scheme", RFC 2368, July 1998.

   [6]  Fielding, R. and et al. , "Hypertext Transfer Protocol --
        HTTP/1.1", RFC 2616, June 1999.

   [7]  Rescola, E., "HTTP over TLS", RFC 2818, May 2000.

11.2.  Informative References

   [8]   Andrews, M., "Negative Caching of DNS Queries (DNS NCACHE)",
         RFC 2308, March 1998.

   [9]   Arends, R. and et al. , "Protocol Modifications for the DNS
         Security Extensions", RFC 4035, March 2005.

   [10]  Atkins, D. and R. Austein, "Threat Analysis of the Domain Name
         System (DNS)", RFC 3833, August 2004.

   [11]  ETSI, "Minimum Requirements for Interoperability of ENUM
         Implementations", ETSI TS 102 172, January 2005.

   [12]  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3",
         RFC 2026, BCP 9, October 1996.

   [13]  Bradner, S., "IETF Rights in Contributions", BCP 78, RFC 3978,
         March 2005.

   [14]  Bradner, S., "Intellectual Property Rights in IETF Technology",
         BCP 79, RFC 3979, March 2005.




Stastny, et al.          Expires April 22, 2006                [Page 17]

Internet-Draft     IANA VOID Enumservice Registration       October 2005


Authors' Addresses

   Richard Stastny
   Oefeg
   Postbox 147
   1103 Vienna
   Austria

   Phone: +43-664-420-4100
   Email: Richard.stastny@oefeg.at


   Lawrence Conroy
   Siemens Roke Manor Research
   Roke Manor
   Romsey
   United Kingdom

   Phone: +44-1794-833666
   Email: lwc@roke.co.uk


   Jim Reid
   DNS-MODA
   6 Langside Court
   Bothwell, SCOTLAND
   United Kingdom

   Phone: +44 1698 852881
   Email: jim@dns-moda.org





















Stastny, et al.          Expires April 22, 2006                [Page 18]

Internet-Draft     IANA VOID Enumservice Registration       October 2005


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Stastny, et al.          Expires April 22, 2006                [Page 19]


