  INTERNET-DRAFT
	                                                            T. Johnson
                                                               CAVNER / UNC-CH
                                                                    M. Yafchak
                                                                      NYSERNet
                                                                    March 2000

The ViDe Reference Model for Internet-extensible H.323 Communications
Filename: draft-johnson-yafchak-vide-h323-reference-model-00.txt
Expiration Date: September 30, 2000

Status of this Memo

This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with all
provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering Task
Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other groups may
also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months and
may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted but other documents at any time. It
is in appropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference material or to cite
them other than as "work in progress."

The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

Copyright (c) The Internet Society (date). All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

This paper discusses H.323 communication as it is being developed and
implemented within the context of today's Internet (I1 and I2). As such it
suggests a model that the authors believe can be developed using current
thinking, protocols, and practices. It is also intended to support a vision
for future communication development that will allow multi-mode
communication to become more universally useful for end-users while
becoming more sophisticated and reliable in its technological foundation.
The authors see the concepts emerging within and around the development of
the H.323 standard as some of the most promising today for enabling
Internet-extensible multi-mode global communication. After a brief
presentation of a communication model, several problems and concerns with
the present state of H.323 communication are presented along with specific
recommendations for changes in these areas.

Several key foci serve as a foundation for the ideas presented herein. It
should be understood throughout that the following are considered
necessary: mobility of the service provided, security in using and in
managing the service, scalability of the service, and the ability for IP
network service providers to autonomously implement H.323 services without
external control or involvement by PSTN operators. These foci necessitate
that several key implementation areas be addressed:


Johnson & Yafchak                INTERNET-DRAFT                       Page 1

       ViDe Reference Model for H.323 Communications      March 2000

- Gatekeeper address resolution and naming schemes (alphanumeric alias
naming as well as naming by numeric extension).
- The use of H.323 metadata to provide smooth integration with other
commonly used information systems (e.g., the World Wide Web).
- Directory services and account management (user lookup, maintenance of
user account information).
- User and device authentication (including single-user and multi-user
system authentication schema, E.164 authentication, and the ability to
integrate user authentication with support for network transport/policy
decisions).
- Inter-zone gatekeeper communications, including suggestions towards a
protocol to integrate with future policy-based networking and QoS offerings.
- Administrative recommendations for more robust or special services to
more fully align H.323 implementations with expected Internet-based
performance.

The paper is intended to provide encouragement and a focal point for
discussion in all of these areas. The authors have included their contact
information in Section 7: Authors' Addresses and welcome input from both
the Internet and H.323 development communities.

Table of Contents

1. Introduction
2. Communication Simplified
3. The Role of H.323 Communication
4. Key Implementation Issues
     4.1 Underlying Design Goals
     4.2 Gatekeeper Address Resolution and Naming Schemes
          4.2.1 Alphanumeric Naming by Alias
          4.2.2 Numeric Naming by Extension
     4.3 H.323 Metadata
     4.4 Directory Services and Account Management
          4.4.1 External vs. Internal User Lookup
          4.4.2 External Lookup - Conditions and Parameters
          4.4.3 Internal Lookup - Conditions and Parameters
          4.4.4 Maintenance of User Account Information
          4.4.5 Availability and Functionality of Directory Services
     4.5 Security
     4.6 Authentication
          4.6.1 User Authentication vs. Device Authentication
          4.6.2 User Authentication and Network Transport/Policy Decisions
          4.6.3 Gatekeeper Authentication
          4.6.4 Multi-user Authentication
          4.6.5 E.164 Authentication
          4.6.6 Inter-zone Access to Gatekeeper Services
     4.7 Policy-based networking and QoS
     4.8 Administrative Recommendations for More Robust Services
          4.8.1 H.323 Processes as Services and Daemons
          4.8.2 Call Control, Logging, and Administration
          4.8.3 General Addressing
          4.8.4 Special Services
     5. References
     6. Security Considerations
     7. Authors' Addresses
     8. Copyright (C) The Internet Society (date).  All Rights Reserved.

Johnson & Yafchak                INTERNET-DRAFT                       Page 2

       ViDe Reference Model for H.323 Communications      March 2000

1. Introduction

This paper discusses H.323 communication as it is being developed and
implemented within the context of today's Internet (I1 and I2). As such it
suggests a model that the authors believe can be developed using current
thinking, protocols, and practices. It is also intended to support a vision
for future communication development that will allow multi-mode
communication to become more universally useful for end-users while
becoming more sophisticated and reliable in its technological foundation.
The simple communication model outlined in the section directly below
illustrates the latter. Subsequent sections detail known problems or
concerns with the present state of H.323 communication (within the H.323
standard or within recent product implementations of that standard) and
recommends changes in these areas. These sections are intended to provide
an outline for the development of a working model that demonstrates the
best current understanding of Internet-extensible H.323 communications.

2. Communication Simplified

The future vision underlying this paper is based on a very simple
communication model. Though communication can and does, in fact, take place
between devices as well as humans, the proposed model concerns itself with
messages where humans are the ultimate end-points. A sender then is assumed
to be anyone who wishes to send a message to anyone else. A receiver is
anyone who wishes to be open to the receipt of incoming messages. If we
begin with this simple model, some basic tenets emerge:

A) A sender's options for message content in the foreseeable future are
data, voice, video, or some combination of those. To send this content, the
sender ideally needs a single application that provides a universal, human-
friendly, secure means of creating and packaging the message and reaching
the desired recipient.

B) A recipient has two options: "I'll take the message live", or "Leave it
in my inbox" This would be applicable to email, voice mail, video mail, or,
eventually, "combo-mail". These conditions exist today in our various
messaging systems though not in any integrated form:

                      Live Receipt                     Inbox
                      ------------                     ------------
Data messaging        Talk, Chat, Instant Messaging	 Email

Voice messaging       Telephone                        Voice mail
                                                       Answering machines

Video messaging       Video Conferencing               "Video mail"
                                                       [not implemented as
                                                       of this writing]

C) There should ideally be a single application that receives all incoming
messages on behalf of the recipient and handles them according to the
recipient's current availability status ("Live" or "Inbox"). The
interface/application that allows the recipient to check the Inbox and
"handle" the messages (e.g., view, reply, forward) should be the same one

Johnson & Yafchak                INTERNET-DRAFT                       Page 3

               ViDe Reference Model for H.323 Communications      March 2000

that enables the recipient to act as a sender.

3. The Role of H.323 Communication

We see the concepts emerging within and around the development of the H.323
standard as some of the most promising today for enabling multi-mode global
communication. True, there are many complex issues to be resolved and
processes to be integrated in order to approach the simple model discussed
above. However, there is great potential for convergence around H.323 as a
specification capable of integrating the best we have come to expect from
traditional telephony, video conferencing, and IP data communications. It
is with an eye towards this that we present the sections below, outlining
the issues and latest developments in several key areas and proposing
immediate implementation changes to enable the design and development of a
short-term working model for Internet-extensible H.323 communication.

4. Key Implementation Issues

4.1 Underlying Design Goals

Several key issues drive the technical schemes suggested in the following
sections. The first is the concept of mobility. A user should be able to
move from her desktop computer to a conference room for a meeting, travel
by automobile with cellular telephone access, dial in from home using an
ISP and use a standard telephone without losing access to her communication
services. Whatever services are subscribed to by the user should follow her
as she moves throughout her day, including 'phone number', email,
voicemail, videomail, conference calling, address book and other
personalized features of her account. The availability and character of
each service may change, being mitigated by the underlying network type
from which each access is made. For example, a videomail message may be
retrievable from a desktop h.323 station, but checking mail from a standard
telephone should yield up the audio portion of the message.

The second concept is that of security. The existence of mobility implies
the availability of a reliable authentication scheme. Without reliable
authentication, services cannot be billed for and costs recovered. As long
as security remains unaddressed, h.323 services will continue to be 'toy'
applications without a fundamental underlying business case behind them.
This is the case with the current generation of h.323 products and
deployments.

The third concept is that of the scalability of services. Communication
services must be scalable to all inhabitants of the earth, because any
person is a potential user of the services. The existence of multiple
private stratified or interlaced networks will not meet the fundamental
criteria of any user being able to contact any other user. That said, it
should be possible to construct virtual private networks if so desired. The
concept of global scalability implies the existence of a unified, unique
and mobile numbering scheme for all users.

The fourth concept is that of scalability of specific implementations. It
is desirable to put in place systems that will scale to very large numbers
of users and be highly integrated with existing large-scale directory

Johnson & Yafchak                INTERNET-DRAFT                       Page 4

               ViDe Reference Model for H.323 Communications      March 2000

services, network policy servers and security systems. At the same time,
network managers are unwilling to invest the huge sums of time and money to
create totally integrated, large scale h.323 systems when they only have
one hundred users on the network. What is needed are systems that can be
implemented cost-effectively and in a 'standalone' fashion now, but that
have 'hooks' into external services that allow for integration and scaling
as the service grows.

A final and important concept is that h.323 services should be able to be
implemented autonomously by IP network service providers without external
control or involvement by PSTN operators. Indeed, the primary reason why
there is so much interest in h.323 today is not so much because it provides
a rich new feature set, but because it is free from the heavy handed
control of today's PSTN

4.2 Gatekeeper Address Resolution and Naming Schemes

In keeping with the existing H.323 standard, there should be two forms of
addressing supported. The first, extension, is a numeric address that is
designed to maintain compatibility with the PSTN. The second, alias, is an
alphanumeric address that is Internet-centric. The extension is meant to
provide backward compatibility with PSTN terminals that are only capable of
generating the 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,0,#,* symbol set. Both forms of addressing
should be supported simultaneously on the h.323 network. It is anticipated
that over time the extension address will no longer be necessary. The alias
is the primary and preferred method of addressing on the Internet and
should be used whenever possible.

The primary feature of an h.323 naming scheme is that the IP address of the
dialed gatekeeper is easily determined from the dialed address itself. The
reasons for this are:

* No central naming authority should 'dole out' addresses. A central
authority undermines the autonomous nature of h.323.
* The currently implemented static table, proxy and multicast gatekeeper
address resolution schemes do not scale to a global level. Indeed, they do
not scale to even the size of the current h.323 deployment.
* Network service providers with existing operational IP networks should be
able to immediately add remove or change h.323 zones without registering
those changes.
* IP addresses are unique.
* IP addressing, coupled with DNS, already provides these capabilities at
the network layer.

4.2.1 Alphanumeric Naming by Alias

Aliases should be of the form user@gatekeeper.domain, where user represents
the local alias of the user and gatekeeper.domain represents the DNS name
of the gatekeeper to which that user is registered. When an originating
gatekeeper receives a call setup request to a destination
user@gatekeeper.domain, it first parses out gatekeeper.domain and resolves
the IP address of that destination gatekeeper. The origination gatekeeper
then signals the destination gatekeeper to establish a call to user in the
destination gatekeeper's zone. It can be assumed that calls placed to user

Johnson & Yafchak                INTERNET-DRAFT                       Page 5

               ViDe Reference Model for H.323 Communications      March 2000

without the @gatekeeper.domain portion of the address are local calls to
users within the home zone. All services on the network should be similarly
named, i.e. service@gatekeeper.domain . In general, network operators will
choose to align h.323 alias fields with user IDs on existing authentication
systems.

4.2.2 Numeric Naming by Extension

Numeric addresses should be of the form gatekeeper+extension, where
gatekeeper is the fully expanded (including leading zeros and excluding
periods) IP address of the gatekeeper to which the user extension is
registered. For example, a gatekeeper with IP address 152.2.21.1 and a user
in that zone of extension 962-4978 would be referred to as
1520020210019624978. In this way a gatekeeper originating a call to another
zone can immediately parse out the IP address of the destination
gatekeeper.

It should be noted that numeric names do not support gatekeepers whose IP
addresses are dynamically assigned. Neither does it support IP version 6,
though it could be extended to do so. Because of these factors, the authors
feel that a seamless alignment of h.323 addresses with E.164 addresses is
not a useful design goal. Further, there is no useful mapping of
gatekeepers to E.164 sub-address (e.g. area codes). Still, using this
naming scheme, PSTN gateways can be built using v.25bis that give h.323
terminal end stations on the IP network E.164 style DNs from the PSTN. In
this way, users can have an extension that looks exactly like an E.164
number to PSTN-originated calls creating the illusion that the IP 'phone'
is actually a normal 'phone.'

Users originating calls on the PSTN should never be concerned with the
gatekeeper portion of the address unless they are dialing from the PSTN
into a gateway and thence to a third zone for toll arbitrage purposes.
Still, this scenario supports the creation of IVR (Interactive Voice
Response) services that could prompt a user for the destination gatekeeper
field for inter-zone dialing. In general, many user-friendly interfaces
could be built on top of this architecture, including text-based menus that
are downloaded to telephones with alphanumeric displays as well as voice-
recognition-driven directories. Those interfaces are beyond the scope of
this document but will be important components in the creation of
successful products that bridge the PSTN and IP networks.

4.3 H.323 Metadata

Multimedia Conferencing, MMC, should be defined as a metadata type to allow
for embedding of h.323 transport services within other document types. A
tag of the form mmc://johndoe@netcall.unc.edu should be used to signal web
browsers, document editors and other applications that the h.323
application registered with the application or operating system should be
invoked and a call placed to johndoe@netcall.unc.edu. In this way, web
pages, including html-based directory services, can be built with links
that activate calls to specific users. Services, such as
mmc://mcu.netcall.unc.edu or mmc://voicegateway.netcall.unc.edu, can be
linked in the same way.

Johnson & Yafchak                INTERNET-DRAFT                       Page 6

               ViDe Reference Model for H.323 Communications      March 2000

4.4 Directory Services and Account Management

4.4.1 External vs. Internal User Lookup

In general, gatekeepers should not maintain private tables of users because
this creates another set of user accounts that must be supported by the
zone administrator. All information about users should be stored externally
so that it is accessible not only by gatekeepers, but by other systems
vital to the operation of the zone's core business, such as billing,
directories, account information, status, etc. Relevant information for
H.323 calls includes user ID, password and a list of services to which each
user is subscribed. The gatekeeper does not retrieve information that is
irrelevant to it, such as date of birth, social security number, etc. For
the sake of this document, we will refer to the process of a gatekeeper
querying these external systems as 'external user lookup.'

However, a gatekeeper attempting to do an external user lookup during each
call setup would introduce unacceptable delay into the call setup process.
Therefore, it is suggested that the gatekeeper take the result of the
external user lookup and store it in a local high performance database. It
is not the responsibility of the gatekeeper to maintain this database in
any way. The gatekeeper simply retrieves information from the database that
is relevant to its operations. For instance, when a terminal end station
places a call, the gatekeeper finds the user information, based on user ID,
in the internal database. For the sake of this document, this process is
referred to as 'internal user lookup.' For implementation efficiency, the
internal database should be a separate application (i.e. not integrated
with the gatekeeper) that uses the same query protocol (LDAP) as the
external database. This facilitates the construction of small scale
'standalone gatekeepers' that allow network administrators to deploy small-
scale non-integrated h.323 zones very cost effectively.

4.4.2 External Lookup - Conditions and Parameters

External user lookup should happen whenever a terminal end station
registers with the gatekeeper, either as a part of RAS or as an additional
process added to the h.323 standard. This causes the gatekeeper to do an
external user lookup on that user and move the information into the
gatekeeper's internal database. Calls placed by the terminal end station
are thus referenced against the internal database. This ensures that user
lookup is very fast and not dependent on the speed of the external user
database. It also helps to keep the size of the internal database low,
since it only contains entries for users that are currently on the network.

The gatekeeper should also have an administratively configurable refresh
period that causes the gatekeeper to do an external lookup and update its
internal database for each currently registered endpoint. If this refresh
causes a condition that would effect the parameters of a call currently in
progress, the decision of whether to disrupt the call immediately or have
changes invoked after the call has been completed should be configurable on
the part of the h.323 system administrator. A scenario where this feature
would be used would be the case of an employee who moves from one
department of a company to another, but never turns off (unregisters) her
terminal end station. In this case, the privileges she had under the old

Johnson & Yafchak                INTERNET-DRAFT                       Page 7

               ViDe Reference Model for H.323 Communications      March 2000

department should be replaced with those of the new department for her
account.

Terminal end stations should also have a 're-registration' button that
causes them to re-register with the gatekeeper and causes the gatekeeper to
refresh its internal database with information from the external user
database. Additionally, terminal end stations should have user-configurable
time value in a personal preferences area that allows them to choose how
often their terminal end stations periodically re-registers (useful values
might include 60-600 seconds, now, and only on application startup). This
ensures that the gatekeeper has access to reasonable up-to-date information
about the status of a user's rights on the network.

4.4.3 Internal Lookup - Conditions and Parameters

As an implementation issue, the gatekeeper's internal database should be
capable of containing permanently defined users that are not accessible via
the external user lookup function. This provides the gatekeeper vendor with
a 'standalone gatekeeper' which is useful for smaller clients that have not
yet implemented large-scale external user databases. It can also be used as
a place to define exceptional users that are not in the external database,
such as guests and system administrators.

4.4.4 Maintenance of User Account Information

All changes to a user's account information, including their password and
which services are available to them should be made from applications
external to the h.323 network. For example, a student registration
application might enable a certain multipoint call service right for all
students currently enrolled in a specific class. The gatekeeper should have
no knowledge of this. If that student tries to access that service, the
gatekeeper will discover upon terminal end station registration whether or
not that right is available for that student.
Scheduling for h.323 resources should be built upon this model. A
scheduling program should enable and disable specific rights in the
external user database in real time. The gatekeeper will only allow use of
requested services if they are enabled at that particular time for that
particular user. The scheduling application is not related in any way to
the gatekeeper. However, developers wishing to implement small 'standalone
gatekeepers' could implement a basic scheduling package that accesses the
internal database.

Groups of users should be managed in this way as well. Group rights
management is already a mature concept in directory services and
authentication schema in place today.

4.4.5 Availability and Functionality of Directory Services

The dynamic directory service scheme currently supported in h.323 and
exemplified by Microsoft's Internet Locator Service is not a useful tool
for extensible h.323 communications because it does not identify user zone
information and thus cannot be used for dialing. Rather, directories should
be web accessible lists of all users in a zone, regardless of whether or
not they are online at the time.

Johnson & Yafchak                INTERNET-DRAFT                       Page 78

               ViDe Reference Model for H.323 Communications      March 2000

In general, a zone directory will be created by an external application
that generates html from the external user database. However, vendors
wishing to create small scale 'standalone gatekeepers' may wish to include
a small web server as a part of their product that serves directory
information from the internal user database. In this case, the internal
user database should contain additional fields for personal information
such as name, URL, address, etc. Directories should use the
mmc://johndoe@netcall.unc.edu metadata as described above to provide
'clickable' connection from the directory.

4.5 Security

All devices on the network should be protected with a user ID and password.
This includes gatekeepers, gateways, and MCUs. It should not be possible to
obtain http, telnet, SNMP or flash upgrade access to a device without a
user ID and password. All security information should traverse the network
in encrypted form.

4.6 Authentication

4.6.1 User Authentication vs. Device Authentication

There is currently little agreement in the h.323 world about the
fundamental mode of authentication. Some implementations take the
'telephone model' approach in which the actual physical instrument is the
entity known to the network. In this model, access to and services
available from a physical instrument are available to any person using that
instrument, and all usage tracking is referenced against that instrument.
The network does not know what human actually used the instrument. Security
is thus controlled by limiting physical access to the device, for example
by placing it in a locked office.

Another approach is the 'Unix model' in which a user provides a user ID /
password pair to assure their identity. In this model, the network does not
care which physical computer is actually used to gain access. It is only
concerned that the proper individual is granted access to their
predetermined resources. The authors strongly favor this approach for h.323
communications. This approach provides a number of advantages to the end
user. First, it is mobile, so users can access their account from their
office machines, home computers, or mobile communication devices. Secondly,
it creates a security model adequate to allow 'kiosk' access to the h.323
network. This is critical in public spaces such as classrooms,
laboratories, conference rooms, reception areas, 'pay phones,' etc., where
it is desirable to have h.323 communication capabilities that do not
compromise the security of the network by providing 'wide open' access to
the network in a public space. Additionally, because each user is uniquely
identified on the network, their individual 'profile,' or set of subscribed
services, is always available regardless of their physical location.

4.6.2 User Authentication and Network Transport/Policy Decisions

In general, h.323 gatekeepers should not utilize physical location, i.e. IP
address, in determining the identity of users and the availability of
services to those users. Because dynamic IP address allocation is becoming

Johnson & Yafchak                INTERNET-DRAFT                       Page 9

               ViDe Reference Model for H.323 Communications      March 2000

more common and address spoofing is easy to accomplish, this approach
provides little advantage. Rather, the network itself should mitigate the
resources available to a given terminal end station. For example, if a user
generally has access to 6-way multipoint calling by virtue of that service
being defined in her account, she should have access to that service
whether she is on a major fiber backbone, T1 line or wireless network. The
gatekeeper should grant access to the service without regard for the
network transport in play.

The underlying network itself, however, using some form of policy based
networking, will allow or disallow various types of connectivity based on
physical location. For example, if the user connects in from a fiber
backbone, she may access her 6-way service at 1 megabit per second.
However, if she moves over to a location that is T1-connected, the network
may only allow her access to 128 kilobits per second for her 6-way service.
In this model, h.323 authentication is performed at the application layer
on a per user basis, as in the 'Unix model.' At the network layer, access
is granted based on physical connection, as in the 'telephone model.' By
separating application and physical layer authentication in this way, h.323
gatekeepers can be developed and deployed without the unreasonable burden
of their being aware of the underlying network transport.

4.6.3 Gatekeeper Authentication

Users should authenticate themselves to the gatekeeper in the zone in which
they are registered by transmitting an encrypted user ID (alias) and
password to the gatekeeper. The gatekeeper will also record the IP address
of the station that is requesting authentication. The gatekeeper will
authenticate the user via the internal database (for standalone
gatekeepers) or via a call to an external authentication server. Once the
user is authenticated, the gatekeeper should allow calls from that terminal
end station / IP address pair.

Users should be de-authenticated whenever they unregister from the
gatekeeper or after a timeout value has elapsed. This timeout value should
be configurable on a per user basis by the zone administrator to be from
'this call only', to several days in order to allow for mobility between
end stations and alignment with DHCP leases. Gatekeepers should support
Pluggable Authentication Modules (PAM) to allow them to hook into existing
authentication schemes in place, such as those built around kerberos, UNIX
or Windows NT.

The following functionality should be defined as a protocol and added to
the h.323 standard: prompting for password, encrypted transmission,
acknowledgment of authentication, acceptance of calls, rejecting of calls.
Since not all terminal end stations will support this new standard, the
authors suggest that gatekeepers provide alternate ways to accomplish
authentication. One method is for the gatekeeper to provide a web interface
that allows the user to authenticate.

Another method is for the gatekeeper developer to provide a small
application that can be given away to h.323 client developers or downloaded
and installed on a client machine. This application could prompt the user
for a ID/password pair and pass that information to the gatekeeper. The

Johnson & Yafchak                INTERNET-DRAFT                      Page 10

               ViDe Reference Model for H.323 Communications      March 2000

application could be standalone or called from the h.323 client
application. This functionality also opens up the possibility for 'pay
phone' services that require a credit card number to be entered along with
the authentication information.

4.6.4 Multi-user Authentication

H.323 terminal end stations should be multi-user profile aware when running
in multi-user operating system environments. When a user logs onto a
machine with a user ID and password, the h.323 client should present the
user with an identification screen. The screen should allow the user to
choose to accept the currently active user ID and password pair (default),
or specify another one. This information should be saved so that subsequent
logins to the machine do not require re-entry of this information. Whether
or not to save password information should be left to the user.

The actual authentication handshake should occur as described in the
previous section. When an h.323 system handles authentication in this way,
terminal end stations that are multi-user profile aware achieve true multi-
user performance. Terminal end stations that are not multi-user profile
aware, such as many of the current generation of end stations running under
Windows 95, behave as 'telephone model' single user instruments. This is an
acceptable tradeoff and allows integration of legacy h.323 clients.

4.6.5 E.164 Authentication

Authentication for terminal end stations that do not support alphanumeric
entry is extremely problematic. For example, a user dialing into a zone via
gateway has no way to type in a user ID and password. That user's ultimate
user ID and password are stored in a central authentication server and are
almost certainly alphanumeric in nature. One possibility is for the
gatekeeper to authenticate the user using an extension / PIN pair. The
gatekeeper could use IVR to prompt the user for a PIN. In this case, the
PINs would have to be stored in an external database, possibly via the LDAP
directory server or in a completely dedicated PIN server. This represents
functionality that is not part of the PSTN today. In return for the extra
step of authenticating via a PIN, telephony end-users would be provided
with an unprecedented level of secure and mobile network access.

4.6.6 Inter-zone Access to Gatekeeper Services

There is currently a need for a zone to be able to offer access to certain
services within the zone to users dialing into the zone from other zones.
For example, a service provider might want to provide access to a
specialized high-speed MCU farm or special rate PSTN gateway services. The
subscribers to this service will not be in the same zone. It is
unacceptable to allow the subscribers to register with the service
provider's gatekeeper, since that violates the notion of network
sovereignty. In order for a user registered in a home directory to use
restricted services in a remote zone, the user should authenticate with the
remote gatekeeper using the same authentication handshake described earlier
for their home zone. The remote zone 'service provider' will of course not
have the same access to authentication and directory services of the user's
home zone, but will have to maintain their own database of users and

Johnson & Yafchak                INTERNET-DRAFT                      Page 11

               ViDe Reference Model for H.323 Communications      March 2000

groups.

4.7 Policy-based networking and QoS

Whenever a gatekeeper completes call setup for a properly authenticated
terminal end station, it should send information about the new call to the
network so that the network can implement policies for that call.
Specifically, the gatekeeper should send the following information:

1. Source IP address
     1.1. Video stream IP port number
          1.1.1. Policy requested (e.g. low latency 384 kb/s service)
     1.2. Audio stream IP port number
          1.2.1. Policy requested
     1.3. T.120 stream IP port number
          1.3.1. Policy requested

2. Destination IP address
     2.1. Video stream IP port number
          2.1.1. Policy requested
     2.2. Audio stream IP port number
          2.2.1. Policy requested
     2.3. T.120 stream IP port number
          2.3.1. Policy requested

This information will be used by a policy enforcement server on the network
to enable quality of service (QoS) mechanisms that will give appropriate
QoS to the specific packet streams associated with this call. When the
gatekeeper disconnects the call, it should send a corresponding message to
the policy enforcement server that this call is no longer in place and the
associated QoS
path should be torn down.

This messaging protocol should be standardized and incorporated into h.323
so that router and policy based networking vendors can begin to build
support for this mechanism into their products.

In general, today's h.323 gatekeeper is an example of a policy server,
although it lacks the enforcement capabilities that a full-featured policy
server would have. In that sense, the gatekeeper functions more as a
'policy requester' to the network and the network provides a 'policy
enforcer' mechanism to carry out the policy. Gatekeepers are currently more
mature discrete devices than are policy servers. In fact they represent one
of the first instantiations policy servers. The authors see a convergence
of gatekeepers and policy servers leading to a mature policy server that
has h.323 awareness as one of its many components.

4.8 Administrative Recommendations for More Robust Services

4.8.1 H.323 Processes as Services and Daemons

All h.323 functions should run continuously as processes on the host
system, without requiring that any particular user be logged on. They
should run as services (Windows NT) or daemons (UNIX) with the user

Johnson & Yafchak                INTERNET-DRAFT                      Page 12

               ViDe Reference Model for H.323 Communications      March 2000

interface being an external application to the core service itself.

4.8.2 Call Control, Logging, and Administration

Active calls should be displayed in a sortable format within the h.323
gatekeeper. For example, it should be possible to see all calls attached to
a particular MCU or MCU service grouped together. This would allow
administrators to quickly determine which MCUs are in use to manually tear
down multipoint calls for servicing. Other types of useful sort criteria
include call registration, call duration, alias, extension and IP address.

Call information should be automatically logged and stored as a text file.
The period for logging (real time, daily, hourly, weekly, etc.) should be
configurable by the administrator, as should the type and granularity of
the elements (including error messages) to be included in the log.

4.8.3 General Addressing

All h.323 IP addressing should be available using DNS or IP address per the
network administrator's preference. Currently, the bulk of h.323 equipment
on the market requires static IP addresses for configuration. This prevents
service providers from switching over to standby services in the event of
equipment failure and generally limits the flexibility service providers
have in managing systems.

4.8.4 Special Services

Gatekeepers should support several convenience features including a user-
definable list of forwarding numbers. This facilitates scenarios such as,
"If I don't answer, then forward my calls to my cell phone. If my cell
phone does not answer, then forward the call to my voicemail."

Voicemail/videomail systems should simply emulate h.323 terminal end
stations with a unique alias/extension pair for each account. In this way,
missed calls can be forwarded directly to a user mailbox.

5. References

[1]  ITU-T Recommendation H.323, "Packet-based multimedia communication
systems", Adopted February 1998.

[2]  Handley, M., Schulzrinne, H., Schooler, E., Rosenberg, J., "SIP:
Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 2543, March 1999.

[3]  Arango, M., Dugan, A., Elliott, I., Huitema, C., Pickett, S., "Media
Gateway Control Protocol (MGCP)", RFC 2705, October 1999.

[4]  ITU-T Recommendation E.164, "The international public
telecommunication numbering plan", Adopted May 1997.

[5]  Radhika, R., "Distributed Gatekeeper Architecture for H.323-Based
Multimedia Telephony", Proceedings of the 24th Conference on Local Computer
Networks, Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, 1998.


Johnson & Yafchak                INTERNET-DRAFT                      Page 13

               ViDe Reference Model for H.323 Communications      March 2000


[6]  Brown, A., "Telephone Number Mapping", Internet Draft, Informational,
November 1999.

6. Security Considerations

This document presents some actual and some conceptual guidelines intended
to further discussion such that protocol development and device
implementation within the area of Internet-extensible H.323 communication
may be enabled. Security considerations are mentioned throughout but most
specifically in sections 4.5, 4.7, and 4.8. However, the information
contained herein is not intended to address security issues at the level of
a new protocol or standards specification. This document also does not
address encryption of data as it is transmitted within an H.323
communication or authenticated communication between H.323 devices.
Security requirements in these areas would be the same as for other IP
devices and are beyond the scope of this document.

7. Authors' Addresses

Tyler Miller Johnson
CAVNER
Center for Advanced Video Network Engineering and Research
CB# 3224
University of North Carolina
Chapel Hill, NC 27599

Phone: +1 919.843.7004
Fax: +1 919.843.7008
Email: Tyler_Johnson@unc.edu


Mary Fran Yafchak
1807 County Route 4
Central Square, NY 13036

Phone: +1 315.413.0345 X5236
Fax: +1 315.413.0346
Email: maryfran@nysernet.org

8. Copyright (C) The Internet Society (date).  All Rights Reserved.

This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to others,
and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it or assist in
its implementation may be prepared, copied, published and distributed, in
whole or in part, without restriction of any kind, provided that the above
copyright notice and this paragraph are included on all such copies and
derivative works.  However, this document itself may not be modified in any
way, such as by removing the copyright notice or references to the Internet
Society or other Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose
of developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be followed, or
as required to translate it into languages other than English.


Johnson & Yafchak                INTERNET-DRAFT                      Page 14

               ViDe Reference Model for H.323 Communications      March 2000

The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be revoked
by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

This document and the information contained herein is provided on an "AS
IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE
DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY
RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Filename: draft-johnson-yafchak-vide-h323-reference-model-00.txt
Expiration Date: September 30, 2000

