








Internet Draft                                       Ananth Nagarajan
Expiration Date: April 2003                                    Sprint
Category: Informational                                      (Editor)
                                                         October 2002



           Generic Requirements for Provider Provisioned VPN
              <draft-nagarajan-ppvpn-generic-reqts-01.txt>

Status of this Memo

This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with all
provisions of Section 10 of [RFC-2026].

Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering Task
Force  (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that other
groups may also  distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.
Internet-Drafts are draft  documents valid for a maximum of six months
and may be updated, replaced, or  obsoleted by other documents at any
time.  It is inappropriate to use  Internet-Drafts as reference material
or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.


Abstract

This document described generic requirements for Provider Provisioned
Virtual Private Networks (PPVPN). The requirements are categorized into
service requirements, provider requirements and engineering
requirements.   These requirements are not specific to any particular
type of PPVPN  technology, but rather apply to all PPVPN technologies.


Conventions used in this document

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL
NOT","SHOULD",  "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in
this document are to  be interpreted as described in [RFC-2119].




                                                                [Page 1]





Internet Draft draft-nagarajan-ppvpn-generic-reqts-01.txt       Oct 2002


1. Introduction


1.1. Summary for Sub-IP area

   This document is an output of the design team formed to develop
   requirements  for PPVPNs in the PPVPN working group.  As such this
   work fits within the  scope of the PPVPN working group.  This
   document discusses generic PPVPN  requirements categorized as
   service, provider and engineering requirements.   These are
   independent of any particular type of PPVPN technology.


1.2. Problem Statement

   Corporations and other organizations have become increasingly
   dependent on  their networks for tele- and datacommunication. The
   data communication  networks were originally built as Local Area
   Networks (LAN). Over time  the  possibility to interconnect the
   networks on different sites has become more  and more  important. The
   connectivity for corporate networks has been  supplied by service
   providers, mainly as FR or ATM connections, but over  recent years
   also as Ethernet and IP-based tunnels. This type of network,
   interconnecting a number of sites over a shared network
   infrastructure is called Virtual Private Network (VPN).  If the sites
   belong to the same organization, the VPN is called an Intranet.  If
   the sites belong to different organizations that share a common
   interest, the VPN is called an Extranet.

   Customers are looking for service providers to deliver data and
   telecom connectivity over one or more shared networks,with service
   level assurances  in the form of security, QoS and other parameters.

   In order to provide isolation between the traffic belonging to
   different customers, mechanisms such as Layer 2 connections or Layer
   2/3 tunnels are  necessary. When the shared infrastructure is an IP
   network, the tunneling  technologies that are typically used are
   IPsec, MPLS, L2TP, GRE, IP-in-IP  etc.

   Traditional Internet VPNs have been based on IPsec to provide
   security over  the Internet. Service providers are now beginning to
   deploy enhanced VPN  services that provide features such as service
   differentiation, traffic  management, Layer 2 and Layer 3
   connectivity, etc.  in addition to security.  Newer tunneling
   mechanisms have certain features that allow the service  providers to
   provide these enhanced VPN services.

   The VPN solutions we define now must be able to accommodate the



                                                                [Page 2]





Internet Draft draft-nagarajan-ppvpn-generic-reqts-01.txt       Oct 2002


   traditional  types of VPNs as well as the enhanced services now being
   deployed. They need  to be able to run in a single service provider's
   network, as well as between a set of service providers and across the
   Internet. In doing so the VPNs should not be allowed to violate basic
   Internet design principles or overload the Internet core routers or
   accelarate the growths of the Internet  routing tables. Specifically,
   Internet core routers shall not be required to maintain VPN-related
   information, regardless of whether the Internet routing protocols are
   used to distribute this information or not. In order to achieve this,
   the mechanisms used to develop  various PPVPN solutions shall be as
   common as possible with generic Internet  infrastructure mechanisms
   like discovery, signaling, routing and management.  At the same time,
   existing Internet infrastructure mechanisms shall not be overloaded.

   Another generic requirement from a standardization perspective is to
   limit the number of different solution approaches to a specific type
   of VPN to as small a number as possible.


1.3. Outline of this document

   This document describes generic requirements for Provider Provisioned
   Virtual Private Networks (PPVPN). The document contains several
   sections,  with each set representing a significant aspect of PPVPN
   requirements.  Section 2 lists authors who contributed to this
   document.  Section 3 defines terminology and presents a taxonomy of
   PPVPN technologies. The taxonomy contains two broad classes,
   representing Layer 2 and Layer 3 VPNs. Each top level VPN class
   contains subordinate classes. For
     example, the Layer 3 VPN class contains a subordinate class of PE-
   based Layer 3 VPNs.  Sections 4, 5, 6 describe generic PPVPN
   requirements.

   The requirements are broadly classified under the following
   categories:


   1) Service requirements - Service attributes that the customer can
   observe or measure. For example, does the service forward frames or
   route datagrams? What security guarantees does the service provide?
   Availability and stability are key requirements in this category.

   2) Provider requirements - Characteristics that Service Providers use
   to determine the cost-effectiveness of a PPVPN service.  Scaling and
   management are examples of Provider requirements.

   3) Engineering requirements - Implementation characteristics that
   make service and provider requirements achievable.  These can be



                                                                [Page 3]





Internet Draft draft-nagarajan-ppvpn-generic-reqts-01.txt       Oct 2002


   further classified as:

   3a) Forwarding plane requirements - e.g., requirements related to
   router forwarding behavior.

   3b) Control plane requirements - e.g., requirements related to
   reachability and distribution of reachability information.

   3c) Requirements related to the commonality of PPVPN mechanisms with
   each other and with generic Internet mechanisms.



2. Contributing Authors

   This document was the combined effort of several individuals that
   were part  of the PPVPN requirements design team.  A significant set
   of requirements  were directly taken from previous work by the PPVPN
   WG to develop  requirements for Layer 3 PPVPN [L3REQTS].  The
   following are the authors  that contributed to this document:

       Loa Andersson
       Ron Bonica
       Dave McDysan
       Junichi Sumimoto
       Muneyoshi Suzuki
       David Meyer
       Marco Carugi
       Yetik Serbest
       Luyuan Fang
       Javier Achirica




3.  Definitions and Taxonomy

   The terminology used in this document is defined in [TERMINOLOGY].



                          PPVPN
            ________________|__________________
            |                                 |
           Layer 2                          Layer 3
      ______|_____                      ______|________
      |          |                      |             |
     P2P        P2M                 PE-based       CE-based



                                                                [Page 4]





Internet Draft draft-nagarajan-ppvpn-generic-reqts-01.txt       Oct 2002


   (vpws)    ____|____            ______|____         |
             |       |            |         |         |
            VPLS    IPLS     RFC2547      Virtual   IPsec
                              Style       Router


   The figure above presents a taxonomy of PPVPN technologies. Some of
   the definitions that are not covered in [TERMINOLOGY] are given
   below:

   CE-based VPN: A VPN approach in which the shared service provider
   network does not have any knowledge of the customer VPN. This
   information is limited to CE equipment.

   PE-Based VPNs: A layer 3 VPN approach in which a service provider
   network is used to interconnect customer sites using shared
   resources. Specifically the PE device maintains VPN state, isolating
   users of one VPN from users of another VPN. Because the PE device
   maintains all required VPN state, the CE device may behave as if it
   were connected to a private network.  Specifically, the CE in a PE-
   based VPN must not require any changes or additional functionality to
   be connected to a PPVPN instead of a private network.

   Virtual Router (VR) style: A PE-based VPN approach in which the PE
   router maintains a complete logical router for each VPN that it
   supports.  Each logical router maintains a unique forwarding table
   and executes a unique instance of the routing protocols.  These VPNs
   are described in [PPVPN-VR].

   RFC 2547 Style: A PE-based VPN approach in which the PE router
   maintains separate forwarding environment for each VPN and a separate
   forwarding table for each VPN. In order to maintain multiple
   forwarding table instances while running only a single routing
   protocol instance, RFC 2547 style VPNs mark route advertisements with
   attributes that identify their VPN context. These VPNs are based on
   the approach described in [RFC2547bis].















                                                                [Page 5]





Internet Draft draft-nagarajan-ppvpn-generic-reqts-01.txt       Oct 2002


4. Service requirements

   These are the requirements that a customer can observe or measure, in
   order  to verify if the PPVPN service that the Service Provider (SP)
   provides is satisfactory.


4.1. Availability

   VPN services must have high availability.  VPNs that are distributed
   over several sites require connectivity to be maintained even in the
   event of network failures or degraded service.

   This  can be achieved via various redundancy techniques such as:

   1. Physical Diversity

   A single site connected to multiple CEs (for CE-based PPVPN) or PEs
   (for PE-based PPVPNs), or different POPs, or even different service
   providers

   or

   2. via tunnel redundancy.



4.2. Stability

   In addition to availability, VPN services must also be stable.
   Stability is a function of several components such as VPN routing,
   signaling and discovery mechanisms, in addition to tunnel stability.
   Stability of the VPN service is directly related to the stability of
   the mechanisms and protocols used to establish the service.  It
   should also be possible to allow network upgrades and maintenance
   procedures without impacting the VPN service.


4.3. Traffic types

   VPN services must support unicast (or point to point) traffic and
   should  support any-to-any traffic including multicast and broadcast
   traffic. In the broadcast model, the network delivers a stream to all
   members of a subnetwork, regardless of their interest in that stream.
   In the multicast model, the network delivers a stream to a set of
   destinations that have registered interest in the stream. All
   destinations need not belong to the same subnetwork. Multicast is
   more appropriate for L3 VPNs while broadcast is more appropriate for



                                                                [Page 6]





Internet Draft draft-nagarajan-ppvpn-generic-reqts-01.txt       Oct 2002


   L2VPNs.  It is desirable  to support multicast limited in scope to an
   intranet or extranet. The solution should be able to support a large
   number of such intranet or extranet specific ulticast groups in a
   scalable manner.

   A PPVPN shall support both IPv4 and IPv6 traffic.


4.4. Data isolation


   The PPVPN must support forwarding plane isolation. The network must
   never deliver user data accross VPN boundaries unless the two VPNs
   participate in an intranet or extranet.

   Furthermore, if the provider network receives signaling or routing
   information from one VPN, it must not reveal that information to
   another VPN unless the two VPNs participate in an intranet or
   extranet.



4.5. Security

   A range of security features should be supported by the suite of
   PPVPN solutions in the form of securing customer flows, providing
   authentication services for temporary, remote or mobile users, and
   the need to protect service provider resources involved in supporting
   a PPVPN[VPN SEC]. Each PPVPN solution should state which security
   features it supports and how such features can be configured on a per
   customer basis. Protection against Denial of Service (DoS) attacks is
   a key component of security mechanisms. Examples of DoS attacks
   include mail spamming, access connection congestion, TCP SYN attacks,
   ping attacks and intrusion attempts such as Trojan horse attack.


4.5.1. User data security

   PPVPN solutions that support user data security should use standard
   methods  (e.g., IPsec) to achieve confidentiality, integrity,
   authentication and  replay attack prevention. Such security methods
   must be configurable between different end points, such as CE-CE, PE-
   PE, and CE-PE. It is also desirable to configure security on a per-
   route or per-VPN basis.







                                                                [Page 7]





Internet Draft draft-nagarajan-ppvpn-generic-reqts-01.txt       Oct 2002


4.5.2. Access control

   A PPVPN solution may also have the ability to activate the
   appropriate filtering capabilities upon request of a customer. A
   filter provides a mechanism so that access control can be invoked at
   the point(s) of communication between different organizations
   involved in an extranet.  Access control can be implemented by a
   firewall, access control lists on routers or similar mechanisms to
   apply policy-based access control to transit traffic. Access control
   must also be applicable between CE-CE, PE-PE and CE-PE.


4.5.3. Site authentication and authorization

   A PPVPN solution requires authentication and authorization of the
   following:

       - temporary and permanent access for users connecting to sites
         (authentication and authorization BY the site)

       - the site itself (authentication and authorization FOR the site)


4.5.4. Inter domain security

   The VPN solution must have appropriate security mechanisms to prevent
   the different kinds of Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) attacks
   mentioned earlier, misconfiguration or unauthorized accesses in inter
   domain PPVPN connections.



4.6. Topology

   A VPN should support arbitrary, customer agent defined inter-site
   connectivity, ranging, for example, from hub-and-spoke, partial mesh
   to full  mesh topology.  These can actually be different from the
   topology used by the service provider. To the extent possible, a
   PPVPN service should be independent  of the geographic extent of the
   deployment.

   A VPN solution should support multiple VPNs per customer site without
   requiring additional hardware resources per VPN. It should also
   support a free mix of L2 and L3 VPNs per customer site.

   To the extent possible, the PPVPN services should be independent of
   access network technology.




                                                                [Page 8]





Internet Draft draft-nagarajan-ppvpn-generic-reqts-01.txt       Oct 2002


4.7. Addressing (support for private, overlapping addresses)

   Each customer resource must be identified by an address that is
   unique within its VPN. It need not be identified by a globally unique
   address.

   A VPN service shall be capable of supporting non-IP customer
   addresses if it  is a Layer 2 VPN (e.g., Frame Relay, ATM, Ethernet).
   Support for non-IP Layer 3 addresses may be desirable in some cases,
   but is beyond the scope of VPN solutions developed in the IETF, and
   therefore, this document.



4.8. Quality of Service

   A PPVPN shall be able to support QoS via IETF standardized mechanisms
   such as Diffserv.  Support for best-effort traffic shall be mandatory
   for all PPVPN types.

   Note that all cases involving QoS may require that the CE and/or PE
   perform shaping and/or policing.

   The need to provide QoS will occur primarily in the access network,
   since that will often be the bottleneck. This is likely to occur
   since the backbone effectively statistically multiplexes many users,
   and is traffic engineerd or includes capacity for restoration and
   growth. There are two directions of QoS management that must be
   considered in any PPVPN service regarding QoS:

        - From the CE across the access network to the PE
        - From the PE across the access network to CE

   PPVPN CE and PE devices should be capable of supporting QoS across at
   least the following subset of access networks, although, to the
   extent possible, the QoS capability of a PPVPN should be independent
   of the access network technology :

        - ATM Virtual Connections (VCs)
        - Frame Relay Data Link Connection Identifiers (DLCIs)
        - 802.1d Prioritized Ethernet
        - MPLS-based access
        - Multilink Multiclass PPP
        - QoS-enabled wireless (e.g., LMDS, MMDS)
        - Cable modem
        - QoS-enabled Digital Subscriber Line (DSL)

   Different service models for QoS may be supported.  Examples of PPVPN



                                                                [Page 9]





Internet Draft draft-nagarajan-ppvpn-generic-reqts-01.txt       Oct 2002


   QoS service models are:

      - Managed access service : Provides QoS on the access connection
   between CE and the customer facing ports of the PE.  No QoS support
   is required in the provider core network in this case.

      - Edge-to-edge QoS : Provides QoS across the provider core, either
   between CE pairs or PE pairs, depending on the tunnel demarcation
   points.  This scenario requires QoS support in the provider core
   network.


4.9. Service Level Agreement and Service Level Specification Monitoring
   and Reporting

   A Service Level Specification (SLS) may be defined per access network
   connection, per VPN, per VPN site, and/or per VPN route. The service
   provider may define objectives and the measurement interval for at
   least the SLS using the following Service Level Objective (SLO)
   parameters:

        - QoS and traffic parameters for the Intserv flow or Diffserv
   class [Y.1541]

        - Availability for the site, VPN, or access connection

        - Duration of outage intervals per site, route or VPN

        - Service activation interval (e.g., time to turn up a new site)

        - Trouble report response time interval

        - Time to repair interval

        - Total traffic offered to the site, route or VPN

        - Measure of non-conforming traffic for the site, route or VPN

        - Delay and delay variation (jitter) bounds

        - Packet ordering, at least when transporting L2 services
   sensitive to reordering (e.g., ATM).

   The above list contains items from [Y.1241], as well as other items
   typically part of SLAs for currently deployed VPN services [FRF.13].
   See [RFC3198] for generic definitions of SLS, SLA, and SLO.

   The provider network management system shall measure, and report as



                                                               [Page 10]





Internet Draft draft-nagarajan-ppvpn-generic-reqts-01.txt       Oct 2002


   necessary, whether measured performance meets or fails to meet the
   above SLS objectives.

   The service provider and the customer may negotiate a contractual
   arrangement that includes a Service Level Agreement (SLA) regarding
   compensation if the provider does not meet an SLS performance
   objective.  Details of such compensation are outside the scope of
   this document.


4.10. Network Resource Partitioning and Sharing between VPNs

   Network resources such as memory space, FIB table, bandwidth and CPU
   processing shall be shared between VPNs. Mechanisms should be
   provided to prevent any specific VPN from taking up available network
   resources and causing others to fail.



5. Provider requirements

   This section describes operational requirements for a cost-effective,
   profitable VPN service offering.


5.1. Scalability

   The scalability for VPN solutions has many aspects. The list below is
   intended to comprise of the aspects that PPVPN solutions should
   address.  Clearly these aspects in absolute figures are very
   different for different types of VPNs - i.e., a point to point
   service has only two sites, while a VPLS or L3VPN may have a larger
   number of sites. It is also important to verify that PPVPN solutions
   not only scales on the high end, a VPN with three sites and three
   users should be as viable as a VPN with hundreds of sites and
   thousands of users.

   Terminology:

   Site: a geographical location with one or more users or one or more
   servers or a combination of servers and users.

   User: the end user equipment (hosts), e.g., a workstation.

   Note: Further discussion on Section 5.1.1 and 5.1.2 is needed.






                                                               [Page 11]





Internet Draft draft-nagarajan-ppvpn-generic-reqts-01.txt       Oct 2002


5.1.1. Service Provider Capacity Sizing Projections


   A PPVPN solution should be scalable to support a very large number of
   VPNs  per Service Provider network. The estimate is that a large
   service provider  will require support for on the order of 10,000
   VPNs within four years.

   A PPVPN solution should be scalable to support of a wide range of
   number of  site interfaces per VPN, depending on the size and/or
   structure of the  customer organization. The number of site
   interfaces should range from a few  site interfaces to over 50,000
   site interfaces per VPN.

   A PPVPN solution should be scalable to support of a wide range of
   number of  routes per VPN. The number of routes per VPN may range
   from just a few to  the number of routes exchanged between ISPs (on
   the order of  100,000). The high end number is especially true
   considering the fact that many large ISPs may provide VPN services to
   smaller ISPs or large corporations. Typically, the number of routes
   per VPN are twice the number of site interfaces or larger.

   A PPVPN solution should support high values of the frequency of
   configuration setup and change, e.g., for real-time provisioning of
   an on-demand videoconferencing VPN or addition/deletion of sites.

   Approaches should articulate scaling and performance limits for more
   complex  deployment scenarios, such as inter-AS(S) VPNs and carriers'
   carrier.  Approaches should also describe other dimensions of
   interest, such as  capacity requirements or limits, number of
   interworking instances supported  as well as any scalability
   implications on management systems.

   A PPVPN solution should support a large number of customer interfaces
   on a single PE (for PE-based PPVPN) or CE (for CE-based PPVPN) with
   current Internet protocols.


5.1.2. VPN Scalability aspects

   This section describes the metrics for scaling PPVPN solutions,
   points out some of the scaling differences between L2 and L3 VPNs.
   Further discussion on service provider sizing projections are in
   Section 5.1.2.







                                                               [Page 12]





Internet Draft draft-nagarajan-ppvpn-generic-reqts-01.txt       Oct 2002


5.1.2.1. Number of users per VPN

   The number of users per VPN is the combination of servers and hosts
   connected to the VPN. It needs to scale from a handful to extremely
   high numbers.

   Clearly there is a possible trade off between the number of users and
   the VPN technology chosen.

   L3 VPNs must scale from 2 users per VPN to O(10^5) users per VPN. L2
   VPNs must scale from 2 users to a few hundred.



5.1.2.2. Number of users per site

   The number of users per site follows the same logic as for users per
   VPN. Further, it must be possible to have single user sites connected
   to the same VPN as very large sites are connected to.

   L3 VPNs must scale from 1 user per site to thousands of users per
   site. L2 VPNs must scale from 1 user to a few hundred per site.


5.1.2.3. Number of sites per VPN

   The number of sites per VPN is clearly limited by the number of users
   for a L2 VPN. The largest number of sites in a L2VPN would be equal
   to the largest number of users, distributed one per site. For L3 VPNs
   number of sites per VPN should scale from 2 to very large numbers
   that are usually limited by router memory.



5.1.2.4. Number of PEs

   The number of PEs that supports the same set of VPNs, i.e., the
   number of PEs that needs to directly exchange information on VPN de-
   multiplexing information is clearly a scaling factor. This number is
   driven by the type of VPN service, and also by whether the service is
   within a single AS/domain or involves a multi-SP or multi-AS network.










                                                               [Page 13]





Internet Draft draft-nagarajan-ppvpn-generic-reqts-01.txt       Oct 2002


5.1.2.5. Number of sites per PE

   The number of sites per PE needs to be discussed based on several
   different scenarios. On the one hand there is a limitation to the
   number of customer facing interfaces that the PE can support. On the
   other hand the access network may aggregate several sites connected
   on comparatively low bandwidth on to one single high bandwidth
   interface on the PE. The scaling point here is that the PE must be
   able to support a few or even a single site on the low end and
   O(10^4) sites on the high end. Various PPVPN solutions may be
   evaluated based on this requirement.



5.1.2.6. Number of VPNs in the network

   The number of sites in a network should not be a scaling issue. The
   number of VPNs should scale linearly with the size of the access
   network and with the number of PEs. As mentioned in Section 5.1.1,
   the number of VPNs in the network should be O(10^4).



5.1.2.7. Number of VPNs per PE

   This is a function of number of sites per PE and number of VPNs per
   site. It is estimated that the number of VPNs needs to be at least
   one order of magnitude higher than the number of sites per PE.




5.1.2.8. Number of VPNs per site

   On a customer's main site it is fully conceivable that the number of
   VPNs could be fairly large, both service diversification and
   separation of different work groups contributes to this. It is
   possible that one customer will run up to O(100) VPNs.


5.1.2.9. Number of addresses per VPN

   Since any VPN solution shall support private customer addresses, the
   number of addresses supported for a L3 VPN needs to scale from very
   few (for smaller customers) to very large numbers seen in typical SP
   backbones. The high end is especially true considering that many Tier
   1 SPs may provide VPN services to Tier 2 SPs or to large
   corporations. For a L2 VPN this number would be on the order of



                                                               [Page 14]





Internet Draft draft-nagarajan-ppvpn-generic-reqts-01.txt       Oct 2002


   addresses supported in typical native Layer 2 backbones.



5.1.2.10. Number of addresses per PE

   This is a function of the number of VPNs per site and the number of
   addresses per site.





5.1.3. Solution-Specific Metrics

   Each PPVPN solution shall document its scalability characteristics in
   quantitative terms. Two examples are provided below as an
   illustration.

   The following example applies to the number of tunnels necessary in
   various  devices in the network. In a PE-based VPN, edge-to-edge
   tunnels (PE-to-PE)  need to be established, while in a CE-based VPN,
   end-to-end tunnels between  pairs of CEs are necessary. Therefore,
   fewer tunnels need to be maintained  in a PE-based solution and
   scalability could be improved over that of  CE-based VPNs. The other
   tradeoff is that in a PE-based solution, the CE is simple at the
   expense of complex PE devices, while on the other hand, in  a CE-
   based solution, the PE devices remain simple while the CE devices are
   more complex.

   A scalable PE-based solution should quantify the amount of state that
   a PE  and P device must support. This should be stated in terms of
   the total  number of VPNs and site interfaces supported by the
   service provider.  Ideally, all VPN-specific state should be
   contained in the PE device for a PE-based VPN. Similarly, all VPN-
   specific state should be contained in the CE device for a CE-based
   VPN.  In all cases, the backbone routers (P devices) shall not
   maintain VPN-specific state as far as possible.



5.2. Management

   A service provider must have a means to view the topology,
   operational state, order status, and other parameters associated with
   each customer's VPN. Furthermore, the service provider must have a
   means to view the underlying logical and physical topology,
   operational state, provisioning status, and other parameters



                                                               [Page 15]





Internet Draft draft-nagarajan-ppvpn-generic-reqts-01.txt       Oct 2002


   associated with the equipment providing the VPN service(s) to its
   customers.

   VPN devices should provide standards-based management interfaces
   wherever feasible.

   Service Provider Network Management System (NMS) requirements mainly
   fall in the traditional fault, configuration, accounting,
   performance, and security (FCAPS) management categories. These
   requirements are available in detail in [Y.1311.1].



6. Engineering requirements

   These requirements are driven by implementation characteristics that
   make service and provider requirements  achievable.


6.1. Forwarding plane requirements

   VPN solutions should not pre-suppose or preclude the use of IETF
   developed tunneling techniques such as IP-in-IP, L2TP, GRE, MPLS or
   IPsec. The separation of VPN solution and tunnels will facilitate
   adaptability with extensions to current tunneling techniques or
   development of new tunneling techniques. It should be noted that the
   choice of the tunneling techniques may impact the service
   capabilities of the VPN solution.

   For Layer 2 VPNs, solutions should utilize the encapsulation
   techniques defined by PWE3, and should not impose any new
   requirements on these techniques.

   PPVPN solutions must not impose any restrictions on the backbone
   traffic engineering and management techniques.  Conversely, backbone
   engineering and management techniques must not affect the basic
   operation of a PPVPN, apart from impacting the SLA/SLS guarantees
   associated with the service.

   By definition, VPN traffic should be segregated from each other, and
   from non-VPN traffic in the network. After all, VPNs are a means of
   dividing a physical network into several logical (virtual) networks.
   VPN traffic separation should be done in a scalable fashion. However,
   safeguards should be made available against misbehaving VPNs to not
   affect the network and other VPNs.

   VPN solution should not impose any hard limit on the number of VPNs
   provided in the network.



                                                               [Page 16]





Internet Draft draft-nagarajan-ppvpn-generic-reqts-01.txt       Oct 2002


6.2.  Control plane requirements

   The plug and play feature of a VPN solution with minimum
   configuration requirements is an important consideration. The VPN
   solutions should have mechanisms for protection against customer
   interface and/or routing instabilities so that they do not impact
   other customers' services.

   A VPN should be provisioned with minimum number of steps. For
   instance, a VPN need not be configured in every PE. For this to be
   accomplished, an auto-configuration and an auto-discovery protocol,
   which should be common to all VPN solutions, should be defined.
   However, these mechanisms should not affect the cost, scalability or
   stability of a service by being overly complex, or by increasing
   layers in the protocol stack.


6.3. Control Plane Containment

   The PPVPN control plane must include a mechanism through which the
   service provider can filter PPVPN related control plane information
   as it passes between Autonomous Systems. For example, if a service
   provider supports a PPVPN offering, but the service provider's
   neighbors do not participate in that offering, the service provider
   should not leak PPVPN control information into neighboring networks.
   Neighboring networks must be equipped with mechanisms that filter
   this information should the service provider leak it.


6.4. Requirements related to commonality of PPVPN mechanisms with each
   other and with generic Internet mechanisms

   As far as possible, the mechanisms used to establish a VPN service
   should re-use well-known IETF protocols as far as possible, limiting
   the need to define new protocols from scratch. It should, however, be
   noted that the use of Internet mechanisms for the establishment and
   running of an Internet-based VPN service, shall not affect the
   stability, robustness, and scalability of the Internet or Internet
   services. In other words, these mechanisms should not conflict with
   the architectural principles of the Internet, nor should it put at
   risk the existing Internet systems. For example, IETF-developed
   routing protocols should be used for routing of L3 PPVPN traffic,
   without adding VPN-specific state to the Internet routers. Similarly,
   familiar L2 technologies should be used in VPNs offering L2 services,
   without imposing risks to the Internet routers.    A solution must be
   implementable without requiring to add additional funcionality to the
   devices in a network.




                                                               [Page 17]





Internet Draft draft-nagarajan-ppvpn-generic-reqts-01.txt       Oct 2002


   In addition to commonality with generic Internet mechanisms,
   infrastructure mechanisms used in different PPVPN solutions (both L2
   and  L3), e.g., discovery, signaling, routing and management, should
   be as common as possible.



6.5. Interoperability

   Each technical solution is expected to be based on interoperable
   Internet standards.

   Multi-vendor interoperability at network element, network and service
   levels among different implementations of the same technical solution
   should be ensured (that will likely rely on the completeness of the
   corresponding standard). This is a central requirement for SPs and
   customers.

   The technical solution must be multi-vendor interoperable not only
   within the SP network infrastructure, but also with the customer's
   network equipment and services making usage of the PPVPN service.

   Customer access connections to a PPVPN solution may be different at
   different sites (e.g., Frame Relay on one site and Ethernet on
   another)

   Interconnection of a L2VPN to a L3VPN as if it were a customer site
   shall be supported.

   Inter-domain interoperability - It should be possible to deploy a
   PPVPN solution across domains, Autonomous Systems, or the Internet.




7. Security Considerations

   This document does not have any security considerations other than
   the security requirements described in Section 4.5.












                                                               [Page 18]





Internet Draft draft-nagarajan-ppvpn-generic-reqts-01.txt       Oct 2002


8. References


8.1. Normative References

      [RFC2026]   Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process - Revision
                  3", BCP 9, RFC 2026, October 1996.
      [RFC2119]   Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
                  Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997


8.2. Non-normative References


     [TERMINOLOGY] Andersson, L., Madsen, T., "Terminology for Provider
                   Provisioned Virtual Private Networks", work in progress
     [PPVPN-FR]    Callon, R., Suzuki, M., et al. "A Framework for Provider
                   Provisioned Virtual Private Networks ", work in progress
     [PPVPN-VR]    Ould-Brahim, H., Gleeson,  B., et al.  "Network based IP
                   VPN  Architecture   using  Virtual  Routers",  work in
                   progress
     [L3REQTS]     Carugi, M., McDysan, D. et al., "Service Requirements
                   for Layer 3 Provider Provisioned Virtual Private
                   Networks", work in progress
     [RFC2547bis]  Rosen, E., Rekhter, Y. et al., "BGP/MPLS VPNs", work
                   in progress.
     [Y.1241]      "IP Transfer Capability for the support of IP based
                   Services", Y.1241 ITU-T Draft Recommendation, March 2000
     [Y.1311.1]    Carugi, M. (editor), "Network Based IP VPN over MPLS
                   architecture",Y.1311.1 ITU-T Recommendation, May 2001
                   (http://ppvpn.francetelecom.com/ituRelated.html)
     [Y.1311]      Knightson, K. (editor), " Network based IP VPN Service
                   - Generic Framework and Service Requirements ", Y.1311
                   ITU-T Draft Recommendation, May 2001
                   (http://ppvpn.francetelecom.com/ituRelated.html)
     [RFC 3198]    A. Westerinen et al, "Terminology for Policy-Based
                   Management," November, 2001.
     [VPN SEC]     J. De Clercq et al, "Considerations about possible
                   security extensions to BGP/MPLS VPN," work in progress.
     [FRF.13]      Frame Relay Forum, "Service Level Definitions
                   Implementation Agreement," August, 1998.
     [Y.1541]      "Network Performance Objectives for IP-based
                   Services," Y.1541, ITU-T Recommendation.








                                                               [Page 19]





Internet Draft draft-nagarajan-ppvpn-generic-reqts-01.txt       Oct 2002


9. Acknowledgements

   This work was done in consultation with the entire design team for
   PPVPN requirements. A lot of the text was adapted from the Layer 3
   requirements document produced by Layer 3 requirements design team.
   The authors would also like to acknowledge the constructive feedback
   from Alex Zinin.

10. Editor's Address

        Ananth Nagarajan
        Sprint
        6220 Sprint Parkway
        Overland Park, KS 66251
        USA
        E-mail: ananth.nagarajan@mail.sprint.com




11. Full Copyright Statement

      Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2000).  All Rights Reserved.

      This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
      others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
      or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
      and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
      kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
      included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
      document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
      the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
      Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
      developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
      copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
      followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
      English.

      The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
      revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

      This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
      "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
      TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
      BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
      HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
      MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.





                                                               [Page 20]





Internet Draft draft-nagarajan-ppvpn-generic-reqts-01.txt       Oct 2002





















































                                                               [Page 21]


