


SIP                                                         J. Rosenberg
Internet-Draft                                                     Cisco
Intended status: Informational                         February 17, 2008
Expires: August 20, 2008


             Concerns around the Applicability of RFC 4474
                draft-rosenberg-sip-rfc4474-concerns-00

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 20, 2008.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

Abstract

   RFC 4474 defines a mechanism for secure identification of callers in
   the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP).  This mechanism has been used
   as the foundation for some recent additional work, including
   connected party identification, anti-spam, and secure media.
   However, concerns have been raised about the applicability of RFC
   4474 in real deployments and the actual level of security services it
   provides.  This document describes those concerns.




Rosenberg                Expires August 20, 2008                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                 INFO Litmus                 February 2008


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  The Problem with Numbers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3.  Attacks Introduced by Usage of Numbers . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     3.1.  The Re-Sign Attack . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     3.2.  The False Number Attack  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   4.  Consequences . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     4.1.  Unsecure Caller ID for Phone Numbers . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     4.2.  Comparison with RFC3325  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     4.3.  Interactions with DTLS-SRTP  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   5.  Conclusions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   6.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   7.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   8.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 14


































Rosenberg                Expires August 20, 2008                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                 INFO Litmus                 February 2008


1.  Introduction

   The Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) [RFC3261] defined a simple
   mechanism for conveying the identity of the caller - a basic From
   field which was inserted by the calling UA.  This mechanism has all
   of the security pitfalls of the From header field in email.

   A short term solution was standardized in [RFC3325], which provides a
   network asserted identity.  This mechanism is better than a basic
   From field, but works only in closed user groups and communities that
   have mutual trust.  A longer term solution was developed, generally
   called SIP Identity, and published in [RFC4474].  SIP Identity makes
   use of domain-based signatures to provide security.  An originating
   proxy authenticates the user, verifies that it matches their identity
   in the From header field, and if so, includes an Identity header
   field.  This header field contains a cryptographic signature over the
   From header field along with other parts of the message, and is then
   signed by the originating domain.  A recipient that receives the
   request can verify the signature, and compare the domain name in the
   signers certificate with the domain name in the From header field.
   If they match, the recipient knows that the originating domain has
   vouched for the identity of the caller.

   The SIP Identity mechanism improves upon RFC 3325 by allowing it to
   work across several transit networks.  There is no requirement of
   mutual trust along every hop; the terminating domain or user directly
   verifies the assertion made by the calling domain.

   SIP Identity has been identified as a core SIP protocol
   [I-D.ietf-sip-hitchhikers-guide].  It has been used as the basis for
   connected identity, which delivers the identity of the called party
   [RFC4916].  More recently, SIP Identity is used to provide the
   integrity services needed to secure DTLS-SRTP
   [I-D.ietf-avt-dtls-srtp].  In essence, it is becoming a core part of
   the SIP security story.

   However, recently concerns have been raised about the applicability
   of SIP Identity, especially in the presence of phone numbers.  This
   document explores those concerns.


2.  The Problem with Numbers

   The mechanism in RFC 4474 is intimately intertwined with the domain
   part of the From URI.  On the receiving side, the identity is
   considered verified when two conditions exist:





Rosenberg                Expires August 20, 2008                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                 INFO Litmus                 February 2008


   o  The signature placed in the Identity header field matches the
      signature computed by the verifier, and

   o  the domain owner, as identified in the signing certificate,
      matches the domain part of the From header field

   Both of these properties are needed to provide the security that SIP
   Identity provides.  Unfortunately, in reality, most SIP deployments
   at the time of writing make use of phone numbers, and not traditional
   email-style user@domain identifiers.  Of course, a phone number does
   not have a domain part.  How, then, can RFC 4474 be used?  The
   specification itself has this to say on the subject:


     11.  Identity and the TEL URI Scheme

        Since many SIP applications provide a Voice over IP (VoIP) service,
        telephone numbers are commonly used as identities in SIP deployments.
        In the majority of cases, this is not problematic for the identity
        mechanism described in this document.  Telephone numbers commonly
        appear in the username portion of a SIP URI (e.g.,
        'sip:+17005551008@chicago.example.com;user=phone').  That username
        conforms to the syntax of the TEL URI scheme (RFC 3966 [13]).  For
        this sort of SIP address-of-record, chicago.example.com is the
        appropriate signatory.

        It is also possible for a TEL URI to appear in the SIP To or From
        header field outside the context of a SIP or SIPS URI (e.g.,
        'tel:+17005551008').  In this case, it is much less clear which
        signatory is appropriate for the identity.  Fortunately for the
        identity mechanism, this form of the TEL URI is more common for the
        To header field and Request-URI in SIP than in the From header field,
        since the UAC has no option but to provide a TEL URI alone when the
        remote domain to which a request is sent is unknown.  The local
        domain, however, is usually known by the UAC, and accordingly it can
        form a proper From header field containing a SIP URI with a username
        in TEL URI form.  Implementations that intend to send their requests
        through an authentication service SHOULD put telephone numbers in the
        From header field into SIP or SIPS URIs whenever possible.


   This text makes it sound like there really isn't much of a problem;
   that the originator merely needs to use the SIP version of his SIP
   URI, and then there will be no problem.  However, the usage of phone
   numbers in this way is problematic.  The presence of the domain part
   in the URI is artificial; as an identifier for a user, the domain
   part is not relevant.




Rosenberg                Expires August 20, 2008                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                 INFO Litmus                 February 2008


   When phone numbers are used, users only know the association between
   the phone number itself and a user.  That is, Bob knows that "+1
   (973) 865-4321" corresponds to Alice.  The domain part is not
   relevant to him.  Bob doesn't use the domain part to reach Alice; he
   just dials the number.  Bob might look up Alice in his phone book,
   but he'll only see the number there.  Bob will use that number when
   dialing Alice from his cell phone or non-VoIP equipment, and not even
   have the opportunity to provide a domain name.  Alice, in turn, gives
   out only her number, without the trailing domain part.  Almost all
   user equipment today that provides a form of caller ID, will NOT
   render the domain part of the URI if the user part is a phone number.
   Indeed, its very likely that Bob doesn't even know that Alice gets
   service from a.com.  Most users don't know the providers of the other
   people they interact with.  Local number portability has made that
   association even more ephemeral.  Users move between providers
   relatively easily now, keeping the same number, even though the
   domain part effectively changes.

   Consequently, the domain part of the SIP URI, when used in
   conjunction with phone numbers, is not relevant to users in
   establishing the identity associated with that number.  For email-
   style identifiers, this is not true - the domain part is highly
   relevant.

   Unfortunately, this problem is a FUNDAMENTAL PROPERTY OF PHONE
   NUMBERS.  No specifications or efforts on the part of IETF can fix
   this problem.  Phone numbers are fundamentally NOT scoped to a
   domain, and attempts to represent them in any other form are
   ultimately futile from an identification perspective.


3.  Attacks Introduced by Usage of Numbers

   The fact that the domain part is irrelevant for SIP URI containing
   phone numbers introduces two attacks into RFC 4474.

3.1.  The Re-Sign Attack

   Consider the network topology of Figure 2.



                  +---------+   +---------+   +---------+
       +-------+  |         |   |         |   |         |  +-------+
       |       |  |         |   |         |   |         |  |       |
       | Alice |--|  a.com  |---|  b.com  |---|  c.com  |--|  Bob  |
       |       |  |         |   |         |   |         |  |       |
       +-------+  |         |   |         |   |         |  +-------+



Rosenberg                Expires August 20, 2008                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                 INFO Litmus                 February 2008


                  +---------+   +---------+   +---------+


                      Figure 2: Transit Configuration

   Alice, who gets VoIP service from a.com, has a phone number of +1
   (973) 865-4321, and sends an INVITE to Bob. Alice has no user@domain
   form of AoR; a.com is providing strictly voice services.  Per the
   instructions in RFC 4474, Alice populates the From header field of
   her INVITE as sip:+19738654321@a.com;user=phone.  The a.com proxy as
   as the authentication service as defined in RFC 4474, and adds an
   Identity header field.  It uses a certificate, signed by a root CA,
   asserting that it is a.com.  This INVITE passes to b.com.  The proxy
   at b.com, for purposes of malice or otherwise, does the following:

   o  Removes the Identity and Identity-Info header fields

   o  Modifies the From header field to
      sip:+19738654321@b.com;user=phone.  In other words, it replaces
      the domain part with its own domain name.

   o  Adds a new Identity and Identity-Info header field, containing its
      own signature, performed using a certificate it holds for the
      b.com domain.

   o  Forwards the request to the target in c.com.

   This request arrives at c.com, and the request is passed to Bob.
   Bob's agent runs the verification process described in RFC 4474.  The
   signature on the request is valid, and the domain in the From header
   field matches the domain in the certificate of the signer.  Bob's UA
   shows the identity of the caller as "+1 (973) 865-4321" and indicates
   that the identity has been verified.  This number does in fact match
   the number of the caller, Alice.  And so, as far as Bob is concerned,
   everything seems fine.  However, b.com has been able to insert
   itself, and do whatever it wants.

   What happened here?  It is illustrative to look at this attack in the
   case where Alice had used a user@domain identifier, for example,
   alice@a.com.  In this case, if the b.com transit domain had done the
   same processing described above, the request would have arrived to
   Bob's user agent.  The signature would be valid, and the domain of
   the signer would match the domain in the From field.  However, the
   identity shown to Bob would be "alice@b.com", which doesn't match
   Alice's AOR as far as Bob knows.  Consequently, Bob will be alerted
   to the fact that something is going on.

   Its important to note that, even with email-style identifiers, the



Rosenberg                Expires August 20, 2008                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                 INFO Litmus                 February 2008


   re-sign attack might not be noticed by Bob. If Bob doesn't know
   Alice; he has no way to know that the caller isn't actually
   alice@b.com.  Consequently, the attack would succeed in that case as
   well.  Indeed, this weakness is outlined in RFC 4474 itself.  From
   Section 13.1:



     In the end analysis, the Identity and Identity-Info headers cannot
     protect themselves.  Any attacker could remove these headers from a
     SIP request, and modify the request arbitrarily afterwards.  However,
     this mechanism is not intended to protect requests from men-in-the-
     middle who interfere with SIP messages; it is intended only to
     provide a way that SIP users can prove definitively that they are who
     they claim to be.

   However, these man-in-the-middle attacks (when an email-style From
   URI is being used) will be detectable for cases where the called
   party knows the caller.  Even when the called party doesn't know the
   caller, attemptes to return their calls would fail, and future
   discussions and communications with the caller would probably quickly
   reveal that the wrong identifier had been delivered.

   Our conclusion is that, when email-style identifiers are used, RFC
   4474 provides a reasonable degree of protection against re-signing
   and, in fact, provides a reasonable degree of message integrity over
   the parts of the message covered by the Identity signature.  However,
   when phone numbers are used, RFC 4474 provides no protection against
   re-signing, and its message integrity is easily subject to MITM
   attacks.

3.2.  The False Number Attack

   Consider once more the topology of Figure 2.  However, in this
   discussion, Alice is a malicious user, and their provider a.com is
   also malicious.  Alice wishes to make a call to Bob, but wishes to
   lie about her phone number in an attempt to mislead Bob as to the
   identity of the caller.  Consequently, even though Alice's actual
   phone number is +1 (973) 865-4321, she would like to initiate a call
   and claim to have the number +1 (202) 456-1414, which is the United
   States White House switchboard number.

   Alice sends her INVITE with a From header field of
   sip:+12024561414@a.com;user=phone.  Her proxy at a.com, which is an
   accomplice in this fabrication, signs the request anyway and includes
   a pointer to its perfectly valid certificate into the Identity-Info
   header field.  The b.com domain is a large provider and doesn't have
   the resources to check up on the behavior of its transit partners.



Rosenberg                Expires August 20, 2008                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                 INFO Litmus                 February 2008


   So, it passes the INVITE on to Bob's domain, c.com.

   This call is then passed to Bob. Since this is a perfectly valid From
   header field value, and the Identity signatures and certificates are
   all valid, Bob accepts the request.  His user agent, noticing that
   this is a phone number, renders just the phone number, which Bob
   recognizes as the White House switchboard number.  He then answers
   the call.

   The reason this attack is possible is that, for phone numbers, only
   the user part, and NOT the domain part, are relevant for
   identification.  Furthermore, there is nothing within the scope of
   RFC 4474 which allows a recipient of a request to determine that a
   particular domain is, in fact, a legitimate owner of a particular
   phone number.  Indeed, the very notion of ownership is a complex one.
   Thus, it is possible for a domain to claim a particular phone number
   in its user part, even if that phone number is not in fact 'owned' by
   that domain.  The only protection offered against this attack is the
   trustworthiness of the domain itself.  A domain cannot lie about who
   they are, but they can lie about what numbers they own.  Thus, if a
   user trusts that a particular domain won't lie, they can determine
   that a call is from that domain, and therefore trust the phone number
   only due to their belief in the truthfulness of that domain.


4.  Consequences

   There are several important consequences of these attacks.

4.1.  Unsecure Caller ID for Phone Numbers

   The false number attack described in Section 3.2 means that RFC 4474
   does not readily provide 'secure caller ID' for phone numbers.  The
   definition of secure in this context is that the phone number present
   in the From header field URI does in fact represent the number of the
   party that originated the call.

   The term 'readily' above is important.  As noted in Section 3.2, the
   asserted calling number can be considered valid if the signing domain
   is trusted by the called UA.  As a general rule, a UA will not have
   an easy way to ascertain the trustworthiness of any particular
   domain.  A UA might, perhaps, be configured with the domains of
   providers it does trust.  For example, a UA might trust the large
   service providers in its country (generally a small and enumerable
   set), and so it could have 'secure' caller ID only for calls from
   those providers.

   If a UA is only willing to trust its own provider, this would likely



Rosenberg                Expires August 20, 2008                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                 INFO Litmus                 February 2008


   result in a model whereby each provider determines the
   trustworthiness of the previous provider, and for those it trusts, it
   modifies the From header field URI and resigns the request.  Such an
   approach would introduce a transitive trust model to possibly
   alleviate this problem.

4.2.  Comparison with RFC3325

   A critical question to be answered, then, is whether RFC 4474
   provides any additional security properties above RFC 3325.

   Firstly, it is clearly the case that for email-style identifiers, RFC
   4474 is far superior to RFC 3325.  RFC 3325 allows the false number
   attack even for those identifiers.  A malicious originating domain
   could assert a caller identity of sip:george@whitehouse.gov, and this
   would be the identity rendered to a called party.  RFC 3325 provides
   an overall level of secure caller ID equal to the trustworthiness of
   the LEAST trustworthy domain in the network.  As the size of a
   network grows, this level of trustworthiness approaches zero.  This
   is not true in RFC 4474; an attacker could not assert identity within
   whitehouse.gov.

   Considering phone numbers, two cases must be considered.  In one
   model, each domain in a chain of domains resigns the request and
   changes the domain name to point to itself.  This is possible because
   the re-sign attack.  In this case, it is not because a domain is
   being malicious; but rather, because it will only choose to re-sign
   if it trusts its upstream domain.  This allows a UA to be configured
   with a single domain to trust - its own provider - and obtain
   transitive trust overall.  This model is, for all intents and
   purposes, identical to the trust model outlined for RFC 3325.
   Consequently, RFC 4474 is no better than RFC 3325 here.

   However, in the second model, intermediate domains do not resign
   requests.  Furthermore, UA's utilize white lists and black lists of
   domains that are known to be trustworthy (or not).  Today, such lists
   do exist and are provided for email spam.  One can imagine a UA
   contacting such a service periodically, or upon an incoming call, to
   verify the signing domain against the list.

   In this model, RFC 4474 is still superior to RFC3325.  In RFC3325,
   the trustworthiness of the caller ID is as trustable as the least
   trustworthy domain.  As noted above, this approaches zero - for all
   calls - once the network reaches a reasonable size.  However, in RFC
   4474, the trustworthiness of the caller ID is as trustable as the
   domain from which the call came.  Of course, calls may still arrive
   from untrusted domains, but in the case of RFC 4474, a UA will know
   that.  As such, it is possible for a UA to separate out caller ID



Rosenberg                Expires August 20, 2008                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                 INFO Litmus                 February 2008


   from domains it does trust from those it doesn't, and if it can
   obtain sufficient coverage from its whitelists so that many incoming
   caller IDs are trusted, the system works better.  That, however, is
   the key.  If the whitelists accessible by a UA cover only 3% of the
   total number of allocated numbers, most incoming calls will not have
   a trustable caller ID, and the system will be just as bad as RFC
   3325.

   If history is any guide, it is my belief that domains are likely to
   follow the first model, and not the second.

   Consequently, the conclusion is that RFC 4474 may provide somewhat
   more trustable caller ID for phone numbers than RFC 3325, but in
   practice they are likely to be identical.  However, for email-style
   identifiers, RFC 4474 is superior.

4.3.  Interactions with DTLS-SRTP

   When used with email identifiers, RFC 4474 provides a limited form of
   message integrity protection against MITM attacks.  As discussed
   above, this is because modified domains in From fields are likely to
   be readily detected by end users, either right away or in the future.
   However, with phone numbers, RFC 4474 provides no message integrity
   against MITM attacks.

   This weakness interacts with DTLS-SRTP [I-D.ietf-avt-dtls-srtp].  In
   particular, [I-D.ietf-sip-dtls-srtp-framework] describes how the DTLS
   handshakes are correlated with the signaling exchange by means of the
   message integrity mechanisms provided by RFC 4474.  However, when the
   calling party has a phone number, that message integrity is lost.

   A consequence of this is that any intermediate signaling entity could
   modify the DTLS fingerprints, insert itself as a media intermediary,
   and then decrypt and re-encrypt media on each side.  Such an attack
   would not be detectable if the caller has a phone number.  Indeed, it
   won't be detectable even if they have an email-style identifier, if
   the called party doesn't recognize that the caller's identity doesn't
   match what their UA is showing to them.

   This, in turn, raises an important question - does, in fact, DTLS-
   SRTP provide "more secure" media than Sdescriptions [RFC4568]?  One
   of the key weaknesses of Sdescriptions is that, assuming each hop is
   TLS, the keying material is still exposed to each and every
   intermediate proxy.  This means that any intermediary could intercept
   and process the media.  When used with phone numbers, DTLS-SRTP has
   this same weakness.

   That said, DTLS-SRTP does provide some advantages even when used with



Rosenberg                Expires August 20, 2008               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft                 INFO Litmus                 February 2008


   phone numbers:

   o  To protect against eavesdropping attacks from off-path attackers,
      Sdescriptions requires that each and every hop has properly
      encrypted the link with TLS (this is ignoring the possibility of
      end-to-end SMIME encryption).  Thus, simple misconfiguration of an
      intermediary can expose Sdescriptions to attacks by offpath
      attackers.  DTLS-SRTP does not rely on confidentiality services
      from intermediaries; indeed it relies on nothing special from
      them, except that they aren't being malicious.  Thus, DTLS-SRTP
      provides better protection against offpath attacks.

   o  With Sdescriptions, because the keying material is in the
      signaling, intermediaries will see it directly even when each
      signaling hop is encrypted.  Consequently, it is possible that
      this material could 'leak' out unsecured channels, such as logs an
      application interfaces.  This would allow other entities access to
      the keying material and thus allow them to manipulate the media
      stream.  With DTLS-SRTP, this is possible only by active attack by
      such applications.  Thus, DTLS-SRTP provides mildly better
      protection here.

   Thus, DTLS-SRTP still provides better security than Sdescriptions.
   However, when used with phone numbers, it is by no means ideal.  Most
   importantly, it does NOT provide guarantees that intermediaries have
   not been able to intercept and decrypt the media.


5.  Conclusions

   Unfortunately, there is no simple remedy to this problem.  The
   problems with RFC4474 cannot just be fixed by an alternate security
   technique.  They are deeply rooted in the domain independence of
   phone numbers.

   Consequently, our recommendation at this point is to more clearly
   document the limitations of RFC4474 when used with phone numbers.  We
   recommend that RFC4474 be revised, and that the updated document
   include a more detailed discussion of the weaknesses it has when used
   with phone numbers.  Similarly, we recommend that
   [I-D.ietf-sip-dtls-srtp-framework] be revised to include a more
   thorough description of the limitations of DTLS-SRTP when used with
   phone numbers.


6.  Security Considerations

   This document is concerned entirely with security.



Rosenberg                Expires August 20, 2008               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft                 INFO Litmus                 February 2008


7.  IANA Considerations

   None.


8.  Informative References

   [RFC3261]  Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston,
              A., Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley, M., and E.
              Schooler, "SIP: Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261,
              June 2002.

   [RFC3325]  Jennings, C., Peterson, J., and M. Watson, "Private
              Extensions to the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) for
              Asserted Identity within Trusted Networks", RFC 3325,
              November 2002.

   [RFC4474]  Peterson, J. and C. Jennings, "Enhancements for
              Authenticated Identity Management in the Session
              Initiation Protocol (SIP)", RFC 4474, August 2006.

   [I-D.ietf-sip-hitchhikers-guide]
              Rosenberg, J., "A Hitchhiker's Guide to the Session
              Initiation Protocol (SIP)",
              draft-ietf-sip-hitchhikers-guide-04 (work in progress),
              November 2007.

   [RFC4916]  Elwell, J., "Connected Identity in the Session Initiation
              Protocol (SIP)", RFC 4916, June 2007.

   [I-D.ietf-avt-dtls-srtp]
              McGrew, D. and E. Rescorla, "Datagram Transport Layer
              Security (DTLS) Extension to Establish Keys for  Secure
              Real-time Transport Protocol (SRTP)",
              draft-ietf-avt-dtls-srtp-01 (work in progress),
              November 2007.

   [I-D.ietf-sip-dtls-srtp-framework]
              Fischl, J., Tschofenig, H., and E. Rescorla, "Framework
              for Establishing an SRTP Security Context using DTLS",
              draft-ietf-sip-dtls-srtp-framework-00 (work in progress),
              November 2007.

   [RFC4568]  Andreasen, F., Baugher, M., and D. Wing, "Session
              Description Protocol (SDP) Security Descriptions for Media
              Streams", RFC 4568, July 2006.





Rosenberg                Expires August 20, 2008               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft                 INFO Litmus                 February 2008


Author's Address

   Jonathan Rosenberg
   Cisco
   Edison, NJ
   US

   Email: jdrosen@cisco.com
   URI:   http://www.jdrosen.net










































Rosenberg                Expires August 20, 2008               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft                 INFO Litmus                 February 2008


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Rosenberg                Expires August 20, 2008               [Page 14]

