
Internet-Draft                                                Ryan Moats
draft-ietf-urn-ietf-00.txt                                          AT&T
Expires in six months                                           May 1997

                 URN Namespace for RFC series documents
                  Filename: draft-ietf-urn-ietf-00.txt


Status of This Memo

      This document is an Internet-Draft.  Internet-Drafts are working
      documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its
      areas, and its working groups.  Note that other groups may also
      distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

      Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
      months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
      documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-
      Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as ``work
      in progress.''

      To learn the current status of any Internet-Draft, please check
      the ``1id-abstracts.txt'' listing contained in the Internet-
      Drafts Shadow Directories on ftp.is.co.za (Africa), nic.nordu.net
      (Europe), munnari.oz.au (Pacific Rim), ds.internic.net (US East
      Coast), or ftp.isi.edu (US West Coast).


Abstract

   A system for Uniform Resource Names (URNs) must be capable of
   supporting new naming systems.  As an example of the sort of
   information that needs to be supplied when proposing new namepsaces,
   this document presents a naming system based on the RFC family of
   documents (RFCs, STDs, and FYIs) developed by the IETF and published
   by the RFC editor.  This namespace can be supported within the URN
   framework and the currently proposed syntax for URNs.

0. Document History and Status

   With the first draft of this document, the only issue that has
   occured on the list is the discussion on functional equivalence for
   this namespace (see section 1.5).  There are currently two positions
   on this:  the first is what is specified here, and the second is that
   there is no equivalency for this namespace, e.g. a resolver receiving
   a request must return ONLY the resource named by that request.





Expires 11/97                                                   [Page 1]





INTERNET DRAFT   URN Namespace for RFC series documents         May 1997


1. Namespace Syntax

   Consistent with the URN syntax specification [1], each namespace must
   specify syntax related information that is specific to that
   namespace.  This section covers these specifications.

1.1. Namespace Identifier (NID)

   The namespace identifier for this namespace is "ietf".

1.2. Namespace Specific String (NSS)

   The Namespace Specific String has the following ABNF [2]
   specification:
           NSS = family ":" number

           family = "rfc" | "std" | "fyi"

           number = 1*DIGIT

           DIGIT = %x30..%x39

   The ABNF specification for "family" above is based on the current
   documents in the RFC family.  As new document series are added to the
   IETF family by the IESG (or its successor), this ABNF specification
   will need to be updated.  Any system intended to resolve names for
   this namespace should be written with the awareness that a new
   document series may be introduced at any time.

1.3. Additional Reserved Characters

   No characters in addition to those specified in [1] are reserved by
   this namespace.

1.4. Additional Lexical Equivalence Relations

   Note that the entire URN is case-insensitive, because of the
   defintion of the NSS.

1.5. Functional Equivalence Relations

   Rules for equivalence in this namespace are embedded in the document
   mappings maintained by the RFC Editor (the index files "rfc-
   index.txt", "fyi-index.txt", "std-index.txt").  A resource is
   equivalent to the set of resources implied by the "(Also...)"
   construct in these mappings.  As an example, the URN
   "urn:ietf:rfc:1661" is equivalent to th URN "urn:ietf:std:51" because
   the "rfc-index.txt" map shows that RFC 1661 is also STD 51.  However,



Expires 11/97                                                   [Page 2]





INTERNET DRAFT   URN Namespace for RFC series documents         May 1997


   the URN "urn:ietf:std:51" is equivalent to the SET of URNs
   "urn:ietf:rfc:1661" and "urn:ietf:rfc:1662" since the "std-index.txt"
   shows that STD 51 is also RFC 1661 and RFC 1662.  Therefore, a
   resolver receiving a N2R request for "urn:ietf:std:51" MUST return
   either STD 51 or BOTH RFC 1661 and RFC 1662.

2. Security Considerations

   Because this namespace defines no additional reserved characters, it
   does not add any security considerations beyond those inherent from
   the existence of the reserved characters from [1].  Further, the
   definition of the NSS above does not use any of the reserved
   characters from [1], which means that resolvers for this namespace
   may be considered "secure" in the sense that any escaping of
   characters in the NSS MUST result in the resolver indicating that the
   URN has incorrect syntax.

3. Acknowledgments

   Thanks to various members of the URN working group for comments on
   earlier drafts of this document.  This document is partially
   supported by the National Science Foundation, Cooperative Agreement
   NCR-9218179.

4. References

   Request For Comments (RFC) and Internet Draft documents are available
   from <URL:ftp://ftp.internic.net> and numerous mirror sites.

         [1]         R. Moats, "URN Syntax," RFC 2141, May 5, 1997.

         [2]         D. Crocker, P. Overell, "Augmented BNF for Syntax
                     Specifications: ABNF," Internet Draft (work in pro-
                     gress), January 1997.

5. Author's Address

   Ryan Moats
   AT&T
   15621 Drexel Circle
   Omaha, NE 68135-2358
   USA

   Phone:  +1 402 894-9456
   EMail:  jayhawk@att.com


              This Internet Draft expires November 30, 1997.



Expires 11/97                                                   [Page 3]





INTERNET DRAFT   URN Namespace for RFC series documents         May 1997





















































Expires 11/97                                                   [Page 4]



