Network Working Group                                      Scott Bradner
Internet-Draft                                        Harvard University
                                                             Vern Paxson
                                                                   ACIRI
                                                               July 1999

                 IANA Allocation Policies For Values In
               the Internet Protocol and Related Headers

                 <draft-bradner-iana-allocation-00.txt>

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This document will expire in January 2000.

Abstract

   This memo provides guidance for the IANA to use in assigning
   parameters for fields in the IPv4, TCP, UDP, ICMP and IPv6 protocol
   headers.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (1999).  All Rights Reserved.

Bradner & Paxson                                                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft              IANA Assignments                   July 1999

1. Introduction

   For many years the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA) has
   allocated parameter values for fields in the network protocols which
   have been created or are maintained by the Internet Engineering Task
   Force (IETF).  Starting a few years ago the IETF began to provide the
   IANA with guidance for the assignment of parameters for fields in
   newly developed protocols.  Unfortunately this type of guidance was
   not consistently provided for the fields in protocols developed
   before 1998.  This memo provides the IANA with guidance to be used in
   the assignment of parameters in some of these protocols.  It is
   expected that additional memos will be developed in the future to
   provide guidance in other cases.

   This memo addresses the fields within the IPv4, TCP, UDP, ICMP and
   IPv6 headers for which the IANA assigns values.

   The terms "Specification Required", "Expert Review", "IESG Approval",
   "IETF Consensus", and "Standards Action", are used in this memo to
   refer to the processes described in [CONS].

2. Temporary Assignments

   From time to time temporary assignments are made in the values for
   fields in these headers for use in experiments.  IESG Approval is
   required for any such temporary assignments.

3. IANA Considerations for fields in the IPv4 header

   The IPv4 header [V4] contains the following fields that carry values
   assigned by the IANA: Version (by definition always 4 in IPv4), Type
   of Service, Protocol, Source Address, Destination Address, and Option
   Type.

   The IANA allocates values from the IP Version name space following a
   Standards Action process.

   The Type of Service field described in [V4] has been superceded
   [DIFF] by the 6-bit Differentiated Services (DS) field and a 2-bit
   currently unused field.  The IANA allocates values in the DS field
   following the IANA Considerations section in [DIFF].  The values in
   the 2-bit unused field are allocated following a Standards Action
   process.

   IANA allocates values from the IPv4 Protocol name space following an
   Expert Review, IESG Approval or Standards Action process.  The Expert

Bradner & Paxson                                                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft              IANA Assignments                   July 1999

   Review process should only be used in those special cases where non-
   disclosure information is involved.  In these cases the expert should
   be designated by the IESG.

   The IPv4 Source and Destination addresses use the same values.  These
   values fall into a number of ranges (called "Classes") defined in
   [V4] and [MULT].  The guidelines for the allocation of the values
   from the IPv4 Class A, Class B and Class C unicast addresses are
   under the control of Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and
   Numbers (ICANN) other than values from the ranges 0/8 (which was
   reserved in [AN80]) and 127/8 (from which the loopback address has
   been taken) along with other values already assigned by the IETF for
   special functions or purposes. (For example, the private addresses
   defined in RFC 1918) Further assignments in the 0/8 and 127/8 ranges
   require an Standards Action process.  The IETF has also assigned a
   number of IPv4 Class D (multicast) addresses for special purposes.
   The values in the range from 224.0.0.0 to 224.0.0.255 , inclusive,
   are reserved for the use of routing protocols and other low-level
   topology discovery or maintenance protocols, such as gateway
   discovery and group membership reporting. (See the IANA web page) New
   values in this range are assigned following an IESG Approval or
   Standards Action process.  Assignments of individual Class D address
   follow an Expert Review, IESG Approval or Standards Action process.
   Until further work is done on multicast protocols large scale
   assignments of IPv4 Class D addresses is not recommended.  IPv4 Class
   E addresses are reserved [MULT] and not to be assigned unless an IETF
   Standards Action modifies the IPv4 protocol in such a way as to make
   Class E addresses valid.

   The IANA allocates values from the IPv4 Option Type name space
   following an IESG Approval, IETF Consensus or Standards Action
   process.

4. IANA Considerations for fields in the IPv6 header

   The IPv6 header [V6] contains the following fields that carry values
   assigned from IANA-managed name spaces: Version (by definition always
   6 in IPv6), Traffic Class, Next Header, Source and Destination
   Address.  In addition, the IPv6 Hop-by-Hop Options and Destination
   Options extension headers include an Option Type field with values
   assigned from an IANA-managed name space.

   The Version field in the IPv6 header uses the same name space as the
   Version field in the IPv4 header. Values in this field are allocated
   as described in Section 2.

   The IPv6 Traffic Class uses the same namespace as the IPv4 6-bit DS

Bradner & Paxson                                                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft              IANA Assignments                   July 1999

   field and 2-bit unused field. Values in these fields are allocated as
   described in Section 2.

   The IPv6 Next Header field carries values from the same name space as
   the IPv4 Protocol name space. These values are allocated as discussed
   in Section 2.

   The IPv6 Source and Destination address fields both use the same
   values and are described in [V6AD].  The addresses are divided into
   ranges defined by a variable length Format Prefix (FP).  The
   guidelines for the assignment of values in the Aggregatable Global
   Unicast Addresses FP (FP 001) are under the control of the Internet
   Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN).  The
   responsibility for assigning values in each of the "unassigned" and
   "reserved" FPs is delegated by IESG Approval or Standards Action
   processes.

   Values for the IPv6 Hop-by-Hop Options and Destination Options fields
   are allocated using an IESG Approval, IETF Consensus or Standards
   Action processes.

5. IANA Considerations for fields in the ICMP header

   The ICMP header [ICMP] contains the following fields that carry
   values assigned from IANA-managed name spaces: Type and Code.

   Values for the ICMP Type and Code fields are allocated using an IESG
   Approval or Standards Action processes.

6. IANA Considerations for fields in the UDP header

   The UDP header [UDP] contains the following fields that carry values
   assigned from IANA-managed name spaces: Source and Destination Port.

   Both the Source and Destination Port fields use the same namespace.
   Values in this namespace are assigned following a Specification
   Required, Expert Review, IESG Approval, IETF Consensus, or Standards
   Action process.  Note that some assignments may involve non-
   disclosure information.

7. IANA Considerations for fields in the TCP header

   The TCP header [TCP] contains the following fields that carry values
   assigned from IANA-managed name spaces: Source and Destination Port,
   Reserved Bits, and Option Kind.

Bradner & Paxson                                                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft              IANA Assignments                   July 1999

   Both the Source and Destination Port fields use the same namespace.
   Values in this namespace are assigned following a Specification
   Required, Expert Review, IESG Approval, IETF Consensus, or Standards
   Action process.  Note that some assignments may involve non-
   disclosure information.

   The reserved bits in the TCP header are assigned following a
   Standards Action process.

   Values in the Option Kind field are assigned following an IESG
   Approval or Standards Action process.

8. Security Considerations

   Security analyzers such as firewalls and network intrusion detection
   monitors often rely on unambiguous interpretations of the fields
   described in this memo.  As new values for the fields are assigned,
   existing security analyzers that do not understand the new values may
   fail, resulting in either loss of connectivity if the analyzer
   declines to forward the unrecognized traffic, or loss of security if
   it does forward the traffic and the new values are used as part of an
   attack.  This vulnerability argues for high visibility (which the
   Standards Action and IETF Consensus processes ensure) for the
   assignments whenever possible.

9. References

   [AN80] Postel, J., "Assigned numbers", RFC 758, August 1979

   [CONS] Narten, T. and H. Alvestrand, "Guidelines for Writing an IANA
      Considerations Section in RFCs", RFC 2434, October 1998.

   [DIFF] Nichols, K., S. Blake, F. Baker, D. Black, " Definition of the
      Differentiated Services Field (DS Field) in the IPv4 and IPv6
      Headers", RFC 2474, December 1998.

   [ICMP] Postel, J., "Internet Control Message Protocol", RFC 792,
      September 1981.

   [MULT] Deering, S. E., "Host extensions for IP multicasting", RFC
      988, July 1986

   [TCP] Postel, J., "Transmission Control Protocol", RFC 793, September
      1981.

   [UDP] Postel, J., "User Datagram Protocol", RFC 768, August 1980.

Bradner & Paxson                                                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft              IANA Assignments                   July 1999

   [V4] Postel, J., "Internet Protocol", RFC 791, September, 1981.

   [V6] Deering, S., R. Hinden, "Internet Protocol, Version 6 (IPv6)
      Specification", RFC 2460, December 1998.

   [V6AD] Hinden, R., S. Deering, "IP Version 6 Addressing
      Architecture", RFC 2373, July 1998

10. Author's Addressees

   Scott Bradner
   Harvard University
   1350 Mass Ave - rm 876
   Cambridge MA - USA
   02138

   sob@harvard.edu
   +1 617 495 3864

   Vern Paxson
   ACIRI / ICSI
   1947 Center Street, Suite 600
   Berkeley, CA - USA
   94704-1198

   vern@aciri.org
   +1 510/642-4274 x302

Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (1999).  All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

Bradner & Paxson                                                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft              IANA Assignments                   July 1999

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Bradner & Paxson                                                [Page 7]
