 



ANIMA WG                                                          B. Liu
INTERNET-DRAFT                                                  S. Jiang
Intended Status: Standard Track                      Huawei Technologies
Expires: January 3, 2019                                         X. Xiao
                                                               A. Hecker
                                                           Z. Despotovic
                                                MRC, Huawei Technologies
                                                            July 2, 2018




            Information Distribution in Autonomic Networking
                 draft-liu-anima-grasp-distribution-06


Abstract

   This document discusses the requirement of capability of information
   distribution among autonomic nodes in autonomic networks. In general,
   information distribution can be categorized into two different modes:
   1) one autonomic node instantly sends information to other nodes in
   the domain; 2) one autonomic node can publish some information and
   then some other interested nodes can subscribe the published
   information. In the former case, information data will be generated
   and consumed instantly. In the latter case, however, information data
   shall be stored in the network and retrieved when necessary.

   These capabilities are fundamental and basic to a network system and
   an autonomic network infrastructure (ANI) should consider to
   integrate them, rather than assisted by other transport or routing
   protocols (HTTP, BGP/IGP as bearing protocols etc.).  Thus, this
   document clarifies possible use cases and requirements to ANI so that
   information distribution can be natively supported. Possible options
   realizing the information distribution function are also briefly
   discussed.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
 


Liu, et al.             Expires January 3, 2019                 [Page 1]

INTERNET DRAFT      Information Distribution in ANI         July 2, 2018


   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html


Copyright and License Notice

   Copyright (c) 2018 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors. All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document. Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document. Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.



Table of Contents

   1  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2. Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   3. Requirements of Advanced Information Distribution  . . . . . . . 4
   4. Real-world Use Case Examples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
      4.1 Service-Based Architecture (SBA) in 3GPP 5G  . . . . . . . . 6
      4.2 Vehicle-to-Everything  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
      4.3 Summary  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   5. Node Behaviors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
      5.1 Instant Information Distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
         5.1.1 Instant P2P and Flooding Communications . . . . . . . . 8
         5.1.2 Instant Selective Flooding Communication  . . . . . . . 8
      5.2 Asynchronous Information Distribution  . . . . . . . . . . . 9
         5.2.1 Event Queue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
         5.2.2 Information Storage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
         5.2.3 Interface between IS and EQ Modules . . . . . . . . .  11
      5.3 Summary  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   6. Protocol Specification (GRASP extension) . . . . . . . . . . .  12
      6.1 Un-solicited Synchronization Message (A new GRASP Message)  12
 


Liu, et al.             Expires January 3, 2019                 [Page 2]

INTERNET DRAFT      Information Distribution in ANI         July 2, 2018


      6.2 Selective Flooding Option  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
      6.3 Subscription Objective Option  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
      6.4 Un_Subscription Objective Option . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
      6.5 Publishing Objective Option  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
   7. Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
   8. IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
   9. Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
   10. Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
   Appendix A. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15



1  Introduction

   In autonomic networking, autonomic functions (AFs) running on
   autonomic nodes utilize autonomic control plane (ACP) to realize
   various control purposes [RFC7575]. Due to the distributed nature of
   a network system, AFs need to exchange information constantly, either
   for control plane signaling, for data plane service or for both. 

   This document discusses the information distribution capability of an
   autonomic network.  We classify information distribution scenarios
   into the following two models:

      1) An instant communication model where a sender directly connects
      and sends information data (e.g. control messages, synchronization
      data and so on) to the receiver(s). 

      2) An asynchronous communication model where an autonomic node
      publishes information and any other nodes that are interested in
      the information can later subscribe that and will be notified if
      the information become available.

   The two communication models should be integrated within the
   Autonomic Network Infrastructure (ANI) [I-D.behringer-anima-
   reference-model], rather than assisted by other transport or routing
   protocols (HTTP, BGP/IGP as bearing protocols etc.). In fact, GRASP
   already provides some capabilities to support parts of the
   information distribution function, utilized for stable connectivity
   as in [I-D.ietf-anima-stable-connectivity-10]. 

   In this document, we analyze possible scenarios of information
   distribution in autonomic networks (Section 3), and then discuss the
   technical requirements (Section 4) that an autonomic node has to
   fulfill. After that, the node behaviors with extensions on current
   GRASP to realize the information distribution are introduced.

 


Liu, et al.             Expires January 3, 2019                 [Page 3]

INTERNET DRAFT      Information Distribution in ANI         July 2, 2018


2. Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].

3. Requirements of Advanced Information Distribution

   Information distribution can occur either between two or among
   multiple network nodes.

   - Point-to-point (P2P) Communications:

   This is a common scenario in most of network systems. Information are
   exchanged between two communicating parties from one node to another
   node. Specifically, the information can be either pushed to the
   receiver or pulled from a sender. Therefore, we have two sub-cases:

      1) One node acquires some information from another one. This is a
      very common scenario that can already be covered by GRASP.

      2) One node actively pushes some information to another one. For
      example, when some common information are propagated to the
      network, it is possible that some nodes are sleeping/off-line, so
      when these nodes get online again, their neighbors could push the
      information to them immediately.

   - One-to-Many Communications:

   Some information exchange involve an information source and multiple
   receivers. This scenario can be divided into two situations:

      1) When some information are relevant to all or most of the nodes
      in the domain, the node that firstly handle the information should
      use a mechanism to propagate it to all the other nodes.  One
      typical case is the Intent distribution, which is briefly
      discussed in Section 4.7 of [I-D.ietf-anima-reference-model]. A
      flood mechanism, which can guarantee the information could reach
      to every node, is the most proper approach to do this.

      2) A more general case is that some information is only relevant
      to a specific group of nodes belonging to the same sub-domain or
      sharing the same interests. Then, the information needs to be
      propagated to the nodes that fit for certain conditions. This
      could reduce some unnecessary signaling amplification.

   Clearly, both of the two scenarios can be directly carried by the
   instant communication model. Especially, if the information exchange
 


Liu, et al.             Expires January 3, 2019                 [Page 4]

INTERNET DRAFT      Information Distribution in ANI         July 2, 2018


   is simple and short, this can be done instantly. In practice,
   however, information distribution is not always simple. As examples,
   in the following cases, a mixture of instant and asynchronous
   communication models is more appropriate.

      1) Long Communication Intervals. The time interval of the
      communication is not necessarily always short and instant.
      Advanced AFs  may rather involve heavy jobs/tasks when gearing the
      network, so the direct mode may introduce unnecessary pending time
      and become less efficient. For example, an AF accesses another AF
      for a database lookup. Similar use cases include AF migration, AF
      authentication and authorization. If simply using an instant mode,
      the AF has to wait until the tasks finish and return. A better way
      is that an AF instantly sends the request but switches to an
      synchronous mode, once the jobs are finished, AFs will get
      notified.

      2) Common Interest Distribution. As mentioned, some information
      are common interests among AFs. For example, the network intent is
      distributed to network nodes enrolled, which is a typical one-to-
      many scenario. We can also finish the intent distribution by an
      instant flooding (e.g. via GRASP) to every network nodes across
      the network domain. Because of network dynamic, however, not every
      node can be just ready at the moment when the network intent is
      flooded. Actually, nodes may join in the network sequentially. In
      this situation, an asynchronous communication model could be a
      better choice where every (newly joining) node can subscribe the
      intent information and will get notified if it is ready (or
      updated).

      3) Distributed Coordination. With computing and storage resources
      on autonomic nodes, alive AFs not only consumes but also generates
      data information. For example, AFs coordinating with each other as
      distributed schedulers, responding to service requests and
      distributing tasks. It is critical for those AFs to make correct
      decisions based on local information, which might be asymmetric as
      well. AFs may also need synthetic/aggregated data information
      (e.g. statistic info, like average values of several AFs, etc.) to
      make decisions. In these situations, AFs will need an efficient
      way to form a global view of the network (e.g. about resource
      consumption, bandwidth and statistics). Obviously, purely relying
      on instant communication model is inefficient, while a scalable,
      common, yet distributed data layer, on which AFs can store and
      share information in an asynchronous way, should be a better
      choice.

   For ANI, in order to support various communication scenarios, an
   information distribution module is required, and both instant and
 


Liu, et al.             Expires January 3, 2019                 [Page 5]

INTERNET DRAFT      Information Distribution in ANI         July 2, 2018


   asynchronous communication models should be supported.

4. Real-world Use Case Examples

   The requirement analysis above shows that generally information
   distribution should be better of as an infrastructure layer module,
   which provides to upper layer utilizations. In this section, we
   review some use cases from the real-world where an information
   distribution module with powerful functions do plays a critical role
   there.

4.1 Service-Based Architecture (SBA) in 3GPP 5G

   In addition to Internet, the telecommunication network (i.e. carrier
   mobile wireless networks) is another world-wide networking system.
   The architecture of the upcoming 5G mobile networks from 3GPP has
   already been defined to follow a service-based architecture (SBA)
   where any network function (NF) can be dynamically associated with
   any other NF(s) when needed to compose a network service. Note that
   one NF can simultaneously associate with multiple other NFs, instead
   of being physically wired as in the previous generations of mobile
   networks. NFs communicate with each other over service-based
   interface (SBI), which is also standardized by 3GPP [3GPP.23.501].

   In order to realize an SBA network system, detailed requirements are
   further defined to specify how NFs should interact with each other
   with information exchange over the SBI. We now list three
   requirements that are related to information distribution here.

      1) NF Pub/Sub: Any NF should be able to expose its service status
      to the network and any NF should be able to subscribe the service
      status of an NF and get notified if the status is available. An
      concrete example is that a session management function (SMF) can
      subscribe the REGISTER notification from an access management
      function (AMF) if there is a new user entity trying to access the
      mobile network [3GPP.23.502].

      2) Network Exposure Function (NEF): A particular network function
      that is required to manage the event exposure and distributions.
      In specific, SBA requires such a functionality to register network
      events from the other NFs (e.g. AMF, SMF and so on), classify the
      events and properly handle event distributions accordingly in
      terms of different criteria (e.g. priorities) [3GPP.23.502].

      3) Network Repository Function (NRF): A particular network
      function where all service status information is stored for the
      whole network. An SBA network system requires all NFs to be
      stateless so as to improve the resilience as well as agility of
 


Liu, et al.             Expires January 3, 2019                 [Page 6]

INTERNET DRAFT      Information Distribution in ANI         July 2, 2018


      providing network services. Therefore, the information of the
      available NFs and the service status generated by those NFs will
      be globally stored in NRF as a repository of the system. This
      clearly implies storage capability that keeps the information in
      the network and provides those information when needed. A concrete
      example is that whenever a new NF comes up, it first of all
      registers itself at NRF with its profile. When a network service
      requires a certain NF, it first inquires NRF to retrieve the
      availability information and decides whether or not there is an
      available NF or a new NF must be instantiated [3GPP.23.502].

4.2 Vehicle-to-Everything

   Carrier networks On-boarding services of vertical industries are also
   one of some blooming topics that are heavily discussed. Connected car
   is clearly one of the important scenarios interested in automotive
   manufacturers, carriers and vendors. 5G Automotive Alliance - an
   industry collaboration organization defines many promising use cases
   where services from car industry should be supported by the 5G mobile
   network. Here we list two examples as follows [5GAA.use.cases].

      1) Software/Firmware Update: Car manufacturers expect that the
      software/firmware of their car products can be remotely
      updated/upgraded via 5G network in future, instead of onsite
      visiting their 4S stores/dealers offline as nowadays. This
      requires the network to provide a mechanism for vehicles to
      receive the latest software updates during a certain period of
      time. In order to run such a service for a car manufacturer, the
      network shall not be just like a network pipe anymore. Instead,
      information data have to be stored in the network, and delivered
      in a publishing/subscribing fashion. For example, the latest
      release of a software will be first distributed and stored at the
      access edges of the mobile network, after that, the updates can be
      pushed by the car manufacturer or pulled by the car owner as
      needed.

      2) Real-time HD Maps: Autonomous driving clearly requires much
      finer details of road maps. Finer details not only include the
      details of just static road and streets, but also real-time
      information on the road as well as the driving area for both local
      urgent situations and intelligent driving scheduling. This asks
      for situational awareness at critical road segments in cases of
      changing road conditions. Clearly, a huge amount of traffic data
      that are real-time collected will have to be stored and shared
      across the network. This clearly requires the storage capability,
      data synchronization and event notifications in urgent cases from
      the network, which are still missing at the infrastructure layer.

 


Liu, et al.             Expires January 3, 2019                 [Page 7]

INTERNET DRAFT      Information Distribution in ANI         July 2, 2018


4.3 Summary

   Through the general analysis and the concrete examples from the real-
   world, we realize that the ways information are exchanged in the
   coming new scenarios are not just short and instant anymore. More
   advanced as well as diverse information distribution capabilities are
   required and should be generically supported from the infrastructure
   layer. Upper layer applications (e.g. ASAs in ANIMA) access and
   utilize such a unified mechanism for their own services.

5. Node Behaviors

   In this section, we discuss how each autonomic node should behave in
   order to realize the information distribution module. In other words,
   we discuss the node requirement if an information distribution module
   is required across the ANI. Supporting the two communication models
   that may happen in the ANI necessarily involves node interactions and
   information data exchange. Specifically, we first introduce the node
   requirement for the instant communication model, and after that we
   introduce the node requirement for the asynchronous communication
   model.

5.1 Instant Information Distribution

   In this case, sender(s) and receiver(s) are explicitly and
   immediately specified (e.g. the addresses of the receivers).
   Information will be directly distributed from the sender(s) to the
   receiver(s). This requires that every node is equipped by some
   signaling/transport protocols so that they can coordinate with each
   other and correctly deliver the information. 

5.1.1 Instant P2P and Flooding Communications

   We consider that current GRASP already provides some of the instant
   P2P and flooding communications capabilities.

   Straightforwardly, it is natural to use the GRASP Synchronization
   message directly for P2P distribution. Furthermore, it is also
   natural to use the GRASP Flood Synchronization message for 1-to-all
   distribution.

   However, as mentioned in Section 3, in some scenarios one node needs
   to actively send some information to another. GRASP Synchronization
   just lacks such capability. An un-solicited synchronization mechanism
   is needed. A relevant GRASP extension is defined in Section 6.

5.1.2 Instant Selective Flooding Communication

 


Liu, et al.             Expires January 3, 2019                 [Page 8]

INTERNET DRAFT      Information Distribution in ANI         July 2, 2018


   When doing selective flooding, the distributed information needs to
   contain the criteria for nodes to judge which interfaces should be
   sent the distributed information and which are not. Specifically, the
   criteria contain:

      o  Matching condition: a set of matching rules.

      o  Matching object: the object that the match condition would be
      applied to.  For example, the matching object could be node itself
      or its neighbors.

      o  Action: what behavior the node needs to do when the matching
      object matches or failed the matching condition.  For example, the
      action could be forwarding or discarding the distributed message.

   The sender has to includes the criteria information in the message
   that carries the distributed information. The receiving node decides
   the action according to the criteria carried in the message. Still
   considering the criteria attached with the distributed information,
   the node behaviors can be:

      o When the Matching Object is "Neighbors", then the node matches
      the relevant information of its neighbors to the Matching
      Condition.  If the node finds one neighbor matches the Matching
      Condition, then it forwards the distributed message to the
      neighbor.  If not, the node discards forwarding the message to the
      neighbor.

      o When the Matching Object is the node itself, then the node
      matches the relevant inforshi mation of its own to the Matching
      Condition.  If the node finds itself matches the Matching
      Condition, then it forwards the distributed message to its
      neighbors; if not, the node discards forwarding the message to the
      neighbors.

   An example of selective flooding is briefly described in the Appendix
   A.

5.2 Asynchronous Information Distribution

   Asynchronous information distribution happens in a different way
   where sender(s) and receiver(s) are normally not immediately
   specified. In other words, both the sender and the receiver may come
   up in an asynchronous way. First of all, this requires that the
   information can be stored; secondly, it requires an information
   publication and subscription (Pub/Sub) mechanism. (Corresponding
   protocol specification of Pub/Sub is defined in Section 6.)

 


Liu, et al.             Expires January 3, 2019                 [Page 9]

INTERNET DRAFT      Information Distribution in ANI         July 2, 2018


   Specifically, an information publisher 1) receives publishing
   requests from local AFs (also from ASAs), 2) decides where to store
   the published information, 3) updates corresponding event queues. On
   the other hand, an information subscriber registers its interests, 2)
   monitors event queues in the system and 3) trigger information
   retrieval if information of registered events are ready.

   In general, each node requires two modules: 1) event queue (EQ)
   module and 2) information storage (IS) module shown in Figure. 1.
   These two modules should be integrated with the information
   distribution module. We introduce details of the two modules in the
   following sections.

                +---------------------------------------+
                | +---------------+   +---------------+ |
                | |  Event Queue  |-|-| Info. Storage | |
                | +---------------+   +---------------+ |
                +---------------------------------------+
              Figure 1. Components for asynchronous comm.
                                    
5.2.1 Event Queue

   Event Queue (EQ) module is responsible for event classification,
   event prioritization and event matching. 

   Firstly, EQ module provides isolated event queues customized for
   different event groups. Specifically, two groups of AFs could have
   completely different purposes or interests, therefore EQ
   classification allows to create multiple message queues where only
   AFs interested in the same category of events will be aware of the
   corresponding event queue.

   Secondly, events generated may have to be processed with different
   priorities. Some of them are more urgent than the normal and regular
   ones. Also between two event queues, their priorities may be
   different. EQ prioritization allows AFs to set different priorities
   on the information they published. Based on the priority settings in
   the event queue, matching and delivery of them will be adjusted. EQ
   module can provide several pre-defined priority levels for both
   intra-queue and inter-queue prioritizations.

   Third, events in queues will be listened and if a publishing event is
   found and matched by a registration event, information retrieval will
   be triggered.

5.2.2 Information Storage

   Events are closely related to the information. IS module handles how
 


Liu, et al.             Expires January 3, 2019                [Page 10]

INTERNET DRAFT      Information Distribution in ANI         July 2, 2018


   to efficiently save and retrieve information for AFs across the
   network according to announced events. Any information that is
   published by AFs will be sent to the IS module, and the IS module
   decides where to store the information and how to index and retrieve
   it.

   The IS module defines a syntax to index information, not only
   generating the hash index value (e.g. a key) for the information, but
   also mapping the hash index to a certain network node in ANI.

   When data information is published by an AF (i.e. publishing events),
   it will be sent to the IS module. The IS module calculates its hash
   index (i.e. the key) and the location responsible for storing the
   information. The IS module confirms with the node chosen to store the
   information by negotiation. After that, if available, the IS module
   sends the information to there.

   When data information has to be retrieved (i.e. subscribing events),
   a request from an AF will be also received by the IS module. IS
   module, by parsing the request, identifies the hash index of the
   information, which tells the location of the information as well.
   After that, the IS module requests the desired information and
   retrieves it once it is ready. 

   IS module can reuse distributed databases and key value stores like
   NoSQL, Cassandra, DHT technologies. storage and retrieval of
   information are all event-driven responsible by the EQ module.

5.2.3 Interface between IS and EQ Modules

   EQ and IS modules are correlated. When an AF publishes information,
   not only an publishing event is translated and sent to EQ module, but
   also the information is indexed and stored simultaneously. Similarly,
   when an AF subscribes information, not only subscribing event is
   triggered and sent to EQ module, but also the information will be
   retrieved by IS module at the same time.

5.3 Summary

   In summary, the general requirements for the information distribution
   module on each autonomic node are two sub-modules handling instant
   communications and asynchronous communications, respectively. For
   instant communications, node requirements are simple, in which
   signaling protocols have to be supported. With minimum efforts,
   reusing the existing GRASP is possible. For asynchronous
   communications, information distribution module requires event queue
   and information storage mechanism to be supported.

 


Liu, et al.             Expires January 3, 2019                [Page 11]

INTERNET DRAFT      Information Distribution in ANI         July 2, 2018


6. Protocol Specification (GRASP extension)

   There are multiple ways to integrate the information distribution
   module. The principle we follow is to minimize modifications made to
   the current ANI. 

   We consider to use GRASP as an interface to access the information
   distribution module. The main reason is that the current version of
   GRASP is already an information distribution module for the cases of
   P2P and flooding. In the following discussions, we introduce how to
   complete the missing part.

6.1 Un-solicited Synchronization Message (A new GRASP Message)

   In fragmentary CDDL, a Un-solicited Synchronization message follows
   the pattern:

      unsolicited_synch-message = [M_UNSOLDSYNCH, session-id, objective]

   A node MAY actively send a unicast Un-solicited Synchronization
   message with the Synchronization data, to another node. This MAY be
   sent to port GRASP_LISTEN_PORT at the destination address, which
   might be obtained by GRASP Discovery or other possible ways. The
   synchronization data are in the form of GRASP Option(s) for specific
   synchronization objective(s). 

6.2 Selective Flooding Option

   In fragmentary CDDL, the selective flood follows the pattern:

      selective-flood-option = [O_SELECTIVE_FLOOD, +O_MATCH-CONDITION,  
                                match-object, action]
      O_MATCH-CONDITION = [O_MATCH-CONDITION, Obj1, match-rule, Obj2]
         Obj1 = text 
         match-rule = GREATER / LESS / WITHIN / CONTAIN
         Obj2 = text
      match-object = NEIGHBOR / SELF
      action = FORWARD / DROP

   The selective flood option encapsulates a match-condition option
   which represents the conditions regarding to continue or discontinue
   flood the current message. For the match-condition option, the Obj1
   and Obj2 are to objects that need to be compared. For example, the
   Obj1 could be the role of the device and Obj2 could be "RSG". The
   match rules between the two objects could be greater, less than,
   within, or contain. The match-object represents of which Obj1 belongs
   to, it could be the device itself or the neighbor(s) intended to be
   flooded. The action means, when the match rule applies, the current
 


Liu, et al.             Expires January 3, 2019                [Page 12]

INTERNET DRAFT      Information Distribution in ANI         July 2, 2018


   device just continues flood or discontinues.

6.3 Subscription Objective Option

   In fragmentary CDDL, a Subscription Objective Option follows the
   pattern:

      subscription-objection-option = [SUBSCRIPTION, 2, 2, subobj]
      objective-name = SUBSCRIPTION
      objective-flags = 2
      loop-count = 2
      subobj = text

   This option MAY be included in GRASP M_Synchronization, when
   included, it means this message is for a subscription to a specific
   object.

6.4 Un_Subscription Objective Option

   In fragmentary CDDL, a Un_Subscribe Objective Option follows the
   pattern:

      Unsubscribe-objection-option = [UNSUBSCRIB, 2, 2, unsubobj]
      objective-name = SUBSCRIPTION
      objective-flags = 2
      loop-count = 2
      unsubobj = text

   This option MAY be included in GRASP M_Synchronization, when
   included, it means this message is for a un-subscription to a
   specific object. 

6.5 Publishing Objective Option

   In fragmentary CDDL, a Publish Objective Option follows the pattern:

      publish-objection-option = [PUBLISH, 2, 2, pubobj] objective-name
      = PUBLISH
      objective-flags = 2
      loop-count = 2
      pubobj = text

   This option MAY be included in GRASP M_Synchronization, when
   included, it means this message is for a publish of a specific object
   data.

   [Editor's Note]: Detailed node behavior and processing procedures of
   these new options will be introduced in the next version.
 


Liu, et al.             Expires January 3, 2019                [Page 13]

INTERNET DRAFT      Information Distribution in ANI         July 2, 2018


7. Security Considerations

   The distribution source authentication could be done at multiple
   layers:

      o  Outer layer authentication: the GRASP communication is within
      ACP (Autonomic Control Plane,
      [I-D.ietf-anima-autonomic-control-plane]). This is the default
      GRASP behavior.

      o  Inner layer authentication: the GRASP communication might not
      be within a protected channel, then there should be embedded
      protection in distribution information itself. Public key
      infrastructure might be involved in this case.

8. IANA Considerations

   TBD.


9. Normative References
   [I-D.ietf-anima-grasp]
   Bormann, D., Carpenter, B., and B. Liu, "A Generic Autonomic
   Signaling Protocol (GRASP)", draft-ietf-animagrasp-15 (Standard
   Track), October 2017.

10. Informative References

   [RFC7575] Behringer, M., "Autonomic Networking: Definitions and
              Design Goals", RFC 7575, June 2015

   [I-D.ietf-anima-autonomic-control-plane] 
              Eckert, T., Behringer, M., and S. Bjarnason, "An Autonomic
              Control Plane (ACP)", draft-behringer-anima-autonomic-
              control-plane-13, December 2017.

   [I-D.ietf-anima-stable-connectivity-10]
              Eckert, T., Behringer, M., "Using Autonomic Control Plane
              for Stable Connectivity of Network OAM", draft-ietf-anima-
              stable-connectivity-10, February 2018.

   [I-D.ietf-anima-reference-model] 
              Behringer, M., Carpenter, B., Eckert, T., Ciavaglia, L.,
              Pierre P., Liu, B., Nobre, J., and J. Strassner, "A
              Reference Model for Autonomic Networking", draft-ietf-
              anima-reference-model-05, October 2017.

   [I-D.du-anima-an-intent]
 


Liu, et al.             Expires January 3, 2019                [Page 14]

INTERNET DRAFT      Information Distribution in ANI         July 2, 2018


              Du, Z., Jiang, S., Nobre, J., Ciavaglia, L., and M.
              Behringer, "ANIMA Intent Policy and Format", draft-
              duanima-an-intent-05 (work in progress), February 2017.


   [I-D.ietf-anima-grasp-api]
              Carpenter, B., Liu, B., Wang, W., and X. Gong, "Generic
              Autonomic Signaling Protocol Application Program Interface
              (GRASP API)", draft-ietf-anima-grasp-api-00 (work in
              progress), December 2017.

   [3GPP.23.501]
              3GPP, "System Architecture for the 5G System", 3GPP TS
              23.501 15.2.0, 6 2018,
              <http://www.3gpp.org/ftp/Specs/html-info/23501.htm>.

   [3GPP.23.502]
              3GPP, "Procedures for the 5G System", 3GPP TS 23.502
              15.2.0, 6 2018, <http://www.3gpp.org/ftp/Specs/html-
              info/23502.htm>.

   [5GAA.use.cases]
              White Paper "Toward fully connected vehicles: Edge
              computing for advanced automotive communications", 5GAA
              <http://5gaa.org/news/toward-fully-connected-vehicles-
              edge-computing-for-advanced-automotive-communications/>




Appendix A.

   GRASP includes flooding criteria together with the delivered
   information so that every node will process and act according to the
   criteria specified in the message. An example of extending GRASP with
   selective criteria can be:

      o  Matching condition: "Device role=IPRAN_RSG"

      o  Matching objective: "Neighbors"

      o  Action: "Forward"

   This example means: only distributing the information to the
   neighbors who are IPRAN_RSG.

Authors' Addresses

 


Liu, et al.             Expires January 3, 2019                [Page 15]

INTERNET DRAFT      Information Distribution in ANI         July 2, 2018


   Bing Liu
   Huawei Technologies
   Q27, Huawei Campus
   No.156 Beiqing Road
   Hai-Dian District, Beijing  100095
   P.R. China

   Email: leo.liubing@huawei.com


   Sheng Jiang
   Huawei Technologies
   Q27, Huawei Campus
   No.156 Beiqing Road
   Hai-Dian District, Beijing  100095
   P.R. China

   Email: jiangsheng@huawei.com

   Xun Xiao
   Munich Research Center
   Huawei technologies
   Riesstr. 25, 80992, Muenchen, Germany

   Emails: xun.xiao@huawei.com

   Artur Hecker
   Munich Research Center
   Huawei technologies
   Riesstr. 25, 80992, Muenchen, Germany

   Emails: artur.hecker@huawei.com

   Zoran Despotovic
   Munich Research Center
   Huawei technologies
   Riesstr. 25, 80992, Muenchen, Germany

   Emails: zoran.despotovic@huawei.com












Liu, et al.             Expires January 3, 2019                [Page 16]
