

Network Working Group                                            K. Best
Internet-Draft                                               OASIS, Inc.
Expires: June 18, 2001                                          N. Walsh
                                                  Sun Microsystems, Inc.
                                                       December 18, 2000


                      A URN Namespace for XML.org
                                 xmlorg
                         draft-best-xmlorg-00.txt 

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents
   at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on June 18, 2001.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2000). All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   This document describes a URN namespace that is engineered by the
   Organization for the Advancement of Structured Information Standards
   (OASIS) for naming persistent resources stored in the XML.org
   repository (such as XML Document Type Definitions, XML Schemas,
   Namespaces, Stylesheets, and other documents).

1. Introduction

   The XML.org Registry is provided by XML.org as a public service
   where XML schemas, DTDs, stylesheets, and other documents can be
   shared. Documents are submitted to a repository then retrieved by


Best & Walsh             Expires June 18, 2001                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft        A URN Namespace for XML.org          December 2000


   others who may want to use them. These documents require unique
   identifiers. 

   Motivated by these observations, XML.org would like to assign URNs
   to some resources in order to retain unique, permanent
   location-independent names for them. 

   This namespace specification is for a formal namespace. 

2. Specification Template

   Namespace ID: 

     "xmlorg" requested.

   Registration Information: 

     Registration Version Number: 1
     Registration Date: 2000-12-18

   Declared registrant of the namespace: 

     OASIS
     Karl Best

   Declaration of structure: 

     The Namespace Specific String (NSS) of all URNs assigned by
     XML.org will have the following hierarchical structure: 

     There is one branch at the top of the hierarchy: "objects". 

     The Objects Hierarchy 

       The general structure of the NSS in the names hierarchy has
       the form: 

         urn:xmlorg:objects:{type}{:subtype}?:{object-id} 

       where "type" identifies the document type (document, schema,
       stylesheet, entity, xmlns, etc.), the optional "subtype"
       provides additional information about the document type (for
       example, stylesheet or schema language), and "object-id" is a
       unique identifier for the document. 

       The Director of Technical Operations at OASIS assigns document
       types, subtypes, and all unique identifiers. 

   Relevant ancillary documentation: 


Best & Walsh             Expires June 18, 2001                  [Page 2]


     None

   Identifier uniqueness considerations: 

     Identifier uniqueness will be enforced by the Director of
     Technical Operations who assigns unique identifiers to all
     documents identified by URN.

   Identifier persistence considerations: 

     OASIS is committed to maintaining the accessability and
     persistence of all the resources that are assigned URNs.

   Process of identifier assignment: 

     Assignment is limited to the owner and those authorities that
     are specifically designated by the owner. OASIS may assign
     portions of its namespace for assignment by other parties.

   Process of identifier resolution: 

     The owner will distribute catalogs (OASIS TR9401 Catalogs)
     that map the assigned URNs to resource identifiers (e.g.,
     URLs). In addition, the owner may provide an online resolution
     service based on RFC2483. 

     The owner will authorize additional resolution services as
     appropriate.

   Rules for Lexical Equivalence: 

     URNs are lexically equivalent if they are lexically identical.

   Conformance with URN Syntax: 

     No special considerations.

   Validation mechanism: 

     None specified. The owner will publish OASIS TR9401 Catalogs.
     The presence of a URN in a catalog indicates that it is valid. 

   Scope: 

     Global


3. Examples

   The following examples are not guaranteed to be real. They are
   listed for pedagogical reasons only. 


Best & Walsh             Expires June 18, 2001                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft        A URN Namespace for XML.org          December 2000


      urn:xmlorg:objects:schema:xmlschema:xcatalog
      urn:xmlorg:objects:dtd:xml:docbook:v4.1.2

4. Security Considerations

   There are no additional security considerations other than those
   normally associated with the use and resolution of URNs in general. 

References

   [1]  Goldfarb, C. F., "ISO (International Organization for
        Standardization) ISO 8879:1986(E) Information Processing --
        Text and Office Systems -- Standard Generalized Markup Language
        (SGML)", 1986.

   [2]  W3C, XML WG, "Extensible Markup Language (XML) 1.0", February
        1998, 
        <http://www.w3.org/TR/REC-xml>.

   [3]  W3C, Namespaces WG, "Namespaces in XML", January 1999, 
        <http://www.w3.org/TR/REC-xml-names>.

   [4]  OASIS, Entity Mgmt. TC, "Entity Management: OASIS Technical
        Resolution 9401:1997 (Amendment 2 to TR 9401)", January 1994, 
        <http://www.oasis-open.org/html/a401.htm>.

   [5]  Moats, R., "URN Syntax", RFC 2141, May 1997.

   [6]  Mealling, M. and R. Daniel, "URI Resolution Services Necessary
        for URN Resolution", RFC 2483, January 1999.


Authors' Addresses

   Karl Best
   OASIS, Inc.
   P.O. Box 455
   Billerica, MA  01821
   US

   EMail: karl.best@oasis-open.org










Best & Walsh             Expires June 18, 2001                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft        A URN Namespace for XML.org          December 2000


   Norman Walsh
   Sun Microsystems, Inc.
   One Network Drive
   MS UBUR02-201
   Burlington, MA  01803-0902
   US

   EMail: Norman.Walsh@East.Sun.COM











































Best & Walsh             Expires June 18, 2001                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft        A URN Namespace for XML.org          December 2000


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2000). All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph
   are included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Acknowledgement

   Funding for the RFC editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.



















Best & Walsh             Expires June 18, 2001                  [Page 6]

