

Provider Provisioned VPN WG                           Hamid Ould-Brahim
Internet Draft                                          Nortel Networks
 
Expiration Date: December 2002                            Bryan Gleeson
                                                         Tahoe Networks
                                                       
                                                          Yakov Rekhter 
                                                       Juniper Networks
                                                       
                                                              June 2002
 
 
    
    
    
                      Global Unique Identifiers (GID) 
    
                     draft-ouldbrahim-ppvpn-gid-01.txt 
 
 
 
 
    
Status of this Memo 
     
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
      all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 [RFC-2026].  
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.  
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
   at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts as 
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."  
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt  
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
 
    
Abstract 
    
    
   The existing VPN solutions [VR, 2547, L2VPN-Kompella] use in their 
   control plane globally unique identifiers. This document describes 
   the format of these identifiers (called GIDs). If any future VPN 
   solutions require globally unique identifiers, they can re-use the 
   format described in this document. 
  
Ould-Brahim, et. al                                           [Page 1] 
Internet-Draft   draft-ouldbrahim-ppvpn-gid-01.txt        June 2002 
 
 
 
ID Summary 
 
   RELATED DOCUMENTS 
    
   [RFC2685], [RFC2547bis], [VR], [L2VPN-Kompella] 
    
    
   WHERE DOES IT FIT IN THE PICTURE OF THE SUB-IP WORK 
    
   Fits the PPVPN box. 
    
   WHY IS IT TARGETED AT THIS WG 
    
   This ID proposes a format for generating unique global identifiers.  
    
   JUSTIFICATION 
 
   This draft proposes a format for generating unique global 
   identifiers to be used by various VPN proposals.  
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
   The existing VPN solutions [VR, RFC2547bis, L2VPN-Kompella] use in 
   their control plane globally unique identifiers. This document 
   describes the format of these identifiers, called GIDs. If any 
   future VPN solutions require globally unique identifiers, they can 
   re-use the format described in this document. 
    
   The GID is based on BGP extended community format. No assumption is  
   made on the usage of the GID. It is up to the VPN solutions to 
   describe the usage of the GID. However, it is important to stress 
   that GIDs have to be unique only within the context of their 
   particular application, but need not be unique across applications. 
   An application can interpret the GID structure according to its own 
   usage. 
    
   This draft doesn't describe a complete list of all possible ways of 
   forming GIDs. In fact, IP addresses, DNS names, URLs, etc, could be 
   used to form GIDs as well. 
    
    
 
    
2. Global Identifier Format 
    
   Each GID is encoded as an eight octet quantity, as follows: 
    
         - Type Field  : 1 or 2 octets 
         - Value Field : Remaining octets 
    
 
Ould-Brahim, et al.             June 2002                  [Page 2] 
Internet-Draft   draft-ouldbrahim-ppvpn-gid-01.txt        June 2002 
 
         Type Field: 
    
            The value of the high-order octet will determine if it is a 
            regular type or extended type. The size of the Type Field    
            for regular types is 1 octet and the size of the Type Field  
            for extended types is 2 octets. 
    
   All GID types must have a unique high-order octet. 
    
            The high-order octet of the Type Field is as shown below: 
    
               First bit (MSB)   : IANA authority bit 
                                   Value 0 : IANA assignable type 
                                   Value 1 : Vendor-specific types 
    
               Second bit        : Reserved 
    
               Remaining 6 bits  : Indicates the structure of the 
                                   GID 
 
   Value Field: 
    
        The encoding of the Value Field dependents on the "type" of 
        the GID as specified by the Type Field.  
    
   This document introduces a few types and defines the Value Field for 
   those types. 
 
 
   - Type 0x00:  
    
   This is an extended type with a Type Field comprising of 2 octets 
   and Value Field of 6 octets. 
    
   The value of the high-order octet of this extended type is 
   0x00 and the low-order octet of this extended type is used to 
   indicate subtypes.  
 
     
     The Value field is structured as follows: 
    
            * Administrator sub-field: 2 octets 
            * Assigned Number sub-field: 4 octets 
    
      The Administrator sub-field must contain an Autonomous System 
      number. If this ASN is from the public ASN space, it must have 
      been assigned by the appropriate authority (use of ASN values 
      from the private ASN space is strongly discouraged).  The 
      Assigned Number sub-field contains a number from a numbering space 
      which is administered by the enterprise to which the ASN has been 
      assigned by an appropriate authority. 
    
   - Type 0x01 
 
Ould-Brahim, et al.             June 2002                  [Page 3] 
Internet-Draft   draft-ouldbrahim-ppvpn-gid-01.txt        June 2002 
 
    
    
   This is an extended type with a Type Field of 2 octets and a Value 
   Field of 6 octets. 
    
   The value of the high-order octet of this extended type is 
   0x01. The low-order octet of this extended type is used to indicate 
   subtypes. 
  
 
       The Value field consists of two sub-fields (6 octets): 
 
            * Administrator sub-field: 4 octets 
            * Assigned Number sub-field: 2 octets 
    
      The Administrator sub-field must contain an IP address. If this IP 
      address is from the public IP address space, it must have been 
      assigned by an appropriate authority (use of addresses from the 
      private IP address space is strongly discouraged). The Assigned 
      Number sub-field contains a number from a numbering space which 
      is administered by the enterprise to which the IP address has 
      been assigned. 
    
   - Type 0x02 
 
        This is an extended type with a Type Field of 2 octets 
        and a Value Field of 6 octets. 
    
        The value of the high-order octet of this extended type is 
        0x02. The low-order octet of this extended type is used to 
        indicate subtypes. 
    
          The Value Field consists of two sub-fields. 
    
              * Administrator sub-field: 4 octets 
              * Assigned Number sub-field: 2 octets  
    
   The Administrator sub-field must contain a 4-octets Autonomous 
   System number. If this ASN is from the public ASN space, it must 
   have  
   been assigned by the appropriate authority (use of ASN values  
   from the private ASN space is strongly discouraged).  The  
   Assigned Number sub-field contains a number from a numbering space  
   which is administered by the enterprise to which the ASN has been  
   assigned by an appropriate authority.  
    
   - Type 0x04 
    
     This is a regular type with a type field of 1 octet and a Value 
   Field of 7 octets.  
    
    
   The Value Field consists of two sub-fields.  
 
Ould-Brahim, et al.             June 2002                  [Page 4] 
Internet-Draft   draft-ouldbrahim-ppvpn-gid-01.txt        June 2002 
 
        
                 * Administrator sub-field: 3 octets  
                 * Assigned Number sub-field: 4 octets   
        
      The Administrator sub-field must contain a 3-octet  
       Organizationally Unique Identifier, as defined in [OUI].    
       Assignment of OUIs is carried out by the IEEE [OUI-Registry].     
       The Assigned Number sub-field contains a number from a numbering  
       space which is administered by the enterprise to which the OUI 
       has been assigned. 
    
    
3. IANA Considerations 
    
   We suggest that within the context of a particular application that 
   uses GIDs, the GID Type Field space be partitioned as follows. The 
   Type Field values 0x00-0x3f (0x0000-0x3fff when expressed as 
   extended-types) be assigned by IANA using the "First  Come First 
   Served" policy defined in RFC 2434. Type values 0x80-0xbf (0x8000-
   0xbfff when expressed as extended-types) are for vendor-specific 
   types, and values in this range are not to be assigned by IANA. 
    
4. Security Considerations 
    
   This document defines the format for generating global identifier 
   without specifying usage. 
 
    
5. References 
    
    
   [BGP-COMM] Ramachandra, Tappan, et al., "BGP Extended Communities 
      Attribute", draft-ramachandra-bgp-ext-communities-09.txt 
   June 2001, work in progress 
    
   [L2VPN-Kompella] Kompella, K., et al., "Layer 2 VPNs Over Tunnels", 
      draft-kompella-ppvpn-l2vpn-01.txt. 
 
   [RFC2547bis] Rosen E., et al, "BGP/MPLS VPNs", work in progress. 
    
   [RFC-2685] Fox B., et al, "Virtual Private Networks Identifier", RFC 
      2685, September 1999. 
    
   [VR], Ould-Brahim, H., et al., "Network-based IP VPNs using Virtual 
      Router architecture", draft-ietf-ppvpn-vr-01.txt, 
    
   [OUI] ANSI/IEEE, Std 802-1990 "IEEE Standards for Local and 
      Metropolitan Area Networks".  
    
   [OUI-Registry] "http://standards.ieee.org/regauth/oui/index.shtml" 

5. Author's Addresses 
    
 
Ould-Brahim, et al.             June 2002                  [Page 5] 
                  draft-ouldbrahim-ppvpn-gid-01.txt          June 2002 
 
 
       
   Hamid Ould-Brahim                        
   Nortel Networks  
   P O Box 3511 Station C                   
   Ottawa, ON K1Y 4H7, Canada                      
   Email: hbrahim@nortelnetworks.com                            
   Phone: +1 613 765 3418                   
 
 
   Bryan Gleeson 
   Tahoe Networks  
   3052 Orchard Drive   
   San Jose, CA 95134 USA   
   Email: bryan@tahoenetworks.com  
 
    
   Yakov Rekhter 
   Juniper Networks 
   1194 N. Mathilda Avenue 
   Sunnyvale, CA 94089 
   E-mail: yakov@juniper.net 
 
                                 
    




























 
Ould-Brahim, et al.         December 2002                     [Page 6] 
                  draft-ouldbrahim-ppvpn-gid-01.txt          June 2002 
 
 
    
Full Copyright Statement 
    
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (date). All Rights Reserved. This 
   document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published 
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any 
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph 
   are included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this 
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for 
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be 
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than 
   English. 
    
   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be 
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns. 
 
    
    





























 
Ould-Brahim, et al.         December 2002                     [Page 7] 

