





Network Working Group
Internet Draft                                              G. Paterno'
Document: draft-gpaterno-wireless-pppoe-00.txt                   Editor
Expires: March 2003                                      September 2002


                Using PPPoE to authenticate Wireless LAN


Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 except that the right to
   produce derivative works is not granted.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.   Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.   It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL
   NOT","SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in
   this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC-2119].

Abstract

   This document targets the Internet Service Providers and Wireless
   Internet Service Providers who aims to provide access to their users
   through Wireless LAN technologies, such as IEEE 802.11. Through this
   paper, the author explores the advantages of using the Point-To-Point
   Protocol over Ethernet to provide access to the internetwork and
   gives suggestions on how to deploy the infrastucture.







G. Paterno'                   Informational                     [Page 1]

Internet-Draft         Using PPPoE in Wireless LAN        September 2002


Table of Contents

   1. Current Wireless LAN Scenario...............................2
   2. Proposed Solution...........................................2
   Copyright and disclaimer.......................................3
   References.....................................................4
   Acknowledgments................................................4
   Author's Addresses.............................................4

1. Current Wireless LAN Scenario

   The current popular standard for Wireless LAN is the IEEE 802.11,
   which is widely adopted by the device manufacturers. In brief, the
   protocol emulates an ethernet network and most of today's access
   points act as bridge between an existant Local Area Network, for
   example the corporate LAN, and the wireless network. Furthermore, the
   protocol itself includes a security feature, named Wireless
   Encription Protocol (WEP), which should provide encryption to the
   connection, thus privacy.

   Unfortunatly, it has been demonstrated that WEP can be broken by a
   potential malicious user that might gain access to the network
   without supplying any credential.

   Furthermore, the use of DHCP or other LAN technologies might
   represent a disadvantage for Internet Service Providers that are
   unable to identify a specific user, for example for accounting
   purposes.

   The protocol 801.11 tries to fill the gap suggesting the use of MAC
   addresses to identify uniquely the users. The use of MAC addresses
   introduces another issue on manageability: if a user changes the
   wireless adapter, for example a broken one, he/she should contact the
   ISP and provides the new MAC address and the old one to be
   deconfigured.

2. Proposed solution

   With the introduction of cable and ADSL technologies, ISPs has
   adopted a methodology for resolving such a problem for the broadband
   world.

   The above technologies, in usual configurations, are able to emulate
   an ethernet network. Although the DHCP is an easy to deploy for a
   Service Provider and to configure from an user perspective, it does
   not provide a way to authenticate the user, thus impossible for
   accounting or authorization.




G. Paterno'                   Informational                     [Page 2]

Internet-Draft         Using PPPoE in Wireless LAN        September 2002


   The community solved this need with the introduction of the Point-To-
   Point over Ethernet protocol (PPPoe), described in RFC 2516.  Through
   the adoption of this protocol, access control, billing and several
   type of services can be done on a per-user, rather than a per-site or
   cell basis.

   The 802.11 tecnology, in a similar way to the aforementioned
   broadband technologies, is able to emulate the ethernet network.  The
   advantage is clear: through applying the PPPoE technology to the
   wireless LANs, traditional ISPs and the Wireless Internet Service
   Providers might bring authentication, authorisation, accounting to
   the wireless users without changing the existing dial-up
   infrastructure.

   A practical example of using this technology is to provide, for
   example, fixed IP addresses to roaming wireless user: wherever the
   the user is located, he/she can have his/her IP address and the
   quality of service subscribed.

   Furthermore, the use of PPP will bring another layer to potential
   malicious users, that should break both the WEP and the PPP layer.
   It is envisaged that password SHOULD not be exchanged through the PAP
   authentication methodology, but a challenged protocol such as CHAP
   should be used instead.

   A possible scenario of deployement would be to disable the use of WEP
   from the access-points and use CHAP and Microsoft Point-To-Point
   Encryption Protocol (RFC3078) instead, which is easier to configure
   from an end-user perspective.

Copyright and disclaimer

   Copyright (C) Giuseppe Paterno' (2002).  All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the author of this document or
   other Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.




G. Paterno'                   Informational                     [Page 3]

Internet-Draft         Using PPPoE in Wireless LAN        September 2002


   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the author or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and Giuseppe Paterno' DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE."

References

   [1] RFC 2516, "A Method for Transmitting PPP Over Ethernet (PPPoE)"
   [2] Roaring Penguin PPPoE implementation
   [3] RAS PPPoE protocol implementation, by Robert Schlabbach

Acknowledgments

   The author of this document wish to thanks Silvio Danesi and Daniele
   Todde for providing the technical infrastructure, Luca Sciortino for
   his moral support.

Author's addresses

   Giuseppe Paterno'
   Via Copernico, 63
   20094 Corsico (MI)
   Italy
   Email: gpaterno@gpaterno.com























G. Paterno'                   Informational                     [Page 4]

