Network Working Group                                       I. Nishioka 
Internet Draft                                                      NEC 
Intended Status: Standard Track                             Daniel King 
Expires: April 2008                                       Aria Networks 
                                                          November 2007 



            The use of SVEC (Synchronization VECtor) list for 
                Synchronized dependent path computations

                  draft-nishioka-pce-svec-list-01.txt


Status of this Memo 
   
   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any 
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware 
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes 
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79. 
   
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet- 
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt. 
    
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
    
Copyright Notice 
 
   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).  All rights reserved. 












Nishioka & King          Expires April, 2008                [Page 1]
Internet-Draft    draft-nishioka-pce-svec-list-01.txt November 2007


Abstract 
   A Path Computation Element (PCE) performing dependent path 
   computations, for instance calculating a diverse working and 
   protected path do not share common network points, would need to
   synchronize the computations in order to increase the probability 
   of meeting the working and protected path disjoint objective and
   network resource optimization objective. This document describes
   the usage of multiple Synchronization VECtors (SVECs) in the SVEC
   list. When a PCE  computes multiple sets of dependent path 
   computation requests concurrently, it is required to use SVEC list
   for association among the sets of dependent path computation
   requests. The aim of this document is to define the association
   among SVECs and its processing rule.


Conventions used in this document 
 
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119]. 


Table of Contents 
    
   1.  Terminology.....................................................3
   2.  Introduction....................................................3
   3.  Association among SVEC..........................................5
   3.1  Associated SVECs ..............................................5
   3.2  Un-associated SVECs ...........................................5
   4.  Processing of SVEC list ........................................6
   4.1 Single PCE, single domain environments..........................6
   4.2 Multiple PCE, single domain environments........................6
   4.3 Multiple PCE, multi domain environments.........................7
   5.  Manageability Considerations  ..................................7
   6.  Security Considerations ........................................8
   7.  IANA Considerations ............................................8
   8.  References .....................................................8
   8.1. Normative references ..........................................8
   8.2. Informative references ........................................9
   9.  Authors' Addresses  ............................................9











Nishioka & King          Expires April, 2008               [Page 2]
Internet-Draft     draft-nishioka-pce-svec-list-01.txt    November 2007

1. Terminology 
 
   Terminology used in this document:  
    
   PCC: Path Computation Client: Any client application requesting a
   path computation to be performed by a Path Computation Element.  
 
   PCE: Path Computation Element: An entity (component, application, or
   network node) that is capable of computing a network path or route
   based on a network graph, and applying computational constraints. 

   PCEP Peer: a neighbor element involved in a PCEP session (i.e. a PCC
   or a PCE).

   GCO: Global Concurrent Optimization: A concurrent path computation
   application where a set of TE paths is computed concurrently in
   order to efficiently utilize network resources.

   Associated SVECs: Multiple SVECs (Synchronization VECtors) to
   indicate a set of synchronized or concurrent path computations.


2. Introduction 

   [ID.pce-pcep] describes the specifications for PCEP (Path Computation 
   Element communication Protocol). PCEP facilitates the communication 
   between a Path Computation Client(PCC) and a Path Computation Element
   (PCE), or between two PCEs based on PCE architecture [RFC4655]. PCEP
   interactions include path computation requests and path computation 
   replies.

   [ID.pce-gco] specifies a global concurrent path computation
   application for the efficient use of network resources, called GCO,
   based on required objective functions (OFs). To compute a set of
   traffic-engineered paths for the GCO application, PCEP supports the
   synchronous and dependent path computation requests required in
   [RFC4657]. When a PCC or PCE sends such path computation requests
   to a PCE, Synchronization VECtor (SVEC) allows the PCC or PCE to
   specify a list of multiple path computation requests that must be
   synchronized along with a potential dependency.

   [ID.pce-pcep] defines two synchronous path computation modes using 
   SVEC.

     o  Bundle of a set of independent and synchronized path computation
        requests,
     o  Bundle of a set of dependent and synchronized path computation
        requests.



Nishioka & King          Expires April, 2008               [Page 3]
Internet-Draft     draft-nishioka-pce-svec-list-01.txt    November 2007


   These are exclusive modes. If one of the dependency flags (i.e.  
   Node, Link or Shared Risk Link Groups (SRLG) diverse flags) in a 
   SVEC is set, the SVEC indicates a set of synchronous path 
   computation requests with a dependency. In order to be synchronized 
   among multiple sets of path computation requests with a dependency, 
   it is necessary to use other SVECs.

   It is important for the PCE, when performing path computations, to
   synchronize any path computation requests with a dependency. For
   example, consider two diverse path computation requests to compute
   for protected end-to-end services with disjointed working and
   protected paths. If the diverse path requests are computed
   sequentially, fulfillment of the initial diverse path computation
   without consideration of the second diverse path computation and
   disjoint constraint, may result in the PCE providing sub-optimal
   results for the second one, or fail to meet the disjoint
   requirement altogether.

   This document defines the handling of synchronous path computation
   for PCE and multiple set of path computation request with a
   dependency. The following scenarios are specifically described:

   o  Single domain, single PCE, dependent and synchronized path
   computation request.

   o  Multi-domain, multiple-PCE, dependent and synchronized path  
   computation request.
   
   The association among multiple SVECs and the processing rules to
   support multiple sets of synchronized dependent path computation
   requests, is also described in this document. Path computation
   algorithms for the associated path computation requests are out of 
   scope in this draft.

   The SVEC association and its processing rule do not require any 
   extension to PCEP message and object formats, while it enable GCO for
   multiple diverse paths. In addition, the use of multiple SVECs is not
   restricted to only SRLG, Node and Link diversity currently defined in
   the SVEC object, [ID.pce-pcep], but is also available for other 
   dependent path computation requests.

   The SVEC association is available to both Multiple PCE path 
   computation as well as a single PCE path computation. 
   






Nishioka & King          Expires April, 2008               [Page 4]
Internet-Draft     draft-nishioka-pce-svec-list-01.txt    November 2007


3. Association among SVECs 
 
    This section describes the associations among SVECs in a SVEC list. 

3.1 Associated SVECs

   Associated SVECs mean that there are relationships among multiple 
   SVECs. Request-IDs in the SVEC objects are used to indicate the 
   association among SVEC objects. If the same request-IDs exist in 
   more than two SVECs, this indicates associated SVECs. 
   When associating among SVECs, only one request-ID may in the SVEC
   object may be contained in the other SVEC object. This contributes 
   to reducing the message size of PCEP request. Even in this case, all 
   of the path computation requests are synchronized.

   Below is an example of associated SVECs. In this example the first 
   SVEC and the other SVECs are associated, and path computation 
   requests from Request-ID#1 to Request-ID#Z must be synchronized.

   <SVEC-list>
       <SVEC> without dependency flags
          Request-ID #1, Request-ID #3, Request-ID #4... , Request-ID #X

       <SVEC> with one or more dependency flags 
          Request-ID #1, Request-ID #2

       <SVEC> with one or more dependency flags
          Request-ID #4, Request-ID #5
       ........

       <SVEC> without dependency flag
          Request-ID #X, Request-ID #Y, Request-ID #Z

   Note that path computation requests that do not have other SVECs, 
   like Request-ID #3, may be contained in the associated SVEC. 
   This request is also synchronized.


3.2 Non-associated SVECs

   Non-associated SVECs mean that there are no relationships among 
   SVECs. If SVEC objects in PECP request messages do not have the 
   same request-ID, the relationship among these SVECs is not 
   associated. Below is an example of non-associated SVECs that does 
   not contain any same request-IDs.





Nishioka & King          Expires April, 2008               [Page 5]
Internet-Draft     draft-nishioka-pce-svec-list-01.txt    November 2007


   <SVEC-list>
       <SVEC> with one or more dependency flags 
             Request-ID #1, Request-ID #2

       <SVEC> with one or more dependency flags
             Request-ID #4, Request-ID #5
       ........

       <SVEC> without dependency flags
           Request-ID #X, Request-ID #Y, Request-ID #Z

4. Processing of SVEC list

4.1 Single PCE, single domain environments 

   When PCEP receives PCReq messages with more than two SVEC objects 
   in the SVEC list, PCEP MUST first check the request-IDs in all SVEC 
   objects in order to identify any associations among them. The SVEC 
   objects MAY be received in a single or multiple PCReq message(s). In 
   the later case, the PCE may start a SyncTimer as recommended in 
   [ID.pce-pcep]. After receiving the whole path computation requests, 
   the analysis for associated SVECs MUST be started.

   If there are no matching request-IDs in the different SVEC objects, 
   these SVEC objects are not associated, and then each set of path 
   computation requests in the non-associated SVEC objects MUST be 
   computed separately. 

   If there are matching request-IDs in the different SVEC objects,
   these SVEC objects are associated, and then all path computation
   requests in the associated SVEC objects SHOULD be treated in a
   synchronous manner for GCO application.

   If the PCE does not have capability to handle the associated SVEC
   objects, it SHOULD send a PCErr message with Error-Type="Capability
   not supported".


4.2 Multi-PCE, single domain environments 

   Currently no mechanisms exist to manage co-ordination of dependent
   SVEC requests between multiple PCE`s in the same domain. If a PCC
   sends a path computation request to a PCE and then sends a second
   service path computation request, which is required to be disjoint
   from the first service, and this request is sent to a different PCE
   in the domain, no SVEC object correlation function between the PCEs
   is currently available. Equally, associated SVECs are not sent to the 
   different PCEs in the domain.


Nishioka & King          Expires April, 2008               [Page 6
Internet-Draft     draft-nishioka-pce-svec-list-01.txt    November 2007


4.3 Multi-PCE, multi-domain environments

   When more than two PCEs are used to concurrently compute a protected
   end-to-end path across multiple domains, additional processing may be
   required. If the PCReq message contains multiple associated SVEC
   objects and these SVEC objects contain path computation requests that
   will be sent to the next PCE along the path computation chain.
   Intermediate PCEs receiving such PCReq messages MAY re-construct
   associations among SVEC objects, and then send PCReq messages to 
   corresponding next PCEs. If the associated SVECs is re-constructed at
   the intermediate PCE, the PCE MUST NOT start path computation until
   all PCRep messages are received from neighbor PCEs.
   In addition, it is not recommended that SVEC objects coming from
   different PCReq messages are re-constructed. This may contribute to
   resource optimization from network operator`s point of view, but it
   is unrealistic in the case of multiple PCE path computation.



5. Manageability considerations

   This section describes manageability considerations specified in
   [ID.pce-mngabl-reqs].

5.1. Control of Function and Policy

   In addition to section 8.1 to [ID.pce-pcep], PCEP implementation
   SHOULD allow the configuration of association among SVECs on PCCs.
   
   o the capability to configure SVEC association.


5.2. Information and Data Models, e.g. MIB modules

   There are no additional parameters for MIB modules.


5.3. Liveness Detection and Monitoring

   The associated SVEC in this document allows PCEs to compute optimal
   sets of diverse path. This type of path computation may require more
   time to obtain its results. Therefore, it is recommended for PCEP to
   support PCE monitoring mechanism specified in [ID.pce-monitor].







Nishioka & King          Expires April, 2008               [Page 7]
Internet-Draft     draft-nishioka-pce-svec-list-01.txt    November 2007


5.4. Verifying Correct Operation

   Section 8.4 in [ID.pce-pcep] provides the sufficient descriptions for
   this document. So, there are no additional considerations.


5.5. Requirements on Other Protocols and Functional Components
   
   This document does not require anything on other protocol and
   functional components. 


5.6. Impact on Network Operation

   Section 8.6 in [ID.pce-pcep] provides the sufficient descriptions for
   this document. So, there are no additional considerations.


6.  Security Considerations

   This document defines the usage of SVEC list, and does not have any
   extensions for PCEP protocol. Therefore the security of this document 
   depends on that of PCEP protocol.


7.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no specific extension for PCEP messages, objects
   and its parameters and does not require any registry assignment.


8.  References

8.1 Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate  
              Requirement Levels," BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997 

   [RFC4655]  A. Farrel, JP. Vasseur and J. Ash, "A Path Computation 
              Element (PCE)-Based Architecture," RFC 4655, 
              September 2006.

   [RFC4657]  J. Ash and J.L. Le Roux, "Path Computation Element (PCE) 
               Communication Protocol Generic Requirements," RFC 4757,
               September 2006.




Nishioka & King          Expires April, 2008               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft     draft-nishioka-pce-svec-list-01.txt    November 2007


8.2 Informative References
 
   [ID.pce-pcep] 
           JP. Vasseur and JL. Le Roux, "Path Computation Element(PCE)
           communication Protocol (PCEP) - Version 1," 
           draft-ietf-pce-pcep-08 Work in progress, Jan. 2007.

   [ID.pce-gco]
           Y. Lee, JL. Le Roux, D. King and E. Oki, "Path Computation
           Element Communication Protocol (PCECP) Requirements and
           Protocol Extensions In Support of Global Concurrent
           Optimization,"
           draft-ietf-pce-global-concurrent-optimization-00
           Work in progress June 2007.

   [ID.pce-mngabl-reqs] 
           A. Farrel, "Inclusion of Manageability Sections in PCE
           Working Group Drafts,"
           draft-ietf-pce-manageability-requirements-02
           Work in progress, Feb. 2007.

   [ID.pce-monitor]
          JP. Vasseur, JL. Le Roux and Y. Ikejiri, "A set of monitoring
          tools for Path Computation Element based Architecture,
          "draft-ietf-pce-monitoring-00.txt Work in progress, Sep. 2007.


9. Authors' Addresses

   Itaru Nishioka
   NEC Corp.
   1753 Shimonumabe, Kawasaki, Kanagawa 211-8555
   Japan

   Phone: +81 44 396 3287
   Email: i-nishioka@cb.jp.nec.com

   Daniel King
   Aria Networks
   44/45 Market Place, Chippenham, SN15 3HU, United Kingdom

   Phone: +44 7790 775187
   Email: daniel.king@aria-networks.com









Nishioka & King          Expires April, 2008               [Page 9]
Internet-Draft     draft-nishioka-pce-svec-list-01.txt    November 2007


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.











