


CAPWAP                                                          S. Hares
Internet-Draft                                               N. Bhandaru
Expires: April 20, 2006                             NextHop Technologies
                                                        October 17, 2005


                         Radio Network Protocol
                         draft-hares-rnp-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 20, 2006.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).

Abstract

   The CAPWAP problem statement describes a problem that needs to be
   addressed before a wireless LAN (WLAN) network designer can construct
   a solution composed of Wireless Termination Points (WTP) and Access
   Controllers (AC) from multiple, different vendors.  One of the
   primary goals is to find a solution that solves the interoperability
   between the two classes of devices (WTPs and ACs) which then enables
   an AC from one vendor to control and manage a WTP from another.  RNP
   is a protocol that supports the management of WTP's Radio



Hares & Bhandaru         Expires April 20, 2006                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                     RNP                      October 2005


   information, Session Parameters, Data Forwarding and interaction with
   the Wireless Portal.  The RNP protocol consists of five sub-
   protocols: RNP-DT (Data Tunneling), RNP-SM (Session Management),
   RNP-RC (Radio Control), RNP-DF (Data Forwarding), and RNP-WP
   (Wireless Portal).  The RTP protocol with it's family of protocol
   provides a complete control situation for the CAPWAP environment.  In
   many ways, RNP provides a super set of the RNP requiremetns.


Table of Contents

   1.  Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
     1.1.  Conventions used in this document . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   3.  Protocol Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   4.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   5.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements  . . . . . . . . . . 8
































Hares & Bhandaru         Expires April 20, 2006                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                     RNP                      October 2005


1.  Definitions

1.1.  Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [1].












































Hares & Bhandaru         Expires April 20, 2006                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                     RNP                      October 2005


2.  Introduction

   The need for a protocol by which wireless LAN (WLAN) Access
   Controllers (AC) can control and manage Wireless Termination Points
   (WTP) from a different vendor has been presented in the CAPWAP
   problem statement [3].

   A Key to solve the CAPWAP problem is to define a complete control
   protocol that enables an AC from one vendor to control and manage a
   WTP from a different vendor.  This protocol needs to be extensible
   and scalable in a variety of deployments.

   A second requirement of an CAPWAP protocol the ability to switch
   support a variety of underlying wireless technologies (802.11,
   802.15, or 802.16).  Different underlying technologies may differ on
   the set of configurable options, and different architectural choices
   that are specific to that underlying technology (similar to the local
   MAC vs. split MAC architectures in 802.11).  The architectural
   choices that are good for one underlying technology may not
   necessarily work for another.  Not to forget that there may be
   multiple architectural choices [2] even for the same underlying
   technology.  A monolithic control protocol that strives to solve this
   problem for multiple technologies runs the risk of adding too much
   complexity and not realizing the desired goals, or it runs the risk
   of being too rigid and hampering technological innovation.

   RNP provides a single protocol with multiple sub-protocols that
   control functional portions of the problem: Radio control, Station
   Management, Data Forwarding/Data Transfer, and Captured Web portal
   handling.

   This approach also lends itself easily to extend the solution as new
   technologies arise or as new innovative methods to solve the same
   problem for an existing technology present themselves later in the
   future.

   In this draft, we present a short summary of the RNP protocol and its
   family.  It is intented as an introductionto this work.













Hares & Bhandaru         Expires April 20, 2006                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                     RNP                      October 2005


3.  Protocol Architecture

   The RNP protocol consists of five sub-protocols: RNP-DT (Data
   Tunneling), RNP-SM (Session Management), RNP-RC (Radio Control),
   RNP-DF (Data Forwarding), and RNP-WP (Wireless Portal).

   RNP-DT delivers 802.11 data frames between the WTP and the AC.

   RNP-SM is used to convey 802.11 management frames and 802.1x packets
   and station context between the WTP and the AC.  This includes
   authentications, associations, and reassociations.

   RNP-RC is used to convey requests and responses between the WTP and
   the AC.  This includes WTP configuration, statistics, health, and
   events or measurements.

   RNP-WP conveys management and data to the captured portal.

   RNP sits on top of IP and UDP, so all RNP messages are routed layer 3
   communications.  Since RNP is routable, an RP and SP need not reside
   on the same layer 2 subnet.  When an RP and SP are on separate
   subnets attached by a router, the RP and SP are said to be using
   "Remote RNP".

   RNP tunnels secure, encrypted Layer 2 in Layer 3

   RNP supports both local MAC and remote MAC.
























Hares & Bhandaru         Expires April 20, 2006                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                     RNP                      October 2005


4.  Security Considerations

   Since RNP runs over a layer 3 protocol, the use of IP-sec on a link
   can provide link-by-link encryption at the IP layer.

5.  References

   [1]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
        Levels", March 1997, <ftp://ftp.isi.edu/in-notes/rfc2119>.

   [2]  "Architecture Taxonomy for Control and Provisioning of Wireless
        Access Points(CAPWAP)", August 2004, <ftp://ftp.isi.edu/
        internet-drafts/draft-ietf-capwap-arch-06.txt>.

   [3]  "Configuration and Provisioning for Wireless Access Points
        (CAPWAP) Problem Statement", February 2005,
        <http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc3990.txt>.

   [4]  "Generic Routing Encapsulation", March 2000,
        <http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2784.txt>.

   [5]  "Requirements for Internet Hosts - Communication Layers",
        October 1989, <http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc1122.txt>.

   [6]  Govindan, S., "Objectives for Control and Provisioning of
        Wireless Access Points (CAPWAP)", November 2004, <http://
        www.ietf.org/internet-drafts/
        draft-ietf-capwap-objectives-00.txt>.























Hares & Bhandaru         Expires April 20, 2006                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                     RNP                      October 2005


Authors' Addresses

   Susan Hars
   NextHop Technologies
   825 Victors Way
   Ann Arbor, MI  48105

   Phone: +1-734-222-1610
   Email: shares@nexthop.com


   Nehru Bhandaru
   NextHop Technologies
   42 NANOG park
   Acton, MA  01720

   Phone: +1-978-849-2731
   Email: shares@nexthop.com

































Hares & Bhandaru         Expires April 20, 2006                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                     RNP                      October 2005


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Hares & Bhandaru         Expires April 20, 2006                 [Page 8]

