
Network Working Group                                   Marko Kulmala
Internet Draft                                          Ville Hallivuori
                                                        Tellabs

                                                        Jyrki Soini
                                                        TeliaSonera
Expiration Date: January 2006                                                                        
                                                        July 2005

                   Inter AS option for BGP/MPLS IP VPN

               draft-kulmala-l3vpn-interas-option-d-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

Abstract

   This document describes new Inter-AS option for RFC2547bis services.
 
   This option is a hydrid of options A and B that are defined in 
   [2547BIS]. The proposed method can inter-operate seamlessly with a 
   peer that is using rfc2547bis ch 10 option B inter-AS method.

   In this Inter AS option ASBR installs VPN-IPv4 routes into VRFs and 
   acts as BGP next hop when it readvertises VPN-IPv4 routes with MP-BGP
   to other PE routers. This eliminates the need to LSP connectivity (or 
   some other type of tunnels) between packet's ingress and egress PE.
   
   Since this option keeps VRFs it will give VPN context at ASBR and 
   inherently provides route filtering based on Route Targets. This 
   option is independent of the interconnecting media.

      
   
     
Kulmala, et al.                                                 [Page 1]

Internet Draft draft-kulmala-l3vpn-interAS-option-d-00.txt     July 2005


Table of Contents

    1      Specification of Requirements  .........................   2
    2      Intellectual Property Statement  .......................   2
    3      Introduction  ..........................................   3
    4      Inter AS option D definition ...........................   3
    5      Inter AS option D characteristics  .....................   3
    6      Security  ..............................................   4
    7      Quality of Service  ....................................   4
    8      Acknowledgments  .......................................   4
    9      Intellectual Property Statement.........................   4
   10      Full Copyright Statement  ..............................   5
   11      Normative References  ..................................   5
   12      Author Information  ....................................   5


1. Specification of Requirements

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119


2. Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.
   
   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at ietf-
   ipr@ietf.org.

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, I certify that any applicable
   patent or other IPR claims of which I am aware have been disclosed,
   or will be disclosed, and any of which I become aware will be
   disclosed, in accordance with RFC 3668.


Kulmala, et al.                                                 [Page 2]
                                                           
Internet Draft draft-kulmala-l3vpn-interAS-option-d-00.txt     July 2005							    

3. Introduction
    
   Three Inter-AS options are defined in [2547BIS]. Option A is the only
   one that provides per VPN context (VRFs) at ASBR. The proposed 
   option, called option D, provides VPN context and eliminates 
   drawbacks of option A. The drawvbacs are:
   - dependency to the capability interconnecting media to provide 
     multiple channels
   - per VRF BGP sessions
   
   In option D the interfaces between ASBRs are MPLS enabled and MP-BGP
   is used between ASes to distribute VPN-IPv4 addresses.  

4. Inter AS option D definition  

   This draft defines additional inter-AS MPLS VPN method. While the
   method is geared towards separating MPLS access networks to separate
   sub-ASs, it can also be used as generic inter-AS method.

   The proposed method can inter-operate seamlessly with a peer that is
   using rfc2547bis ch 10 option B inter-as method.

   Chapter 10 of draft-ietf-l3vpn-rfc2547bis-03.txt is amended with 
   option D:
      d) EBGP redistribution of VRF routes as labeled VPN-IPv4 routes
         from AS to neighboring AS.

         In this procedure, the PE routers use IBGP to redistribute
         labeled VPN-IPv4 routes either to an Autonomous System Border
         Router (ASBR), or to a route reflector of which an ASBR is a
         client.  The ASBR installs received routes to local VRFs
         using normal route-target based route selection. The ASBR
         then uses EBGP to re-advertise routes from VRFs as labeled
         VPN routes, with export route-targets and route-distinguisher
         of the VRF route is being advertised from, to the neighboring
         ASBR. Nexthop of the advertised routes is set to the
         advertising ASBR. The neighoring ASBR installs routes to
         local VRFs, and performs same re-export/re-advertisement
         procedure towards IBGP neighbors.

5. Inter AS option D characteristics  

   Option D is a hydrid of options A and B. It enables the level of 
   access to forwarded packets provided by the option A while removing 
   the requirement of using per VRF peering sessions. Option D is 
   agnostic to interconnecting media. Option D keeps customer routes 
   in VRFs thus it inherently provides route filtering based on Route 
   Targets. Option D allows ASBR to:
     -select QoS behaviour per VPN
     -aggregate VPN routes
     -execute VPN specific ACLs to forwarded packets
     -select PSN tunnels per VRF (end to end TE is possible)
 

Kulmala, et al.                                                 [Page 3]
                                                           
Internet Draft draft-kulmala-l3vpn-interAS-option-d-00.txt     July 2005   
   
   

   Option D hides core network structure (RTs and RDs) and enables
   load-balancing when multiple ASBRs are used. Option D eliminates the 
   label switched path between the ingress and egress PE routers.


6. Security
 
   Security is at similar level than in option A in [2547BIS]. 
    

7. Quality of Service

   IETF defined DS and DS-TE can be used.    


8. Acknowledgments

   The authors wish to acknowledge the contributions of Paul Hallanoro, 
   Heikki Heikkila and Jouni Tiainen.


9. Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at ietf-
   ipr@ietf.org.








Kulmala, et al.                                                 [Page 4]
                                                           
Internet Draft draft-kulmala-l3vpn-interAS-option-d-00.txt     July 2005  

10. Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005). 
   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.
  
   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.



11. Normative References

   [2547BIS] "BGP/MPLS IP VPNs", Rosen, E, Rekhter, Y.
    draft-ietf-l3vpn-rfc2547bis-03.txt, October 2004.




12. Author Information


   Ville Hallivuori
   Tellabs
   Sinimaentie 6
   FI-02630 Espoo, Finland
   e-mail: ville.hallivuori@tellabs.com

   Marko Kulmala
   Tellabs
   Sinikalliontie 7
   FI-02630 Espoo, Finland
   e-mail: marko.kulmala@tellabs.com

   Jyrki Soini
   TeliaSonera
   P.O.Box 935
   FI-00051 Sonera, Finland
   e-mail: jyrki.soini@teliasonera.com




Kulmala, et al.                                                 [Page 5]
