Network Working Group                                        Pradeep Kumar Xplorer
Internet-Draft							Ex SUN Employee
Intended status: Standards Track                                  Individual
Expires: Dec 13, 2019                             		Jun 13, 2019
                                                      		
                                                          


                 The need for email archival option in email clients
                         draft-emailarchiveitoption-std-02


Abstract

    This document describes the need for a email archive option
    button or check box in email client to make sure of accountability
    of emails, transmission delivery and control of email SPAM

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on May 13, 2019.



Pradeep Kumar Xplorer     Expires Dec 13, 2019              [Page 1]
Internet-Draft    Using Whois to query on Email addresses       Jun 13, 2019

Copyright Notice

Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents
   1. Introduction ............................................... 2
   2. Background ..................................................2
   3. General Information of the service ..........................3
   4. Authors Addresses ...........................................4
   5. Acknowledgements ............................................4


1. Introduction

    
    This document describes the need for a email archive option
    button or check box in email client to make sure of accountability
    of emails, transmission delivery and control of email SPAM.

2. Background
	If i send an email from pradeepan88@hotmail.com to sovereignamber@hotmail.com
        theres no guarantee it would be delivered, theres no proof that pradeepan88@hotmail.com
        wrote it, theres no guarantee originator is spam. I recieved emails
        from efcc.nigeria.org@representative.com about a ATM valued 8.3 million dollars
        issued to be in Feb 2013 i responded followed their instructions and still
        does not have the ATM instead i was harmed in low class western medical hospitals
        and the email pradeep@explodingmoon.org i used disabled by disabling the website 
        for nonpayment.If my email client had a archiveit checkbox then archive.org
        can be used to archive it.

Pradeep Kumar Xplorer     Expires Dec 13, 2019                [Page 2]
Internet-Draft    Using WHois query on email addresses             Jun 13, 2019


	
3. General Information of the service
	Nowadays backup is not costly as terrabytes can be obtained for dollars
        and not millions. I am stranded outside my natural land of california
        because of racist criminals stealing my money and using a birth place
        and the criminals there to exploit it and having been sending many SOS 
        emails. I have send emails with evidence of crime to many authortiy emails.
        I do not have a solution by delivery of money and is being stolen. The authority
        recipients cannot held liable as theres no evidence to public i have reported
        the crime. If for every email for which the sender checks in archiveit option
        as a checkbox or button then i can hold the authorities liable and punish
        them for financial crime if it is archived in a specific URL in archive.org
        that can be derived from the email.


Pradeep Kumar Xplorer     Expires Nov 13, 2019               [Page 3]
Internet-Draft    Using WHois query on email addresses             Jun 13, 2019




4.Authors' Addresses

    Pradeep Kumar Xplorer
    EMail: pradeep@explodingmoon.org, pradeepan88@hotmail.com
    URI: http://www.pradeepkumarxplorer.com




5.Acknowledgement
    None

Pradeep Kumar Xplorer     Expires Dec 13, 2019               [Page 4]
Internet-Draft    Using WHois query on email addresses             Jun 13, 2019




