



Network Working Group                                        B. Decraene
Internet-Draft                                                    Orange
Updates: 6790 (if approved)                                  K. Kompella
Intended status: Standards Track                  Juniper Networks, Inc.
Expires: December 13, 2019                                 W. Henderickx
                                                                   Nokia
                                                           June 11, 2019


                  BGP Next-Hop dependent capabilities
                 draft-ietf-idr-next-hop-capability-05

Abstract

   RFC 5492 advertises the capabilities of the BGP peer.  When the BGP
   peer is not the same as the BGP Next-Hop, it is useful to also be
   able to advertise the capability of the BGP Next-Hop, in particular
   to advertise forwarding plane features.  This document defines a
   mechanism to advertise such BGP Next Hop dependent Capabilities.

   This document defines a new BGP non-transitive attribute to carry
   Next-Hop Capabilities.  This attribute is guaranteed to be deleted or
   updated when the BGP Next Hop is changed, in order to reflect the
   capabilities of the new BGP Next-Hop.

   This document also defines a Next-Hop capability to advertise the
   ability to process the MPLS Entropy Label as an egress LSR for all
   NLRI advertised in the BGP UPDATE.  It updates RFC 6790 with regard
   to this BGP signaling.

Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in BCP
   14 RFC 2119 [RFC2119] RFC 8179 [RFC8174] when, and only when, they
   appear in all capitals, as shown here.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.




Decraene, et al.        Expires December 13, 2019               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft          BGP Next-Hop Capabilities              June 2019


   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 13, 2019.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2019 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   2.  BGP Next-Hop dependent Capabilities Attribute . . . . . . . .   3
     2.1.  Encoding  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     2.2.  Attribute Operation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     2.3.  Interpreting received Capability  . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     2.4.  Attribute Error Handling  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     2.5.  Network operation considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   3.  Entropy Label Next-Hop dependent Capability . . . . . . . . .   6
     3.1.  Readable Label Depth  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     3.2.  Entropy Label Next-Hop Capability error handling  . . . .   9
   4.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     4.1.  Next-Hop Capabilities Attribute . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     4.2.  Next-Hop Capability registry  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   5.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   6.  Acknowledgement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   7.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
     7.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
     7.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   Appendix A.  Changes / Author Notes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12







Decraene, et al.        Expires December 13, 2019               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft          BGP Next-Hop Capabilities              June 2019


1.  Introduction

   [RFC5492] advertises the capabilities of the BGP peer.  When the BGP
   peer is not the same as the BGP Next-Hop, it is useful to also be
   able to advertise the capability of the BGP Next-Hop, in particular
   to advertise forwarding plane features.  This document defines a
   mechanism to advertise such BGP Next Hop Capabilities.

   This document defines a new BGP non-transitive attribute to carry
   Next-Hop Capabilities.  This attribute is guaranteed to be deleted or
   updated when the BGP Next Hop is changed, in order to reflect the
   capabilities of the new BGP Next-Hop. Hence it allows advertising
   capabilities which are dependent of the BGP Next-Hop.

   This attribute advertises the capabilities of the BGP Next-Hop for
   the NLRI advertised in the same BGP update.  A BGP Next-Hop may
   advertise different capabilities for different set of NLRI.

   This document also defines a first application to advertise the
   capability to handle the MPLS Entropy Label defined in [RFC6790].
   Note that RFC 6790 had originally defined a BGP attribute for this
   but it has been latter deprecated in [RFC7447].

2.  BGP Next-Hop dependent Capabilities Attribute

2.1.  Encoding

   The BGP Next-Hop dependent Capabilities Attribute is an optional,
   non-transitive BGP Attribute, of value TBD1.  The attribute consists
   of a set of Next-Hop Capabilities.

   The inclusion of a Next-Hop Capability "X" in a BGP UPDATE message,
   indicates that the BGP Next-Hop, encoded in either the NEXT_HOP
   attribute defined in [RFC4271] or the Network Address of Next Hop
   field of the MP_REACH_NLRI attribute defined in [RFC4760], supports
   the capability "X" for the NLRI advertised in this BGP UPDATE.

   This document does not make a distinction between these two Next-Hop
   fields and uses the term 'BGP Next-Hop' to refer to whichever one is
   used in a given BGP UPDATE message.

   A Next-Hop Capability is a triple (Capability Code, Capability
   Length, Capability Value) aka a TLV:








Decraene, et al.        Expires December 13, 2019               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft          BGP Next-Hop Capabilities              June 2019


                     +------------------------------+
                     | Capability Code (2 octets)   |
                     +------------------------------+
                     | Capability Length (2 octets) |
                     +------------------------------+
                     | Capability Value (variable)  |
                     ~                              ~
                     +------------------------------+

                     Figure 1: BGP Next-Hop Capability

   Capability Code: a two-octets unsigned binary integer which indicates
   the type of "Next-Hop Capability" advertised and unambiguously
   identifies an individual capability.

   Capability Length: a two-octets unsigned binary integer which
   indicates the length, in octets, of the Capability Value field.  A
   length of 0 indicates that no Capability Value field is present.

   Capability Value: a variable-length field.  It is interpreted
   according to the value of the Capability Code.

   BGP speakers SHOULD NOT include more than one instance of a Next-Hop
   capability with the same Capability Code, Capability Length, and
   Capability Value.  Note, however, that processing of multiple
   instances of such capability does not require special handling, as
   additional instances do not change the meaning of the announced
   capability; thus, a BGP speaker MUST be prepared to accept such
   multiple instances.

   BGP speakers MAY include more than one instance of a capability (as
   identified by the Capability Code) with non-zero Capability Length
   field, but with different Capability Value and either the same or
   different Capability Length.  Processing of these capability
   instances is specific to the Capability Code and MUST be described in
   the document introducing the new capability.

2.2.  Attribute Operation

   The BGP Next-Hop dependent Capabilities attribute being non-
   transitive, as per [RFC4271], a BGP speaker which does not understand
   it will quietly ignore it and not pass it along to other BGP peers.

   A BGP speaker that understands the BGP Next-Hop dependent
   Capabilities Attribute and does not change the BGP Next-Hop, SHOULD
   NOT change the BGP Next-Hop dependent Capabilities Attribute and
   SHOULD pass the attribute unchanged along to other BGP peers.




Decraene, et al.        Expires December 13, 2019               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft          BGP Next-Hop Capabilities              June 2019


   A BGP speaker that understands the BGP Next-Hop dependent
   Capabilities Attribute and changes the BGP Next-Hop, MUST remove or
   update the received BGP Next-Hop dependent Capabilities Attribute
   before propagating the BGP UPDATE to other BGP peers.  If the
   capability is not removed, it MUST be updated to only advertise the
   capabilities of the new BGP Next-Hop for these NLRIs.  An
   implementation MAY allow, by configuration, to not advertise some of
   the capabilities of a BGP Next-Hop. If a received capability is
   unknown, it can't be updated hence unknown capabilities MUST be
   removed when the BGP Next-Hop is changed.

   The BGP Next-Hop Capability Code MUST reflect the capability of the
   router indicated in the BGP Next-Hop, for the NLRI advertised in the
   BGP UPDATE.  If a BGP speaker sets the BGP Next-Hop to an address of
   a different router, it MUST NOT advertise a BGP Next-Hop Capability
   not supported by this router for these NLRI.

2.3.  Interpreting received Capability

   A BGP speaker receiving a BGP Next-Hop Capability Code that it
   supports behave as defined in the document defining this Capability
   Code.  A BGP speaker receiving a BGP Next-Hop Capability Code that it
   does not support MUST ignore this BGP Next-Hop Capability Code.  In
   particular, this MUST NOT be handled as an error.  In both cases, the
   BGP speaker MUST examine the remaining BGP Next-Hop Capability
   Code(s) that may be present in the BGP Next-Hop Capabilities
   Attribute.

   The presence of a Next-Hop Capability SHOULD NOT influence route
   selection or route preference, unless tunneling is used to reach the
   BGP Next-Hop or the selected route has been learnt from EBGP (i.e.
   the Next-Hop is in a different AS).  Indeed, it is in general
   impossible for a node to know that all BGP routers of the Autonomous
   System (AS) will understand a given Next-Hop Capability; and having
   different routers, within an AS, use a different preference for a
   route, may result in forwarding loops if tunnelling is not used to
   reach the BGP Next-Hop.

2.4.  Attribute Error Handling

   A BGP Next-Hop dependent Capabilities Attribute is considered
   malformed if the length of the Attribute is not equal to the sum of
   all (BGP Next-Hop dependent Capability Length +4) of the capabilities
   carried in this attribute.  Note that "4" is the length of the fields
   "Type" and "Length" of each BGP Next Hop dependent Capability, as the
   capability length only account for the length of the Value field.





Decraene, et al.        Expires December 13, 2019               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft          BGP Next-Hop Capabilities              June 2019


   A BGP UPDATE message with a malformed BGP Next-Hop dependent
   Capabilities Attribute SHALL be handled using the approach of
   "attribute discard" defined in [RFC7606].

   Unknown Next-Hop Capabilities Codes MUST NOT be considered as an
   error.

   A document that specifies a new Next-Hop Capability SHOULD provide
   specifics regarding what constitutes an error for that Next-Hop
   Capability.

   If a Next-Hop dependent Capability is malformed, this Capability MUST
   be ignored and removed.  Others Next-Hop Capabilities MUST be
   processed as usual.

2.5.  Network operation considerations

   In the corner case where multiple nodes use the same IP address as
   their BGP Next-Hop, aka anycast nodes as described in [RFC4786], a
   BGP speaker MUST NOT advertise a given Next-Hop Capability unless all
   nodes sharing this same IP address support this Next-Hop Capability.
   The network operator operating those anycast nodes is responsible for
   enforcing that an anycast node does not advertise a BGP Next-Hop
   capability not supported by all nodes advertising this anycast
   address.  This can be performed by using anycast nodes sharing the
   same capabilities or by filtering the BGP Next-Hop Capabilities which
   are not shared by all anycast nodes.

   For security considerations, a network operator may want to filter
   the BGP Next-Hop capabilities advertised from or to external
   Autonomous Systems on a per capability, capability type or attribute
   basis.

3.  Entropy Label Next-Hop dependent Capability

   The Entropy Label Next-Hop Capability has type code 1 and a length of
   0 or 1 octet.

   The inclusion of the "Entropy Label" Next-Hop Capability indicates
   that the BGP Next-Hop can be sent packets, for all routes indicated
   in the NRLI, with a MPLS entropy label (ELI, EL) added immediately
   after the label stack advertised with the NLRI.

   On the receiving side, suppose BGP speaker S has determined that
   packet P is to be forwarded according to BGP route R, where R is a
   route of one of the labeled address families.  And suppose that L is
   the label stack embedded in the NLRI of route R.  Then to forward
   packet P according to route R, S either replaces P's top label with



Decraene, et al.        Expires December 13, 2019               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft          BGP Next-Hop Capabilities              June 2019


   L, or else pushes L onto the MPLS label stack.  If the EL-Capability
   is advertised in the BGP UPDATE advertising this route R, S knows
   that it may safely place the ELI and an EL on the label stack
   immediately beneath L.

   A BGP speaker S that sends an UPDATE with the BGP Next-Hop "NH" MAY
   include the Entropy Label Next-Hop Capability only if the NLRI are
   labelled and for all the NLRI in the BGP UPDATE, either of the
   following is true:

   o  Egress case: NH is the egress of the LSP advertised with the NLRI
      and its capable of handling the ELI during the lookup of the MPLS
      top label.

   o  Transit LSR case: NH is a transit LSR for the LSP advertised with
      the NLRI (i.e.  NH swaps one of the label advertised in the NLRI)
      and next downstream BGP Next-Hop(s) has(have) advertised the
      Entropy Label Next-Hop Capability (or a similar capability
      signalled by protocol P if the route is redistributed, by NH, from
      protocol P into BGP).

3.1.  Readable Label Depth

   When stacked LSPs are used and a LSR nests LSP(s) inside this BGP
   signalled LSP, its useful for the ingress LSRs to know how many
   labels the BGP Next-Hop and its downstream LSR(s) may read when load-
   balancing based on the Entropy Label.  In other words, how many
   labels the ingress LER may push, before pushing an entropy label that
   will be seen by the BGP Next-Hop and its downstream LSR(s).

   This maximum number of labels is called the Readable Label Depth
   (RLD) of the LSP(s).  It is related, yet different, to the RLD of an
   node which is defined in [I-D.ietf-mpls-spring-entropy-label]

   The RLD of the LSP(s) advertised in the NLRI, may be advertised in
   the first octet of value field of the Entropy Label Next-Hop
   Capability.  This value field is optional.  If present, the value
   field is a one-octet unsigned binary integer which indicates the
   maximum Readable Label Depth (RLD) of the LSP(s) advertised in the
   NLRI.  In other words, this is the maximum number of MPLS labels that
   may be pushed by the ingress, before pushing the ELI, EL labels,
   where the BGP Next-Hop and its downstream LSR(s) are capable of
   performing load-balancing based on the entropy label.

   S SHOULD advertise a RLD of:

   o  If S is the egress of the LSP(s) advertised in the NLRI: its own
      local RLD;



Decraene, et al.        Expires December 13, 2019               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft          BGP Next-Hop Capabilities              June 2019


   o  If S is propagating in BGP a route received in BGP: the minimum
      of:

      *  its own node RLD;

      *  the RLD of the LSP from itself to the BGP NEXT_HOP of its
         received route minus (Number of Labels in the received NLRI -
         Number of Labels in the sent NLRI);

      *  0 if a RLD is not present in its received routes or the RLD in
         the received BGP route minus (Number of Labels in the received
         NLRI - Number of Labels in the sent NLRI).

      *  Note that the first term represents the limitation of the new
         BGP NEXT_HOP (S), the second term the contribution of the
         LSR(s) between the new BGP NEXT_HOP (S) and the old (received)
         BGP NEXT_HOP (S'), the third term represent the contribution
         from the old BGP NEXT_HOP (S') toward the egress.

   o  If S is propagating in BGP a route received in protocol X: the
      minimum of:

      *  its own node RLD;

      *  the minimum of thg RLD(s) in the received protocol X to reach
         the NLRI(s).

   255 is a reserved value.

   Note that the local RLD is meant as a node value.  If a router has
   multiple line cards with different capabilities, the router SHOULD
   advertise the smallest one.  However, a router MAY choose to only
   consider the line cards that may be used by the BGP routers receiving
   the ELC. e.g. if the ELC is advertised over an EBGP session with peer
   A, a router MAY consider only the line cards connected to peer A.

   Advertisement of the RLD is optional.  When used, changes in IGP
   routing may trigger BGP re-advertisement and hence will increase BGP
   churn.  If the RLD is decreased, it SHOULD be readvertised
   immediatly.  If the RLD is increased is MAY NOT be readvertised
   immediatly.  We note however that labelled BGP routes are typically
   not advertised outside of an administrative domain hence the churn
   would be limited to this administrative domain.








Decraene, et al.        Expires December 13, 2019               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft          BGP Next-Hop Capabilities              June 2019


3.2.  Entropy Label Next-Hop Capability error handling

   If the Entropy Label Next-Hop Capability is present more than once,
   it MUST be considered as received once with a length of 0.

   If the Entropy Label Next-Hop Capability is received with a length
   other than 0 or 1, it is not considered malformed, and its semantics
   are exactly the same as if it had a length of 1.  In other words,
   additional octets MUST be ignored.  This allows for the graceful
   addition of future extensions.

4.  IANA Considerations

4.1.  Next-Hop Capabilities Attribute

   IANA is requested to allocate a new Path Attribute, called "Next-Hop
   Capabilities", type Code TBD1, from the "BGP Path Attributes"
   registry.

4.2.  Next-Hop Capability registry

   The IANA is requested to create and maintain a registry entitled "BGP
   Next-Hop Capabilities".

   The registration policies [RFC8126] for this registry are:

           0   Reserved
            1-63   IETF Review
    64-65534   First Come First Served
       65535   Reserved

   IANA is requested to make the following initial assignments:

               Registry Name: Next-Hop Capability.

    Value      Meaning                                  Reference
    ---------- ---------------------------------------- ---------
          0    Reserved  (not to be allocated)          This document
          1    Entropy Label                            This document
    2-65534    Unassigned
      65535    Reserved for future registry extension   This document

5.  Security Considerations

   This document does not introduce new security vulnerabilities in BGP.
   Specifically, an operator who is relying on the information carried
   in BGP must have a transitive trust relationship back to the source
   of the information.  Specifying the mechanism(s) to provide such a



Decraene, et al.        Expires December 13, 2019               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft          BGP Next-Hop Capabilities              June 2019


   relationship is beyond the scope of this document.  Please refer to
   the Security Considerations section of [RFC4271] for security
   mechanisms applicable to BGP.

   As this attribute is removed when the BGP Next-Hop is changed, the
   source of the information is the router which IP address is indicated
   in the BGP Next-Hop. Such Next-Hop is typically either within the AS
   when a BGP Next-Hop Self policy is configured, or in the neighboring
   AS with which an interconnection and an EBGP has been established.
   If this neighboring AS is not trusted with regards to information
   carried in the BGP attribute, or carried in a specific capability,
   this attribute or specific capability should be removed when
   received.  Note that in some cases, this Next-Hop may advertise
   information based on information it has received from its own
   downstream BGP Next-Hop, hence the transitive trust relationship.  If
   the underlying transport between both ASes is not trusted, BGP
   transport should be protected for integrity and authentification.

   The advertisement of BGP Next-Hop capabilities to EBGP peers may
   disclose, to the peer AS, some capabilities of the BGP node and may
   help fingerprinting its hardware model and software version.  This
   may be mitigated by filtering the capability advertised to EBGP
   peers.

   Security of the Entropy Label capability advertisement is unchanged
   compared to [RFC6790] which originally defined this signaling.

6.  Acknowledgement

   The Entropy Label Next-Hop Capability defined in this document is
   based on the ELC BGP attribute defined in section 5.2 of [RFC6790].

   The authors wish to thank John Scudder for the discussions on this
   topic and Eric Rosen for his in-depth review of this document.

   The authors wish to thank Jie Dong and Robert Raszuk for their review
   and comments.

7.  References

7.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.





Decraene, et al.        Expires December 13, 2019              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft          BGP Next-Hop Capabilities              June 2019


   [RFC4271]  Rekhter, Y., Ed., Li, T., Ed., and S. Hares, Ed., "A
              Border Gateway Protocol 4 (BGP-4)", RFC 4271,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC4271, January 2006,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4271>.

   [RFC4760]  Bates, T., Chandra, R., Katz, D., and Y. Rekhter,
              "Multiprotocol Extensions for BGP-4", RFC 4760,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC4760, January 2007,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4760>.

   [RFC6790]  Kompella, K., Drake, J., Amante, S., Henderickx, W., and
              L. Yong, "The Use of Entropy Labels in MPLS Forwarding",
              RFC 6790, DOI 10.17487/RFC6790, November 2012,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6790>.

   [RFC7606]  Chen, E., Ed., Scudder, J., Ed., Mohapatra, P., and K.
              Patel, "Revised Error Handling for BGP UPDATE Messages",
              RFC 7606, DOI 10.17487/RFC7606, August 2015,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7606>.

   [RFC8126]  Cotton, M., Leiba, B., and T. Narten, "Guidelines for
              Writing an IANA Considerations Section in RFCs", BCP 26,
              RFC 8126, DOI 10.17487/RFC8126, June 2017,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8126>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8174>.

7.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.ietf-mpls-spring-entropy-label]
              Kini, S., Kompella, K., Sivabalan, S., Litkowski, S.,
              Shakir, R., and J. Tantsura, "Entropy label for SPRING
              tunnels", draft-ietf-mpls-spring-entropy-label-12 (work in
              progress), July 2018.

   [RFC4786]  Abley, J. and K. Lindqvist, "Operation of Anycast
              Services", BCP 126, RFC 4786, DOI 10.17487/RFC4786,
              December 2006, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4786>.

   [RFC5492]  Scudder, J. and R. Chandra, "Capabilities Advertisement
              with BGP-4", RFC 5492, DOI 10.17487/RFC5492, February
              2009, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5492>.







Decraene, et al.        Expires December 13, 2019              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft          BGP Next-Hop Capabilities              June 2019


   [RFC7447]  Scudder, J. and K. Kompella, "Deprecation of BGP Entropy
              Label Capability Attribute", RFC 7447,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC7447, February 2015,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7447>.

Appendix A.  Changes / Author Notes

   [RFC Editor: Please remove this section before publication]

   Changes -01:

   o  Capability code and length encoded over 2 octets (from one).  IANA
      registry is now mainly FCFS.

   o  Addition of section "Network operation considerations", in
      particular to discuss anycast nodes.

   o  Enhanced Security consideration (capability advertised to external
      ASes).

   o  Editorial changes and typo corrections.

   Changes -02: No change.  Refresh only.

   Changes -03: Addition of the optional Readable Label Depth.

   Changes -04: Update to security section, following discussion on the
   IDR mailing list.

   Changes -05: No change.  Refresh only.

Authors' Addresses

   Bruno Decraene
   Orange

   Email: bruno.decraene@orange.com


   Kireeti Kompella
   Juniper Networks, Inc.
   1194 N.  Mathilda Avenue
   Sunnyvale, CA  94089
   USA

   Email: kireeti.kompella@gmail.com





Decraene, et al.        Expires December 13, 2019              [Page 12]

Internet-Draft          BGP Next-Hop Capabilities              June 2019


   Wim Henderickx
   Nokia
   Copernicuslaan 50
   Antwerp 2018, CA  95134
   Belgium

   Email: wim.henderickx@nokia.com












































Decraene, et al.        Expires December 13, 2019              [Page 13]
