
Network Working Group                                        W. Kruithof
Internet-Draft                             Unix-AG Universitaet Hannover
Expires: July 4, 2005                                    January 3, 2005

                         Spam reducing protocol
                  draft-kruithof-spam-reducing-02.txt

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is subject to all provisions
   of section 3 of RFC 3667.  By submitting this Internet-Draft, each
   author represents that any applicable patent or other IPR claims of
   which he or she is aware have been or will be disclosed, and any of
   which he or she become aware will be disclosed, in accordance with
   RFC 3668.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on July 4, 2005.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).

Abstract

   A protocol is shown which is highly spamresistant and can
   transparently be used as an extension of the regular email protocol.
   Accepted emails do the sender not cost money, not accepted ones do.
   A central server for keeping track of money and information is
   needed.  A protocol, in which encryption naturally appear, is shown
   in which you can freely distribute your emailadress without ever
   having to read spam, for negligable costs.


Kruithof                  Expires July 4, 2005                  [Page 1]
Internet-Draft           Spam reducing protocol             January 2005

Table of Contents

   1.   Requirements notation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   2.   Introduction and overview  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   3.   Overview of the protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   4.   Technical remarks on the protocol  . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   5.   Practical problems/issues in applying the protocol . . . . .   8
   6.   Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   7.   Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   8.   Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   9.   References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
        Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
        Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . .  12



















Kruithof                  Expires July 4, 2005                  [Page 2]
Internet-Draft           Spam reducing protocol             January 2005

1.  Requirements notation

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL","SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].























Kruithof                  Expires July 4, 2005                  [Page 3]
Internet-Draft           Spam reducing protocol             January 2005

2.  Introduction and overview

   Nowadays, spam is dealt with by using white- and blacklists and spam
   filters.  It is to be expected that the spam problem will not
   satisfactory be solved by these solutions.  Neither is guaranteed
   that receivers will not get spam, nor that non-spam emails always
   pass the anti-spam solutions.

   The essence of the protocol: if a telephonenumber costs 1 euro per
   minute, you will not call them without a very good reason.  Suppose
   you are in a room with 1,000 other people.  Everybody is talking to
   you, because talking to you is free.  In such a situation you are
   unable to effectively pick out the things that are important to you.
   But what if talking to you is not free? Say you charge one euro and
   promise to give it back if the information was important.  This way,
   only people with important information will want to talk to you,
   knowing it will not cost them a penny.  People with non-important
   information will not be bothering you, for they risk losing money.
   And the other way round, if a company chooses to talk to you anyway,
   you know they will have something interesting to say.

   This document proposes a spamresistant protocol that ensures that a
   minimum amount of spam will be sent.  The second advantage is that a
   sender will know for sure whether the receiver has received the
   message.  The basic principle is that a sender has to pay for getting
   a way of communicating via encrypted communication with the receiver.
   In case of accepting (more specifically: not rejecting) the message
   the money is booked back to the sender, if not, the money is booked
   to the central server company.  if for example a spammer earns 0.0025
   eurocent by each sent email, setting a price of 0.10 cents for your
   mailbox will work.  Bill Gates may want to set his account to 500
   euros.

   The protocol in this draft could just be the push developers need to
   implement a protocol stacked on top of the smtp/pop protocol which is
   spamresistant.  This document will put the system to the test to see
   if it can cope with the requirements that such a system should meet.
   The draft does not go deeply into the practical issues.  This makes
   sense, but should be seen in context.  This document will also
   discuss some practical problems.

   The term 'spam' is used in this document to refer to unsolicited or
   unwanted email messages.  This document does not attempt to define
   what exactly constitutes spam.




Kruithof                  Expires July 4, 2005                  [Page 4]
Internet-Draft           Spam reducing protocol             January 2005

3.  Overview of the protocol

   Suppose Alice wants to send an email to Bob, whose email address she
   knows.  She can just send the email, but she wants to make sure that
   it will not disappear in Bob his spam folder causing the message to
   be forgotten or even deleted.

   For successful communication both Alice and Bob MUST deposit money to
   a (SHOULD be non-profit) company, which transfers it to virtual
   money.  In the database of the company his server for each email
   address SHALL be seen how many it costs to send an email to the
   receiving party.  This SHOULD also be done by client software.
   OPTIONAL is searching in the database.  Alice MUST pay the amount of
   money that is set by Bob for downloading from the server the public
   key of Bob.  Alice her email address MUST be associated with this
   public key on the server by the database.  Alice SHOULD at the same
   time upload her public key, which is accessible by Bob if he accepts
   her email, and which is deleted if he rejects the email.  This
   private-public key pair MAY be real time generated on the server and
   could be send encrypted to Bob if Alice pays, or the client SHOULD
   upload several public keys.  It SHOULD also be possible to specify
   which amount of money could be spent per certain amount of time,
   otherwise virusses e.g.  could initiate unwanted transactions.

   If Alice sends her email to Bob, this MUST be encrypted with the
   public key of Bob for which she paid.  Bob his email client receives
   the email, and MUST check whether the email is encrypted.  if so, his
   clients MUST connect to the server to get the public key, with which
   the email is encrypted.  This SHOULD be done by matching the senders
   email address, otherwise Bob has to try every private key on the
   encrypted message.  if the email address matches, a public key of
   Alice SHOULD also be transferred to Bob, to complete the safe
   communication.  If the email is not encrypted, it SHALL be lead
   further in the 'normal' email processing (spam filters etc), which
   shows the transparency of the new protocol aside of the normal email
   protocol.

   Now Bob knows which private key he has to use to decrypt the email
   message.  If not, the email can be lead further in the normal system.
   It still could be a normal encrypted message if no matching email
   address is found in the database.  If the receiver does not
   explicitly reject the email, the cost MUST be booked back.  OPTIONAL
   is accepting email from Alice email address n times.  The connection
   is now established, because Alice MAY setup her client software to
   accept always from email addresses for which she paid to get the
   public key.  If the receiver does not accept the message, which SHALL
   be done by the receiver explicitly, the money is neither booked back
   to the sender, neither booked to the receiver.  It SHALL be booked to


Kruithof                  Expires July 4, 2005                  [Page 5]
Internet-Draft           Spam reducing protocol             January 2005

   the company his account.

   For each new connection (new person or new email address) a new
   public-key/private key pair SHOULD be generated.  This is for just in
   case a public key of Bob gets out in the open to people who Bob does
   not want to know his email address.  As soon as a connection is made,
   the used private key with each email address SHOULD be saved by
   client software, so that in the future the server is not needed
   again.  In case of a 'one-time' key pair, the public key SHOULD be
   deleted from the server by the client or even the server.

   Bob can reject the email, which is why spam will not be sent.
   Advertisements will only be sent if the company really thinks it will
   gain more than they lose.  Of course, this will be the case in the
   equilibrium situation; Bob wants his 'to pay' to stay as low as
   possible, but just not low enough for companies which think they can
   cope with the costs.

   In practice, Bob MAY setup an email address for which he will
   exclusively use the new protocol.  Each email which is not encrypted
   MAY be bounced with a message how to send an email which will be
   guaranteed be delivered.  Now Bob MAY freely distribute this email
   address in the Internet.














Kruithof                  Expires July 4, 2005                  [Page 6]
Internet-Draft           Spam reducing protocol             January 2005

4.  Technical remarks on the protocol

   Of course there are some technical issues that need to be dealt with
   in order to approve the protocol for usability.

   As can be logically derived, the heart of the protocol is full-proof.
   Using a private-public key pair in such a way can indeed take care of
   unwanted communication.  Nevertheless there could be requirements
   that may damage the usability of this protocol.

   First of all, servers containing the databases should be globalized
   in order to minimize access times.  This is of course not a problem
   in todays world.  More of a problem could be the need for realtime
   synchronization among servers.  It can not be that if one server is
   unavailable, the user is not able to read his email.  Though the same
   can happen with your pop-server, the real problem lies in sending
   emails.  It MUST NOT happen that, due to the need of knowing the
   costs of sending, an email can not be sent because a server is down.
   Therefore there MUST always be a complete functional server
   available.

   Secondly the weakness that can cause money to get lost.  If a server
   is compromised accounts can be altered causing money to be lost.  As
   a problem that happens once or twice this is moretheless acceptable.
   But if even the design of the protocol does not satisfactory handles
   this problem the protocol will not stand and its standard will not
   hold.  A possible sollution can be found in the sollution of the
   first problem; multiple servers that are realtime synchronized.  If
   an attack or system crash causes an account to be altered by in a
   non-regular way, the realtime synchronisation can be used as a fault
   masking voter using majority vote.  This is widely used in hardware
   to mask errors that occur due to unforseen and unpredictable errors
   that are simply there in nature, making it reliable enough to cope
   with a hacker compromising a system.  As email is a massively used
   tool this might not be practical considering traffic and cpu
   intensitivity of a majority voting system.  On the other hand, the
   system is only used in iniating connections, not handling the email
   traffic itself.  More research is needed at this point, but at least
   this shows that the weakness of moneyloss can be solved.

   Thirdly there is the issue of hackers.  If a system prevents spam
   from being spread and also handles a lot of money, there is the
   all-time great risk of hackers.  The entire spam community could go
   after the creditmailservers.  This means that high precautions need
   to be taken and that the security of such systems SHOULD equal the
   securitylevel of online banking.



Kruithof                  Expires July 4, 2005                  [Page 7]
Internet-Draft           Spam reducing protocol             January 2005

5.  Practical problems/issues in applying the protocol

   The solution of massive mailinglists etc.  can of course be found in
   the regular email protocol.  These companies could require that the
   emailaddress you want your mail on, also accepts unencrypted
   messages.

   Because money is used as factor to decide whether a commucation
   channel is initiated or not, problems may arise in the equilibrium
   state considering different countries.  The payment SHOULD require to
   pay an equivalent in dollars or euros.  Because of the differences in
   GNP (Gross National Product) this could lead to (dis)advantages in
   different countries.

   An interesting effect may be the advertisement business, which will
   be sent even though the sender has to pay for example 10 eurocents.
   The receiver than knows, that the content may be interesting for him.
   So, it is possible to receive paid advertisment.

















Kruithof                  Expires July 4, 2005                  [Page 8]
Internet-Draft           Spam reducing protocol             January 2005

6.  Conclusion

   The protocol as such is a simple, flexible and effective way of
   minimizing spam in a very natural way.  Nonetheless, a lot of
   research has to be done in the field of economics and in how easy it
   is to implement.  Maybe this protocol will eventually just be used in
   businesses.  After all, they are the ones in most desperate need of
   getting rid of spam.






















Kruithof                  Expires July 4, 2005                  [Page 9]
Internet-Draft           Spam reducing protocol             January 2005

7.  Security Considerations

   This section handles the case a server has been compromised and why
   various SHOULDs lead to a system in which also compromising of this
   server does not affect all the communication, it only requires the
   resetting of the communication channels.  The weakness is the
   possibility of loosing money if the server is compromised.

   Essential is the central server, which is used for keeping track of
   the virtual money.  Public-private keys SHOULD be generated by the
   clients, because it avoids generating 'bad keys' in case of
   errors/misuse of the server software.  One-time key-pairs SHOULD be
   used, because if Alice accidentally or intentionally leaks the key to
   someone else, Bob can delete this key-pair.  Also SHOULD the key-pair
   be generated by the client, so that only the client has the private
   key.  This avoids when the server is compromised the spread of
   private keys to the public.  The public key SHOULD be in case of
   One-time-key-pair be deleted on the server if Alice has paid for the
   key.  Than a compromised server cannot spread this public key
   anymore.

   If it is discovered that the server is compromised, in case of all
   the SHOULDs in this section are followed, the communication channel
   can be reset by sending to each connection a new public key, with
   encrypting with the old key.  This communication cannot be read in
   each case, and after establishing the new connection, all the old
   keys, which MAY be in the hands of third parties, MUST thrown away.

   The weakness which is left is the book keeping data server.  In case
   of compromising this part, money can be lost.











Kruithof                  Expires July 4, 2005                 [Page 10]
Internet-Draft           Spam reducing protocol             January 2005

8.  Acknowledgments

   The author would like to thank several people for many helpful
   comments and suggestions, including Anne Franssens (University of
   Twente, NL, Computer Science).

9  References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

Author's Address

   Wilbert Kruithof
   Unix AG Universitaet Hannover
   Welfengarten 1
   30167 Hannover
   Germany

   Phone: +495 11 7623226
   EMail: wilbert@stud.uni-hannover.de















Kruithof                  Expires July 4, 2005                 [Page 11]
Internet-Draft           Spam reducing protocol             January 2005

Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.

Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.

Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.


Kruithof                  Expires July 4, 2005                 [Page 12]
