



Internet Engineering Task Force                                   Y. Lee
Internet-Draft                                              J. Livingood
Intended status: Informational                                   Comcast
Expires: 22 March 2021                                           J. Weil
                                                  Charter Communications
                                                       18 September 2020


            Problem Statements for MAC Address Randomization
                   draft-lee-randomized-macaddr-ps-00

Abstract

   MAC address is the Link Layer address used in the Ethrenet protocol.
   It is usually assigned by the Network Interface Card manufacturer and
   being used for forwording and receiving frame.  Due to the static
   nature of the MAC address, it raises some privacy concerns and MAC
   address randomization is being implemented.  This draft documents the
   impacts of MAC address randomization to existing use cases and
   proposes few next steps IETF may consider to work on.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 22 March 2021.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2020 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components



Lee, et al.               Expires 22 March 2021                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft              Abbreviated Title             September 2020


   extracted from this document must include Simplified BSD License text
   as described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
     1.1.  Requirements Language . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   2.  Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   4.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   5.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   6.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   Appendix A.  Additional Stuff . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5

1.  Introduction

   Ethernet protocol is the implementation of data link layer defined in
   the Open Systems Interconnection model (OSI).  Ethernet protocol is
   defined in IEEE 802.1 standard and MAC address is the address used in
   Ethernet protocol.  MAC address is 48-bit long and usually defined in
   the hardware.  Each Ethernet interface comes with a MAC address
   assigned by the manufacturer.  Each device has one or more MAC
   addresses.  For example, a given IoT device may only have a single
   WiiFi network interface and therefore a single MAC address.  In
   contract, a laptop may have three interfaces that encompasses two
   wired Ethernet ports and a WiFi interface, and therefore will have
   three MAC addresses.  MAC address is used at the Local-Area-Network
   (LAN) for frame forwarding.  It is locally significant in the LAN and
   critical LAN-to-LAN communications.

   The device manufacturer typically assigns the MAC address to an
   interface.  Unless the user or operating system modifies the MAC
   address, which is sometimes the case, the MAC address follows a
   defined format and uses 2 parts.  Those are Manufacturer ID and
   Interface ID.  In a typical MAC address, the first 3 bytes correspond
   to the organization that created the device, called the
   Organizationally Unique Identifier (OUI).  This OUI portion uniquely
   identifies a manufacturer, vendor, or other organization, and is
   assigned by the IEEE from their IEEE Registration Authority.  The
   second 3 bytes of the MAC address, the Network Interface Controller
   (NIC) portion, is an identifier assigned by the manufacturer (or
   whatever organization was assigned the OUI).  Because of how MAC
   addresses are constructed, a MAC address may contain information from
   which an actor/service on a local network can infer the type and/or
   manufacturer of the device, which is useful for a variety of
   operational and troubleshooting reasons.  For example, a MAC address



Lee, et al.               Expires 22 March 2021                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft              Abbreviated Title             September 2020


   can be used to determine to which device on a LAN to permit or deny
   access at a particular time of day (e.g. child's tablet may not
   access Internet after 22:00 hrs until 06:00 hrs).  Such services
   often rely on a database or other method to map MAC addreses to a
   likely device make and model, such as using a commercial service from
   Fingerbank, https://fingerbank.org/about/, after which the user would
   then label the device (e.g.  Jane's iPhone).

   Many networks today use MAC address to uniquely identify a device.
   For example: Sticky DHCP assignment often maps to MAC address.  In
   additional, many local network policies such as port-forwarding, DMZ
   setup and LAN QoS are all based on MAC address.  There are also
   business policies that are making assumptions on MAC address.  For
   example: Hospitality Internet service used in hotels, airplanes, and
   Community WiFi often uses MAC address to tie to Internet
   subscription.

   Major operating systems have implemented and deployed MAC address
   randomization to improve device and user privacy.  It is common
   practice on many types of networks today to use the MAC address as a
   form of device identification.  Some examples are LAN forwarding
   policy, sticky DHCP IP assignments, static NAT policy and MAC address
   ACL for blocking malicious or unwanted devices.  We are interested in
   determining if there is sufficient support in the IETF community to
   define best practices and potentially a new protocol for service
   continuity in the presence of MAC address randomization.

1.1.  Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].

2.  Problem Statement

   Recently, more and more privacy concerns are related to the static
   MAC address.  In particular, security community worries about people
   being able to tie the MAC address to a particular device.  This may
   enable device tracking and tracing.  To address the privacy concern,
   MAC address randomization is developed.  MAC address randomization is
   a technique similar to IPv6 temporary IIDs defined in RFC 7217
   [RFC7217].  Devices will auto-generate the MAC address based on the
   device policy and use the random generated MAC address instead of the
   hardware based MAC address assigned by the manufacturer when they
   connect to the network.  Many modern Operation Systems such as Apple
   iOS (https://support.apple.com/en-us/HT211227), Google Android
   (https://source.android.com/devices/tech/connect/wifi-mac-
   randomization) and Microsoft Windows 10



Lee, et al.               Expires 22 March 2021                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft              Abbreviated Title             September 2020


   (https://support.microsoft.com/en-us/help/4027925/windows-how-and-
   why-to-use-random-hardware-addresses) are experimenting MAC addresses
   randomization.  The randomization policy could be time based, network
   based, combination of both and more.  MAC address randomization is a
   important step forward to protect user privacy.  However, it will
   break some applications that make assumptions of the MAC address.

   In some circumstances, users may want to give the trusted network
   (e.g., home network) some predictability of the MAC address for some
   important services.  For example, whitelisting MAC address for
   network access.  This document defines a set of problem statements to
   continue the existing LAN services when MAC address is randomized.

   [PS-01] Internet Service Provider (ISP) must not make any assumption
   about the MAC address

   [PS-02] ISP must not make any assumption of the Randomization Policy

   [PS-03] LAN policy must not tie to a fixed MAC address

   [PS-04] A mechanism must be defined to securely identify a device.
   The mechanism can leverage existing protocols (e.g., EAP) or newly
   defined protocol.

   [PS-05] ISP and device may leverage existing protocol or define a new
   mechanism to exchange information about MAC address randomization

3.  IANA Considerations

   This memo includes no request to IANA.

   All drafts are required to have an IANA considerations section (see
   Guidelines for Writing an IANA Considerations Section in RFCs
   [RFC5226] for a guide).  If the draft does not require IANA to do
   anything, the section contains an explicit statement that this is the
   case (as above).  If there are no requirements for IANA, the section
   will be removed during conversion into an RFC by the RFC Editor.

4.  Security Considerations

   All drafts are required to have a security considerations section.
   See RFC 3552 [RFC3552] for a guide.

5.  Normative References







Lee, et al.               Expires 22 March 2021                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft              Abbreviated Title             September 2020


   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.

   [RFC3552]  Rescorla, E. and B. Korver, "Guidelines for Writing RFC
              Text on Security Considerations", BCP 72, RFC 3552,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC3552, July 2003,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3552>.

   [RFC5226]  Narten, T. and H. Alvestrand, "Guidelines for Writing an
              IANA Considerations Section in RFCs", RFC 5226,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC5226, May 2008,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5226>.

6.  Informative References

   [RFC7217]  Gont, F., "A Method for Generating Semantically Opaque
              Interface Identifiers with IPv6 Stateless Address
              Autoconfiguration (SLAAC)", RFC 7217,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC7217, April 2014,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7217>.

Appendix A.  Additional Stuff

   This becomes an Appendix.

Authors' Addresses

   Yiu L. Lee
   Comcast
   1800 Arch Street
   Philadelphia, PA 19103
   United States of America

   Phone: +1 215 286 5894
   Email: yiu_lee@comcast.com


   Jason Livingood
   Comcast
   1800 Arch Street
   Philadelphia, PA 19103
   United States of America

   Phone: +1 215 286 7407
   Email: jason_livingood@comcast.com




Lee, et al.               Expires 22 March 2021                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft              Abbreviated Title             September 2020


   Jason Weil
   Charter Communications
   Orlando, FL
   United States of America

   Email: Jason.Weil@charter.com













































Lee, et al.               Expires 22 March 2021                 [Page 6]
