Network Working Group                                        E. Burger 
Internet Draft                                SnowShore Networks, Inc. 
Document: draft-burger-speechsc-reqts-00.txt                   D. Oran 
Category: Informational                            Cisco Systems, Inc. 
Expires August 2002                                      June 13, 2002 
 
 
   Requirements for Distributed Control of ASR, SV and TTS Resources 
 
 
Status of this Memo 
 
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 [1].  
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of 
   six months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
   documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts 
   as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in 
   progress."  
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt  
    
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
    
    
1. Abstract 
    
   This document outlines the needs and requirements for a protocol to 
   control distributed speech processing of audio streams.  By speech 
   processing, this document specifically means automatic speech 
   recognition, speaker verification and text-to-speech.  Other IETF 
   protocols, such as SIP and RTSP, address rendezvous and control for 
   generalized media streams.  However, speech processing presents 
   additional requirements that none of the extant IETF protocols 
   address. 
    
   Discussion of this and related documents is on the MRCP list.  To 
   subscribe, send the message "subscribe mrcp" to 
   majordomo@snowshore.com.  The public archive is at 
   http://flyingfox.snowshore.com/mrcp_archive/maillist.html. 
    
   NOTE: This mailing list will be superseded by an official working 
   group mailing list, cats@ietf.org, once the WG is formally 
   chartered. 
    
  
Burger & Oran    Informational ? Expires August 2002                1 
                Distributed Media Control Requirements  February 2002 
 
 
2. Conventions used in this document 
    
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in 
   this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [2]. 
    
   FORMATTING NOTE: Notes, such at this one, provide additional, 
   nonessential information that the reader may skip without missing 
   anything essential.  The primary purpose of these non-essential 
   notes is to convey information about the rationale of this document, 
   or to place this document in the proper historical or evolutionary 
   context.  Readers whose sole purpose is to construct a conformant 
   implementation may skip such information.  However, it may be of use 
   to those who wish to understand why we made certain design choices. 
    
   OPEN ISSUES: This document highlights questions that are, as yet, 
   undecided as "OPEN ISSUES". 
    
    
3. Introduction 
    
   There are multiple IETF protocols for establishment and termination 
   of media sessions (SIP[3]), low-level media control (MGCP[4] and 
   MEGACO[5]), and media record and playback (RTSP[6]). This document 
   focuses on requirements for one or more protocols to support the 
   control of network elements that perform Automated Speech 
   Recognition (ASR), speaker verification (SV), and rendering text 
   into audio, a.k.a. Text-to-Speech (TTS). Many multimedia 
   applications can benefit from having automatic speech recognition 
   (ASR) and text-to-speech (TTS) processing available as a 
   distributed, network resource.  This requirements document limits 
   its focus on the distributed control of ASR, SV and TTS servers.  
    
   To date, there are a number of proprietary ASR and TTS API's, as 
   well as two IETF drafts that address this problem [7] [8].  However, 
   there are serious deficiencies to the existing drafts.  In 
   particular, they mix the semantics of existing protocols yet are 
   close enough to other protocols as to be confusing to the 
   implementer.  
    
   This document sets forth requirements for protocols to support 
   distributed speech processing of audio streams. 
    
   For simplicity, and to remove confusion with existing protocol 
   proposals, this document presents the requirements as being for a 
   "new protocol" that addresses the distributed control of speech 
   resources It refers to such a protocol as "SRCP", for Speech 
   Resource Control Protocol. 
    
    
4. SRCP Framework 
    
   The following is the SRCP framework for speech processing. 
  
Burger & Oran    Informational ? Expires August 2002                2 
                Distributed Media Control Requirements  February 2002 
 
 
    
                       +-------------+ 
                       | Application | 
                       |   Server    | 
                       +-------------+ 
         SIP or whatever / 
                        /  
        +------------+ /                       +--------+ 
        |   Media    |/          SRCP          |  ASR   | 
        | Processing |-------------------------| and/or | 
    RTP |   Entity   |           RTP           |  TTS   | 
   =====|            |=========================| Server | 
        +------------+                         +--------+ 
    
   The "Media Processing Entity" is a network element that processes 
   media.  The "Application Server" is a network element that instructs 
   the Media Processing Entity on what transformations to make to the 
   media stream.  The "ASR and/or TTS Server" is a network element that 
   either generates a RTP stream based on text input (TTS) or returns 
   speech recognition results in response to an RTP stream as input 
   (ASR).  The Media Processing Entity controls the ASR or TTS Server 
   using SRCP as a control protocol. 
    
   Physical embodiments of the entities can reside in one physical 
   instance per entity, or some combination of entities.  For example, 
   a VoiceXML [9] Gateway may combine the ASR and TTS functions on the 
   same platform as the Media Processing Entity. Note that VoiceXML 
   Gateways themselves are outside the scope of this protocol. 
    
   Likewise, one can combine the Application Server and Media 
   Processing Entity, as would be the case in an interactive voice 
   response (IVR) platform. 
    
   One can also decompose the Media Processing Entity into an entity 
   that controls media endpoints and entities that process media 
   directly.  Such would be the case with a decomposed gateway using 
   MGCP or megaco. However, this decomposition is again orthogonal to 
   the scope of SRCP. 
    
    
5. General Requirements 
    
5.1. Reuse Existing Protocols 
    
   To the extent feasible, the SRCP framework SHOULD use existing 
   protocols.   
     
5.2. Maintain Existing Protocol Integrity 
    
   In meeting requirement 5.1, the SRCP framework MUST NOT redefine the 
   semantics of an existing protocol. 
    
Burger & Oran    Informational ? Expires August 2002                3 
                Distributed Media Control Requirements  February 2002 
 
 
   Said differently, we will not break existing protocols or cause 
   backward compatibility problems. 
    
5.3. Avoid Duplicating Existing Protocols 
    
   To the extent feasible, SRCP SHOULD NOT duplicate the functionality 
   of existing protocols.  For example, SIP with msuri [10] and RTSP 
   already define how to request playback of audio. 
    
   The focus of SRCP is new functionality not addressed by existing 
   protocols or extending existing protocols within the strictures of 
   requirement 5.2. 
    
5.4. Explicit invocation of services 
    
   The SRCP framework MUST be compliant with the IAB OPES[11] 
   framework. The applicability of the SRCP protocol will therefore be 
   specified as occurring between clients and servers at least one of 
   which is operating directly on behalf of the user requesting the 
   service. 
    
5.5. Server Location and Load Balancing 
    
   To the extent feasible, the SRCP framework SHOULD exploit existing 
   schemes for performing service location and load balancing, such as 
   the Service Location Protocol[12] or DNS SRV records[13]. Where such 
   facilities are not deemed adequate, the SRCP framework MAY define 
   additional load balancing techniques. 
    
6. TTS Requirements 
    
   The SRCP framework MUST allow a Media Processing Entity, using a 
   control protocol, to request the TTS Server to playback text as 
   voice in an RTP stream. 
    
   The TTS Server MUST support the reading of plain text.  For reading 
   plain text, the language and voicing is a local matter. 
    
   The TTS Server SHOULD support the reading of SSML [14] text. 
    
   OPEN ISSUE: Should the TTS Server infer the text is SSML by 
   detecting a legal SSML document, or must the protocol tell the TTS 
   Server the document type? 
    
   The TTS Server MUST accept text over the SRCP connection for reading 
   over the RTP connection. The server MUST accept text either ?by 
   value? (embedded in the protocol), or ?by reference? (by de-
   referencing a URI embedded in the protocol). 
    
   OPEN ISSUE: Should we allow (or require) the TTS Server to use long-
   lived control channels? 
    
Burger & Oran    Informational ? Expires August 2002                4 
                Distributed Media Control Requirements  February 2002 
 
 
   The TTS Server SHOULD support, and the SRCP framework MUST support 
   the specification of, "VCR Controls", such as skip forward, skip 
   backward, play faster, and play slower. 
    
   OPEN ISSUE: Should we allow for session parameters, like prosody and 
   voicing, as is specified for MRCP over RTSP [7]? 
    
   OPEN ISSUE: Should we allow for speech markers, as is specified for 
   MRCP over RTSP [7]? 
    
    
7. ASR Requirements 
    
   The SRCP framework MUST allow a Media Processing Entity to request 
   the ASR Server to perform automatic speech recognition on an RTP 
   stream, returning the results over SRCP. 
    
   The ASR Server MUST support the XML specification for speech 
   recognition [15]. 
    
   The ASR Server MUST accept grammar specifications either ?by value? 
   (embedded in the protocol), or ?by reference? (by de-referencing a 
   URI embedded in the protocol). 
    
   OPEN ISSUE: Should we allow the ASR Server to support alternative 
   grammar formats?  If so, we need mechanisms to specify what format 
   the grammar is in, capability discovery, and handling unsupported 
   grammars. 
    
   OPEN ISSUE: Is there a need for all of the parameters specified for 
   MRCP over RTSP [7]?  Most of them are part of the W3C speech 
   recognition grammar. 
    
   The ASR Server SHOULD support a method for capturing the input media 
   stream for later analysis and tuning of the ASR engine. 
   The ASR Server SHOULD support sharing grammars across sessions.  
   This supports applications with large grammars for which it is 
   unrealistic to dynamically load.  An example is a city-country 
   grammar for a weather service. 
    
8. Speaker Verification Requirements 
    
   The SRCP framework MUST allow a Media Processing Entity to request 
   the SV Server to perform speaker verification on an RTP stream, 
   returning the results over SRCP. 
    
   The SV Server MUST The server MUST accept grammar specifications 
   either ?by value? (embedded in the protocol), or ?by reference? (by 
   de-referencing a URI embedded in the protocol). 
    
   The SRCP framework MUST accommodate an identifier for each 
   verification resource and permit control of that resource by ID, 
   because voiceprint format and contents are vendor specific 
  
Burger & Oran    Informational ? Expires August 2002                5 
                Distributed Media Control Requirements  February 2002 
 
 
    
   The SRCP framework MUST work with SV servers which maintain state to 
   handle multi-utterance verification. 
    
   The SV Server SHOULD support a method for capturing the input media 
   stream for later analysis and tuning of the SV engine. 
    
9. Dual-Mode Requirements 
    
   One very important requirement for an interactive speech-driven 
   system is that user perception of the quality of the interaction 
   depends strongly on the ability of the user to interrupt a prompt or 
   rendered TTS with speech.  Interrupting, or barging, the speech 
   output requires more than energy detection from the user's 
   direction.  Many advanced systems halt the media towards the user by 
   employing the ASR engine to decide if an utterance is likely to be 
   real speech, as opposed to a cough, for example. 
    
   To achieve low latency between utterance detection and halting of 
   playback, many implementations combine the speaking and ASR 
   functions.  The SRCP framework MUST support such dual-mode 
   implementations.  
    
    
10. Thoughts to Date (non-normative) 
    
   The protocol assumes RTP carriage of media. Assuming session-
   oriented media transport, the protocol will use SDP to describe the 
   session.  
    
   The working group will not be investigating distributed speech 
   recognition (DSR), as exemplified by the ETSI Aurora project.  The 
   working group will not be recreating functionality available in 
   other protocols, such as SIP or SDP.   
    
   TTS looks very much like playing back a file.  Extending RTSP looks 
   promising for when one requires VCR controls or markers in the text 
   to be spoken.  When one does not require VCR controls, SIP in a 
   framework such as Network Announcements [16] works directly without 
   modification. 
    
   ASR has an entirely different set of characteristics.  For barge-in 
   support, ASR requires real-time return of intermediate results.  
   Barring the discovery of a good reuse model for an existing 
   protocol, this will most likely become the focus of SRCP.  
    
 
11. Security Considerations 
 
   Protocols relating to speech processing must take security into 
   account.  This is particularly important as popular uses for TTS 
   include reading financial information.  Likewise, popular uses for 
   ASR include executing financial transactions and shopping. 
  
Burger & Oran    Informational ? Expires August 2002                6 
                Distributed Media Control Requirements  February 2002 
 
 
    
   We envision that rather than providing application-specific security 
   mechanisms in SRCP itself, the resulting protocol will employ 
   security machinery of either containing protocols or the transport 
   on which it runs.  For example, we will consider solutions such as 
   using TLS for securing the control channel, and SRTP for securing 
   the media channel. 
    
    
12. References 
    
 
   1  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3", BCP 
      9, RFC 2026, October 1996. 
    
   2  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement 
      Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997 
    
   3  Handley, M., Schulzrinne, H., Schooler, E., and Rosenberg, J., 
      "SIP: Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 2543, March 1999 
    
   4  Arango, M., Dugan, A., Elliott, I., Huitema, C., and Pickett, S., 
      "Media Gateway Control Protocol (MGCP) Version 1.0", RFC 2705, 
      October 1999 
    
   5 Cuervo, F., Greene, N., Rayhan, A., Huitema, C., Rosen, B., and 
      Segers, J., "Megaco Protocol Version 1.0", RFC 3015, November 2000 
    
   6 Schulzrinne, H., Rao, A., and Lanphier, R., "Real Time Streaming 
      Protocol (RTSP)", RFC 2326, April 1998 
    
   7 Shanmugham, S., Monaco, P., and B. Eberman, "MRCP: Media Resource 
      Control Protocol", draft-shanmugham-mrcp-01.txt, November 2001, 
      work in progress 
     
   8 Robinson, F., Marquette, B., and R. Hernandez, "Using Media 
      Resource Control Protocol with SIP", draft-robinson-mrcp-sip-
      00.txt, September 2001, work in progress 
    
   9 World Wide Web Consortium, "Voice Extensible Markup Language 
      (VoiceXML) Version 2.0", W3C Working Draft, 
      <http://www.w3.org/TR/2001/WD-voicexml20-20011023/>, 
      October 2001, work in progress 
    
   10 Van Dyke, J. and Burger, E., "SIP URI Conventions for Media 
      Servers", draft-burger-sipping-msuri-01, July 2001, work in 
      progress (expired) 
    
   11 Floyd, S., Daigle, L., ?IAB Architectural and Policy 
      Considerations for Open Pluggable Edge Services,? RFC3238, 
      January 2002. 
    
 
  
Burger & Oran    Informational ? Expires August 2002                7 
                Distributed Media Control Requirements  February 2002 
 
 
 
   12 Guttman, E., Perkins, C., Veizades, J., Day, M. , "Service 
      Location Protocol, Version 2,? RFC 2608, June 1999. 
    
   13 Gulbrandson, A, Vixie, P., Esibov, L., ?A DNS RR for specifying 
      the location of services (DNS SRV)?, RFC2782, February 2000. 
    
   14 World Wide Web Consortium, "Speech Synthesis Markup Language 
      Specification for the Speech Interface Framework", W3C Working 
      Draft, <http://www.w3.org/TR/speech-synthesis>, January 2001, 
      work in progress 
    
   15 World Wide Web Consortium, "Speech Recognition Grammar 
      Specification for the W3C Speech Interface Framework", W3C 
      Working Draft, <http://www.w3.org/TR/speech-grammar/>, August 
      2001, work in progress 
    
   16 O'Connor, W., Burger, E., "Network Announcements with SIP", 
      draft-ietf-sipping-netann-01.txt, November 2001, work in progress 
 
    
    
13. Acknowledgments 
    
   Brian Eberman came up with the new name.  It is catchy and describes 
   what we are working on. 
    
    
    
14. Author's Addresses 
    
   Eric W. Burger 
   SnowShore Networks, Inc. 
   Chelmsford, MA 
   USA 
   Email: eburger@snowshore.com 
    
   David R. Oran 
   Cisco Systems, Inc. 
   Acton, MA 
   USA 
   Email: oran@cisco.com 
    
    
15. Change Log 
    
   From version draft-burger-mrcp-reqts-00 to version draft-burger-
   speechsc-reqts-00: 
        - draft name changed per area director advice 
        - added speaker verification to the areas addressed, including 
          speaker verification requirements, per Dan Burnet?s 
          presentation at the Minneapolis BoF (see minutes).  
Burger & Oran    Informational ? Expires August 2002                8 
                Distributed Media Control Requirements  February 2002 
 
 
        - based on mailing list discussion, added requirement to handle 
          both ?by value? and ?by reference? data. This is both for TTS 
          to be played out and grammar(s) to be applied to ASR. 
        - Based on discussion at the BoF in Minneapolis, added a 
          requirement concerning the use of load balancing schemes, 
          including those based on SRVLOC, SRV. 
        - Added a requirement for OPES compliance, per a discussion 
          with Sally Floyd as IAB observer for the BoF.

Burger & Oran    Informational ? Expires August 2002                9 
                Distributed Media Control Requirements  February 2002 
 
 
           
Full Copyright Statement 
 
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002).  All Rights Reserved. 
    
   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published 
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any 
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are 
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this 
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for 
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be 
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than 
   English. 
    
   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be 
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.  This 
   document and the information contained herein is provided on an "AS 
   IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK 
   FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT 
   LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL 
   NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY 
   OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
    
Acknowledgement 
    
   The Internet Society currently provides funding for the RFC Editor 
   function. 

Burger & Oran    Informational ? Expires August 2002               10 