

INTERNET DRAFT                                                Mark Prior
Guidelines for IETF Meeting Sites                 connect.com.au pty ltd
<draft-prior-future-host-guidelines-03.txt>                 Dave Crocker
                                                  Brandenburg Consulting
                                                            Bill Manning
                                                                     ISI
                                                            E. Paul Love
                                          Internet Consulting of Vermont
                                                           Simon Coppins
                                          Sellnet Communications Pty Ltd



                   Guidelines for IETF Meeting Sites

Status of this Memo

    This document is an Internet-Draft.  Internet-Drafts are working
    documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its
    areas, and its working groups.  Note that other groups may also
    distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

    Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
    months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
    documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-
    Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as
    ``work in progress.''

    To learn the current status of any Internet-Draft, please check
    the ``1id-abstracts.txt'' listing contained in the Internet-
    Drafts Shadow Directories on ds.internic.net (US East Coast),
    ftp.nordu.net (Europe), ftp.isi.edu (US West Coast), or
    munnari.oz.au (Pacific Rim).

    This Internet Draft expires on 31 May 1998.

    Please send comments to the authors.


Abstract

    The IETF is an international group that conducts most of its
    business using electronic mail however three times a year it
    conducts an open meeting for one week. For the most part the actual
    mechanics of the meeting are organised by the IETF secretariat but
    there are some requirements placed on the organisation hosting the
    meeting.

    This document attempts to provide some guidelines for organisations
    that wish to volunteer to act as host for one of these open
    meetings. As the IETF growth pattern mirrors the Internet itself
    this document expresses sizes as a percentage of the expected
    attendance rather than use fixed numbers as we expect these numbers
    to change for each meeting. At the last meeting, in Washington DC
    there were just over 1900 attendees.


Travel

    The IETF is an international organisation so it is expected that
    meetings will be held in various parts of the globe and that it
    will be necessary to travel to "remote" locations. It is
    recommended that the host city have direct intercontinental
    connections from two other continents. For example a city in
    Europe should have direct connections from two of North America,
    South America, Africa or Asia. It is also expected that these
    connections be of sufficient capacity and frequency at the time of
    the proposed meeting to accomodate the arrival and departure of
    the predicted number of non-local attendees. Ideally this would
    mean that the host city could be reached with at most 2 aircraft
    transfers for most attendees.


Accommodation

    The host city must have sufficient hotels within walking distance
    (maximum 10 minutes) of the meeting site to accommodate everyone
    that wishes to attend the meeting. At the present time this means
    providing block booking for the peak night of approximately 60% of
    the expected attendance (remembering that not everyone attends for
    the whole week). It is desirable that the hotels be of, at least,
    superior standard with at least one offering rates within the
    current US government employee per diem limit and be members of an
    international chain of hotels (to aid booking of rooms from
    overseas). Information should also be provided on inexpensive hotels
    that are within walking distance of the meeting site, to accomodate
    attendees on a more strict budget. It is also desirable that the
    hotels be located close by to other amenities, including a range of
    restaurants with a variety of cuisines (including vegetarian
    dishes). There should be a variety of means of reaching the hotel
    from the airport in addition to rental cars, such as taxis, airport
    shuttles and public transport.


Meetings Site

    The IETF is made up of a large number of working groups the majority
    of which will wish to meet during the week, possibly more than once.
    It is therefore a requirement that the meetings site be capable of
    supporting at least 7 simultaneous meetings with meeting rooms
    varying in sizes. The specific requirements are as follows:
        Sunday
                1 "foyer area" for registration
                1 x 10%         1000-1800
                1 x 30%         1500-1700
                1 x 80%         1700-2000

        Monday - Friday
                1 "foyer area" for registration
                2 x 5%          0900-2200
                2 x 10%         0900-2200
                2 x 15%         0900-2200
                2 x 20%         0900-2200
                2 x 25%         0900-2200
                1 x small meeting room (hollow square) 0700-0900

        Thursday (additional)
                1 x 80%         1500-1900       plenary hall

    In addition an office is required (board room style) from Saturday
    until Friday for IETF secretariat use.

    Two of the larger rooms must be capable of supporting the broadcast
    of proceeding to the Internet. It is preferred that the meeting site
    be located within one of the hotels but if this is not possible it
    must be located within 5 minutes walk of the hotels and it must have
    access for people with disabilities.


Terminal Room

    One component of the meeting that must be provided by the local
    host is the "terminal room". This room must be located at the
    meeting site and is in addition to the meetings rooms. It should
    be designed to provide attendees with easy access from the host
    location to the Internet. The terminal room is expected to be
    available from noon Sunday through noon Friday. To accommodate
    those attendees who arrive on Saturday (due to air fare savings,
    jet lag recover, etc) it would be desirable to have it operational
    from Saturday afternoon or evening if possible. The room itself
    will need to be available for computer/network setup on the Friday
    preceeding the meeting and should be at least 250 square metres
    (approx 2500 square feet). An additional room is also required for
    storage.

    X window displays (or Windows based PCs) (5%) and Ethernet drops
    (7.5%) should be provided, with a small number of localtalk runs. In
    addition 3 high performance laser printers are required with one
    dedicated to transparencies. A suitable server will be required to
    support dynamic host configuration for those devices connecting to
    the Ethernet drops (although some people may require fixed
    configuration information in order to traverse their firewalls).
    A number of PCs providing access to software for the preparation
    and modification of documents and presentations would also be
    highly desirable. Supply, installation and support of all terminal
    room equipment and the associated Internet link are at the expense
    of the local host.

    It would be very desirable to provide a "small" number of dialin
    lines to the terminal room so that attendees at hotels remote from
    the meeting site can readily access the facilities in the terminal
    room.


MBONE

    Recent IETF meetings have been broadcast over the Internet,
    normally two simultaneous sessions. To broadcast a meeting you
    need a connection to the MBONE (Multicast Backbone) over at least
    an E1/T1 link. As the MBONE is still experimental you will require
    a MBONE router to connect to the MBONE, this may be a multicast
    capable workstation (using the MROUTER software) or a router that
    supports IP Multicast (and DVMRP tunnels).

    To broadcast a session you will need a multicast capable
    workstation with a frame grabber as well as video & audio mixing
    equipment suitable for interworking with the sites audio/video
    facility. This facility should be configured so that remote
    participants can contribute to the discussion as well as just
    watch proceedings.

    It is also desirable that sessions be recorded and then
    rebroadcast during the night to allow people in other time zones
    the opportunity to watch the session, even if they cannot
    participate.


Social Event

    Although optional, traditionally the host site has also been
    responsible for arranging a social event for at least 10-20% of the
    participants, that is held on one evening early in the week
    (determined in coordination with the IETF secretariat).

    The actual scope and content of the event is up to the local host,
    the IETF secretariat can provide advice on the appropriateness of
    the event but cannot be directly involved.


Authors

    Mark Prior
    connect.com.au pty ltd
    C/- AAPT
    Level 1, 45 Pirie Street
    Adelaide, SA 5000
    AUSTRALIA

    Phone: +61 8 8203 2088
    Fax:   +61 8 8203 2099
    Email: mrp@connect.com.au


    Dave Crocker
    Brandenburg Consulting
    675 Spruce Dr.
    Sunnyvale, CA 94086
    USA

    Phone: +1 408 246 8253
    Fax:   +1 408 249 6205
    Email: dcrocker@brandenburg.com


    Bill Manning
    ISI
    4676 Admiralty Way #1001
    Marina del Rey, CA 90292
    USA

    Phone: +1 310 822 1511
    Email: bmanning@isi.edu


    E. Paul Love
    Internet Consulting of Vermont
    Brattleboro, VT 05301
    USA

    Phone: +1 802 254 9087
    Fax:   +1 802 254 5783
    Email: epl@sover.net


    Simon Coppins
    SellNet Communications Pty Ltd
    155 Fullarton Road
    Rose Park, SA 5067
    AUSTRALIA

    Phone: +61 8 8431 0044
    Fax:   +61 8 8431 0074
    Email: coppins@sell.net

