


Network Working Group                                         F. Templin
Internet-Draft                                                S. Russert
Intended status: Informational                               I. Chakeres
Expires: June 18, 2007                                             S. Yi
                                                    Boeing Phantom Works
                                                       December 15, 2006


                        MANET Autoconfiguration
                   draft-templin-autoconf-dhcp-03.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on June 18, 2007.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

Abstract

   Mobile Ad-hoc Networks (MANETs) comprise asymmetric reachability link
   types that connect MANET routers, and connect to the global Internet
   via zero or more MANET gateways.  MANET routers with nodes on
   downstream-attached links that require global Internet access must
   have a way to automatically provision globally routable and unique IP
   addresses/prefixes.  This document specifies mechanisms for MANET



Templin, et al.           Expires June 18, 2007                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft           MANET Autoconfiguration           December 2006


   autoconfiguration (AUTOCONF).  Solutions for both IPv4 and IPv6 are
   given.


1.  Introduction

   Mobile Ad-hoc Networks (MANETs) comprise asymmetric reachability link
   types ([RFC2461], Section 2.2) that connect MANET Routers (MRs).  MRs
   participate in a routing protocol such that packets can be forwarded
   via multiple hops across the MANET if necessary.  MANETs attach to
   provider networks (and/or the global Internet) via zero or more MANET
   Gateways (MGs), and MRs may be multiple IP hops away from their
   nearest MG in some scenarios.  MRs with nodes on downstream-attached
   links that require global Internet access must have a means to
   delegate global IP addresses/prefixes and/or other configuration
   information.

   MRs comprise a router entity and a host entity that are connected via
   a virtual point-to-point VLAN configured over an imaginary shared
   link for the MANET (e.g., via a loopback interface).  The imaginary
   shared link provides the appearance of a fully-connected link to
   which all MRs attach, and has an associated "landmark" prefix that
   MRs can use to identify the MANET(s) to which they attach.  An MR
   (and its downstream-attached links) is a "site" unto itself, and a
   MANET is therefore a "site-of-sites".

   MANETs that comprise homogeneous link types can configure the routing
   protocol to operate as a Layer-2 mechanism such that Layer-3 (i.e.,
   IP) sees the MANET as a non-broadcast, multiple access (NBMA) link.
   When a Layer-2 broadcast/multicast flooding mechanism is also used,
   IP sees the MANET as an ordinary shared link, i.e., the same as for a
   (bridged) campus LAN.  In that case, a single IP hop is sufficient to
   traverse the MANET.

   MANETs that comprise heterogeneous link types must configure the
   routing protocol to operate as a Layer-3 mechanism such that routing
   protocol operation and packet forwarding are based on Layer-3 MANET-
   Local Addresses (MLAs) to avoid issues associated with bridging media
   types with dissimilar Layer-2 address formats and maximum
   transmission units (MTUs).  In that case, multiple IP hops may be
   necessary to traverse the MANET.

   This document specifies DHCP and neighbor discovery operation for
   MANET autoconfiguration as well as details of operation for multiple
   MGs.  Operation using standard BOOTP/DHCP
   [RFC0951][RFC2131][RFC3315][RFC3633] and neighbor discovery
   [RFC0826][RFC1256][RFC2461][RFC2462] mechanisms is assumed unless
   otherwise specified.  Solutions for both IPv4 [RFC0791] and IPv6



Templin, et al.           Expires June 18, 2007                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft           MANET Autoconfiguration           December 2006


   [RFC2460] are given.


2.  Terminology

   The terminology in the normative references apply; the following
   terms are defined within the scope of this document:

   Mobile Ad-hoc Network (MANET)
      a connected network region that comprises MANET routers that
      maintain a routing structure among themselves in a relatively
      arbitrary fashion over asymmetric reachability link types
      ([RFC2461], Section 2.2).  Further information on the
      characteristics of MANETs can be found in [RFC2501].

   MANET Interface
      a MANET router's attachment to a link within the MANET.

   MANET Router (MR)
      a node that participates in a routing protocol over its MANET
      interface(s), connects its downstream-attached links to the MANET
      and forwards packets on behalf of other MRs.  An MR comprises a
      router entity and a host entity that communicate via a virtual
      point-to-point VLAN configured over an imaginary shared link for
      the MANET (e.g., via a loopback interface).  An MR (and its
      downstream-attached links) is a "site" unto itself, and a MANET is
      therefore a "site-of-sites".  For the purpose of this
      specification, an MR's host entity configures a DHCP client and
      its router entity configures a DHCP relay.

   landmark prefix
      an IP prefix associated with the imaginary shared link that
      connects MRs in a MANET; used by MRs to identify their current
      MANET point(s) of attachment and as an identifier for the virtual
      interface(s) configured over the imaginary link.

   MANET Gateway (MG)
      an MR that also provides gateway service to a provider network
      and/or the global Internet.  For the purpose of this
      specification, MGs configure a DHCP relay and/or a DHCP server.

   MANET Local Address (MLA)
      a Layer-3 unicast address/prefix configured by an MR that is used
      for intra-MANET communications, i.e., routable only within the
      scope of the MANET.  For IPv6, Unique Local Addresses (ULAs)
      [RFC4193][I-D.jelger-autoconf-mla] provide a natural MLA
      mechanism.




Templin, et al.           Expires June 18, 2007                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft           MANET Autoconfiguration           December 2006


   Extended Router Advertisement/Solicitation (ERA/ERS)
      an IP Router Advertisement/Solicitation (RA/RS) message [RFC1256]
      [RFC2461] with an MLA source address and with destination address
      set to an MLA or a site-scoped multicast address that spans the
      MANET via a broadcast/multicast flooding mechanism (see:
      Section 3.5).  Unlike ordinary RA/RS messages, ERA/ERS messages
      may travel multiple IP hops.


3.  MANET Autoconfiguration

   The following sections specify autoconfiguration operation for
   MANETs.  In-scope for this specification are "stub" MANETs with zero
   or more gateways that connect either to the same provider network or
   to the public Internet using provider-independent addressing.  The
   mechanisms in this specification are also necessary (but may not be
   sufficient) for supporting multihomed MANETs, MANETs configured as
   transit networks, default MG selection, etc.

3.1.  MANET Router (MR) Operation

   Each MR configures one or more MLAs on each of its MANET interfaces.
   For IPv6, MLAs are generated using [RFC4193][I-D.jelger-autoconf-mla]
   with interface identifiers that are either managed for uniqueness
   ([RFC4291], Appendix A) or self-generated using a suitable random
   interface identifier generation mechanism that is compatible with
   EUI-64 format, e.g., Cryptographically Generated Addresses (CGAs)
   [RFC3972].  For IPv4, MLAs are generated using a corresponding unique
   local address configuration mechanism.

   Each MR next engages in the routing protocol then discovers the MLAs
   of MGs and a landmark prefix for the MANET's imaginary shared link by
   either receiving ERAs or through a means outside the scope of this
   specification, e.g., via an out-of-band service discovery protocol,
   via information conveyed in the routing protocol itself, etc.  MRs
   can also send a small number of ERSs to elicit immediate ERAs if no
   unsolicited ERAs are received.

   After a MR discovers the MLAs of MGs, it selects one or more MGs as
   default MGs.  The MR's DHCP client function then sends a DHCP
   DISCOVER (DHCPv4) or Solicit (DHCPv6) request to its DHCP relay
   function across the virtual interface that connects its host and
   router functions.  The relay function then forwards the request to
   the MLA(s) for one or more MG, to the MLAs of other known DHCP
   servers within the MANET, or to a site-scoped "All-DHCP-Servers"
   multicast address.

   For DHCPv4, the relay writes an MLA from the outgoing MANET interface



Templin, et al.           Expires June 18, 2007                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft           MANET Autoconfiguration           December 2006


   (i.e., the relay's upstream-attached interface) in the 'giaddr' field
   and also includes the MLA in a DHCPv4 MLA option (see: Section 3.4).
   If necessary to identify the downstream-attached virtual interface,
   the relay also includes a link selection sub-option [RFC3527] with an
   address from the landmark prefix for the MANET's imaginary shared
   link.

   For DHCPv6, the relay writes an MLA from the outgoing MANET interface
   in the "peer-address" field and also writes an address from the
   landmark prefix for the MANET's imaginary shared link in the "link-
   address" field.  The MR can also use DHCP prefix delegation [RFC3633]
   to obtain prefixes for further sub-delegation to nodes on its
   downstream-attached links.

   The DHCP request will elicit a DHCP reply from a server with IP
   address/prefix delegations.  When addresses are delegated, the MR
   assigns the resulting addresses to the virtual interface that
   connects its host and router functions, i.e., the addresses are *not*
   assigned on a MANET interface.  When prefixes are delegated, the MR
   can further sub-delegate the prefixes to its downstream-attached
   links, including physical links and virtual links of the MR itself.

   After the MR configures global IP addresses/prefixes, it can send IP
   packets with global IP source addresses to off-MANET destinations
   using any of the MGs in its default MG list as egress gateways.  For
   MANETs in which MGs can inject a 'default' route that propagates
   throughout the MANET, the MR can send the IP packets without
   encapsulation at the expense of extra TTL (IPv4) or Hop Limit (IPv6)
   decrementation.  For MANETs in which MGs cannot propagate a default
   route, the MR either: a) encapsulates IP packets with an MLA for an
   MG as the destination address in the outer header (i.e., tunnels the
   packets to the MG), or b) inserts an IPv4 source routing header
   (likewise IPv6 routing header) to ensure that the packets will be
   forwarded through an MG.

3.2.  MANET Gateway Operation

   MGs send periodic and/or solicited ERAs on their attached MANET
   links.  For IPv6, MGs advertise prefixes in ERAs that are to be used
   as landmark prefixes for the MANET (e.g., by setting the 'A', 'L'
   bits in Prefix Information Options to 0).

   MGs act as BOOTP/DHCP relays for the DHCP requests/replies exchanged
   between MRs and DHCP servers.  (When the DHCP server function resides
   on the MG itself, the MG acts as a DHCP server.)  For DHCPv4, when a
   MG acting as a relay forwards a MR's DHCP request that includes an
   MLA option, it writes its own address in the 'giaddr' field, i.e., it
   overwrites the value that was written into 'giaddr' by the MR's relay



Templin, et al.           Expires June 18, 2007                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft           MANET Autoconfiguration           December 2006


   function.

   For each DHCP reply message it processes pertaining to address/prefix
   delegation, the MG creates a tunnel (if necessary) with the tunnel's
   destination address set to the MLA for the MR encoded in the DHCPv4
   MLA option or the DHCPv6 "peer-address" field (see: Section 3.4).
   The MG then creates entries in its IP forwarding table that point to
   the tunnel for each delegated IP address/prefix and relays the reply
   to the MLA for the MR.  For MANETs in which MRs will inject delegated
   addresses/prefixes into the routing protocol, tunneling from the MG
   is not necessary since standard IP routing within the MANET will
   direct packets to the correct MR.

3.3.  DHCP Server Deployments and Extensions

   DHCP servers can reside on provider networks, the Internet or on the
   MGs themselves; they can also reside on some non-MG node within the
   MANET.

   DHCPv4 servers examine DHCPv4 requests for a DHCPv4 MLA option (see:
   Section 3.4).  If a DHCPv4 MLA option is present, the DHCPv4 server
   copies the option into the corresponding DHCPv4 reply message(s).

   No MANET-specific extensions are required for DHCPv6 servers.

3.4.  MLA Encapsulation

   For DHCPv6, the MLA is encoded directly in the "peer-address" field
   of DHCPv6 requests/replies.

   For DHCPv4, a new DHCPv4 option [RFC2132] called the 'MLA option' is
   required to encode an MLA for DHCP transactions that will traverse a
   MG, i.e., so that the MG has a MANET-relevant address to direct
   DHCPv4 replies to the correct MR, which may be multiple Layer-3 hops
   away.  The format of the DHCPv4 MLA option is given below:

     Code  Len   Ether Type      MLA
   +-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+---
   | TBD |  n  |    type   |  a1 |  a2 | ...
   +-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+---

   Code
      a one-octet field that identifies the option type (see:
      Section 5).







Templin, et al.           Expires June 18, 2007                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft           MANET Autoconfiguration           December 2006


   Len
      a one-octet field that encodes the remaining option length.

   Ether Type
      a type value from the IANA "ethernet-numbers" registry.

   MLA
      a variable-length MANET Local Address (MLA).

3.5.  MANET Flooding

   MRs and MGs in Layer-3 MANETs that implement this specification
   require a MANET flooding mechanism (e.g., Simplified Multicast
   Forwarding (SMF) [I-D.ietf-manet-smf]) so that site-scoped multicast
   messages can be propagated across multiple Layer-3 hops.


4.  Operation with Multiple MGs

   MGs are associated with landmark prefixes that identify the MANET's
   point of attachment to a provider network.  For a set of MGs that
   attach to the same provider network, MRs can retain their global IP
   address/prefix delegations as they move between different MGs if the
   landmark prefix stays the same and if the network participates with
   the MGs and MRs in a localized mobility management scheme, e.g., see:
   [I-D.templin-autoconf-netlmm-dhcp].

   For a set of MGs that attach to different provider networks and/or
   serve different global IP prefixes from within the same provider
   network, MRs must configure new global IP addresses/prefixes as they
   change between different MGs unless inter-MG tunnels and routing
   protocol exchanges are supported, e.g., see:
   [I-D.templin-autoconf-netlmm-dhcp], Appendix A.

   Global mobility management mechanisms for MRs that configure new
   global IP addresses/prefixes as they move between different MGs are
   beyond the scope of this document.


5.  IANA Considerations

   A new DHCP option code is requested for the DHCP MLA Option in the
   IANA "bootp-dhcp-parameters" registry.


6.  Security Considerations

   Threats relating to MANET routing protocols also apply to this



Templin, et al.           Expires June 18, 2007                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft           MANET Autoconfiguration           December 2006


   document.


7.  Related Work

   Telcordia has proposed DHCP-related solutions for the CECOM MOSAIC
   program.  Various proposals targeted for the IETF AUTOCONF working
   group have suggested stateless mechanisms for address configuration.


8.  Acknowledgements

   The Naval Research Lab (NRL) Information Technology Division uses
   DHCP in their MANET research testbeds.  Many of the ideas on this
   document originated from IETF Autoconf working group discussions on
   various aspects of autoconfiguration for MANETs.

   The following individuals (in chronological order) have provided
   valuable input: Thomas Henderson.


9.  References

9.1.  Normative References

   [RFC0791]  Postel, J., "Internet Protocol", STD 5, RFC 791,
              September 1981.

   [RFC0826]  Plummer, D., "Ethernet Address Resolution Protocol: Or
              converting network protocol addresses to 48.bit Ethernet
              address for transmission on Ethernet hardware", STD 37,
              RFC 826, November 1982.

   [RFC0951]  Croft, B. and J. Gilmore, "Bootstrap Protocol", RFC 951,
              September 1985.

   [RFC1256]  Deering, S., "ICMP Router Discovery Messages", RFC 1256,
              September 1991.

   [RFC2131]  Droms, R., "Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol",
              RFC 2131, March 1997.

   [RFC2132]  Alexander, S. and R. Droms, "DHCP Options and BOOTP Vendor
              Extensions", RFC 2132, March 1997.

   [RFC2460]  Deering, S. and R. Hinden, "Internet Protocol, Version 6
              (IPv6) Specification", RFC 2460, December 1998.




Templin, et al.           Expires June 18, 2007                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft           MANET Autoconfiguration           December 2006


   [RFC2461]  Narten, T., Nordmark, E., and W. Simpson, "Neighbor
              Discovery for IP Version 6 (IPv6)", RFC 2461,
              December 1998.

   [RFC2462]  Thomson, S. and T. Narten, "IPv6 Stateless Address
              Autoconfiguration", RFC 2462, December 1998.

   [RFC3315]  Droms, R., Bound, J., Volz, B., Lemon, T., Perkins, C.,
              and M. Carney, "Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol for
              IPv6 (DHCPv6)", RFC 3315, July 2003.

   [RFC3633]  Troan, O. and R. Droms, "IPv6 Prefix Options for Dynamic
              Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP) version 6", RFC 3633,
              December 2003.

9.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.ietf-manet-smf]
              Macker, J., "Simplified Multicast Forwarding for MANET",
              draft-ietf-manet-smf-03 (work in progress), October 2006.

   [I-D.jelger-autoconf-mla]
              Jelger, C., "MANET Local IPv6 Addresses",
              draft-jelger-autoconf-mla-01 (work in progress),
              October 2006.

   [I-D.templin-autoconf-netlmm-dhcp]
              Templin, F., "Network Localized Mobility Management using
              DHCP", draft-templin-autoconf-netlmm-dhcp-04 (work in
              progress), October 2006.

   [I-D.thaler-autoconf-multisubnet-manets]
              Thaler, D., "Multi-Subnet MANETs",
              draft-thaler-autoconf-multisubnet-manets-00 (work in
              progress), February 2006.

   [I-D.thaler-intarea-multilink-subnet-issues]
              Thaler, D., "Issues With Protocols Proposing Multilink
              Subnets", draft-thaler-intarea-multilink-subnet-issues-00
              (work in progress), March 2006.

   [RFC2501]  Corson, M. and J. Macker, "Mobile Ad hoc Networking
              (MANET): Routing Protocol Performance Issues and
              Evaluation Considerations", RFC 2501, January 1999.

   [RFC3527]  Kinnear, K., Stapp, M., Johnson, R., and J. Kumarasamy,
              "Link Selection sub-option for the Relay Agent Information
              Option for DHCPv4", RFC 3527, April 2003.



Templin, et al.           Expires June 18, 2007                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft           MANET Autoconfiguration           December 2006


   [RFC3972]  Aura, T., "Cryptographically Generated Addresses (CGA)",
              RFC 3972, March 2005.

   [RFC4193]  Hinden, R. and B. Haberman, "Unique Local IPv6 Unicast
              Addresses", RFC 4193, October 2005.

   [RFC4291]  Hinden, R. and S. Deering, "IP Version 6 Addressing
              Architecture", RFC 4291, February 2006.


Appendix A.  IPv6 Neighbor Discovery and Duplicate Address Detection

   IPv6 Neighbor Discovery (ND) and Duplicate Address Detection (DAD)
   for MANETs is for further study.  In terms of ND, [RFC2461][RFC4291]
   require that a node configure a link-local address on each of its
   IPv6-enabled interfaces, but the primary use for link-locals seems to
   be for the purpose of uniquely identifying routers on the link.
   Also, it is an open question as to whether MRs should send RAs on
   MANET links at all, since the MANET is a peering point between
   distinct sites and not the link of a single site with a clear set of
   serving routers and dependent end-hosts.  In particular, since MANET
   interfaces configure MLAs which already provide a statistically-
   unique identifier, link-local addresses may be of little/no value on
   MANET interfaces and hence strict enforcement of link-local address
   uniqueness may not be necessary.

   In terms of DAD, in-service DAD upon link change is problematic,
   since MANET links are constantly changing due to node mobility.
   Also, pre-service DAD on a MANET link would require either flooding
   the entire MANET or somehow discovering a targeted region of the
   MANET on which a node that configures a duplicate address resides and
   sending a directed DAD message toward that region.  In both
   instances, the overhead for performing DAD is substantial and prone
   to false-negatives due to packet loss.  Note also that link-local
   addresses using Cryptographically Generated Addresses (CGAs)
   [RFC3972] provide random generation only in 59 bits of the lower 64
   bits of the IPv6 address, while MLAs using CGAs also use 40/56 bits
   of random generation in the upper 64 bits of the IPv6 address.  Since
   such MLAs are highly unlikely to collide, pre-service DAD and in-
   service DAD based on link change can be avoided and a passive DAD,
   e.g., one that monitors routing protocol messages, can be used
   instead.

   Note also that no DAD is required for the global addresses/prefixes
   delegated to MRs as long as the addresses are configured on the MR's
   downstream-attached links (and not the MANET link) and as long as
   standard DAD procedures are observed on the downstream-attached links
   themselves.



Templin, et al.           Expires June 18, 2007                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft           MANET Autoconfiguration           December 2006


Appendix B.  Change Log

   Changes from -02 to -03:

   o  updated terminology based on RFC2461 "asymmetric reachability"
      link type; IETF67 MANET Autoconf wg discussions.

   o  added new appendix on IPv6 Neighbor Discovery and Duplicate
      Address Detection

   o  relaxed DHCP server deployment considerations allow DHCP servers
      within the MANET itself

   Changes from -01 to -02:

   o  minor updates for consistency with recent developments

   Changes from -00 to -01:

   o  new text on DHCPv6 prefix delegation and multilink subnet
      considerations.

   o  various editorial changes


Authors' Addresses

   Fred L. Templin
   Boeing Phantom Works
   P.O. Box 3707 MC 7L-49
   Seattle, WA  98124
   USA

   Email: fred.l.templin@boeing.com


   Steven W. Russert
   Boeing Phantom Works
   P.O. Box 3707 MC 7L-49
   Seattle, WA  98124
   USA

   Email: steven.w.russert@boeing.com








Templin, et al.           Expires June 18, 2007                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft           MANET Autoconfiguration           December 2006


   Ian D. Chakeres
   Boeing Phantom Works
   P.O. Box 3707 MC 7L-49
   Seattle, WA  98124
   USA

   Email: ian.chakeres@gmail.com


   Seung Yi
   Boeing Phantom Works
   P.O. Box 3707 MC 7L-49
   Seattle, WA  98124
   USA

   Email: seung.yi@boeing.com



































Templin, et al.           Expires June 18, 2007                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft           MANET Autoconfiguration           December 2006


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Templin, et al.           Expires June 18, 2007                [Page 13]


