


Network Working Group                                         P. Hoffman
Internet-Draft                                            VPN Consortium
Expires: April 15, 2005                                 October 15, 2004


          Revised Registration Procedures for URL Scheme Names
                    draft-hoffman-scheme-reg-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is subject to all provisions
   of section 3 of RFC 3667.  By submitting this Internet-Draft, each
   author represents that any applicable patent or other IPR claims of
   which he or she is aware have been or will be disclosed, and any of
   which he or she become aware will be disclosed, in accordance with
   RFC 3668.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 15, 2005.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).

Abstract

   This document revises the registration procedures given in RFC 2717
   based on five years of experience.  It simplifies the requirements
   for getting a scheme listed by IANA by removing the technical review
   and allowing multiple registrants to share a scheme name.

1.  Introduction

   RFC 2717 [RFC2717] describes the current mechanism for registering



Hoffman                  Expires April 15, 2005                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft      Revised Registration Procedures         October 2004


   new URL schemes.  There is widespread dissatisfaction in the Internet
   community with these procedures, which has led to many people simply
   ignoring them and using unregistered schemes in many widely-deployed
   applications.

   This document revises the procedures in RFC 2717 to make registration
   much simpler and more definitive, at a cost of allowing some schemes
   to have multiple registrations.  The basic structure of the new
   procedure is:

   o  Scheme names in the registry can have multiple entries for the
      name.  There is no "first come, first served" restriction on a
      name.
   o  After an RFC that registers a scheme name is published, the RFC is
      entered into the registry and the name is then closed to
      additional entries.
   o  There is no technical review of registrations, only a minor
      secretarial review (and a check whether or not the name's
      registration is already closed).
   o  Schemes in the current IANA registry are closed to new
      registrations.

2.  Procedure for Registering

   The registrant should first check the IANA scheme name registry to
   see whether or not there is already an entry for the name desired
   and, if so, whether the name's registration is closed.  If it is not
   closed (or there is no entry under the name yet), the registrant may
   register the name by submitting the template shown here to IANA.

   Upon receipt of the filled-in template, IANA:

   1.  Checks the submission for completeness.
   2.  Checks the current registry for an entry of that name.  If such a
       registry exists, checks that the registry is not closed.  If it
       is closed, IANA rejects the registration request.
   3.  Checks the URL given in the request, makes sure it is alive, and
       checks that it generally describes the URL scheme being
       registered.
   4.  [[ Possibly more here.  ]]
   5.  Fills in the registry.

2.1  Registration Template

   [[ Use same template as RFC 2717, but add "URL of document more
   completely describing the scheme".  ]]





Hoffman                  Expires April 15, 2005                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft      Revised Registration Procedures         October 2004


2.2  Registering from RFCs

   [[ Needs to be filled in.  Similar to steps as above, but with the
   addition of marking the name's registry as "closed" after entering
   the new entry.  ]]

3.  IANA Considerations

   Clearly, this whole document is about IANA considerations.

3.1  Converting the current registry to the new format

   [[ Stuff here about adding URLs.  ]]

   [[ Adding an indicator for each current name that the name is closed
   because all current names start off closed.  ]]

3.2  Registering new names

   [[ How to start a new name entry ]]

3.3  Adding additional registrations to existing names

   [[ Checking that the name is actually open ]]

3.4  Registering names from RFCs

   [[ Making it the last entry; closing out the name ]]

4.  Security Considerations

   There are no known security issues with the new registration
   mechanism.

5  Normative References

   [RFC2717]  Petke, R. and I. King, "Registration Procedures for URL
              Scheme Names", BCP 35, RFC 2717, November 1999.













Hoffman                  Expires April 15, 2005                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft      Revised Registration Procedures         October 2004


Author's Address

   Paul Hoffman
   VPN Consortium
   127 Segre Place
   Santa Cruz, CA  95060
   US

   EMail: paul.hoffman@vpnc.org










































Hoffman                  Expires April 15, 2005                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft      Revised Registration Procedures         October 2004


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Hoffman                  Expires April 15, 2005                 [Page 5]


