


Network Working Group                                       M. Wasserman
Internet-Draft                                                ThingMagic
Expires: August 8, 2004                                 February 8, 2004


   Update to RFC 2418 Regarding the Management of IETF Mailing Lists
                draft-wasserman-rfc2418-ml-update-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at http://
   www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 8, 2004.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004). All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   This document is an update to RFC 2418 that gives WG chairs explicit
   responsibility for managing WG mailing lists. In particular, it gives
   WG chairs the authority to temporarily suspend the mailing list
   posting privileges of disruptive individuals.












Wasserman                Expires August 8, 2004                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft       Mailing List Management Update        February 2004


1. Introduction

   As written, RFC 2418 [1] gives WG chairs more authority to manage
   face-to-face discussions than to manage mailing list discussions.  In
   face-to-face meetings, the WG chair has the authority "to refuse to
   grant the floor to any individual who is unprepared or otherwise
   covering inappropriate material, or who, in the opinion of the Chair
   is disrupting the WG process."  However, RFC 2418 does not give the
   WG chair the authority to suspend the mailing list posting privileges
   of an individual who is similarly disrupting WG mailing list
   discussions.  RFC 2418 explicitly requires full IESG approval for
   this action.

   This document is an update to RFC 2418, section 3.2.  It gives WG
   chairs the authority to temporarily suspend the posting privileges of
   disruptive individuals, without IESG approval.



































Wasserman                Expires August 8, 2004                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft       Mailing List Management Update        February 2004


2. Specific Changes to RFC 2418

   The following paragraph supersedes the last paragraph of RFC 2418,
   section 3.2:

   As in face-to-face sessions, occasionally one or more individuals may
   engage in behavior on a mailing list which, in the opinion of the WG
   chair, is disruptive to the WG process.  Unless the disruptive
   behaviour is severe enough that it must be stopped immediately, the
   WG chair should attempt to discourage the disruptive behavior by
   communicating directly with the offending individual.  If the
   behavior persists, the WG chair should send at least one public
   warning on the WG mailing list.  As a last resort and typcially after
   one or more explicit warnings, the WG chair, in consultation with the
   responsible Area Director, may suspend the mailing list posting
   privileges of the disruptive individual for a period of not more than
   30 days. Even while posting privileges are suspended, the individual
   must not be prevented from receiving messages posted to the list.
   Like all other WG chair decisions, any suspension of posting
   privileges is subject to appeal, as described in RFC 2026 [2].  Other
   methods of mailing list control must be approved by the IESG.






























Wasserman                Expires August 8, 2004                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft       Mailing List Management Update        February 2004


3. Security Considerations

   This document describes a modification to the IETF process for
   managing mailing list discussions.  It has no security
   considerations.














































Wasserman                Expires August 8, 2004                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft       Mailing List Management Update        February 2004


4. Acknowledgements

   This document reflects a discussion that was held on the MPOWR
   mailing list in December 2003 and January 2004.  In particular, the
   following people contributed ideas that influenced this draft: Harald
   Alvestrand, Dave Crocker, James Kempf and John Klensin.

   This document was written using the xml2rfc tool described in RFC
   2629 [3].










































Wasserman                Expires August 8, 2004                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft       Mailing List Management Update        February 2004


Normative References

   [1]  Bradner, S., "IETF Working Group Guidelines and Procedures", BCP
        25, RFC 2418, September 1998.

   [2]  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3", BCP
        9, RFC 2026, October 1996.












































Wasserman                Expires August 8, 2004                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft       Mailing List Management Update        February 2004


Informative References

   [3]  Rose, M., "Writing I-Ds and RFCs using XML", RFC 2629, June
        1999.


Author's Address

   Margaret Wasserman
   ThingMagic
   One Broadway, 14th Floor
   Cambridge, MA  02142
   USA

   Phone: +1 617 758 4177
   EMail: margaret@thingmagic.com
   URI:   http://www.thingmagic.com/


































Wasserman                Expires August 8, 2004                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft       Mailing List Management Update        February 2004


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it
   has made any effort to identify any such rights. Information on the
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11. Copies of
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of
   licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to
   obtain a general license or permission for the use of such
   proprietary rights by implementors or users of this specification can
   be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice
   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF Executive
   Director.


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004). All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assignees.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION



Wasserman                Expires August 8, 2004                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft       Mailing List Management Update        February 2004


   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.











































Wasserman                Expires August 8, 2004                 [Page 9]


