

Network Working Group                                            T. Hardie
Internet-Draft                                             Qualcomm, Inc.
                                                                June  2003


                   Twelve heresies, two visions, and one belief
	                   draft-hardie-12-2-1-00.txt

Status of this Memo

     This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
     all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

     Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
     Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
     other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
     Drafts.

     Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
     and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
     time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
     material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

     The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at http://
     www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

     The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
     http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.



Copyright Notice

     Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003).  All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

     The IETF brings together a technical community that shares a
     common dedication to making the best possible engineering choices
     and protocol standards for the Internet as whole.  The community
     shares a number of common beliefs, which create the basis of a
     common work style and inform many of the decisions made within the
     IETF.  As in many communities of believers, some of these beliefs
     have been elevated to the status of dogma.  In the process of
     considering reform, the treatment of these as unquestionable may
     be hindering progress.  This document challenges some of the
     beliefs which the author believes have become dogmatic.  It also
     presents two visions for the evolution of the IETF and articulates
     a single belief.

1.  The Heresies

1.1 Rough consensus.

     "rough consensus and running code" is a way to judge whether or
     not an an idea will work, not a goal in and of itself.

     Dave Clark's much-quoted credo for the IETF cites "rough consensus
     and running code" as the key criteria for decision making in the
     IETF.  Aside from a pleasing alliteration, these two touchstones
     provide a concise summary of the ideals which guide the IETF's
     decision making.  The first implies an open process in which any
     technical opinion will be heard and any participant's concerns
     addressed; the second implies a recognition that any decision must
     be grounded in solid engineering and the known characteristics of
     the network and its uses.  As touchstones, they are excellent.
     The aim of the IETF is to make the best possible engineering
     choices and protocol standards for the Internet as a whole, and
     these two statements should guide it in making its choices and
     standards.

     Note, though, that they should be guidelines, not inflexible
     rules.  We rely on this viewpoint as a way of judging things for
     many situations, but we can't be hamstrung by it.  There are times
     when the IETF's need to make a decision on a technical point may
     be greater than its need to use consensus as a process to reach
     that goal.  RFC 3127 documents one such occasion.  There are
     others where the failure to use other methods delayed or destroyed
     important efforts, and these occasions should warn us not to treat
     this advice as dogma.

1.2 Working group participation.

     Working groups need to identify their participants.

     The IETF uses an open process which allows technical contributions
     from any one, regardless of affiliation or attendance.  This is a
     good thing.  A bad thing which has arisen from that good thing is
     a reluctance to identify the participants in a working group
     effort, presumably out of fear that working group "members" will
     ignore the input of those who are not members and that the
     openness will thus be compromised.  Openness is important, but the
     result of this choice can be broken working group processes.
     Chairs and document authors may have to make generic pleas for
     participation or document review, rather than asking specific
     individuals to undertake those tasks.  Since some of those who
     might be willing if asked instead assume someone else will take
     the task, participation is reduced despite there being a pool of
     participants who are fundamentally committed to the work.

     Identifying working group participants acknowledges that the IETF
     is much larger than the current pool of authors or slate of Area
     Directors and working group chairs.  Making participation more
     explicit improves the ability of those outside a particular effort
     to tap expertise in it and enables the organization to identify
     those who may be ready to take on new roles as authors, chairs, or
     mentors.  Identifying participants should not exclude technical
     comments from those outside an effort who review its work, and
     checks and balance may, of course, still be needed to make sure
     such exclusion does not occur.

1.3  Working group oversight.

     Self-organizing working groups need oversight to ensure that the
     decisions they reach are the best decisions for the Internet as a
     whole.

     A rational decision for a working group may not be the right
     decision for the IETF as a whole.  From some perspectives, it may
     be rational to resist change to deployed clients, even though they
     contribute to congestion or lack security.  It may be rational to
     avoid interoperability with competing systems, so that a larger
     scope for the current effort may be planned.  It may even be
     rational for the working group to replicate at one layer a suite
     of services developed or being developed at another, so as to
     avoid dependencies.

     At the moment, the IETF has poor mechanisms to deal with those
     tensions, even though most IETF participants would agree that
     congestion control, security, interoperability, and the reuse of a
     common core set of services are all laudable design goals.  The
     community reviews charters and constrains them such that efforts
     are expected to meet certain design goals.  There can be pushback
     during IETF Last Call or during the IESG's review.  Fundamentally,
     though, we trust that participants have internalized the issues
     and that they, therefore, will handle the tension themselves.

     That can and does work, but we need other mechanisms to reinforce
     it: some of those may be training, some may be structural reviews
     at periodic intervals, and some may be creating methods to ensure
     that cross-speciality expertise is more consistently available.
     Some form of oversight is required, though, to ensure that it has
     worked.  The current form, though, is not the only possibility.
     The IETF might shift to a system in which working groups are not
     entirely self-organizing but instead requires participation by
     those with specific expertise or points of view (e.g. security,
     operations), so that "oversight" is in fact part of normal working
     group processes.  It also might mean oversight by bodies other
     than those currently handling the task, but with the same duty to
     examine the working group's output from the broader perspectives
     available outside the group or its area.

1.4 Interim meetings.

      Interim meetings are not inherently a bad thing.

      Working groups need to make progress throughout the year, not
      just in the period immediately before and after an IETF plenary
      meeting.  While the IETF's main mode of operations, working on
      mailing lists, supports this goal, face to face time can help.
      Face to face meetings or open conference calls can help a group
      make progress by helping focus the participant's efforts and by
      providing for a quicker exchange of ideas than is possible on
      mailing lists.  Interim meetings can be just as open to those
      doing the work as the plenary meetings, provided they are
      well-advertised, planned sufficiently far in advance, and take
      into account the need for fairness in travel budgeting when
      selecting locations.

      Interim meetings do not allow for the same level of interaction
      outside the core participant group as is allowed by IETF plenary
      meetings, but minuted results provide a reasonable degree of
      openness for those not actively engaged in the work.

1.5 Areas.

      It does make sense to group work together.

      The existence of useful directorates outside the set of current
      areas (e.g the LDAP directorate or XML directorate) indicates
      that this grouping may in fact be valuable at multiple levels,
      and that some groupings may intersect.  The current set of areas
      and interactions may or may not make sense and may or may not be
      sufficient, but the idea is fundamentally sound.

1.6 Dependencies.

     The work of one group must be able to depend on the work of another.

     An organization with expected output of the IETF must be able to
     have the work of one unit depend on the work of another.  Working
     groups commonly divide their work into multiple related documents,
     rather than trying to create a single, monolithic specification.
     The IETF as a larger community needs to be able to do the same
     thing, by allowing specific groups' work to depend on that being
     done at other layers or in other areas.  One advantage the IETF
     has in open review and input is that when one group's lack of
     conclusive output is gating other work, those waiting can add
     their energy to the working group they depend on.

1.7 One way.

     There is no fundamental requirement that the IETF use a single way
     to make decisions or progress standards.

     While it is important to specify the ways decisions happen and
     progress is made, there is no reason to assume that one single
     process must be used in all cases.  Having multiple ways of doing
     things that fit different circumstances allows us to focus on the
     output needed, rather than the process used to achieve it.  As we
     consider reform, we must recognize that replacing one single way
     of doing the work with any other single way of doing the work will
     move the pain, but may accomplish little else.

1.8 Legal fiction.

     The IETF operates under a legal fiction that relates its work to
     ISOC; that fiction needs to be replaced with a new legal fiction
     that lets the IETF stand apart.

     The legal fiction that the IETF is an organized activity of ISOC
     grew out of the need for the IETF to have an organizational home
     that could provide insurance, legal counsel, and related services.
     The author believes that it also grew out of the reluctance of
     many participants in the IETF to be pinned down as a membership
     organization, for reasons articulated in 1.2, above.  To restate
     those reasons in an organizational form, the author believes that
     there was considerable concern that those funding the IETF would
     expect or receive treatment that limited the IETF's ability to
     make the best engineering decisions for the Internet.  Allowing
     the IETF to exist as an activity, rather than an organization, put
     it at one remove from direct funding and helped assuage those
     fears.

     The IETF existed prior to ISOC's formation, and has related to the
     IAB, IRTF, RFC Editor and other organizations in ways very
     different from those currently in place.  The current legal
     fiction has had a host of unintended consequences, and we find
     ourselves at a moment when ending it makes sense.  ISOC has a
     stable income stream related to PIR's management of the .org TLD,
     and it has itself created a new structure to refocus its
     priorities.

     The IETF, too, is considering reform and in so doing it has the
     opportunity to put in place other mechanisms to ensure that it
     retains the ability to make the best possible engineering
     decisions while obtaining the ability to make more direct
     decisions about its supporting organizations and external
     relationships.

1.9 Paid staff.

     The pride the IETF takes in having volunteer effort should not
     blind the IETF to the opportunities that having paid staff may
     represent.

     There are already a number of critical services that the IETF
     derives through Memoranda of Understanding or other contracts, and
     the benefits in event planning, publication services, and related
     capabilities are clear.  There are other areas, such as working
     group management, where the IETF does not use paid staff and where
     doing so would represent a fundamental change in the nature of the
     IETF.  There are also, however, some grey areas where having paid
     staff who worked directly for the IETF might be a significant
     advantage.  An IETF-employed executive director might logically
     negotiate contracts on its behalf, for example, where one employed
     via an MoU would be barred from negotiating at least that
     contract, if not all contracts.


1.10 Document Series.

     The existence of an independent, technical RFC editor is vital to
     the ongoing dialog about what technologies and services will
     improve the Internet.  It is also best served by splitting the
     document series so that IETF-produced documents and other
     documents published by the RFC editor cannot be confused.

     At the moment, there is a tension between the community's need and
     desire for an open publication series which allows for
     wide-ranging documents exploring the space of packet-switched
     networking and the community's need for a clear set of
     specifications for the protocols and practices it has developed.
     Note, in particular, that the community needs for the set to be
     clear as well as the documents themselves to be clear.  This
     tension means that attempts to publish the specifications which
     have not been considered or selected by some working groups face
     resistance that may derive from the need for a clear set, rather
     than any inherent flaw in the ideas themselves.

     The IETF has tried to assuage that tension by supplementary
     marking, using the "standards track" and "Informational or
     Experimental" as tags to indicate which documents do and do not
     belong to the set.  This effort has largely failed.  It is blurred
     partly by our own rules, which allow some IETF-produced or
     set-relevant documents to use the same categories as those outside
     the IETF set.  It is also blurred by the ease of misunderstanding
     the categories and the ease of elision of the supplementary
     marking.

     Further efforts to increase the supplementary marking, with "IESG
     notes" and similar commentary take a great deal of time and increase
     the tension between the two needs articulated above.  There is also
     no substantial indication that they are or will be more effective.
     Eliminating these efforts and returning the others to primary markings
     is both likely to be more effective and likely to increase the
     freedom of the RFC editor to publish documents that, in its independent
     judgement, should be part of the ongoing dialog on how to improve
     the Internet.


1.11 Personalities.

     The IETF community has consistently placed its trust in specific
     individuals, trusting that they had the personal contacts, charisma,
     or technical knowledge to resolve thorny problems.  This trust is
     a mistake.

     It is not a mistake because the assessments of those individuals
     are wrong; it is a mistake because it works around structural
     problems with the effort and abilities of people who may not
     always be available.  To answer the question: "Should the reform
     process be managed by the AD for the General area?" with "Sure, I
     trust Harald to do the job." is confuse the personal abilities and
     manner of the current person doing the job with the job itself.
     To scale to a reasonable level, the IETF must be able to define
     the work associated with specific roles.  It can then recruit or
     train people for those roles.  Working the mechanism in reverse,
     so that the individual's capacities are the primary gauge for
     the scope of the job occupied, makes for serious succession problems.


1.12 Reform.

     "If it ain't broke don't fix it" does not apply on a piecemeal
     basis to complex systems.

     In a reform process, ruling some items out of bounds for change
     because they do not cause current pain is a mistake.  If you
     change any fundamental part of a system, you must consider whether
     the other parts of a system need to be adjusted to handle new
     load, tasks, or interactions.  This does not mean that all change
     must occur at once, but it does mean that the process of reform
     must be open to change at all levels.

2.  The Visions

2.1 New integration along traditional lines.

     The author believes that the IETF has traditionally been
     integrated in two different ways, one formal and one informal.
     The formal integration relates to the steps of the standards
     process and the precursor steps of working group formation and
     chartering.  The informal integration is an overlapping set of
     personal relationships that allows participants to identify
     skills, perspectives, or energy needed to complete the efforts
     identified in the formal processes.  During a period of rapid
     growth and a follow-on period of contraction, the second system has
     been strained to the point of failure.  Though the IETF retains a
     large pool of skilled professionals with energy and needed
     perspectives, the overlap in personal networks is now not
     sufficient to associate those with the efforts the IETF has taken
     on.  This has led to delay, lowered quality, and frustration, both
     among those whose skills and perspectives are not appropriately
     connected to salient efforts and among those whose efforts have
     stalled for lack of energy or early input by those with relevant
     expertise.

     One path forward for the IETF is to retain much or all of its
     current formal process, but take the traditionally informal lines
     of integration and to increase its efforts to create and support
     them.  It may also have to shift some of those lines of
     integration from the informal to the formal.  The SIR proposal,
     and especially its color-coded variant (SIRS), provides one
     example of how the IETF might create a formal mechanism
     (opportunity for early review by those outside an area) to replace
     the informal mechanism of passing work back and forth among one's
     colleagues.

     Beyond that are a host of possible mechanisms.  Having an
     identifiable group of committed participants may create an esprit
     de corps among those actively participating in a particular
     working group that will carry on beyond the group's tasks.
     Initial training sessions can create lines of contact both among a
     cohort trained together and between those trained and the
     trainers.  That can be extended by fostering round table
     discussions among participants from different groups, document
     authors, and chairs.  Cross-area and cross-working group
     integration can be improved by setting up liaison roles.
     Mentoring programs and peer review systems can be used to create
     new lines of communication.  The connection provided by
     directorates can also be extended, both by having open-membership
     directorates for some specific topics and by increasing the amount
     of inter and intra-group communication expected.

     None of the changes described above is a magic bullet, and none,
     at first glance, creates much structural change in the IETF.  Each
     mechanism is, after all, an elaboration of something we already
     do.  It is, instead, a cultural change that suggests the real
     strength of the IETF is that it brings together folks from
     substantially different backgrounds who still share a common goal.
     More importantly, it suggests that to retain that strength the
     IETF needs to foster mechanisms that brings those folks together
     early and often.  It also presumes that with renewed strength in
     this core area that the quality problems, delay, and frustration
     can be addressed within the framework already established.

     There is a long-held belief by some that the real work of any
     organization gets done in hallways.  For the IETF, the right
     response to that may be to make sure that the networks of folks in
     those hallways is vibrant, active, and just as open to new
     membership and participation as its formal processes have always
     been.  That may mean moving some of those meetings out of the
     hallway and into meeting rooms and mailing lists, but the
     trade-off might be worth it.


2.2 Coordination as an alternate path.

     The vision set out above presumes that the best result is an IETF
     with approximately the same scope as it has now but an increased
     effectiveness within that scope.  More importantly, it presumes
     that a tight integration among the different parts of the IETF
     is of benefit to each of those parts.

     One contrary view is that the right path may actually be to shift
     to a model in which the different parts of the IETF are far more
     loosely integrated than they are now.  Under this view, the IETF
     as a whole should become a coordinating body, which would create
     and coordinate more focused organizations.  To some extent, this
     view recognizes that a great deal of the work of protocol
     development and Internet engineering is done outside of the IETF
     as it stands now, and that this is not likely to change.  Rather
     than attempting to change that fact, it suggests that the IETF
     should evolve to be a coordinating body that can reconcile the
     work both of its sub-organizations and those organizations outside
     the current IETF which wish to be part of the larger framework.
     It also answers the question of how to maintain informal personal
     networks by suggesting that the natural size of an organization of
     this type should be one in which the participants can or would
     know each other personally.

     Under such a system, the IETF would create individual
     organizations for its areas or other suitable clusters of
     activity, and it would then create a set of mechanisms to
     coordinate the work in those activities.  The individual
     organizations might have working groups and directorates that
     behave much as they do now, but the integration with other
     organizations would be different.  These mechanisms might include
     liaisons, cross-cluster meetings and mailing lists, and periodic
     review.  That coordination could include organizations that have
     historically been focused on specific applications of IETF
     technology.

     At the forefront of this vision of the IETF is the idea that the
     field of protocol design and Internet engineering is very large
     and getting larger, and that getting all of the work into a single
     organization is unwieldy and unlikely.   Rather than attempt it, it
     suggests that the right answer is to create a group of smaller,
     focused organizations that can take on specific roles.  As a
     coordinating body, the IETF's role would be both to charter new
     organizations as needed and to coordinate them once chartered.
     A critical part of that coordination would be ensuring that
     work done in one organization is reviewed in other organizations
     whose work would be effected.

     To some extent, the IETF already holds this vision, since it does
     not do all protocol design in a single working group or even a
     single working group per area.  Whether it wants to extend that
     vision to clusters of working groups as a mechanism for scaling
     may depend on how we balance the types of coordination.  It would
     also depend on the development of a host of subsidiary mechanisms
     for coordination that we don't have now.  Despite that dependence
     on systems with no running code, there is an argument to be made
     that this simply recognizes a reality--that groups spin off to
     take on new tasks--and attempts to enable the IETF to retain a
     coordination role after that has occurred.  As the field expands,
     this may well be one of the key ways that the IETF can help ensure
     that engineering decisions take into account what's best for the
     Internet as a whole.

3.  The Belief.

    The work is worth doing.

    The IETF has no enforcement power.  Every adherent to any standard
    or engineering recommendation put forward by the IETF follows it
    voluntarily.  That makes clear that the work of the IETF is not to
    manage the Internet, or even manage protocol development for the
    Internet.  The work of the IETF is to provide a community and set
    of tools for those who want to see the Internet grow and develop;
    nothing more.  Nothing less.

    That work is worth doing.


6. Security Considerations.

    Any change to organizational structure creates risk that attackers
    will be able to game the new system in ways they could not game the old.

7. IANA Considerations.

    This document does contain any actions for IANA.

8. Normative References

    None.

9. Non-Normative References

Mitton, D. et al. "Authentication, Authorization, and Accounting: 
Protocol Evaluation",
     RFC3127. (RFC3127)

Carpenter, B. et al. "Careful Additional Review of Documents (CARD) by
      Senior IETF Reviewers (SIRS)" draft-carpenter-solution-sirs-01.txt
      (SIRS)

10. Author's Address

     Ted Hardie
     Qualcomm, Inc.
     675 Campbell Technology Parkway
     Suite 200
     Campbell, CA
     U.S.A.

     EMail: hardie@qualcomm.com


Full Copyright Statement


     Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003).  All Rights Reserved.

     This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
     others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
     or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
     and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
     kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
     included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
     document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
     the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
     Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
     developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
     copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
     followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
     English.

     The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
     revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

     This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
     "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
     TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
     BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
     HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
     MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Acknowledgement

     Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
     Internet Society.






















