



           Internet Draft         SIP for Video       February 22, 2001


           Internet Engineering Task Force			O. Levin
           Internet Draft						RADVision Inc.
           draft-levin-sip-for-video-00.txt
           February 22, 2001
           Expires: August 2001


                SIP Requirements for support of Multimedia and Video


           STATUS OF THIS MEMO

              This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full
              conformance with all provisions of Section 10 of
              RFC2026.
              Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet
              Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its
              working groups.  Note that other groups may also
              distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.
              Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum
              of six months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted
              by other documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to
              use Internet-Drafts as reference material or to cite
              them other than as "work in progress".
              The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
              http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt
              The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be
              accessed at http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

           Abstract

                This document outlines requirements for a call control
             protocol for real-time multimedia support over IP. As a
             part of its broader scope, the document examines
             important aspects of interactive video communications
             that need to be addressed by a call control protocol for
             real-time multimedia support and discusses techniques
             currently used to deal with them.

                This document examines the way SIP/SDP/RTP/RTCP can be
             used today to support multimedia sessions and to deal
             with some of the presented requirements. In a small
             number of cases, this document mentions possible
             directions to enhance SIP in order to add new required
             functionality or to provide the same functionality in a
             more efficient way.







           Internet Draft         SIP for Video       February 22, 2001


			Table of Contents

             1.	GENERAL									2
             2.	MULTIMEDIA APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS					3
             2.1	GENERAL									3
             2.2	CAPABILITIES SPECIFICATION						3
             2.2.1	Bit Rate								3
             2.2.2	Advanced CODEC schemes support				4
             2.2.3	Lip Synchronization						5
             2.3	RESOURCE RESERVATION							6
             2.4	MEDIA STREAM CONTROL							6
             2.4.1	An ability to reference a specific media stream		7
             2.4.2	Effective addressing of collision conditions during 
             		asynchronous operations						7
             2.4.3	Explicit start and stop of data transmitting in a 					certain direction							8
             2.4.4	Bandwidth changes							9
             2.4.5	Video/CODEC Specific Commands					9
             2.4.6	Transmission of media stream commands			9
             3.	INTEROPERABILITY WITH EXISTING VIDEO SYSTEMS			10
             3.1	H.320										10
             3.2	H.324 AND H.324M								10
             3.3	H.323										11
             4.	CONCLUSION									11
             5.	SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS							11
             6.	REFERENCES									11
             7.	ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS								13
             8.	AUTHORS' ADDRESSES							13




















           O. Levin                                              Page 1





           Internet Draft         SIP for Video       February 22, 2001


           1. General

                The specific motivation underlying this document is to
             help define a framework to enable SIP/SDP/RTP/RTCP
             systems to provide real-time multimedia services across
             global networks with quality video that delivers a
             satisfying end user experience.

                Videoconferencing can serve as an example application
             and a test case for a service that uses SIP as a basic
             call control protocol for managing a call leg, and uses
             complementary technologies such as protocols for floor
             control, camera control, etc. for achieving other
             functionalities. It is important to emphasize that while
             each application would use various basic tools to address
             the specific needs of the particular application, a basic
             tool should be effective and convenient for general use
             in its area of expertise, so that it would be appropriate
             to fulfill needs of emerging applications.

                In some cases, when discussing a specific desired
             functionality, this document refers to SIP and
             SIP/SDP/RTP/RTCP suite of protocols interchangeably. In
             many cases the discussed functionality exists (or may be
             achieved in the future) as a result of these protocols
             working together and complementing each other. Since this
             document presents merely requirements rather then
             specific solutions, it is helpful to present the
             requirements from a system point of view, before mapping
             them into the protocol (or protocols).

                In the end this document lists other multimedia
             protocols besides SIP together with the systems they are
             used in. This information is presented to highlight some
             possible obstacles and interoperability problems that














           O. Levin                                              Page 2



           Internet Draft         SIP for Video       February 22, 2001


             need to be considered on the way towards the desired
             networks convergence.


           2. Multimedia Application Requirements

           2.1 General

                Each device has a set of its capabilities in terms of
             its CPU processing power, additional HW characteristics
             and the algorithms it supports. During a session's
             lifetime, its characteristics may be changing dynamically
             both as a result of network conditions and as part of a
             broader application (such as videoconferencing).

                All the requirements, presented in this chapter, are
             required for providing basic reliable services: meaning
             establishing a session of a certain quality, based on
             capabilities agreement during the session establishment
             and sustained throughout the duration of the session.

                The problem can be described as a lack of
             expressiveness in three following areas:

                -    Capabilities Specification
                -    Resource Reservation
                -    Media Stream Control
                
                The desired ultimate goal is to

                -    Express the capabilities (i.e. supported media,
                     CODECs algorithms, bandwidth, etc.) without a
                     need in configuration
                -    Signal the total resources, required for a
                     specific session (probably in terms of
                     capabilities)
                -    Within a session, explicitly open and close media
                     streams, modify the parameters of a certain
                     stream within the boundaries of previously
                     announced capabilities and reserved resources

           2.2 Capabilities Specification

           2.2.1 Bit Rate

                Each CODEC (COder DECoder) algorithm is defined to
             work at a certain rate or rates measured in bits per
             second.


           O. Levin                                              Page 3


           Internet Draft         SIP for Video       February 22, 2001


                SDP [2] has a concept of "Application-Specific Maximum
             Bandwidth" that can be applied to "m" (media) line and
             specified in kilobits per second.

                The required functionality is to express CODEC
             capabilities for both ranges of rates and a discrete
             number of rates. The "discrete number of rates"
             requirement has a number of purposes:

                -    Efficient resources allocation
                -    Multipoint applications where the rates from
                     different sources should be matched
                -    Interworking with terminals using multiplexing
                     schemes, such as H.320 [12] and H.324 [13], in
                     which only a discrete number of bit rates are
                     available.

                The defined capabilities may be used both for resource
             reservation and the actual control of a media stream.

           2.2.2 Advanced CODEC schemes support

                Video CODEC algorithms (among them H.263 [9]) have a
             concept of CIF " Common Intermediate Format Definition
             with its derivatives: QCIF, 4CIF, etc. This definition of
             resolution implies the number of pixels and the format of
             the composed picture.

                The challenge of providing quality video services over
             imperfect networks results in inventing of new coding
             algorithms with numerous optional operation modes fitting
             various environments. A famous example is the latest
             H.263 Recommendation ("H.263+") [10] that specifies a
             coded representation that can be used for compressing the
             moving picture component of audio-visual services at low
             bit rates and has innumerous number of standard options
             described in its Annexes.

                All of the mentioned characteristics (bit rate,
             resolution, H.263+ options) are examples of CODECs
             capabilities. Many CODECs implementations are capable of
             changing the mode of their operation in real time, as a
             result of changing conditions, and signaling the new mode
             within the RTP payload header.

                RTP has a definition of a specific RTP Payload header
             for each CODEC scheme carrying both the configuration and


           O. Levin                                              Page 4





           Internet Draft         SIP for Video       February 22, 2001


             the dynamically changing segmentation information
             describing the format of the transmitted RTP packet.

                In order to use various options dynamically during a
             session lifetime, without probability of dropping a call,
             a "capabilities announcement" mechanism should exist,
             expressing modes of operations, supported by each of the
             sides.

                In the future, SDPng work [22] may define a language,
             expressive enough to describe different modes of
             operations. SDP may be expanded to carry some of the
             parameters. SIP extensions may be needed to separate the
             "capabilities announcement" phase from the actual opening
             of media streams.

           2.2.3 Lip Synchronization

                One of the basic requirements for a multimedia session
             is the synchronization between audio and video streams
             when presenting them to the user.

           2.2.3.1 Skew

                The different timing of two media streams usually
             derives from an unequal processing time required for the
             encoding of the streams by the originating device. This
             difference is referred as a Skew. Skew is defined as a
             maximum time that the two media streams are delayed from
             each other as delivered to the transport network. Skew is
             usually measured in milliseconds.

                Using RTP [3] timestamping service, during an active
             multimedia session the receiving device is capable of
             computing the skew and adjusting its buffers accordingly
             in order to provide the end user video and audio display
             in a synchronized manner.

                Additional useful functionality, helping to deal with
             the lip synchronization problem, is providing the
             receiving device with a skew metric before the actual
             media streams are transmitted. Knowing the maximum skew
             value in advance allows the receiving device, based on
             its capabilities, either to reject the call or to
             allocate its buffers accordingly increasing probability
             for a high quality call and pleasant end user experience.
             Currently this functionality is missing from the
             SIP/SDP/RTP/RTPC definitions.

           O. Levin                                              Page 5



           Internet Draft         SIP for Video       February 22, 2001


           2.2.3.2 Association of media streams

                A single multimedia session may consist of multiple
             video or multiple audio streams, addressing multilingual
             requirements or CODECs multi-rate requirements
             respectively. In order to implement lip synchronization,
             an association between a certain video stream and its
             corresponding audio stream is required. Currently this
             functionality is missing from the SIP/SDP/RTP/RTPC
             definitions.

           2.3 Resource Reservation

                 An end user may support more than a single CODEC
             scheme for a specific media type. The trivial reason for
             choosing a specific CODEC (out of a list of supported
             CODECs) is to match the CODEC scheme, supported by the
             other end. In multimedia applications, it is desired to
             explicitly choose a certain combination of audio and
             video CODECs without exceeding CPU processing power
             limitations or certain available network bandwidth.

                Using the same system (with a defined CPU processing
             power and a support for various CODEC schemes) you would
             like to be able to receive different types of multimedia
             applications. At one time you might want to receive a
             classical concert program; at another time you might want
             to be able to participate in a medical surgery session.
             In this example, the application running on your computer
             represents its CODECs capabilities, CPU constraints and,
             may be, the local network limitations. The other side,
             i.e. the "service provider", knows minimal CODECs
             requirements for providing a service with a certain
             quality. One of the possible ways to express "resources
             ability" is by grouping the "capabilities", discussed
             above. It is an open question, if SIP, as a peer call
             control protocol, requires actual "resources reservation
             commands" being imposed on the other side.

           2.4 Media Stream control

                This section presents requirements to effectively
             control a particular media stream automatically. These
             requirements do not refer to manually driven commands
             such as floor control or camera control.

                It is interesting to mention that despite the fact
             that user commands are not in the scope of a call control


           O. Levin                                              Page 6



           Internet Draft         SIP for Video       February 22, 2001


             protocol (such as SIP), a correlation among them and the
             media streams should be taken into consideration during
             the design of both protocols. For example, a particular
             camera (managed by some application protocol) should be
             by associated with its originated video stream, managed
             by SIP.

                Video requires broader control than voice. Some
             examples of video specific control are listed towards the
             end of this section. It is believed that a convenient
             means for media streams control is required for both
             voice and video, although supporting of video
             applications obviously complicates the problem.

                Currently, in SIP/SDP/RTP/RTCP systems the media
             control commands are divided between SIP/SDP conventions
             and commands defined for certain CODECs and carried by
             "reverse" RTCP control packets, as in [4].

           2.4.1 An ability to reference a specific media stream

                The first basic requirement is the ability to
             reference a particular media stream within a session.

                This functionality does not currently exist within the
             SDP. In order to signal a specific change within a single
             media stream the whole block of media descriptors (i.e. m
             lines) has to be retransmitted. Moreover, the receiving
             side has to perform matching against the old information
             for each one of the m lines in order to recognize the
             changes.

                This functionality should be fixed for the "old" SDP
             version, without waiting for the results of SDPng work.

           2.4.2 Effective addressing of collision conditions during
           asynchronous operations

                In most cases, the change of media stream parameters
             is of an asynchronous nature (see examples below).
             Therefore, both of the sides may issue a request for a
             conflicting change or command "simultaneously",
             generating a so-called "race-condition".

                Currently, SIP solves this problem by introducing the
             "retry-after" header field in the INVITE message. One of
             the disadvantages of this approach is that it locks the



           O. Levin                                              Page 7



           Internet Draft         SIP for Video       February 22, 2001


             whole session, when the collision exists in a certain
             media stream only.

           2.4.3 Explicit start and stop of data transmitting in a
           certain direction

                Explicit start and stop of data transmitting in a
             certain direction is the first basic "control command"
             out of set of media controls. Its necessity becomes
             obvious during the design of PSTN interworking. Early
             establishment of a media path in one direction only,
             strict billing regulations are just a few of the
             examples.

                Today SIP addresses this functionality by "putting
             media streams on Hold" by setting "c" destination
             addresses to value "0.0.0.0".

           2.4.4 Bandwidth changes

                Applications involving video are particularly prone to
             frequent bandwidth changes causing packets lost, error
             conditions, etc.

                The first cause for frequent changes is the network
             changing conditions. Future IP based wireless networks
             will become a real test bed for SIP services.

                Similar changing conditions would frequently be caused
             by the "multimedia nature" of the video services. Some
             examples are presented below.

                Today, in many integrated services, "multimedia
             communication" includes a data session (such as T.120
             [16]) bundled together with voice and video services.
             Opening and closure of the data stream may significantly
             change the desired parameters of the media streams.

                The same effect may exist in multimedia applications,
             where instead of using QCIF derivatives, video streams
             are presented to the user in separate windows. This mode
             of operation may be advantages to the user, who has a
             better control over the session and can use network
             resources in a more effective way.

                Additional example of an "application condition" is a
             multi-conferencing service, where adding of a participant



           O. Levin                                              Page 8



           Internet Draft         SIP for Video       February 22, 2001


             may result in a change of transmitted stream parameters
             or in a reconsideration of conference capabilities.

           2.4.5 Video/CODEC Specific Commands

                Various video specific techniques have been used in
             today's networks in order to cope with the conditions
             mentioned above with minimum service degradation and as
             seamlessly as possible to the users.  Below are some of
             the examples.

                H.261 and H.263 video CODECs have a notion of
             picture's building blocks:  "full picture", GOB and
             MacroBlock (MB). The decoder would have an ability to
             recognize synchronization degradation and explicitly
             request from an encoder for a "full picture", a whole GOB
             or a whole MacroBlock.

                In SIP/SDP/RTP/RTCP systems, the only analogous
             functionality is defined in RFC-2032 "RTP Payload Format
             for H.261 Video Streams" [4] that defines a "Full INTRA-
             frame Request" (FIR) to be carried in RTCP "reverse"
             control packet. This technique is definitely an exception
             to a normal RTCP design and therefore does not work in
             all the cases. No corresponding functionality has been
             defined for H.263 CODEC in [5] and [6].

                A simple example of a video specific command is a
             request to "freeze a picture" in this case originated
             from the encoder towards the decoder. In case the encoder
             is aware of oncoming massive changes in the transmitted
             picture, it would request the decoding side to stop
             presenting the changes, until a new stable image is
             encoded and transmitted.

                Another inherent example of a video specific command
             is a request to change the tradeoff between temporal and
             spatial resolutions, i.e. the tradeoff between the rate
             of the samples and the resolution of the picture. This
             request would be originated by the decoder towards the
             encoder (if the encoder has the capability to dynamically
             change the tradeoff).

           2.4.6 Transmission of media stream commands

                Today the media stream commands are transmitted by
             RTCP. "FIR" command defined for H.261 and described above



           O. Levin                                              Page 9



           Internet Draft         SIP for Video       February 22, 2001


             is the example for this technique. The benefit of this
             approach is that the commands flow the same path as the
             media stream itself and therefore are synchronized in
             time.

                On the other hand, the RTCP approach has a number of
             following drawbacks:

                -    RTCP is an unreliable transport channel
                -    RTCP mechanisms were originally designed to work
                     in primarily multicast environment. This may
                     introduce complications for stream control
                     commands issued in both directions.
                -    Difficulty in RTCP potential use of capabilities
                     defined by SDP (or SDPng)

           3. Interoperability with existing video systems

                Today several protocols are defined to support
             multimedia systems both for Circuit Switched and Packets
             networks. Part of them (such as H.320[12] and H.323[11])
             are deployed, others (such as H.324M) are intended to be
             used in future networks.

                It is important to be aware of the architecture of
             these systems and the interworking challenges they
             introduce.

                Below is the list of these specifications.

           3.1 H.320

                ITU-T Recommendation H.320 [12]  "Narrow-band visual
             telephone systems and terminal equipment" is defined for
             use over ISDN networks. Its deployment is especially
             successful in Europe. H.320 Specification defines an
             umbrella system using the following protocols: H.221,
             H.242, H.230, H.224, H.281, H.120.

           3.2 H.324 and H.324M

                ITU-T Recommendation H.324 [13] "Terminal for low bit-
             rate multimedia communication " is defined for use over
             regular PSTN networks.

                H.324M is the profile of H.324 defined for Mobile
             networks. H.324M is the 3GPP choice for Videoconferencing
             over Circuit Switched Networks.


           O. Levin                                             Page 10



           Internet Draft         SIP for Video       February 22, 2001


                H.324 Recommendation defines an umbrella using the
             following protocols: H.223, H.245, H.120.

           3.3 H.323

                ITU-T Recommendation H.323 [11] "Packet-based
             multimedia communications systems" is defined for use
             over Packet Based Networks which may not provide a
             guaranteed Quality of Service.

                H.323 Recommendation defines an umbrella for use of
             the following protocols: H.225.0, H.245, H.282, H.283,
             H.224, H.281, T.120

           4. Conclusion

                This draft is a first attempt to present and summarize
             issues needed for video services support in
             SIP/SDP/RTP/RTCP systems. Part of the solutions may be
             defined in a short period of time. More advanced features
             or complicated problems will be resolved in the future by
             SDPng and SIP extensions related to it.

                It is important to be aware of the current limitations
             or open issues in the standard because, based on the
             imperativeness of the requirements, SIP allows for
             extensions adding functionality in a standard
             interoperable manner.

                An alternative possible approach might be the
             definition of conventions for certain SIP based
             multimedia systems.

           5. Security Considerations

                This document does not introduce new security
             requirements to existing SIP/SDP/RTP/RTCP systems.

           6. References

             [1] M. Handley, H.Schulzrinne, E.Schooler, and
                 J.Rosenberg, "SIP:Session Initiation Protocol", RFC
                 2543, IETF, March 1999.

             [2] M. Handley and V. Jacobson, "SDP: Session Description
                 Protocol", RFC 2327, IETF, April 1998.

             [3] H. Schulzrinne, S. Casner, R. Frederick, and V.


           O. Levin                                             Page 11



           Internet Draft         SIP for Video       February 22, 2001


                Jacobson, "RTP: a transport protocol for real-time
                applications," Request for Comments1889, IETF, Jan.
                1996.

             [4] Turletti, T. and C. Huitema, "RTP Payload Format for
                 H.261 Video Streams", RFC 2032, IETF, October 1996.

             [5] Zhu, C., "RTP Payload Format for H.263 Video
                 Streams", RFC 2190, IETF, September 1997.

             [6] Bormann, Cline, Deisher, Gardos, Maciocco, Newell,
                 Ott, Sullivan, Wenger, Zhu, "RTP Payload Format for
                 the 1998 Version of ITU-T Rec. H.263 Video (H.263+)",
                 RFC 2429, IETF, October 1998.

             [7] R. Fielding, J. Gettys, J. Mogul, H. Frystyk, L.
                 Masinter, P.Leach, and T.Berners-Lee, "Hypertext
                 transfer protocol -- HTTP/1.1,"RFC 2616, IETF,
                 June1999.

             [8] ITU-T Recommendation H.261 (1993), Video codec for
                 audiovisual services at p . 64 kbit/s.

             [9] ITU-T Recommendation H.263 (1996), Video coding for
                 low bit rate communication.

             [10] ITU-T Recommendation H.263 (1998), Video coding for
                  low bit rate communication.

             [11] ITU-T Recommendation H.323 (2000), Packet-based
                  multimedia communications systems.

             [12] ITU-T Recommendation H.320 (1997), Narrow-band
                  visual telephone systems and terminal equipment.

             [13] ITU-T Recommendation H.324 (1996), Terminal for low
                  bit rate multimedia communication.

             [14] ITU-T Recommendation H.225.0 (1999), Call signalling
                  protocols and media stream packetization for packet
                  based multimedia communication systems.

             [15] ITU-T Recommendation H.245 (2000), Control protocol
                  for multimedia communication.

             [16] ITU-T Recommendation T.120 (1996), Data protocols
                  for multimedia conferencing.



           O. Levin                                             Page 12



           Internet Draft         SIP for Video       February 22, 2001


             [17] ITU-T Recommendation H.223 (1996), Multiplexing
                  protocol for low bit rate multimedia communication.

             [18] ITU-T Recommendation H.224 (1994), A real time
                  control protocol for simplex applications using the
                  H.221 LSD/HSD/MLP channels.

             [19] ITU-T Recommendation H.281 (1994), A far end camera
                  control protocol for video conferences using H.224.

             [20] ITU-T Recommendation H.282 (1999), Remote Device
                  Control Protocol for Multimedia Applications.

             [21] ITU-T Recommendation H.283 (1999), Remote Device
                  Control Logical Channel Transport.

             [22] Kutscher/Ott/Bormann, "Requirements for Session
                  Description and Capability Negotiation", draft-
                  kutscher-mmusic-sdpng-req-01.txt, IETF, November
                  2000.

           7. Acknowledgements

                Sasha Ruditsky, Yair Miranda, Eli Doron, Itamar Gilad
             and Danny Levin participated in earlier discussions on
             this topic.

           8. Authors' Addresses

             Orit Levin
             RADVision Inc.,
             575 Corporate Drive Suite 420
             Mahwah, NJ 07430
             Phone: +1 201 529 4300
             Email: orit@radvision.com


              Full Copyright Statement

              Copyright (c) The Internet Society (2000). All Rights
              Reserved.

              This document and translations of it may be copied and
              furnished to others, and derivative works that comment
              on or otherwise explain it or assist in its
              implementation may be prepared, copied, published
              and distributed, in whole or in part, without



           O. Levin                                             Page 13



           Internet Draft         SIP for Video       February 22, 2001


              restriction of any kind, provided that the above
              copyright notice and this paragraph are included on
              all such copies and derivative works. However, this
              document itself may not be modified in any way, such as
              by removing the copyright notice or references to the
              Internet Society or other Internet organizations, except
              as needed for the purpose of developing Internet
              standards in which case the procedures for copyrights
              defined in the Internet Standards process must be
              followed, or as required to translate it into languages
              other than English.

              The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and
              will not be revoked by the Internet Society or its
              successors or assigns.

              This document and the information contained herein is
              provided on an "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY
              AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL
              WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
              LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
              HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
              ARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
              PURPOSE.


























           O. Levin                                             Page 14


