





INTERNET-DRAFT                                           Gunnar Lindberg
draft-lindberg-anti-spam-mta-03.txt                  Chalmers University
Expires October, 1998                                      of Technology
                                                             23 Apr 1998

                  Anti-Spam Recommendations for SMTP MTAs

Abstract

   This memo gives a number of implementation recommendations for SMTP
   [1] MTAs (Mail Transfer Agents, e.g. sendmail [6]) to make them more
   capable of reducing the impact of spam(*).

   The intent is that these recommendations will help clean up the spam
   situation, if applied on enough SMTP MTAs on the Internet, and that
   they should be used as guidelines for the various MTA vendors. We are
   fully aware that this is not the final solution, but if these
   recommendations were included, and used, on all Internet SMTP MTAs,
   things would improve considerably and give time to design a more long
   term solution. Some ideas are presented in the Future Work section.

   A brief summary of this memo is:

   o   Stop unauthorized mail relaying.
   o   Spammers then have to operate in the open; deal with them.
   o   Design a mail system that can handle spam.

Status of This Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft.  Internet-Drafts are working
   documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas,
   and its working groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts. Comments on this draft should
   be sent to <anti-spam@chalmers.se>.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   To view the entire list of current Internet-Drafts, please check the
   "1id-abstracts.txt" listing contained in the Internet-Drafts Shadow
   Directories on ftp.is.co.za (Africa), ftp.nordu.net (Northern
   Europe), ftp.nis.garr.it (Southern Europe), munnari.oz.au (Pacific
   Rim), ftp.ietf.org (US East Coast), or ftp.isi.edu (US West Coast).






Lindberg et.al. Anti-Spam Recommendations for SMTP MTAs         [Page 1]

draft-lindberg-anti-spam-mta-03.txt                          23 Apr 1998


1. Introduction

   This memo is intended to become a Best Current Practice (BCP) RFC.
   As such it should be used as a guideline for SMTP MTA implementors to
   make their products more capable of preventing/handling spam.
   Despite this being its primary goal, an intended side effect is to
   suggest to the sysadmin/Postmaster community which "anti spam knobs"
   an SMTP MTA is expected to have.

   However, this memo is not generally intended as a description on how
   to operate an SMTP MTA - which "knobs" to turn and how to configure
   the options. If suggestions are provided, they will be clearly marked
   and they should be read as such.

1.1. Background

   Mass unsolicited electronic mail, often known as spam(*), has
   increased considerably during a short period of time and has become a
   serious threat to the Internet email community as a whole. Something
   needs to be done fairly quickly.

   The problem has several components:

   o   It is high volume, i.e. people get a lot of such mail in their
       mailboxes.

   o   It is completely "blind", i.e. there is no correlation between
       the receivers' areas of interest and the actual mail sent out
       (at least if one assumes that not everybody on the Internet is
       interested in porno pictures and spam programs...).

   o   It costs real money for the receivers. Since many receivers
       pay for the time to transfer the mailbox from the (dialup) ISP
       to their computer they in reality pay real money for this.

   o   It costs real money for the ISPs. Assume one 10 Kbyte message
       sent to 10 000 users with their mailboxes at one ISP host;
       that means an unsolicited, unexpected, storage of 100 Mbytes.
       State of the art disks, 4 Gbyte, can take 40 such message
       floods before they are filled. It is almost impossible to
       plan ahead for such "storms".

   o   Most of the senders of spam are dishonest, e.g. hide behind
       false return addresses, deliberately write messages to look
       like they were between two individuals so the spam recipient
       will think it was just misdelivered to them, say the message
       is "material you requested" when you never asked for it, and
       generally do everything they can without regard to honesty or



Lindberg et.al. Anti-Spam Recommendations for SMTP MTAs         [Page 2]

draft-lindberg-anti-spam-mta-03.txt                          23 Apr 1998


       ethics, to try to get a few more people to look at their
       message".

       In fact many of the spam-programs show a pride in adding
       false info that will "make the ISPs scratch their heads".

       It is usually the case that people who send in protests (often
       according to the instructions in the mail) find their mail
       addresses added to more lists and sold to other parties.

   o   It is quite common practice to make use of third party hosts
       as relays to get the spam mail sent out to the receivers. This
       theft of service is illegal in most - if not all - countries
       (at least in the US, spammers have been successfully sued).
       However, with the original sender in the US, the (innocent)
       relay in Sweden and the list of receivers back in the US, the
       legal process of getting damages from the spammers becomes
       extremely difficult

1.2. Scope

   This memo has no intent to be the final solution to the spam problem.

   If, however, enough Internet MTAs did implement enough of the rules
   described below (especially the Non-Relay rules), we would get the
   spammers out in the open, where they could be taken care of. Either
   pure legal actions would help, or we can block them technically using
   other rules described below (since the Non-Relay rules now make them
   appear openly, with their own hosts and domains, we can apply various
   access filters against them). In reality, a combination of legal and
   technical methods is likely to give the best result.

   This way, the spam problem could be reduced enough to allow the
   Internet community to design and deploy a real and general solution.

   But, please note:

       The Non-Relay rules are not in themselves enough to stop spam.
       Even of 99% of the SMTP MTAs implemented them from day 1,
       spammers would still find the remaining 1% and use them. Or,
       spammers would just switch gear and connect directly to each
       and every recipient host; that will be to a higher cost for
       the spammer, but is still quite likely.

   Despite IPv6 deployment may be near in time, the spam problem is here
   already and thus this memo restricts itself to the current IPv4.





Lindberg et.al. Anti-Spam Recommendations for SMTP MTAs         [Page 3]

draft-lindberg-anti-spam-mta-03.txt                          23 Apr 1998


1.3. Terminology

   Throughout this memo we will use the terminology of RFC2119, [4]:

   o   "MUST"

       This word or the adjective "REQUIRED" means that the item is
       an absolute requirement.

   o   "SHOULD"

       This word or the adjective "RECOMMENDED" means that there may
       exist valid reasons in particular circumstances to ignore
       this item, but the full implications should be understood and
       the case carefully weighed before choosing a different course.

   o   "MAY"

       This word or the adjective "OPTIONAL" means that this item is
       truly optional. One vendor may choose to include the item
       because a particular marketplace requires it or because it
       enhances the product, for example; another vendor may omit
       the same item.

1.4. Using DNS information

   In the memo we sometimes use the term "host name" or "domain name"
   which should be interpreted as a Fully Qualified Domain Name, FQDN.
   By this we mean the name returned from the DNS in response to a PTR
   query (.IN-ADDR.ARPA), i.e. when an IP address is translated to a
   name, or we mean a name with a DNS A or MX record associated to it.

   When we suggest use of FQDNs rather than IP addresses this is because
   FQDNs are intuitively much easier to use. However, all such usage
   depends heavily on DNS and .IN-ADDR.ARPA (PTR) information. Since it
   is fairly easy to forge that, either by false cache information
   injected in DNS servers or spammers running their own DNS with false
   information in them, host and domain names must be used with care,
   e.g. verified so that the translation address->name corresponds to
   name->address. With Secure DNS, RFC2065, [5], things will improve,
   since spoofing of .IN-ADDR.ARPA will no longer be possible.

   One of the recommendations is about verifying "MAIL From:" domains
   with the DNS (assure that appropriate DNS information exisists for
   the domain). When making use of this capability there are a few
   things to consider:

   For early versions of spam software it does provide quite some



Lindberg et.al. Anti-Spam Recommendations for SMTP MTAs         [Page 4]

draft-lindberg-anti-spam-mta-03.txt                          23 Apr 1998


   relief, since that software generates mail with completely bogus
   "MAIL From:"  that will never get into the system if verified with
   the DNS. This is in active use at many installations today and it
   does reduce spam.

   On the other hand, sites with weak DNS connectivity may find their
   legitimate mail having problems reaching destinations due to DNS
   timeouts when the receivers verify their "MAIL From:". However, since
   DNS information is handled asynchronously and is cached even though
   the initial requester has given up, chances are high that the
   necessary information is there at a later attempt.

   For later versions of spam software, a check of "MAIL From:" is much
   less likely to help, since spam software evolves too and will start
   using existing mail addresses (whether or not that is legal is beyond
   the scope of this memo). But, at least the Internet will benefit from
   the side effect that this test stops typos and misconfigured UAs.

1.5. Where to block spam, in SMTP, in RFC822 or in the UA

   Our basic assumption is that refuse/accept is handled at the SMTP
   layer and that an MTA that decides to refuse a message should do so
   while still in the SMTP dialogue. First, this means that we do not
   have to store a copy of a message we later decide to refuse and
   second, our responsibility for that message is low or none - since we
   have not yet read it in, we leave it to the sender to handle the
   error.

1.6. SMTP Return Codes

   SMTP has several classes of Return Codes, see [1] for a discussion:

   o   5xx
       is a Permanent Negative Completion reply (Fatal Error) and
       results in the mail transfer being terminated and the mail
       returned to sender.

   o   4xx
       is a Transient Negative Completion reply (Temporary Error) and
       results in the mail transfer being put back on queue again and
       a new attempt being made later.

   o   2xx
       is a Positive Completion reply and indicates that the MTA now
       has taken responsibility for the delivery of the mail.

   When making use of the options/"knobs" described in this memo there
   are a few things to consider:



Lindberg et.al. Anti-Spam Recommendations for SMTP MTAs         [Page 5]

draft-lindberg-anti-spam-mta-03.txt                          23 Apr 1998


   For some events, like "Denied - you're on the spammer's list", 5xx
   may be the correct Return Code, since it terminates the session at
   once and we are done with it. However, a mistake in configuration may
   cause legitimate mail to bounce, which may be quite unfortunate.

   Therefore, we suggest 4xx as the Return Code for most cases. Since
   that is a non fatal error, the mail gets re-queued at the sender and
   we have at least some time to discover and correct configuration
   errors, rather than have mail bounce (typically this is when we
   refuse to Relay for domains that we actually should accept since we
   are on their MX list).

   A 4xx response also makes the spammer's host re-queue the mail and if
   it really is his own host who gets to do this, it is probably a good
   thing - fill up his disks with his own spam. If, on the other hand,
   he is using someone else as Relay Host, all the spam mail being
   queued is a fairly strong evidence that something bad is going on and
   should cause attention at that Relay Host.

   However, 4xx Temporary Errors may have unexpected interaction with
   MX-records. If the receiving domain has several MX records and the
   lowest preference MX-host refuses to receive mail with a "451"
   Response Code, the sending host may choose to - and often will - use
   the next host on the MX list.

   If that next MX host does not have the same refuse-list, it will of
   course accept the mail, only to find that the final host still
   refuses to receive that piece of mail ("MAIL From:"). I.e. our intent
   was to make the offending mail stay at the offending sender's host
   and fill up his mqueue disk, but it all ended up at our friend, the
   next lowest preference MX-host.

   Finally, it has been suggested that one may use a 2xx Return Code but
   nevertheless decide not to forward or receive the spam mail; typical
   alternatives are to store it elsewhere (e.g. /dev/null). This clearly
   violates the intent of RFC821 and should not be done without careful
   consideration - instead of blindly dropping the mail one could re-
   queue it and manually (or automagically) inspect whether it is spam
   or legitimate mail and whether it should be dropped or forwarded.

1.7. Mailing Lists

   An MTA that also has the ability to handle mailing lists and expand
   that to a number of recipients, needs to be able to authorize senders
   and protect its lists from spam. The mechanisms for this may be very
   different from those for ordinary mail and ordinary users and are not
   covered in this memo.




Lindberg et.al. Anti-Spam Recommendations for SMTP MTAs         [Page 6]

draft-lindberg-anti-spam-mta-03.txt                          23 Apr 1998


2. Recommendations

   Here we first give a brief list of recommendations, followed by a
   more thorough discussion of each of them. We will also give
   recommendations on things NOT to do, things that may seem natural in
   the spam fight (and might even work so far) but that might wreak
   havoc on Internet mail and thus may cause more damage than good.

   1)  MUST be able to restrict unauthorized use as Mail Relay.

   2)  MUST be able to provide "Received:" lines with enough
       information to make it possible to trace the mail path, despite
       spammers use forged host names in HELO statements etc.

   3)  MUST be able to provide local log information that makes it
       possible to trace the event afterwards.

   4)  SHOULD be able to log all occurrences of anti-relay/anti-spam
       actions.

   5)  MUST NOT refuse "MAIL To: <Postmaster@my.local.dom.ain>".

   6)  SHOULD be able to refuse mail from a host or a group of hosts.

   7a) MUST NOT refuse "MAIL From: <>".

   7b) MUST NOT refuse "MAIL From: <user@my.local.dom.ain>".

   8a) SHOULD be able to refuse mail from a specific "MAIL From:"
       user, <foo@domain.example>.

   8b) SHOULD be able to refuse mail from an entire "MAIL From:"
       domain <.*@domain.example>.

   9)  SHOULD be able to limit ("rate control") mail flow.

   10) SHOULD be able to verify "MAIL From:" domain (using DNS or
       using other means).

   11) SHOULD be able to verify <local-part> in outgoing mail.

   12) SHOULD be able to control SMTP VRFY and EXPN.

   13) SHOULD be able to control SMTP ETRN.

   14) MUST be able to configure to provide different Return Codes
       for different rules (e.g. 451 Temp Fail vs 550 Fatal Error).




Lindberg et.al. Anti-Spam Recommendations for SMTP MTAs         [Page 7]

draft-lindberg-anti-spam-mta-03.txt                          23 Apr 1998


   The discussion below often ends up in a need to do various forms of
   pattern matching, on domain/host names and on IP addresses/subnets.
   It is RECOMMENDED that the data/template for doing so may be supplied
   outside of the MTA, e.g. that the pattern matching rules be included
   in the MTA but that the actual patterns may be in an external file.
   It is also RECOMMENDED that the pattern matching rules (external
   file) may contain regular expressions, to give maximum flexibility.

   Of course all string matching on domain/host names MUST be non case
   sensitive. Since <local-part> may be case sensitive it may be natural
   to keep that here. However, since <sPAmMeR@domain.example> and
   <spammer@domain.example> is most probably the same user and since the
   string compares are used to refuse his messages, we suggest that
   <local-part> be compared non case sensitive too.

2.1. Restricting unauthorized Mail Relay usage

   Unauthorized usage of a host as Mail Relay means theft of the relay's
   resources and puts the owner's reputation at risk. It also makes it
   impossible to filter out or block spam without at the same time
   blocking legitimate mail.

   Therefore, the MTA MUST be able to control/refuse such Relay usage.

   In an SMTP session we have 4 elements, with a varying degree of
   trust:

   1)  "HELO Hostname"           Easily and often forged.
   2)  "MAIL From:"              Easily and often forged.
   3)  "RCPT To:"                Correct, or at least intended.
   4)  SMTP_Caller (host)        IP.src addr OK, FQDN may be OK.

   Since 1) and 2) are so easily and often forged, we cannot depend on
   them at all to authorize usage of our host as Mail Relay.

   Instead, the MTA MUST be able to authorize Mail Relay usage based on
   a combination of:

   o   "RCPT To:" address (domain).
   o   SMTP_Caller FQDN hostname.
   o   SMTP_Caller IP address.










Lindberg et.al. Anti-Spam Recommendations for SMTP MTAs         [Page 8]

draft-lindberg-anti-spam-mta-03.txt                          23 Apr 1998


   The suggested algorithm is:

   a)  If "RCPT To:" is one of "our" domains, local or a domain that
       we accept to forward to (alternate MX), then accept to Relay.

   b)  If SMTP_Caller is authorized, either its IP.src or its FQDN
       (depending on if you trust the DNS), then accept to Relay.

   c)  Else refuse to Relay.

   When doing a) you have to make sure all kinds of SMTP source routing
   (both the official [@a,@b:u@c], the '%' hack and uucp-style '!' path)
   is either removed completely before the test, or is at least not
   taken into account.

   In all cases the configuration MUST support wild cards for FQDNs and
   classful IP addresses and SHOULD support "address/mask" for classless
   IP addresses, e.g. domain.example and *.domain.example; 10.11.*.*,
   192.168.1.*, 192.168.2.*, 10.0.0.0/13, 192.168.1.0/23.

   The configuration SHOULD allow for the decision/template data to be
   supplied by an external source, e.g. text file or dbm database. The
   decision/template SHOULD be allowed to contain regular expressions.

2.2. Received: lines

   The MTA MUST prepend a "Received:" line in the mail (as described in
   RFC822, [2], and required in RFC1123, [3]). This "Received:" line
   MUST contain enough information to make it possible to trace the mail
   path back to the sender. We have two cases:

2.2.1. Direct MTA-to-MTA connections

   Internet mail was designed such that the sending host connects
   directly to the recipient as described by MX records (there may be
   several MX hosts on a priority list). To assure traceability back to
   the sending host (which may be a firewall/gateway, as described
   later) each MTA along the path, including the final MTA, MUST prepend
   a "Received:" line. For such a "Received:" line we have:

   It MUST contain:

   o   The IP address of the caller.

   o   The 'date-time' as described in RFC822, [2], pp 18.

   It SHOULD contain:




Lindberg et.al. Anti-Spam Recommendations for SMTP MTAs         [Page 9]

draft-lindberg-anti-spam-mta-03.txt                          23 Apr 1998


   o   The FQDN corresponding to the callers IP address.

   o   The argument given in the "HELO" statement.

   It is suggested that most other "Received:" fields described in
   RFC822 be included in the "Received:" lines.

   These recommendations are deliberately stronger than RFC1123, [3],
   and are there to assure that mail sent directly from a spammer's host
   to a recipient can be traced with enough accuracy; a typical example
   is when a spammer uses a dialup account and the ISP needs to have his
   IP address at the 'date-time' to be able to take action against him.

2.2.2. Firewall/gateway type devices

   Organizations with a policy to hide their internal network structure
   must still be allowed and able to do so. They usually make their
   internal MTAs prepend "Received:" lines with a very limited amount of
   information, or prepend none at all. Then they send out the mail
   through some kind of firewall/gateway device, which may even remove
   all the internal MTAs' "Received:" lines before it prepends its own
   "Received:" line (as required in RFC1123, [3]).

   By doing so they take on the full responsibility to trace spammers
   that send from inside their organization or they accept to be held
   responsible for those spammers' activities. It is REQUIRED that the
   information provided in their outgoing mail is sufficient for them to
   perform necessary traces.

2.3. Event logs

   The MTA MUST be able to provide enough local log information to make
   it possible to trace the event. This includes most of the information
   put into the "Received:" lines, see above.

2.4. Log anti-relay/anti-spam actions

   The MTA SHOULD be able to log all anti-relay/anti-spam actions. The
   log entries SHOULD contain at least:

   o   Time information.

   o   Refuse information, i.e. why the request was refused ("Mail
       From", "Relaying Denied", "Spam User", "Spam Host", etc).

   o   "RCPT To:" addresses (domains).

   o   Offending host's IP address.



Lindberg et.al. Anti-Spam Recommendations for SMTP MTAs        [Page 10]

draft-lindberg-anti-spam-mta-03.txt                          23 Apr 1998


   o   Offending host's FQDN hostname.

   o   Other relevant information (e.g. given during the SMTP
       dialogue, before we decided to refuse the request).

2.5 "MAIL To: <Postmaster@my.local.dom.ain>"

   The MTA MUST NOT refuse "MAIL To: <Postmaster@my.local.dom.ain>".

   By "my.local.dom.ain" we mean the domain name(s) that are treated as
   local and result in local delivery.

   This is regardles of any other anti-spam actions that have been
   taken, specified in this memo or elsewhere, and is to assure that it
   is at least possible to reach the Postmaster (RFC822, [2]) on a
   possibly misconfigured system and have him/her correct the error.

2.6. Refuse mail based on SMTP_Caller address

   The MTA SHOULD be able to accept or refuse mail from a specific host
   or from a group of hosts. Here we mean the IP.src address or the FQDN
   that its .IN-ADDR.ARPA resolves to (depending on whether your trust
   the DNS). This functionality could be implemented at a firewall, but
   since the MTA should be able to "defend itself" we recommend it here.

   It is RECOMMENDED that the MTA decide based on FQDN hostnames
   (host.domain.example), on wild card domain names (*.domain.example),
   on individual IP addresses (10.11.12.13) or on IP addresses with a
   prefix length (10.0.0.0/8, 192.168.1.0/24).

   It is also RECOMMENDED that these decision rules can be combined to
   form a flexible list of accept/refuse/accept/refuse, e.g:

       accept   host.domain.example
       refuse   *.domain.example
       accept   10.11.12.13
       accept   192.168.1.0/24
       refuse   10.0.0.0/8

   The list is searched until first match and the accept/refuse action
   is based on that.

   IP-address/length is RECOMMENDED. However, implementations with wild
   cards, e.g. 10.11.12.* (classful networks on byte boundaries only)
   are of course much better then those without.

   To improve filtering even more, the MTA MAY provide complete regular
   expressions to be used for hostnames; possibly also for IP addresses.



Lindberg et.al. Anti-Spam Recommendations for SMTP MTAs        [Page 11]

draft-lindberg-anti-spam-mta-03.txt                          23 Apr 1998


2.7 "MAIL From: <>" and "MAIL From: <user@my.local.dom.ain>"

   Although the fight against spammers is important it must never be
   done in way that violates existing email standards.

   The MTA MUST NOT refuse to receive "MAIL From: <>".

   That sender address is used in error messages from the mail system
   itself, e.g. when a legitimate mail relay is used and forwards an
   error back to the user. Refusing to receive such mail means that
   users may not be notified of errors, e.g. "User unknown", which will
   no doubt wreak more havoc to the mail community than spam does.

   The MTA MUST NOT refuse "MAIL From: <user@my.local.dom.ain>".

   By "my.local.dom.ain" we mean the domain name(s) that are treated as
   local and result in local delivery. At first thought it may seem like
   noone else will need to say "MAIL From: <user@my.local.dom.ain>" and
   that restrictions on who may say that would reduce the risk of fraud
   and thus reduce spam. While this may be true in the (very) short
   term, it also does away with at least two legitimate usages:

   o   Aliases (.forward files).
       <user1@my.local.dom.ain> sends to <user2@external.example> and
       that mail gets forwarded back to <user2@my.local.dom.ain>, e.g.
       since <user2> has moved to my.local.dom.ain and has a .forward
       file.

   o   Mailing lists.
       RFC1123, [3], gives a clear requirement that "MAIL From:" for
       mail from a mailing list should reflect the owner of the list,
       rather then the individual sender. However, not all lists are
       that well maintained (not even all IETF lists) and thus we will
       have to fall back to the principle of "Be strict in what you
       send and liberal in what you receive".

   If "MAIL From: <user1@my.local.dom.ain>" is rejected, both these
   cases will result in failure to deliver a legitimate mail.

2.8. Refuse based on "MAIL From:"

   The MTA SHOULD be able to refuse to receive mail from a specific
   "MAIL From:" user (foo@domain.example) or from an entire "MAIL From:"
   domain (domain.example). In general this kind of rules are easily
   overcome by the spammers changing "MAIL From:" every so often, but
   the ability to block a certain user or a certain domain is quite
   helpful while an attack has just been discovered and is ongoing.




Lindberg et.al. Anti-Spam Recommendations for SMTP MTAs        [Page 12]

draft-lindberg-anti-spam-mta-03.txt                          23 Apr 1998


   Please note that

       "MAIL From: <>"
   and
       "MAIL From: <user@my.local.dom.ain>"

   MUST NOT be refused (see above).

2.9. Rate Control

   The MTA SHOULD provide tools for the mail host to control the rate
   with which mail is sent or received. The idea is twofold:

   1)  If we happen to have an legitimate mail user with an existing
       legitimate account and this user sends out spam, we may want
       to reduce the speed with which he sends it out. This is not
       without controversy and must be used with extreme care, but it
       may protect the rest of the Internet from him.

   2)  If we are under a spam attack it may help us considerably just
       being able to slow down the incoming mail rate for that
       particular user/host.

   For sending mail, this has to be done by throttling the TCP
   connection to set the acceptable output data rate, e.g. reduce the
   "write()" frequency.

   For receiving mail, we could use basically the same technique, e.g.
   reduce the "read()" frequency, or we could signal with a 4xx Return
   Code that we cannot receive. It is RECOMMENDED that the decision to
   take such action be based on "MAIL From:" user, "MAIL From:" domain,
   SMTP_Caller (name/address) or a combination of all these.

2.10. Verify "MAIL From:"

   The MTA SHOULD be able to perform a simple "sanity check" of the
   "MAIL From:" domain and refuse to receive mail if that domain is
   nonexistent (i.e. does not resolve to having an MX or an A record).
   If the DNS error is temporary, TempFail, the MTA MUST return a 4xx
   Return Code (Temporary Error). If the DNS error is an Authoritative
   NXdomain (host/domain unknown) the MTA SHOULD still return a 4xx
   Return Code (since this may just be primary and secondary DNS not
   being in sync) but it MAY allow for an 5xx Return Code (as configured
   by the sysadmin).

2.11. Verify <local-part>

   The MTA SHOULD allow outgoing mail to have its <local-part> verified



Lindberg et.al. Anti-Spam Recommendations for SMTP MTAs        [Page 13]

draft-lindberg-anti-spam-mta-03.txt                          23 Apr 1998


   so that the sender name is a real user or an existing alias. This is
   basically to protect the rest of the Internet from various "typos"
       MAIL From: <fo0bar@domain.example>
   and/or malicious users
       MAIL From: <I.am.unknown.to.you.he.he@domain.example>

   As always this can be overcome by spammers really wanting to do so,
   but with more strict rules for relaying it becomes harder and harder.
   In fact, catching "typos" at the initial (and official) mail relay is
   in itself enough motivation for this recommendation.

2.12. SMTP VRFY and EXPN

   Both SMTP VRFY and EXPN provide means for a potential spammer to test
   whether the addresses on his list are valid (VRFY) and even get more
   addresses (EXPN). Therefore, the MTA SHOULD control who is is allowed
   to issue these commands. This may be "on/off" or it may use access
   lists similar to those mentioned previously. Default for both should
   be "off".

2.13. SMTP ETRN

   SMTP ETRN means that the MTA will re-run its mail queue, which may be
   quite costly and open for Denial of Service attacks. Therefore, the
   MTA SHOULD control who is is allowed to issue the ETRN command.  This
   may be "on/off" or it may use access lists similar to those mentioned
   previously. Default should be "off".

2.14. Return Codes

   The primary issue here is flexibility - it is simply not possible to
   define in a document how to make tradeoffs between returning 5xx and
   make legitimate mail fail at once due to a configuration mistake and
   returning 4xx and be able to catch such configuration mistakes via
   log file inspection.

   Therefore, the MTA MUST be configurable to provide different Return
   Codes, 5xx / 4xx / 2xx, for different rules or policies

   However, when the response is the result of a DNS lookup and the DNS
   system returned TempFail, a temporary error, the MTA MUST reflect
   this and provide a 4xx return code. If the DNS response is an
   Authoritative NXdomain (host or domain unknown) the MTA MAY reflect
   this by a 5xx Return Code.

   Please refer to the previous section on SMTP Return Codes.





Lindberg et.al. Anti-Spam Recommendations for SMTP MTAs        [Page 14]

draft-lindberg-anti-spam-mta-03.txt                          23 Apr 1998


3. Future work

3.1. Impact on SMTP UAs and end users

   Despite this memo is about MTAs and recommendations for them, some of
   what is done here falls back to the UAs (User Agents, the "ordinary
   mail programs").

   A UA does two things:

   1)  Reads mail from a mailbox and prints on the screen.
       This typically uses a protocol like POP, IMAP or NFS.

   2)  Reads text from the keyboard and hands that over to the
       mailbox MTA for delivery as a piece of mail. This typically
       uses the SMTP protocol, i.e. the same protocol that is used
       between MTAs.

   When MTAs now start to implement various anti-relay filters as
   described above, a UA on a portable laptop host may get a response
   like "Relaying Denied" just because it happens to use IP addresses
   within an unknown range or that resolve to unknown FQDNs.

   The typical victim of this "Relaying Denied" response is a salesman
   carrying a laptop on a business trip, or even an IETF delegate at a
   meeting hotel. The salesman will probably dial his nearest ISP and
   will get an IP address from that dialup pool; the IETF delegate will
   use an IP address for the terminal room. In both cases their laptop
   mail program (the UA; e.g. pine, Netscape, Eudora) will try to send
   out mail via their home MTA, e.g. SMTP-SERVER=mail.home.example, but
   unless mail.home.example has been updated to accept that (temporary)
   IP address it will respond "Relaying Denied" and refuse.

   To get around this problem we could simply add the terminal room's or
   the dialup pool's IP network to the list of accepted networks at
   mail.home.example. This does open up some minimal risk of spammers
   using that host as their Mail Relay: If they use the same ISP's
   dialup pool and they configure to use mail.home.example at the same
   time as our salesman is on his trip, then the spammers will be
   authorized to relay their spam through mail.home.example. However,
   this is not extremely likely and as long as we do not open up for the
   entire world all the time and we keep the log files under close
   observation and we stop relaying at once we find we're being used,
   this solution is probably good enough.

   Another way around is that our salesman uses a Mail Relay provided by
   the current dialup ISP, if that service exists. To do so he has to
   modify SMTP-SERVER= in his UA, which may or may not be reasonable.



Lindberg et.al. Anti-Spam Recommendations for SMTP MTAs        [Page 15]

draft-lindberg-anti-spam-mta-03.txt                          23 Apr 1998


   The correct way to handle this situation, though, is by some other
   mail-sending protocol between the UA and the MTA. Although not
   officially standardized, one such protocol is the "XTND XMIT"
   extensions to POP3 [7].

   Or, we could note that when the SMTP Authentication work is all in
   place, it will allow for Authenticated SMTP to serve as The Protocol
   between the UAs and the home MTA (whether that should be considered a
   new protocol or "the same old SMTP" is irrelevant here).

   This adds one item to the suggested Relay algorithm:

   +   If "SMTP Authenticated" then accept to Relay.

3.2. Personal anti-spam filters

   Since all users are individuals, there is little hope that any
   central anti-spam action will suit them all - in fact one could argue
   about Freedom of Speech if some central set of anti-spam rules is
   enforced without the users' approval (one could of course also argue
   whether spam really adds anything to anyone, but that must be up to
   each individual user rather than centrally decided).

   Therefore the only reasonable extension is to allow for personal
   anti-spam filters, i.e. anti-spam filters like the ones described
   earlier in this memo, but available and configurable on a per user
   basis. Since most users will not have a strong opinion (except that
   they want to avoid spam) the mail system should provide a system
   default and give each user the ability to override or modify that.
   In a UNIX based environment one could think of

       /etc/mail/rc.spam
       ~/.spamrc

   and rules on how the latter can interfere with the former.

   All of this opens up quite a number of unresolved issues, e.g.
   whether each user himself really should be allowed to decide on SMTP
   Return Codes (and how it should be described so he understands enough
   of the implications) and how existing mail systems will deal with
   different per user responses, especially how they will deal with a
   mix of 5xx and 4xx codes:

       C  MAIL From: <usr@spam.example>
       S  250 <usr@spam.example>... Sender ok
       C  RCPT To: <usr@domain.example>
       S  250 <usr@domain.example>... Recipient ok
       C  RCPT To: <foo@domain.example>



Lindberg et.al. Anti-Spam Recommendations for SMTP MTAs        [Page 16]

draft-lindberg-anti-spam-mta-03.txt                          23 Apr 1998


       S  451 <foo@domain.example>... Denied due to spam list
       C  RCPT To: <bar@domain.example>
       S  550 <bar@domain.example>... Denied due to spam list

   Of course one could decide on either "250 OK" or "550 Denied" with no
   other alternatives for the individual user, but this too has to be
   explained enough that an ordinary user understands the implications
   of "Refuse 'MAIL From: <.*@spam.example>'" and that it can do away
   with, or block out, mail he actually wanted.

3.3. SMTP Authentication

   SMTP Authentication has already been mentioned as a method to
   authorize Mail relaying, but of course there is much more to it than
   that. When that infrastructure and functionality is all in place,
   spammers will have a much harder time forging addresses and hiding.

3.4. SMTP Type

   A lot of the problem with spam is actually that it is so completely
   "blind", without any relation to the receivers' personal interest and
   that there is no easy way to say No Thank You.

   One way things could evolve is that spam is taken care of by legal
   means, e.g. making it illegal to send unsolicited commercial email
   and make that happen world wide. Not very likely, but anyway.

   Another way would be to accept that spam/UCE will continue to exist,
   accept it legally (just like we accept the pile of paper mail that
   clutters up the paper mail mailbox) but require it be tagged as UCE.
   This would then go along the lines of personal anti-spam filters
   (~/.spamrc) where each user could define what kind of UCE he is
   willing to accept and then have an "SMTP Type" code that could match
   his areas of interest. This also goes quite well with the various
   rules and regulations used by international Telemarketing.  The SMTP
   dialogue would then be:

       S  220 host.domain.example Ready
       C  HELO host.uce.example
       S  250 host.domain.example Hello host.uce.example
       C  SMTP Type: UCE; money, porno
       S  250 accepted
       C  MAIL From: <uce@uce.example>
       S  250 <uce@uce.example>... Sender ok
       C  RCPT To: <foo@domain.example>
       S  250 <foo@domain.example>... Recipient ok
       C  RCPT To: <bar@domain.example>
       S  550 <bar@domain.example>... No thanks, not for me



Lindberg et.al. Anti-Spam Recommendations for SMTP MTAs        [Page 17]

draft-lindberg-anti-spam-mta-03.txt                          23 Apr 1998


   Having the test at the SMTP layer means we may not need to receive a
   copy of the mail in question - if all potential receivers say "550"
   the SMTP session is terminated without data copy.

   This requires adding more functionality to (E)SMTP, which is IETF
   controlled. It also need some legal support to handle the case

       SMTP Type: mail; personal

   although it is really spam/UCE. This can be done on a legal basis
   (which is hard in the international context) or it can be put into
   the ISPs contract with its customers, just like most ISPs today have
   contracts against customers sending spam.

3.5. Spam and NATs

   With the increased use of NATs, Network Address Translators, may come
   a need for additional information in log files. As long as there is
   an 1:1 mapping between the addresses inside the NAT and the addresses
   used outside it everything is OK, but if the NAT box also translates
   port numbers (to combine many internal hosts into one external
   address) we will need to log not only the IP addresses of spam hosts
   but also the port numbers. Otherwise we will not be able to identify
   the individual host inside the NAT.

4. Security Considerations

   The grassfire-like increase of spam raises several security issues
   which, in fact, puts the entire Internet mail community at risk:

   o   People may fail to find important mail in their flooded
       mailboxes. Or, they may delete it while cleaning up.

   o   ISPs get mailbox hosts overloaded and disk filled. Cleaning
       up and helping customers requires a lot of human resources.
       In fact, ISP mail servers have crashed by too much mail.

   o   While disks are unaccessible, either due to being filled or
       due to "mail quota", important mail may be delayed or lost.
       Normally this would not happen without notice, but if both
       the sender and receiver hosts have their disk flooded, the
       mail being returned may also fail, i.e. the email service may
       become less trustworthy then before.

   o   Hosts used as unauthorized Mail Relays get overloaded. Besides
       the technical implications, this too requires a lot of human
       resources, cleaning up mail queues and taking care of furious
       external users that were spammed through the Relay.



Lindberg et.al. Anti-Spam Recommendations for SMTP MTAs        [Page 18]

draft-lindberg-anti-spam-mta-03.txt                          23 Apr 1998


   o   The fight against spammers include blocking their hosts (which
       is described in this memo). However, there is a great risk
       that Mail Relay hosts be blocked too, despite they are also
       victims. In the long run, this may deteriorate Internet mail.

   o   The common use of forged "MAIL From:" and "From:" addresses
       puts the blame on innocent persons/hosts/organizations. This
       is bad for reputation and may affect business relations.

5. Acknowledgements

   This memo is the result of discussions in an ad hoc group of Swedish
   ISPs and Universities. Without hope to mention everyone we simply
   give the domain names here: algonet.se, global-ip.net, pi.se,
   swip.net, telia.net, udac.se; chalmers.se, sunet.se, umu.se, and
   uu.se.

   We want to acknowledge valuable input and suggestions from Andras
   Salamon, John Myers, Bob Flandrena, Dave Presotto, Dave Kristol,
   Donald Eastlake, Ned Freed, Keith Moore and Paul Hoffman.

   Finally many thanks to Harald Alvestrand for support and guidance
   through the IETF process.

6. References

   [1] Jonathan B. Postel "Simple Mail Transfer Protocol; RFC821",
       August 1982.
       Available via anonymous ftp at
       ftp://ds.internic.net/rfc/rfc821.txt

   [2] David H. Crocker "Standard for the format of ARPA Internet
       text messages; RFC822", August 1982.
       Available via anonymous ftp at
       ftp://ds.internic.net/rfc/rfc822.txt

   [3] R.T. Braden "Requirements for Internet hosts - application
       and support; RFC1123", Oct-01-1989.
       Available via anonymous ftp at
       ftp://ds.internic.net/rfc/rfc1123.txt

   [4] S. Bradner "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
       Level; RFC2119", March 1997.
       Available via anonymous ftp at
       ftp://ds.internic.net/rfc/rfc2119.txt






Lindberg et.al. Anti-Spam Recommendations for SMTP MTAs        [Page 19]

draft-lindberg-anti-spam-mta-03.txt                          23 Apr 1998


   [5] D. Eastlake, 3rd, C. Kaufman "Domain Name System Security
       Extensions; RFC2065", January 1997.
       Available via anonymous ftp at
       ftp://ds.internic.net/rfc/rfc2065.txt

   [6] sendmail Home Page.
       http://www.sendmail.org

   [7] POP3 extensions
       http://musicm.mcgill.ca/~MSI/HTTP/pop3xtndxmit.html

   *   spam (R) is a registered trademark of a meat product made by
       Hormel. Use of the term spam in the Internet community comes
       from a Monty Python sketch and is almost Internet folklore.
       The term spam is usually meant negative, however this is not
       in any way intended to describe the Hormel product.

Editor's Address

   Gunnar Lindberg
   Computer Communications Group
   Chalmers University of Technology
   S-412 96 Gothenburg, SWEDEN,
   Phone +46 31 772 5913
   FAX   +46 31 772 5922
   lindberg@cdg.chalmers.se

























Lindberg et.al. Anti-Spam Recommendations for SMTP MTAs        [Page 20]

