

Network Working Group                                       G. Hellstrom
Internet-Draft                                                   Omnitor
Intended status: Informational                               A. van Wijk
Expires: July 13, 2008                                  Realtimetext.org
                                                        January 10, 2008


          Registration of the Real-time-text Media Feature Tag
                 draft-hellstrom-text-turntaking-01.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on July 13, 2008.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

Abstract

   This memo defines a new Media Feature Tag "real-time-text" for use in
   SIP registration and session establishment.  This is used to indicate
   if a device capable of text communication has full real-time text
   capabilities or limitations in its capabilities requiring the users
   to apply some turn-taking habits.





Hellstrom & van Wijk      Expires July 13, 2008                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft      Real-time-text Media Feature Tag        January 2008


To the RFC editor

   Please replace y.y with the assigned ASN.1 identifier and XXXX with
   the RFC number of this specification.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   3.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   4.  Example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   5.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   6.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   7.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements  . . . . . . . . . . 7


































Hellstrom & van Wijk      Expires July 13, 2008                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft      Real-time-text Media Feature Tag        January 2008


1.  Introduction

   Media feature tags for use in SIP headers are introduced in RFC 3840
   [1].  They are used with the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP).

   When negotiating a text communication medium in a session, a user may
   find it very desirable to achieve a text communication path with
   real-time text capabilities.  In order to support routing of
   negotiating to support this preference, an indication in a SIP media-
   feature tag can be used.  That media-feature tag is defined in this
   specification.  One value is given to the parameter for indication of
   full simultaneous two way capabilities of the text communication.

   When interworking with legacy telecommunication devices through a
   gateway, an IP based text phone using SIP may be required to limit
   its capabilities to match those devices.  For example, V.21 based
   textphones are full duplex in transport, but have varying handling of
   the presentation.  Some types merge the two sources in one window.
   Some have a kind of irc-like display with labels in front of the text
   from different participants.  And yet some do a split in two windows
   of real-time text from each direction.

   In order for a SIP-based text capable device to display an
   appropriate user interface when interacting with one of these legacy
   devices, it is necessary to convey a parameter indicating the limited
   capability of the legacy device.  It is also of interest to route
   calls to the most capable device.

   When it is interacting with a legacy device, an IP text phone may
   receive an offer that contains the 'real-time-text' tag indicating
   some restriction.  That tag then acts as a cue to configure the user
   interface appropriately, although there is nothing in the generated
   answer to indicate that this has been done.  Similiarly, if an answer
   is received that contains a 'real-time-text' tag, that indicates that
   the remote device has limited capabilities, and the user-interface
   should present some indication of this to the user.

   More information on handling of real-time text is found in Framework
   for real-time text over IP using the Session Initiation Protocol [1].
   This memo defines such a parameter.


2.  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [2].




Hellstrom & van Wijk      Expires July 13, 2008                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft      Real-time-text Media Feature Tag        January 2008


3.  IANA Considerations

   This specification defines a Media Feature tag 'real-time-text'.  Its
   formatting in SIP headers is described in the following:

   Media Feature Tag name: sip.real-time-text

   ASN.1 Identifier: y.y.

   Summary of the media feature indicated by this tag: The sip.real-
   time-text media feature tag indicates whether a communications device
   can simultaneously handle the real-time text medium and audio in its
   user interface or towards attached devices, or if limitations must be
   applied by users who communicate with the device.

   Values appropriate for use with this feature tag: Token with an
   equality relationship.

   Defined values are:

   full:  The device can handle real-time text simultaneously in both
      directions and if it supports audio, audio and text can also be
      handled simultaneously. (default)

   unspecified-restrictions:  The device requires some ordered turn-
      taking to take place.  It is not specified how strict this
      turntaking must be, and it is left to the users to figure out what
      level of turntaking signaling is needed.

   soft-turntaking:  The device can handle simultaneous transmission of
      text in both directions, but there is a risk that the display is
      made in one window so that it requires "soft" turntaking
      indications in order to get a readable display.  Simultaneous
      transmission can be used for interruptions and alerting.  If audio
      is supported, it is handled alternating with text.

   strict-turntaking:  The device cannot handle real-time text
      transmission in both directions in its user interface or towards
      attached devices.  Strict turntaking must be applied by the users
      and is usually signalled by agreed turntaking indicators in the
      text medium.  If audio is supported, it shall only be used
      alternating with text.

   The feature tag is intended primarily for use in the following
   applications, protocols, services, or negotiation mechanisms: This
   feature tag is most useful in a communications application for
   describing the capabilities of a SIP multimedia communication device,
   SIP application servers implementing services including real-time



Hellstrom & van Wijk      Expires July 13, 2008                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft      Real-time-text Media Feature Tag        January 2008


   text, or a PSTN textphone gateway, connecting SIP devices with legacy
   textphones, with the intention both to support routing of the call
   and indication to the SIP device user if turntaking must be applied.

   Examples of typical use: Choosing to communicate with a native, real-
   time text capable device rather than a legacy textphone behind a
   gateway, when a selection is possible.  Instruct the user of the SIP
   device about the need to apply turntaking habits as used with legacy
   textphones when the call is made through a gateway with that kind of
   device.

   Related standards or documents: RFC XXXX.

   Security Considerations: Security considerations for this media
   feature tag are discussed in Section 11.1 of RFC 3840.


4.  Example

   The following example shows the use of the 'text-turntaking' tag in a
   SIP message.


       REGISTER sip:example.com SIP/2.0
    From: sip:user@example.com;tag=asd98
    To: sip:user@example.com
    Call-ID: hh89as0d-asd88jkk@host.example.com
    CSeq: 9987 REGISTER
    Max-Forwards: 70
    Via: SIP/2.0/UDP host.example.com;branch=z9hG4bKnashds8
    Contact: <sip:user@host.example.com>;audio;text;text-turntaking=soft
    Content-Length: 0


5.  Security Considerations

   Security considerations for this media feature tag are discussed in
   Section 11.1 of RFC 3840.


6.  Acknowledgements

   The need for this registration was discussed with Barry Dingle,
   Gonzalo Camarillo , and Colin Perkins.







Hellstrom & van Wijk      Expires July 13, 2008                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft      Real-time-text Media Feature Tag        January 2008


7.  Normative References

   [1]  Wijk, A. and G. Gybels, "Framework for real-time text over IP
        using the Session Initiation Protocol  (SIP)",
        draft-ietf-sipping-toip-08 (work in progress), October 2007.

   [2]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
        Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [3]  Holtman, K., Mutz, A., and T. Hardie, "Media Feature Tag
        Registration Procedure", BCP 31, RFC 2506, March 1999.

   [4]  Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., and P. Kyzivat, "Indicating User
        Agent Capabilities in the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)",
        RFC 3840, August 2004.

   [5]  Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston, A.,
        Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley, M., and E. Schooler, "SIP:
        Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261, June 2002.


Authors' Addresses

   Gunnar Hellstrom
   Omnitor
   Box 92 054
   Stockholm  12006
   Sweden

   Email: gunnar.hellstrom@omnitor.se
   URI:   http://www.omnitor.se


   Arnoud A. T. van Wijk
   Realtimetext.org

   Email: arnoud@realtimetext.org














Hellstrom & van Wijk      Expires July 13, 2008                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft      Real-time-text Media Feature Tag        January 2008


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Hellstrom & van Wijk      Expires July 13, 2008                 [Page 7]


