WebDAV                                                        J. Amsden 
Internet Draft                                                      IBM 
Document: draft-ietf-webdav-properties-extension-00.txt  September 1999 
Category: Informational                                                 
Expires: March, 2000 
 
 
                Proposed Extensions to WebDAV Properties 
 
 
Status of this Memo 
 
    
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
      all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 [1].  
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of 
   six months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
   documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts 
   as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in 
   progress." 
     
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
 
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
    
1. Abstract 
    
   The WebDAV protocol defines facilities for adding properties to Web 
   resources. These properties consist of name/value pairs interchanged 
   using XML. The protocol includes the PROPFIND method for accessing 
   properties, and the PROPPATCH method for updating and removing 
   properties. Experience building both WebDAV clients and a WebDAV 
   server indicates the need for three minor extensions to the current 
   properties protocol: 1) allow PROPPATCH to create and initialize the 
   properties of a resource that did not exist, 2) distinguish between 
   adding a new property, and setting the value of an existing property 
   of a resource, and 3) give client applications more control in 
   specifying how PROPPATCH errors should be handled. 
    
    
2. Conventions used in this document 
    
   Since this document describes a set of extensions to the HTTP/1.1 
   protocol, the augmented BNF used here to describe protocol an element 
   is exactly the same as described in Section 2.1 of [HTTP].  Since 
   this augmented BNF uses the basic production rules provided in 
   Section 2.2 of [HTTP], these rules apply to this document as well. 
  
Amsden          Informational û Expiration March 2000               1 


               Proposed Extensions to WebDAV Properties September 1999 
 
 
    
   In examples, "C:" and "S:" indicate lines sent by the client and 
   server respectively. 
    
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in 
   this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [2]. 
    
    
3. Terminology 
    
   The terminology used here extends that defined in the WebDAV 
   Distributed Authoring Protocol specification [WebDAV]. Definitions of 
   the terms resource, Uniform Resource Identifier (URI), and Uniform 
   Resource Locator (URL) are provided in [URI]. 
    
   Null Property - A property that responds with 404 (Not Found) to a 
   PROPFIND method. A null property MUST not appear in the list of 
   properties of a resource the PROPFIND is specified with DAV:allprop. 
    
    
4. Introduction 
    
   This Internet Draft specification introduces three simple extensions 
   or modifications to the handling of WebDAV properties. All are based 
   on experience gained through building a WebDAV class 2 server, and 
   sample client applications. The extensions are all compatible with 
   existing WebDAV property semantics, and all involve property updates 
   through the PROPPATCH method. 
 

4.1 PROPPATCH on a Null Resource 
 

   HTTP and WebDAV do not specify methods for creating resources; they 
   are created as the side effect of other methods. For example, PUT on 
   a null resource (a resource that does not exist) creates the resource 
   and establishes its initial contents. LOCK on a null resource creates 
   a lock-null resource, which has properties, but no content. COPY and 
   MOVE can create resources at the destination URI. It is often 
   necessary to create resources and initialize their state before any 
   other access is allowed in order to ensure the integrity of the 
   operations. WebDAV currently has no protocol for creating and 
   initializing the properties of a resource in a single method. This 
   Internet Draft proposes that PROPPATCH on a null resource creates the 
   resource with empty contents, and initializes its properties based on 
   the propertyupdate elements in the request entity body. 
 

   The WebDAV spec is currently somewhat silent about PROPPATCH on a 
   null resource. It does say that PROPPATCH on a lock null resource (a 
   resource created by the LOCK method) will fail, but this is 
   inconsistent with PUT which is allowed, and changes the state of the 
   resource from lock null to resource. [HTTP] uses status 404, Not 
   Found, to indicate the server has not found anything matching the 
   Request-URI. It does not say that the server cannot create a resource 

  
<Lastname>              Category - Expiration                       2 


               Proposed Extensions to WebDAV Properties September 1999 
 
 
   at the Request-URI. The HTTP and WebDAV PUT method on a null resource 
   is defined to create the resource and set its initial contents. 
   Allowing PROPPATCH on a null resource to create the resource and set 
   its initial properties is consistent with the PUT semantics, and 
   other resource state changing methods that create resources as a side 
   effect. 
 

4.2 Adding New Properties 
 

   Typical database management systems distinguish three kinds of 
   updates; add, remove, and change. It is often necessary to 
   distinguish between add and change in order to ensure a property is 
   added only once, and that its value is not inadvertently changed 
   after it has been initialized.  
    
   The WebDAV PROPPATCH method updates a resource's properties based on 
   the instructions contained in the DAV:propertyupdate element of the 
   request entity body. The propertyupdate element currently supports 
   setting and removing properties. DAV:set creates a new property if it 
   does not exist, and sets its value. If the property already exists, 
   the value is changed.  
    
   This Internet Draft proposes the addition of a DAV:add propertyupdate 
   that adds a new property and sets its value, but fails if the 
   property already exists. In addition, this draft proposes that 
   DAV:set on a null property (a property that does not exist) fails 
   instead of creating a new property. This may help prevent erroneous 
   client property updates resulting from setting the values of 
   properties where the property name is incorrectly specified. 
    
4.3 Handling PROPPATCH Errors 
 

   Client applications currently use PROPPATCH to update the properties 
   of a resource. PROPPATCH supports the update of a number of 
   properties in a single method request in order to reduce 
   communication overhead and maintain resource state integrity with 
   atomic updates.  
    
   Currently, the WebDAV spec dictates that the result of a PROPPATCH is 
   an atomic transaction. That is, either all the updates succeed, or 
   none of them succeed and the updates are rolled back. This can result 
   in excessive client burden. A client application may attempt to make 
   a number of updates with PROPPATCH, and doesn't care if some of them 
   don't succeed. This is often the case when some of the properties are 
   live on the server, but the client has no way to determine which are 
   live without attempting to update their value and getting an error. 
   This situation arises when different servers support different live 
   properties. Updating the desired properties, ignoring the ones that 
   are live requires the client to attempt the update, examine the 
   DAV:multistatus response that is returned, construct a new PROPPATCH 
   entity request body removing the properties that failed, and re-
   submitting the PROPPATCH request.  
    

  
<Lastname>              Category - Expiration                       3 


               Proposed Extensions to WebDAV Properties September 1999 
 
 
   This Internet Draft proposes that a mechanism be added to the 
   DAV:propertyupdate element that gives client applications more 
   control over updating resource properties by allowing the protocol to 
   specify how to handle errors on each of the updates in the 
   DAV:propertyupdate of a PROPPATCH entity request body. This is 
   similar to the DAV:propertybehavior element of the COPY and MOVE 
   entity request body that is used to specify how properties are copied 
   to the destination resource.  
    
   By making this change to the PROPPATCH entity request body, it is now 
   possible to completely specify the semantics of COPY and MOVE in 
   terms of the more primitive GET, PUT, PROPFIND, and PROPPATCH 
   methods. This is not currently possible because there is no way to 
   process the DAV:propertybehavior element of the COPY or MOVE entity 
   request body with a PROPPATCH method. 
    
    
5. PROPPATCH Protocol Changes 
    
   This section specifies changes to section 8.2 PROPPATCH of [WebDAV] 
   and section 12 to support the semantics described above. 
    
   Update section 8.2 PROPPATCH to indicate that PROPPATCH on a null 
   resource creates the resource at the given Request-URI, and 
   initializes its properties as specified in the DAV:propertyupdate 
   element of the PROPPATCH entity request body. 
    
   Change section 8.2 PROPPATCH to include simple error processing of 
   PROPPATCH method requests. Update the DAV:set and DAV:remove elements 
   to include information describing how the client wishes to handle 
   errors. Change the semantics of DAV:set to fail on a null property. 
    
   Change section 12.13.2 set XML element to: 
    
   12.13.2 set XML element 
    
   Name:            set 
   Namespace:       DAV: 
   Purpose:         List the DAV property values to be set for a 
   resource. 
   Description: The set XML element MUST contain only a prop XML 
   element. The elements contained by the prop XML element inside the 
   set XML element MUST specify the name and value of properties that 
   are set on the resource identified by the Request-URI. If the 
   property does not exist then a 404 (Not Found) status is returned, 
   and the property update fails. The DAV:updatebehavior element 
   specifies how update failures are to be handled. Language tagging 
   information in the property's value (in the "xml:lang" attribute, if 
   present) MUST be persistently stored along with the property, and 
   MUST be subsequently retrievable using PROPFIND. 
    
   <!ELEMENT set (prop, updatebehavior?) > 
    
  
<Lastname>              Category - Expiration                       4 


               Proposed Extensions to WebDAV Properties September 1999 
 
 
   Change section 12.13.1 remove XML element to: 
    
   12.13.1 remove XML element 
    
   Name:            remove 
   Namespace:       DAV: 
   Purpose:         List the DAV property values to be removed from a 
   resource. 
   Description: Remove instructs that the properties specified in the 
   prop should be removed. Specifying the removal of a null property is 
   not an error. All the XML elements in a prop XML element inside of a 
   remove XML element MUST be empty, as only the names of properties to 
   be removed are required. The DAV:updatebehavior element specifies how 
   update failures are to be handled. 
     
   <!ELEMENT remove (prop, updatebehavior?) > 
    
   Extend the DAV:propertyupdate element of the PROPPATCH entity request 
   body to include element DAV:add. The DAV:add element has the same 
   contents as DAV:set.  
    
   Adding a property fails with 403 (Forbidden) if the property already 
   exists. Setting a null property results in a 404 (Not Found) status. 
    
   Change to section 12.13 propertyupdate XML element to: 
    
   12.13 propertyupdate XML element 
    
   Name:            propertyupdate 
   Namespace:       DAV: 
   Purpose:         Contains a request to alter the properties on a 
   resource 
   Description:     This XML element is a container for the information 
   required to modify the properties on the resource. This XML element 
   is multi-valued to support adding, changing, and/or removing 
   properties. 
    
   <!ELEMENT propertyupdate (add | set | remove) > 
    
   Add section 12.13.3, add XML element as follows: 
    
   12.13.3 add XML element 
    
   Name:            add 
   Namespace:       DAV: 
   Purpose:         List the DAV property values to be added to a 
   resource. 
   Description: The add XML element MUST contain only a prop XML 
   element. The elements contained by the prop XML element inside the 
   add XML element MUST specify the name and value of properties that 
   are to be added to the resource identified by the Request-URI. If a 
   property already exists then a 403 (Forbidden) status is returned, 
   and the property is not added. The DAV:updatebehavior element 
  
<Lastname>              Category - Expiration                       5 


               Proposed Extensions to WebDAV Properties September 1999 
 
 
   specifies how update failures are to be handled. Language tagging 
   information in the property's value (in the "xml:lang" attribute, if 
   present) MUST be persistently stored along with the property, and 
   MUST be subsequently retrievable using PROPFIND. 
    
   <!ELEMENT add (prop, propertyupdate?) > 
    
   Add sections to section 12.13 to specify error processing on property 
   updates. 
    
   12.13.4 updatebehavior XML element 
    
   Name:            updatebehavior 
   Namespace:       DAV: 
   Purpose:         Specify how errors on property updates are to be 
   handled. 
   Description: An updatebehavior specifies how errors are to be handled 
   on the corresponding DAV:add, DAV:set, or DAV:remove propertyupdate. 
   The client can specify that the error should be ignored, or that it 
   must succeed. If DAV:mustsucceed is specified, then the PROPPATCH 
   method will fail if any of the updates fail. This is the default 
   behavior. 
    
   <!ELEMENT updatebehavior (ignore | mustsucceed) > 
    
   12.13.5 ignore XML element 
    
   Name:            ignore 
   Namespace:       DAV: 
   Purpose:         Causes corresponding property update errors to be 
   ignored 
   Description: The default behavior for a PROPPATCH method is all 
   property updates must succeed, or none of them succeed. If an 
   updatebehavior is not included, it is equivalent to the default 
   behavior or specifying <mustsucceed>*</mustsucceed> meaning that all 
   the updates must be successful or none of them are performed. The 
   DAV:ignore element specifies that the server should make best-effort 
   property updates. Any error caused by the associated propertyupdate 
   is ignored. The error is reported in the resulting DAV:multistatus, 
   but the rest of the updates specified in the PROPPATCH entity request 
   body are processed as if this propertyupdate was not specified. 
    
   <!ELEMENT ignore EMPTY > 
    
   12.13.6 mustsucceed XML element 
    
   Name:            mustsucceed 
   Namespace:       DAV: 
   Purpose:         Specifies the corresponding property update must 
   succeed. 
   Description: The default behavior for a PROPPATCH method is all 
   property updates must succeed, or none of them succeed. The 
   DAV:mustsucceed element allows the client to specify a list of named 
  
<Lastname>              Category - Expiration                       6 


               Proposed Extensions to WebDAV Properties September 1999 
 
 
   properties whose property update must succeed. Any error caused by 
   the associated propertyupdate causes the PROPPATCH method to fail, 
   and all property updates are rolled back. If a value of "*" is given 
   for the mustsucceed XML element, this designates that all property 
   updates must succeed. "*" is the only PCDATA value that can be 
   specified. 
    
   <!ELEMENT mustsucceed (#PCDATA | href+)> 
    
   Note: element DAV:mustsucceed may not be necessary because the 
   default behavior is for the PROPPATCH to fail if any propertyupdate 
   fails. It is really only necessary to specify which errors are to be 
   ignored. I have included it here for completeness, and consistency 
   with the DAV:keepalive XML element. 
    
    
6. Formal Syntax 
    
   < Commonly used grammar is BNF grammar defined in RFC-2234.  
   Suggested wording.> 
 
   This section summarizes the changes and additions to the WebDAV DTD 
   given in section 24.1 of [WebDAV]. 
     
   <!ELEMENT propertyupdate (add | set | remove)+> 
    
   <!ELEMENT add (prop, updatebehavior?) > 
   <!ELEMENT set (prop, updatebehavior?) > 
   <!ELEMENT remove (prop, updatebehavior?) > 
    
   <!ELEMENT updatebehavior (ignore | mustsucceed)> 
   <!ELEMENT ignore EMPTY> 
   <!ELEMENT mustsucceed (#PCDATA | href+)> 
    
    
7. Security Considerations 
 
   This section is provided to detail issues concerning security  
   implications of which WebDAV applications need to be aware.  
    
   All of the security considerations of HTTP/1.1 and the WebDAV  
   Distributed Authoring Protocol specification also apply to WebDAV  
   collections.  
    
   These changes may introduce a denial of service security violation 
   through the possibility of a client application exhausting server 
   resources with PROPPATCH methods. However, the same possibility 
   exists with PUT operations, so no new security issues are introduced. 
    
    
8. IANA Considerations 
 


  
<Lastname>              Category - Expiration                       7 


               Proposed Extensions to WebDAV Properties September 1999 
 
 
   This document uses the namespaces defined by [WebDAV] for properties 
   and  
XML elements.  All other IANA considerations mentioned in [WebDAV] also  
apply to this document. 
 

9. Copyright 
 

   To be supplied by the RFC Editor. 
 

10. Intellectual Property 
 

   To be supplied by the RFC Editor. 
 

11. References 
    
 
   1  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3", BCP 
      9, RFC 2026, October 1996. 
    
   2  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement 
      Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997 
    
    
    
   [RFC2119] S. Bradner, "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate 
   Requirement  
   Levels."  RFC 2119, BCP 14.  Harvard University.  March, 1997. 
    
   [XML] T. Bray, J. Paoli, C.M. Sperberg-McQueen, "Extensible Markup  
   Language (XML)."  World Wide Web Consortium Recommendation REC-xml- 
   19980210. http://www.w3.org/TR/1998/REC-xml-19980210. 
    
   [HTTP] R. Fielding, J. Gettys, J. Mogul, H. Frystyk, T. Berners-Lee,  
   "Hypertext Transfer Protocol -- HTTP/1.1." RFC 2068.  UC Irvine, DEC,  
   MIT/LCS.  January, 1997. 
    
   [WebDAV] Y. Y. Goland, E. J. Whitehead, Jr., A. Faizi, S. R. Carter, 
   D.  
   Jensen, "HTTP Extensions for Distributed Authoring - WebDAV." RFC 
   2518.   
   Microsoft, U.C. Irvine, Netscape, Novell.  February, 1999. 
    
    
11. Acknowledgments 
    
   This draft has benefited from thoughtful discussion by Jim Whitehead, 
   Geoff Clemm, and others. 
    
    
12. Author's Addresses 
    
   James Amsden 
   IBM 

  
<Lastname>              Category - Expiration                       8 


               Proposed Extensions to WebDAV Properties September 1999 
 
 
   3039 Cornwallis Road 
   RPT, NC 
   Phone: 919-461-3919 
   Email: jamsden@us.ibm.com 

















































  
<Lastname>              Category - Expiration                       9 

