
INTERNET DRAFT                                          Larry McAdams
Expires: September 2000                                 Cisco Systems
<draft-mcadams-lightpath-attributes-00.txt>
                                                       Jennifer Yates
                                                 AT&T Labs - Research


          Lightpath attributes and related service definitions


Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at  any
   time.    It  is  inappropriate  to  use  Internet-Drafts  as
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress".

   The  list  of  current  Internet-Drafts  can  be  accessed  at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.


Abstract

   This document specifies the attributes and related service
   definitions that may be associated with lightpaths in an optical
   network.  The document is currently being developed within the
   Optical Internetworking Forum (OIF) and is being presented to the
   IETF for informational purposes.


1. Introduction

   The goal of this document is to specify lightpath attributes and
   their use in service definition.  This draft has been created within
   the Optical Internetworking Forum (OIF) and submitted to the IETF as
   an informational draft. As such, the document uses OIF terminology,
   in particular, the draft refers to User to Network Interfaces (UNIs)
   and Network to Network Interfaces (NNIs).  This terminology is not
   consistent with IETF terminology, and is in no way meant to imply a
   particular network architecture.



McAdams, Yates                                                [Page 1]

              draft-mcadams-lightpath-attributes-00.txt    March 2000

   The OIFÆs generic requirements for the Optical Internetwork [1]
   specify that a number of different types of clients must be
   supported; that rapid provisioning should be supported; that various
   levels of circuit protection be provided; that some form of mesh
   restoration be supported; and that a high level of manageability and
   provisioning flexibility be provided for SDH/SONET framed circuits.

   [1] defines the UNI as the interface between the optical network and
   a "client" to the optical network. It is required that the UNI be
   provisionable to support different types of services, protection
   levels, etc.; that a signaling method be provided between the client
   and the UNI that might be implemented in a number of ways (in-band,
   out-of-band, may or may not use SONET overhead bytes); that not all
   circuit types will support duplex in-band signaling; and that the UNI
   shall be specified so as to allow failure detection and localization
   (in or out of the Optical Network) and notification of the failure to
   the appropriate network management entities, and also continual
   verification of the integrity of the circuit.

   Adopting a unified protocol across both the optical network and its
   clients fundamentally enhances the flexibility of the control plane.
   Now, depending on the nature of the network and the service offered,
   both a client-server or overlay model (i.e. UNI) and a peer-to-peer
   model is possible (i.e. NNI).  In some cases, the NNI may be simply
   viewed as an extension of the UNI.  This is an issue outside the
   scope of this document.

2. Lightpath services

   The optical network is primarily offering high bandwidth connectivity
   in the form of lightpaths, where a lightpath is defined to be a fixed
   bandwidth connection between two network elements, such as IP routers
   or ATM switches, established via the optical network.  The behaviors
   of the lightpaths are defined by their lightpath attributes.

   The definition of an atomic lightpath request needs to be discussed.
   In particular, whether the atomic lightpath request is for a single
   connection, or for multiple lightpaths, needs consideration.  The
   simplest approach is to define the atomic lightpath request to be for
   a single lightpath.  However, more flexibility might be achieved
   using a more complicated definition, in which multiple lightpaths may
   be simultaneously requested.

3. Lightpath operations

   The fundamental actions or operations related to a lightpath are:
   - request for a new lightpath
   - disconnection or teardown of an established lightpath
   - lightpath query (i.e. obtain current status information re:
     lightpath)
   - lightpath attribute change (i.e. change a parameter regarding an
     established lightpath û e.g. restoration requirements).



McAdams, Yates  Informational - Expires September 2000        [Page 2]

              draft-mcadams-lightpath-attributes-00.txt    March 2000

4. Lightpath attributes

   A lightpath request, query, disconnect or attribute change has
   associated attributes.  The following is a list of the attributes
   associated with a lightpath.

   It is envisioned that these attributes will be negotiated over the
   signaling channel between the client and the network.  Many of the
   attributes are denoted as being required attributes, meaning that
   their definition is essential for the control plane operation.
   However, other attributes are optional.  In some cases, not all of
   the attributes will be available, depending on the services offered
   and the equipment available. However, the UNI specification should
   not preclude any attribute.

Connection-related attributes

   The first group of attributes are important in the connection
   establishment process and in ongoing capacity management and
   maintenance activities.

   Although these connection-related attributes are different and in
   many ways independent of the lightpath attributes used to describe
   the behaviors, they are included here because they are needed and the
   authors were not aware of their inclusion in any other relevant
   documents.  If they are under discussion in other more appropriate
   documents they may be removed from this document and transferred to
   such related documents as appropriate.

   - globally unique end-to-end lightpath identifier: an identifier for
     the lightpath. This identifier may be assigned by either the
     client, or by the network.  This is a required attribute in the
     sense that it must be known or derivable by the network.

   - client identifier: an identifier by which we can refer to the
     business entity which "owns" the lightpath. It could also identify
     a specific "virtual optical network" (analogous to IP VPNÆs) if
     the need arose.  This is important for connection acceptance,
     billing, etc.  It appears to differ from the information
     obtainable by end system discovery, which is focused on
     topological information.  In some cases it may be derivable from
     port information. This is a required attribute in the sense that
     it must be known or derivable by the network.

   - security object: required for authentication, but could be closely
     related to the client identifier.  The necessity and details of
     this needs further study.

   - desired availability period: the date/time when the lightpath is
     desired to be in service, and the earliest and latest date/time
     when the lightpath will be disconnected.  The disconnect
     information is needed for capacity management; it might also be a
     factor in determining charges. It could be set to infinity.  The
     inclusion of this attribute within the optical network as opposed

McAdams, Yates  Informational - Expires September 2000        [Page 3]

              draft-mcadams-lightpath-attributes-00.txt    March 2000

     to a higher layer management system should be further
     investigated.

   - destination address: the address of the destination to which the
     lightpath is to be established. It is proposed that this address
     be an IP address. However, it is unclear whether additional
     addressing schemes need to be understood by the optical network to
     handle non-IP aware equipment, such as ATM switches.  Should the
     optical network understand multiple higher layer addressing
     schemes, or should the non-IP aware boxes (e.g. ATM switches) be
     assigned IP addresses by which they are referred to in the optical
     network? These IP addresses could be associated with the ports to
     which the clients are attached to the optical network. This is a
     required attribute.

   - destination port index: if individual ports are not given unique
     addresses, then a port index is required to identify them.  The
     destination port index used by a lightpath may be assigned by
     either the client, or by the network.  This is a required
     attribute.

   - destination sub-port index: when the network or end system allows
     multiplexing or switching at a finer granularity below the port
     level then the sub-port index is used to refer to specific
     channels below the port level.  In future, more highly integrated
     systems there may be a need for additional levels of sub-port
     indexes.  The destination sub-port index may be assigned by either
     the client or the network.  This is an optional attribute.

   - source address: the address from which the lightpath is to be
     established. This is a required attribute in the sense that it
     must be known or derivable by the network.

   - source port index: similar to destination port index.  The source
     port index may be assigned by either the client or the network.
     This is a required attribute in the sense that it must be known or
     derivable by the network.

   - source sub-port index: similar to destination sub-port index.  The
     source sub-port index may be assigned by either the client or the
     network.  This is an optional attribute.

Physical attributes

   The next group of attributes relate to the physical and transmission
   characteristics of a lightpath.

  - framing type and use: the line protocol carried on the lightpath.
     Examples of such line protocols include SONET/SDH and Ethernet
     (GbE and 10GbE).  This parameter may not be required in an
     optically transparent network.  The proposed digital wrapper may
     allow some simplification of this attribute to the extent that it
     is used to encapsulate line protocols, but it cannot be assumed to
     be ubiquitous.  This is a required attribute.

McAdams, Yates  Informational - Expires September 2000        [Page 4]

              draft-mcadams-lightpath-attributes-00.txt    March 2000


     Other attributes need to be associated with specific line
     protocols.  For example, transparency and drop side protection
     attributes need to be associated with lightpaths established using
     SONET/SDH framing.

     transparency: Because of its ubiquity, SONET/SDH framing is
     particularly important.  Three modes of operation that could be
     supported at the UNI are identified in [2]:
        Transparent: All SONET/SDH overheads would be transported
        unchanged. This would avoid interoperability problems with
        client signals using proprietary features or management
        techniques.
        Regenerator Section (SONET Section) Termination: AIS could be
        inserted, and a segment of a SDH MS Shared Protection Ring
        (SONET BLSR) could be transported.  Protection would be limited
        to 1+1.
        Multiplex Section (SONET Line) and Regenerator Section
        Termination: The tributaries within a channelized facility could
        be routed separately, and the K1/K2 bytes would be available for
        use within the Optical Layer.  M:N Linear Automatic Protection
        Switching could also be supported.
     Performance monitoring and fault handling for each of these
     options needs further study. This is a required attribute.

     drop side protection: This refers to protection between the client
     network element and the optical network.  In the case of co-
     location, the choices would seem to be 0:1(unprotected), 1:N, M:N
     and 1+1.  The non-colocated case needs further study.  This is a
     required attribute.

     Similar attributes will need to be investigated / defined for
     other framing types.

  - capacity: bandwidth associated with the lightpath.  For example, a
     lightpath used to transport SONET encoded signals may be
     configured to have OC-N capacity, or STS-M capacity.  STS-1
     granularity is suggested for SONET encoded signals, although this
     does not imply that a vendor has to implement such a granularity.
     This parameter may not be required in an optically transparent
     network.  Asymmetric capacity might be provided by combining bi-
     directional and uni-directional capacity assignments; however this
     requires further study.  This is a required attribute.

  - directionality: lightpaths may be either uni-directional or bi-
     directional. This is a required attribute.

  - priority and pre-emptability: this multi-level attribute determines
     a lightpathÆs treatment during restoration and provisioning
     events.  This attribute would specify whether or not the resources
     used by a lightpath are reusable by other lightpaths in the event
     that there is insufficient capacity to handle a failure or the
     provisioning of a new lightpath with a higher priority.  A simple,
     single level form of this attribute is required, while more

McAdams, Yates  Informational - Expires September 2000        [Page 5]

              draft-mcadams-lightpath-attributes-00.txt    March 2000

     elaborate multi-level forms are optional and may require further
     study.

  - protection and restoration: numerous possible definitions of
     protection levels exist. The simplest is to have a binary decision
     as to whether the lightpath is restored or not.  At a finer
     granularity, different types of restoration can be specified.
     These need to be defined in terms of sub-attributes, such as:
     1. restoration time,
     2. what restoration capacity would be used (dedicated or shared,
         for example),
     3. what restoration method should be used (e.g. mesh or BLSR, for
         example),
     4. what failures are targeted (single link, single node, two
         links, ...), and
     5. reversion strategy - does the lightpath get restored to its
         original route? An "optimal" available route?  When?

     It is preferable that the definition of this attribute be
     functional (e.g., 100 mSec restoration time) rather than solution-
     specific (e.g., SONET BLSR).  However, the above definition
     provides the ability for solution-specific restoration
     requirements.  Maximum flexibility should be left for vendor and
     network operator innovation without requiring a standards change.
     A simple form of this attribute is required, while more elaborate
     forms will require further study.

Routing attributes

   - relationships between lightpaths:  various relationships may be
     defined between lightpaths.  For example, a client may request
     that multiple lightpaths be diversely routed, that multiple
     lightpaths be routed along the same physical route, that multiple
     lightpaths be bundled together and treated as a single entity with
     a common set of attributes, or that a given lightpath be routed on
     the same route as an existing lightpath.

     Two lightpaths are diverse if they have no Shared Risk Link Groups
     in common (See [3] for more on Shared Risk Link Groups.) Diverse
     routing is frequently a requirement of sophisticated enterprise
     networks whose availability objectives may require that no single
     failure isolate a node or disconnect the network, for example.
     The diversity requirement for such a network is best expressed by
     a matrix, with element a{j,k} specifying whether lightpaths j and
     k must be diverse.

     This attribute requires further study.  In particular, the
     definition of how multiple lightpaths may be bundled together
     requires further work.

   - specified routing: client specification for specific physical
     routing of a lightpath.  This routing may be specified in terms of
     specific links or nodes which must/must not be traversed.


McAdams, Yates  Informational - Expires September 2000        [Page 6]

              draft-mcadams-lightpath-attributes-00.txt    March 2000

     Constraints such as the maximum delay or number of hops should
     also be supported.

     The delay is of particular importance.  There are a number of ways
     to characterize delay.  A simple metric is the total round trip
     delay; however it may be desirable to create a more detailed
     description of the temporal behavior.   For example, in some
     cases, the differential delay between the incoming and the
     outgoing directions of the lightpath may be important. Finally,
     the change in delay caused by a protection event may also be
     important. In other words, it may be desirable to not only
     establish the temporal behavior of the primary lightpath, but also
     the temporal behavior of the lightpath after it has been restored,
     so that the delay is bounded on both the primary and restoration
     routes.  Delay along a lightpath will be directly proportional to
     the route mileage of the lightpath, so it may be appropriate to
     formulate this constraint in mileage terms.
     This attribute requires further study.

   - client constraints: client constraints may have to be propagated
     across the UNI - particularly in all-optical networks without
     wavelength conversion available between the client and the
     network.  In particular, information may have to be conveyed
     regarding the set of wavelengths accessible from the client and
     whether the client can re-tune its wavelengths in the face of a
     failure within the network.  This parameter requires further
     investigation.

5. Summary

   This document specifies lightpath attributes and their use in service
   definition.

6. References

[1] R. Bary, "Proposed Architecture Working Group Requirements
Document," OIF contibution OIF2000.007.
[2] J. Berthold, "Optical Internetworking Requirements for SDH Framed
UNIs," OIF contribution OIF1999.161.
[3] S. Chaudhuri, G. Hjßlmt²sson and J. Yates, " Control of Lightpaths
in an Optical Network," IETF Internet Draft.

7. Author's addresses

   Larry McAdams
   Cisco Systems Inc.
   170 West Tasman Drive
   San Jose, CA 95134-1706, USA
   lmcadams@cisco.com
   +1 408 525 4628





McAdams, Yates  Informational - Expires September 2000        [Page 7]

              draft-mcadams-lightpath-attributes-00.txt    March 2000


   Jennifer Yates
   AT&T Labs - Research
   180 Park Avenue, Room B159
   Florham Park, NJ 07932, USA
   jyates@research.att.com
   +1 973 360 7036
















































McAdams, Yates  Informational - Expires September 2000        [Page 8]

