



Geopriv                                                   H. Schulzrinne
Internet-Draft                                               Columbia U.
Expires: February 16, 2006                                 H. Tschofenig
                                                                 Siemens
                                                         August 15, 2005


                        Location Types Registry
           draft-ietf-geopriv-location-types-registry-03.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on February 16, 2006.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).

Abstract

   This document creates a registry for location types.  The place types
   'aircraft', 'airport', 'arena', 'bus', 'bus-station', 'automobile',
   'bank', 'bar', 'cafe', 'classroom', 'club', 'construction',
   'convention-center', 'cycle', 'residence', 'hotel', 'industrial',
   'library', 'shopping-area', 'government', 'stadium', 'office',
   'outdoors', 'parking', 'prison', 'restaurant', 'school', , 'street',
   'theater', 'hospital', 'store', 'train', 'train-station', 'underway',



Schulzrinne & Tschofenig    Expires February 16, 2006           [Page 1]

Internet-Draft           Location Types Registry             August 2005


   'truck', 'public', 'place-of-worship', 'warehourse', 'water',
   'watercraft', 'unknown', 'other' and 'public-transport' are created
   with this document.

   Additional place types can be added on a 'First Come First Served'
   policy.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Location Types . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   4.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   5.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   6.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   7.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
     7.1   Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
     7.2   Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
       Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
       Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . 15































Schulzrinne & Tschofenig    Expires February 16, 2006           [Page 2]

Internet-Draft           Location Types Registry             August 2005


1.  Introduction

   This document creates a registry for location types.  The place types
   'aircraft', 'airport', 'arena', 'bus', 'bus-station', 'automobile',
   'bank', 'bar', 'cafe', 'classroom', 'club', 'construction',
   'convention-center', 'cycle', 'residence', 'hotel', 'industrial',
   'library', 'shopping-area', 'government', 'stadium', 'office',
   'outdoors', 'parking', 'prison', 'restaurant', 'school', , 'street',
   'theater', 'hospital', 'store', 'train', 'train-station', 'underway',
   'truck', 'public', 'place-of-worship', 'warehourse', 'water',
   'watercraft', 'unknown', 'other' and 'public-transport' are created
   with this document.

   Additional place types can be added on a 'First Come First Served'
   policy.




































Schulzrinne & Tschofenig    Expires February 16, 2006           [Page 3]

Internet-Draft           Location Types Registry             August 2005


2.  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [1].














































Schulzrinne & Tschofenig    Expires February 16, 2006           [Page 4]

Internet-Draft           Location Types Registry             August 2005


3.  Location Types

   This section describes types of location where an entity is located.
   The entity is not further specified and can be a person or an object
   such as a network access point.


   aircraft:

      The entity is in a plane, helicopter or balloon.


   airport:

      The entity is located in an airport, heliport or similar location.


   arena:

      The entitz is in an enclosed area used for sports events.


   bus:

      The entity is travling in a public or charter bus.


   bus-station:

      The entity is in a terminal that serves bus passengers; bus depot
      or bus terminal.


   automobile:

      The entity is in a railroad car.


   bank:

      The entity is in a business establishment in which money is kept
      for saving or commercial purposes or is invested, supplied for
      loans, or exchanged.








Schulzrinne & Tschofenig    Expires February 16, 2006           [Page 5]

Internet-Draft           Location Types Registry             August 2005


   bar:

      The entity is in a bar or saloon.


   cafe:

      The entity is in a cafe or coffeeshop.


   classroom:

      The person is in an academic classroom or lecture hall.


   club:

      The person is in a dance club or discotheque.


   construction:

      The entity is on a construction site.


   convention-center:

      The entity is in a convention center.


   cycle:

      The entity is riding a bicycle, motorcycle or similar vehicle.


   residence:

      The entity is in a private or residential setting, not necessarily
      the personal residence of the entity, e.g., including a friend's
      home.


   hotel:

      The entity is in a hotel, motel, inn or other lodging
      establishment.





Schulzrinne & Tschofenig    Expires February 16, 2006           [Page 6]

Internet-Draft           Location Types Registry             August 2005


   industrial:

      The entity is in an industrial setting, such as a manufacturing
      floor or power plant.


   library:

      The entity is in a library or other public place that provides
      access to books, music, periodicals, newspapers, pamphlets,
      prints, records, and tapes, are kept for reading, reference, or
      lending.


   shopping-area:

      The entity is frequenting a shopping mall or shopping area.  This
      area is a large, often enclosed shopping complex containing
      various stores, businesses, and restaurants usually accessible by
      common passageways.


   government:

      The person is in a government building, such as those used by the
      legislative, executive, or judicial branches of governments,
      including court houses, police stations and military
      installations.


   stadium:

      The person is in a large, usually open structure for sports
      events, including a racetrack.


   office:

      The entity is in a business setting, such as an office.


   outdoors:

      The entity is in a general outdoors area, such as a park or city
      streets.






Schulzrinne & Tschofenig    Expires February 16, 2006           [Page 7]

Internet-Draft           Location Types Registry             August 2005


   parking:

      The person is in a parking lot or parking garage.


   prison:

      The person is in a prison, penitentiary, jail, brig, or criminal
      mental institution.


   restaurant:

      The entity is in a restaurant, coffee shop or other public dining
      establishment.


   school:

      The entity is in a school or university, but not necessarily in a
      classroom or library.


   street:

      The entity is walking in a street.


   theater:

      The entity is in a theater, lecture hall, auditorium, class room,
      movie theater or similar facility designed for presentations,
      talks, plays, music performances and other events involving an
      audience.


   hospital:

      The entity is in a hospital, hospice, medical clinic, mental
      institution, or doctor's office.


   store:

      The person is located in a place where merchandise is offered for
      sale; a shop.





Schulzrinne & Tschofenig    Expires February 16, 2006           [Page 8]

Internet-Draft           Location Types Registry             August 2005


   train:

      The entity is traveling in a train, monorail, maglev, cable car or
      similar conveyance.


   train-station:

      The person is in a terminal where trains load or unload passengers
      or goods; railway station, railroad station, railroad terminal,
      train depot.


   underway:

      The person is in a land, water, or air craft which is underway (in
      motion).


   truck:

      The entity is in a truck, used primarily to carry goods rather
      than people.


   place-of-worship:

      The entity is at a religious rites where congregations gather for
      religious observances, such as a church, chapel, meetinghouse,
      mosque, shrine, synagogue, or temple.


   warehouse:

      The person is in a place in which goods or merchandise are stored;
      a storehouse or self-storage facility.


   water:

      The person is on water, such as an ocean, lake, river, canal or
      other waterway.


   watercraft:

      The person is traveling in a boat or ship.




Schulzrinne & Tschofenig    Expires February 16, 2006           [Page 9]

Internet-Draft           Location Types Registry             August 2005


   public:

      The entity is in a public area such as a shopping mall, street,
      park, public building, train station, airport or in public
      conveyance such as a bus, train, plane or ship.  This general
      description encompasses the more precise descriptors 'street',
      'public-transport', 'aircraft', 'ship', 'bus', 'train', 'airport',
      'mall' and 'outdoors'.


   unknown:

      The type of place is unknown.


   other:

      The entity is in a place without a registered place type
      representation.


   public-transport:

      The entity is using any form of public transport, including
      aircraft, bus, train or ship.


























Schulzrinne & Tschofenig    Expires February 16, 2006          [Page 10]

Internet-Draft           Location Types Registry             August 2005


4.  IANA Considerations

   This document creates new IANA registries for location types as
   listed in Section 3 starting with 'aircraft' and finishing with
   'public-transport'.

   Following the policies outline in RFC 2434 [2], these tokens are
   assigned on a 'First Come First Served' policy.  Each registration
   must include the name of the token and a brief description similar to
   the ones offered in for the initial registrations contained this
   document:

   Token Identifier:

      Identifier of the token


   Description:

      Brief description indicating the meaning of the token.


   Note that the usage of these tokens is not limited to XML and the
   'Token Identifier' is the XML element content and not the XML element
   name.


























Schulzrinne & Tschofenig    Expires February 16, 2006          [Page 11]

Internet-Draft           Location Types Registry             August 2005


5.  Security Considerations

   This document defines a registry for location types and as such does
   not raise security issues.















































Schulzrinne & Tschofenig    Expires February 16, 2006          [Page 12]

Internet-Draft           Location Types Registry             August 2005


6.  Acknowledgements

   We would like to thank V. Gurbani, P. Kyzivat and J. Rosenberg for
   their work on RPID [3] which lead to the location types listed in
   this document.  Many thanks to Allison Mankin for her guidance.  Rick
   Jones pointed us to the Global Justice XML work (see
   http://it.ojp.gov/jxdm/) that helped us to add more values to the
   location registry.











































Schulzrinne & Tschofenig    Expires February 16, 2006          [Page 13]

Internet-Draft           Location Types Registry             August 2005


7.  References

7.1  Normative References

   [1]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
        Levels", March 1997.

   [2]  Narten, T. and H. Alvestrand, "Guidelines for Writing an IANA
        Considerations Section in RFCs", BCP 26, RFC 2434, October 1998.

7.2  Informative References

   [3]  Schulzrinne, H., "RPID: Rich Presence Extensions to the Presence
        Information Data Format", draft-ietf-simple-rpid-08 (work in
        progress), July 2005.


Authors' Addresses

   Henning Schulzrinne
   Columbia University
   Department of Computer Science
   450 Computer Science Building
   New York, NY  10027
   USA

   Phone: +1 212 939 7042
   Email: schulzrinne@cs.columbia.edu
   URI:   http://www.cs.columbia.edu/~hgs


   Hannes Tschofenig
   Siemens
   Otto-Hahn-Ring 6
   Munich, Bavaria  81739
   Germany

   Email: Hannes.Tschofenig@siemens.com
   URI:   http://www.tschofenig.com












Schulzrinne & Tschofenig    Expires February 16, 2006          [Page 14]

Internet-Draft           Location Types Registry             August 2005


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Schulzrinne & Tschofenig    Expires February 16, 2006          [Page 15]


