
Network Working Group                                    Randall Atkinson
Internet Draft                                  Naval Research Laboratory
draft-atkinson-ipng-sec-00.txt                            4 November 1994
                                                    Expires in six months



                       IPv6 Security Architecture





STATUS OF THIS MEMO
     This document is an Internet Draft.  Internet Drafts are working
   documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its Areas, and
   its working groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute working
   documents as Internet Drafts.

     Internet Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of 6 months.
   Internet Drafts may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
   documents at any time.  It is not appropriate to use Internet Drafts as
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress".

     This particular Internet Draft is a product of the IETF's IPng
   working group.  It is intended that a future version of this draft be
   submitted to the IESG for publication as a standards-track RFC.
   Discussion of this draft normally takes place on the IPng Working
   Group mailing list: ip-ng@sunroof.eng.sun.com To add/drop from that
   mailing list, send an email request to:
   ip-ng-request@sunroof.eng.sun.com

1. INTRODUCTION

     The Internet community is making a transition from version 4 of the
   Internet Protocol (IPv4) to version 6 of the Internet Protocol (IPv6).
   [Hi94] This memo describes the security mechanisms integrated into
   version 6 of the Internet Protocol (IPv6) and the services that they
   provide.  Each security mechanism is specified in a separate document.
   It also describes how security mechanisms outside the scope of the
   IPng effort (e.g. key management) relate to the IPv6 security
   mechanisms.

1.1 Definitions

   SAID

   Authentication



Atkinson                                                        [Page 1]

Internet Draft                                           4 November 1994


   Integrity

   Confidentiality

   Non-repudiation

   Traffic Analysis


2.0 IPv6 SECURITY MECHANISMS

     There are two security mechanisms in IPv6.  The first is the
   Authentication Header which provides integrity and authentication
   without confidentiality. [At94a] The second is the Encapsulating
   Security Payload which, depending on algorithm and mode, might provide
   integrity, authentication, and always provides confidentiality.
   [At94b] The IPv6 mechanisms do not provide security against a number
   of traffic analysis attacks.  However, there are several techniques
   outside the scope of this specification (e.g. bulk link encryption)
   that might be used to provide protection against traffic analysis.
   The two IPv6 security mechanisms may be combined.

2.1 AUTHENTICATION HEADER

     The IPv6 Authentication Header seeks to provide integrity and
   authentication for IPv6 datagrams.  It does this by computing a
   cryptographic authentication function over the IPv6 datagram and using
   a secret authentication key in the computation.  [Atk94a] The sender
   computes the authentication data just prior to sending the
   authenticated IPv6 packet and the receiver verifies the correctness of
   the authentication data upon reception.  Certain fields which must
   change in transit, such as the Hop Limit field decremented on each
   hop, are omitted from the authentication calculation.  However the
   omission of the Hop Limit field does not adversely impact the security
   provided.  Non-repudiation might be provided by some authentication
   algorithms used with the Authentication Header, but it is not provided
   by all authentication algorithms that might be used with the
   Authentication Header.  The default authentication algorithm is keyed
   MD5, which does not provide non-repudiation.  Confidentiality and
   traffic analysis protection are not provided by the Authenticaton
   Header.

     The IPv6 Authentication Header holds authentication information
   for its IPv6 datagram. This authentication information is calculated
   using all of the fields in the IPv6 datagram which do not change
   during transit from the originator to the recipient.  All IPv6
   headers, payloads, and the user data are included in this calculation.
   The only exception is that fields which need to change in transit (e.g.



Atkinson                                                        [Page 2]

Internet Draft                                           4 November 1994


   IPv6 Header's "Hop Count" or the IPv6 Routing Header's "Next Address")
   are omitted when the authentication data is calculated.

     Use of the Authentication Header will increase the IPv6 protocol
   processing costs in participating systems and will also increase the
   communications latency.  The increased latency is primarily due to the
   calculation of the authentication data by the sender and the
   calculation and comparison of the authentication data by each receiver
   for each IPv6 datagram containing an Authentication Header (AH).

     The Authentication Header provides much stronger security than
   exists in most of the current Internet and should not affect
   exportability or significantly increase implementation cost.  While
   the Authentication Header might be implemented by a security gateway
   on behalf of hosts on a trusted network behind that security gateway,
   this mode of operation is not encouraged.  Instead, the Authentication
   Header should be used from origin to final destination.  All
   IPv6-capable hosts MUST implement the IPv6 Authentication Header with
   at least the MD5 algorithm using a 128-bit key.  Other authentication
   algorithms may also be implemented in addition to keyed MD5.

2.2 ENCAPSULATING SECURITY PAYLOAD

    The IPv6 Encapsulating Security Payload (ESP) seeks to provide
   integrity, authentication, and confidentiality to IPv6 datagrams.  It
   does this by encapsulating either an entire IPv6 datagram or only the
   upper-layer protocol data inside the ESP, encrypting most of the ESP
   contents, and then using the ESP as the user data for a cleartext IPv6
   datagram.  This cleartext IPv6 datagram carries the protected data
   through the internetwork.  The recipient of the cleartext datagram
   removes and discards the cleartext IPv6 header and cleartext IPv6
   options, decrypts the ESP, processes and then removes the ESP headers,
   and then processes the (now decrypted) original IPv6 datagram or
   upper-layer protocol data as per the normal IPv6 protocol
   specification.

2.2.1 Description of the ESP Modes

   There are two modes within ESP.  The first mode, which is known as
   IP-mode, encapsulates and entire IP datagram within the ESP header.
   The second mode, which is known as Transport-mode, encapsulates either
   a UDP or TCP frame inside IP.

2.2.2 Usage of ESP

     ESP works between hosts, between a host and a security gateway, or
   between security gateways. This support for security gateways permits
   trustworthy networks to exist without the performance and monetary



Atkinson                                                        [Page 3]

Internet Draft                                           4 November 1994


   costs of security, while providing security for traffic transiting
   untrustworthy network segments.  When both hosts directly implement
   ESP and there is no intervening security gateway, then they may use
   the Transport-mode (where only the upper layer protocol data (e.g. TCP
   or UDP) is encrypted).  This mode reduces both the bandwidth consumed
   and the protocol processing costs for users that don't need to keep
   the entire IPv6 datagram confidential.  ESP works with both unicast
   and multicast traffic.

2.2.3 Performance Impacts of ESP

     The encapsulating security approach used by ESP can noticeably
   impact network performance in participating systems, but should not
   adversely impact routers or other intermediate systems that are not
   participating in the particular ESP association.  Protocol processing
   in participating systems will be more complex when encapsulating
   security is used, requiring both more time and more processing power.
   Use of encryption will also increase the communications latency.  The
   increased latency is primarily due to the encryption and decryption
   required for each IPv6 datagram containing an Encapsulating Security
   Payload.  The precise cost of ESP will vary with the specifics of the
   implementation, including the encryption algorithm, key size, and
   other factors.  Hardware implementations of the encryption algorithm
   are recommended when high throughput is desired.  Because of the
   performance impact, users not requiring confidentiality will probably
   prefer to use the IPv6 Authentication Header instead of ESP.  For
   interoperability throughout the worldwide Internet, all conforming
   implementations of IPv6 Encapsulting Security Payload MUST support the
   use of the Data Encryption Standard (DES) in Cipher-Block Chaining
   (CBC) Mode.  Other confidentiality algorithms and modes may also be
   implemented in addition to this mandatory algorithm and mode.

2.3 COMBINING SECURITY MECHANISMS

     In some cases the IPv6 Authentication Header might be combined with
   the IPv6 Encapsulating Security Protocol to obtain the desired
   security properties.  The Authentication Header always provides
   integrity and authentication and can provide non-repudiation if used
   with certain authentication algorithms (e.g. RSA) .  The Encapsulating
   Security Payload always provides integrity and confidentiality and can
   also provide authentication if used with certain authenticating
   encryption algorithms.  Adding the Authentication Header to a IPv6
   datagram prior to encapsulating that datagram using the Encapsulating
   Security Protocol might be desirable for users wishing to have strong
   integrity, authentication, confidentiality, and perhaps also
   non-repudiation.  When the two mechanisms are combined, the placement
   of the IPv6 Authentication Header makes clear which part of the data
   is being authenticated.  Details on combining the two mechanisms are



Atkinson                                                        [Page 4]

Internet Draft                                           4 November 1994


   provided in the IPv6 Encapsulating Security Payload
   specification. [At94b]

2.4 OTHER SECURITY MECHANISMS
     Protection from traffic analysis is not provided by any of the
   security mechanisms described above.  It is unclear whether meaningful
   protection from traffic analysis can be provided economically at the
   Internet Layer and it appears that few Internet users are concerned
   about traffic analysis.  One traditional method for protection against
   traffic analysis is the use of bulk link encryption.  Another
   technique is to send false traffic in order to increase the noise in
   the data provided by traffic analysis.  The reader is referred to [VK83]
   for more information on traffic analysis issues.

3. KEY MANAGEMENT

     The Key Management protocol that will be used with IPv6 has not been
   specified yet.  However, because the key management protocol is
   coupled to the other security mechanisms only via the Security
   Association Identifier (SAID), those other security mechanisms have
   already been defined. What follows in this section is a brief
   discussion of a few alternative approaches to key management.

3.1 Manual Key Distribution

     The simplest form of key management is manual key management, where
   a person manually configures each system with its own key and also
   with the keys of other communicating systems.  This is quite practical
   in small, static environments but does not scale.  It is not a viable
   medium-term or long-term approach, but might be appropriate in a small
   LAN environment or with routers that only need to authenticate routing
   updates with adjacent routers.  It also might be appropriate when only
   selected communications need to be secured.

3.2 Some Existing Key Management Techniques

     There are a number of key management algorithms that have been
   described in the public literature.  Needham & Schroeder have proposed
   a key management algorithm which relies on a centralised key
   distribution system. [NS78, NS81] This algorithm is used in the
   Kerberos Authentication System developed at MIT under Project
   Athena. [KB93] More recently, Diffie & Hellman have devised an
   algorithm which does not require a centralised key distribution
   system. [DH76] Unfortunately, the original Diffie-Hellman technique is
   vulnerable to an active attack.  However, this vulnerability can be
   mitigated by using signed keys to bootstrap into the Diffie-Hellman
   exchange.




Atkinson                                                        [Page 5]

Internet Draft                                           4 November 1994


3.2 Automated Key Distribution

     Widespread deployment and use of IPv6 security will require an
   Internet-standard scalable key management protocol.  Ideally such a
   protocol would support a number of protocols in the Internet protocol
   suite, not just IPv6 security.  There is work underway within the IETF
   to add signed host keys to the Domain Name System [EK94] The DNS keys
   enable the originating party would to authenticate key management
   messages with the other key management party using an asymmetric
   algorithm.  The two parties would then have an authenticatible
   communications channel that could be used to create a shared session
   key using Diffie-Hellman or other means. [DH76]

     Further, the security mechanisms can be keyed either on a
   host-to-host basis, where all users on host 1 share the same key for
   use on traffic destined for all users on host 2, or on a user-to-user
   basis, where user A on host 1 has a unique session key with user B on
   host 2.  When host-to-host keying is used and given two users A and B
   that do not trust each other but do have access to the network
   connecting their computer with other systems, it is possible for user
   A to determine the host-to-host key via well known methods and then
   either read user B's encrypted traffic or forge traffic from user B.
   When user-to-user keying is used, this particular attack from one user
   onto another user's traffic is not possible.

3.3 Multicast Key Distribution

     <text needed here>

3.4 IPv6 Key Management Requirements

     All IPv6 implementations MUST support manual key management.  All
   IPv6 implementations SHOULD support an Internet standard key
   management protocol once the latter is defined.  All IPv6
   implementations MUST permit the configuration and use of user-to-user
   keying and MAY additionally permit the configuration of host-to-host
   keying as an added feature to make manual key distribution easier.

     The method by which keys are configured on a particular system is
   implementation-defined.  A flat file containing security association
   identifiers and the security parameters, including the key(s), is an
   example of one possible method for manual key distribution.

4. DESIGN OBJECTIVES

     This section describes some of the design objectives of this
   security architecture and its component mechanisms.  The primary
   objective of this work is to ensure that IPv6 will have solid security



Atkinson                                                        [Page 6]

Internet Draft                                           4 November 1994


   mechanisms available to users who desire security.  These mechanisms
   are designed such that Internet users who do not employ these
   mechanisms will not be adversely affected.  These mechanisms are
   intended to be algorithm-independent so that the cryptographic
   algorithms can be altered without affecting the other parts of the
   implementation.  Standard default algorithms (i.e. keyed MD5, DES CBC)
   are specified (i.e. keyed MD5, DES CBC) to ensure interoperability in
   the global Internet.  The selected algorithms are the same as the
   standard default algorithms used in SNMPv2.  The IPv6 Security
   mechanisms should be useful in enforcing a variety of security
   policies.

5. USAGE
     This section describes the use of the security mechanisms provided by
   IPv6 in several different situations.

5.1 USE WITH FIREWALLS
     Firewalls are not uncommon in the current Internet.  While many
   dislike their presence because they restrict connectivity, they are
   unlikely to disappear in the near future.  Both of the IPv6 mechanisms
   can be used to increase the security provided by firewalls.

     Firewalls used with IPv6 will need to be able to parse the header
   daisy-chain to determine the transport protocol (e.g. UDP or TCP) in
   use and the port number for that protocol.  Firewall performance
   should not be significantly affected by use of IPv6 because the header
   format rules in IPv6 make parsing easy and fast.

     Firewalls can use the Authentication Header to gain assurance that
   the data (e.g.  source, destination, transport protocol, port number)
   being used for access control decisions is correct and authentic.
   IPv4 firewalls are unable to authenticate the data being used for
   access control decisions and necessarily trust data that is not
   trustworthy.  Authentication might be performed not only within an
   organisation or campus but also end to end with remote systems across
   the Internet.  This use of the Authentication Header with IPv6
   provides much more assurance of security than IPv4 provides.

     Organisations (e.g. the Foo Company) with two or more sites that are
   interconnected using commercial IP service might wish to use a
   selectively encrypting firewall.  If an encrypting firewall were
   placed between each site of the Foo Company and the commercial IP
   service provider, the firewall could provide an encrypted IP tunnel
   among all of the Foo Company's sites.  It could also encrypt traffic
   between the Foo Company and its suppliers, customers, and other
   affiliates.  Traffic with the NIC, with public Internet archive, or
   some other organisations might not be encrypted in order to facilitate
   better communications, improved network performance, and increased



Atkinson                                                        [Page 7]

Internet Draft                                           4 November 1994


   connectivity.  Such a practice could easily protect the organisation's
   sensitive traffic from eavesdropping and modification.

     Some organisations (e.g. governments) might wish to use a fully
   encrypting firewall to provide a protected virtual network over
   commercial IP service.  The difference between that and a bulk IPv6
   encryption device is that a fully encrypting firewall would provide
   filtering of the decrypted traffic as well as providing encryption of
   IP packets.

5.3 USE WITH IPv6 MULTICAST
     In the past several years, the Multicast Backbone (MBONE) has grown
   rapidly.  IETF meetings and other conferences are now regularly
   multicast with real-time audio, video, and whiteboards.  Many people
   are now using teleconferencing applications based on IP Multicast in
   the Internet or in private internal networks.  Hence it is important
   that the security mechanisms in IPv6 be suitable for use in an
   environment where multicast is the general case.

     The Security Association Identifiers (SAIDs) used in the IPv6
   security mechanisms are receiver-oriented, making them well suited for
   use in IP multicast. [Atk94a, Atk94b] Unfortunately, most currently
   published multicast key distribution protocols do not scale well.
   However, there is active research in this area.  As an interim step, a
   multicast group could repeatedly use a secure unicast key distribution
   protocol to distribute the key to all members or the group could
   pre-arrange keys using manual key distribution.

5.4 USE TO PROVIDE QOS PROTECTION
     The recent IAB Security Workshop identified Quality of Service
   protection as an area of significant interest. [BCCH] The two IPv6
   security mechanisms are intended to provide good support for real-time
   services as well as multicasting.  This section describes one possible
   approach to providing such protection.

     The Authentication Header can be used, with appropriate key
   management, to provide authentication of packets.  This authentication
   is potentially important in packet classification within routers.  The
   IPv6 Flow Identifier can act as a Low-Level Identifier (LLID).  Used
   together, packet classification within routers becomes
   straightforward if the router is provided with the appropriate key
   material.  For performance reasons the routers might authenticate only
   every Nth packet rather than every packet, but this is still a
   significant improvement over capabilities in the current Internet.
   Quality of service provisioning is likely to also use the Flow ID in
   conjunction with a resource reservation protocol, such as RSVP.  Thus,
   the authenticated packet classification can be used to help ensure
   that each packet receives appropriate handling inside routers.



Atkinson                                                        [Page 8]

Internet Draft                                           4 November 1994


5.5 USE IN COMPARTMENTED OR MULTI-LEVEL NETWORKS
     A multi-level secure (MLS) network is one where a single network is
   used to communicate data at different sensitivity levels (e.g.
   Unclassified and Secret).  Many governments have significant interest
   in MLS networking.  The IPv6 security mechanisms have been designed to
   support MLS networking.  MLS networking requires the use of strong
   Mandatory Access Controls (MAC) which ordinary users are incapable of
   controlling or violating.  Mandatory Access Controls differ from
   Discretionary Access Controls in this respect.

     The Authentication Header can be used to provide strong
   authentication among hosts in a single-level network.  This can be
   used to provide strong assurance for both mandatory access control
   decisions and discretionary access control decisions.  If IP
   sensitivity labels are used and confidentiality is not considered
   necessary within the particular operational environment, the
   Authentication Header is used to provide authentication for the entire
   packet, including cryptographic binding of the sensitivity level to
   the IPv6 header and user data.  This is a significant improvement over
   labelled IPv4 networks where the label is trusted even though it is
   not trustworthy because there is no authentication or cryptographic
   binding of the label to the IP header and user data.

     The Encapsulating Security Payload can be combined with appropriate
   key policies to provide full multi-level secure networking.  In this
   case each keys must be used only at a single sensitivity level and
   compartment.  For example, Key "A" might be used only for Unclassified
   packets while Key "B" is used only for Secret/No-compartments traffic
   and Key "C" is used only for Secret/No-Foreign traffic.

     In sensitive environments, appropriate organisational policies will
   dictate the actual key management policy and also the set of
   algorithms that are appropriate for use.  In such environments, the
   ability to communicate between the Internet and the hosts handling
   sensitive data is probably undesirable.  Hence, systems only handling
   sensitive information might not implement the Internet standard
   algorithms and instead only have algorithms approved by appropriate
   policies for such use.  Such systems would not be fully conforming to
   the IPv6 Encapsulating Security Payload specification with regard to
   implementation of the mandatory Internet algorithm, but those users
   might not care or might consider that to be desirable.

     Encryption is very useful and desirable even when all of the hosts
   are within a protected environment.  The Internet-standard encryption
   algorithm could be used, in conjuction with appropriate key
   management, to provide strong Discretionary Access Controls (DAC) in
   conjunction with either implicit or explicit sensitivity labels.  Some
   environments might consider the Internet-standard encryption algorithm



Atkinson                                                        [Page 9]

Internet Draft                                           4 November 1994


   sufficiently strong to provide Mandatory Access Controls (MAC).  Full
   encryption SHOULD be used for all communications between multi-level
   computers or compartmented mode workstations even when the computing
   environment is considered to be protected.















































Atkinson                                                       [Page 10]

Internet Draft                                           4 November 1994


6. SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS

     This entire draft discusses the IPv6 Security Architecture.

     Users need to understand that the quality of the security provided
   by the mechanisms provided by IPv6 depends completely on the strength
   of the implemented cryptographic algorithms, the strength of the key
   being used, the correct implementation of the cryptographic
   algorithms, the security of the key management protocol, and the
   correct implementation of IPv6 and the several security mechanisms in
   all of the participating systems.  The security of the implementation
   is in part related to the security of the operating system which
   embodies the security implementations.  For example, if the operating
   system does not keep the private cryptologic keys confidential, then
   traffic using those keys will not be secure.  If any of these is
   incorrect or insufficiently secure, little or no real security will be
   provided to the user.  Because different users on the same system might
   not trust each other, each user or each session should usually be
   keyed separately.  This will also tend to increase the work required
   to cryptanalyse the traffic since not all traffic will use the same key.

     Certain security properties (e.g. traffic analysis protection) are
   not provided by any of these mechanisms.  One possible approach to
   traffic analysis protection is appropriate use of link
   encryption. [VK83] Users must carefully consider which security
   properties they require and take active steps to ensure that their
   needs are met by these or other mechanisms.

     Certain applications (e.g. electronic mail) probably need to have
   application-specific security mechanisms.  Application-specific
   security mechanisms are out of the scope of the IPv6 Security
   Architecture.  Users interested in electronic mail security should
   consult the RFCs describing the Internet's Privacy-Enhanced Mail
   system.  Users concerned about other application-specific mechanisms
   should consult the online RFCs to see if suitable Internet Standard
   mechanisms exist.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

     Many of the concepts here are derived from or were influenced by the
   US Government's SDNS security protocol specifications, the ISO/IEC's
   NLSP specification, or from the proposed swIPe security
   protocol. [SDNS, ISO, IBK93a, IBK93b] The work done for SNMP Security
   and SNMPv2 Security influenced the choice of default cryptological
   algorithms and modes.  [GM93] Steve Bellovin, Steve Deering, Richard
   Hale, George Kamis, Phil Karn, Frank Kastenholz, and Dave Mihelcic
   provided critiques of earlier versions of this draft.




Atkinson                                                       [Page 11]

Internet Draft                                           4 November 1994


REFERENCES
   [At94a] Randall Atkinson, IPv6 Authentication Header, Internet Draft,
           draft-atkinson-ipng-auth-00.txt, 4 November 1994.

   [At94b] Randall Atkinson, IPv6 Encapsulating Security Payload, Internet
           Draft, draft-atkinson-ipng-esp-00.txt, 4 November 1994.

   [BCCH]  R. Braden, D. Clark, S. Crocker, & C. Huitema, "Report of IAB
           Workshop on Security in the Internet Architecture", RFC-1636,
           DDN Network Information Center, June 1994.

   [SDNS]  SDNS Secure Data Network System, Security Protocol 3, SP3,
           Document SDN.301, Revision 1.5, 15 May 1989, published
           in NIST Publication NIST-IR-90-4250, February 1990.

   [ISO]   ISO/IEC JTC1/SC6, Network Layer Security Protocol, ISO-IEC
           DIS 11577, International Standards Organisation, Geneva,
           Switzerland, 29 November 1992.

   [IBK93a] John Ioannidis, Matt Blaze, & Phil Karn, "swIPe: The IP
           Security Protocol", USENIX ???, 14 April 1993.

   [IBK93b] John Ioannidis, Matt Blaze, & Phil Karn, "swIPe: Network-Layer
           Security for IP", presentation at the Spring 1993 IETF Meeting,
           Columbus, Ohio.

   [GM93]  James Galvin & Keith McCloghrie, Security Protocols for version 2
           of the Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMPv2), RFC-1446,
           DDN Network Information Center, April 1993.

   [Hi94]  Bob Hinden (Editor), Internet Protocol version 6 (IPv6) Specification,
           draft-hinden-ipv6-spec-00.txt, October 1994.

   [KB93]  J. Kohl & B. Neuman, The Kerberos Network Authentication Service (V5),
           RFC-1510, DDN Network Information Center, 10 September 1993.

   [NS78]  R.M. Needham & M.D. Schroeder, "Using Encryption for Authentication
           in Large Networks of Computers", Communications of the ACM, Vol. 21,
           No. 12, December 1978, pp. 993-999.

   [NS81]  R.M. Needham & M.D. Schroeder, "Authentication Revisted", ACM
           Operating Systems Review, Vol. 21, No. 1., 1981.

   [DH76]  W. Diffie & M. Hellman, "New Directions in Cryptography", IEEE
           Transactions on Information Theory, Vol. IT-22,  No. 6, November
           1976, pp. 644-654.

   [Ke93]  Steve Kent, Privacy Enhancement for Internet Electronic Mail:



Atkinson                                                       [Page 12]

Internet Draft                                           4 November 1994


           Part II: Certificate-Based Key Management, RFC-1422, DDN Network
           Information Center, 10 February 1993.

   [VK83]  V.L. Voydock & S.T. Kent, "Security Mechanisms in High-level
           Networks", ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 15, No. 2, June 1983.

   [EK94]  Donald E. Eastlake III & Charles W. Kaufman, "Domain Name System
           Protocol Security Extensions", Internet Draft,
           draft-ietf-dnssec-secext-01.txt, March 1994.

DISCLAIMER

     The views expressed in this note are those of the author and are not
   necessarily those of his employer.  The Naval Research Laboratory has
   not passed judgement on the merits, if any, of this work.  The author
   and his employer specifically disclaim responsibility for any problems
   arising from correct or incorrect implementation or use of this
   design.

AUTHOR INFORATION

   Randall Atkinson <atkinson@itd.nrl.navy.mil>
   Information Technology Division
   Naval Research Laboratory
   Washington, DC 20375-5320
   USA

   Voice: (DSN) 354-8590
   Fax:   (DSN) 354-7942






















Atkinson                                                       [Page 13]

