



  IPv6 WG                                                S. Daniel Park 
  Internet Draft                                         S. Madanapalli 
  Expires : August 2004                                      O.L.N. Rao 
                                                                SAMSUNG 
                                                          February 2004 
   
   
   
                Transmission of IPv6 Packets over WiFi Networks 
                     <draft-syam-ipv6-over-wifi-00.txt> 
   
   
  Status of this Memo 
      
     This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
     all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026. 
      
     Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering     
     Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that     
     other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-     
     Drafts. 
      
     Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
     months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
     documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-
     Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as "work 
     in progress". 
      
     The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
     http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt  
      
     The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
     http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
      
      
  Copyright Notice 
      
     Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).  All Rights Reserved. 
   
   
  1. Introduction 
      
     WiFi networks use radio technologies defined by IEEE in 802.11x to   
     provide secure, reliable, fast wireless connectivity. A WiFi network   
     can be used to connect computers to each other, to the Internet, and   
     to Wired Ethernet Networks.  
      



   
  Park, Syam, OLN                Informational                  [Page 1] 
   
  Internet Draft            IPv6 Packets over WiFi         February 2004 
   
   
   
     This document describes the frame format for transmission of IPv6   
     [IPV6] packets and the method of forming IPv6 link-local addresses,   
     statelessly autoconfigured addresses and Duplicate Address Detection 
     (DAD) procedures on WiFi networks.  It also describes the content of 
     the Source/Target Link-layer Address option used in Neighbor 
     Discovery [NDP] when the messages are transmitted over WiFi network. 
      
     This document provides reference to [IPv6oE] wherever applicable. 
      
     The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",   
     "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this   
     document are to be interpreted as described in [KEYWORDS]. 
      
      
  2. Maximum Transmission Unit 
      
     Same as described in [IPv6oE]. 
      
      
  3. Frame Format 
      
     Same as described in [IPv6oE]. 
      
      
  4. Stateless Autoconfiguration 
      
     The Interface Identifier [AARCH] for a WiFi interface is based on 
     the EUI-64 identifier [EUI64] derived from the interface's built-in 
     48-bit IEEE 802 address.  Forming of EUI64 is same as described in 
     [IPv6oE]. 
      
      
  4.1 Duplicate Address Detection 
      
     In WiFi networks, IPv6 DAD defined in [ACONF] will not work because   
     of the Source Address Based Packet Filtering at layer 2.  
      
     The following are the snips from different standards. 
      
     Appendix A of RFC 2462 [ACONF] states: 
      
        To perform Duplicate Address Detection correctly in the case 
        where   two interfaces are using the same link-layer address, an 
        implementation MUST have a good understanding of the interfaces   
        multicast loopback semantics, and the interface cannot discard 


   
  Park, Syam, OLN                Informational                  [Page 2] 
   
  Internet Draft            IPv6 Packets over WiFi         February 2004 
   
   
   
        received packets simply because the source link-layer address is 
        the same as the interface. 
      
      
     RFC 1112 [MCAST], introducer of multicast concept, states: 
      
        Recommends that the service interface provide a way for an upper-   
        layer protocol to inhibit local delivery of packets sent to a    
        multicast group that the sending host is a member of. 
      
      
     9.2.7 Section of WLAN Specification 802.11 [WLAN] states: 
      
        The STA originating the message SHALL receive the message as a 
        broadcast/multicast message. Therefore, all STAs SHALL filter out    
        broadcast/multicast messages that contain their address as the    
        source address. 
      
      
     The above statements conclude that "Multicast Packet Filtering    
     based on Source Address" is a MUST.  So, all DAD-NS (Neighbor 
     Solicitation) & DAD-NA (Neighbor Advertisement) packets gets 
     filtered at L2 and L3 does not get the DAD packets from the other 
     node with the same MAC address.  Hence, "Duplicate Address 
     Detection" always succeeds even though there are two end stations 
     with the same MAC address. 
      
      
  4.1.1 DAD Procedures in WiFi Networks 
      
     One way of solving this problem is to permanently disable the    
     "Source based multicast packet filtering" by L2 and L3 has to 
     process all the packets and do filtering at L3.  In this case, the 
     DAD originating STA gets its own DAD packets and DAD always fails. 
      
     So a node running Duplicate Address Detection must maintain the 
     count of the number of Neighbor Solicitations the node has sent and 
     the number of Neighbor Solicitations received for a tentative 
     address and compares them. If there is a mismatch and the number of 
     Neighbor Solicitations received is more than the sent then the 
     tentative address is a duplicate. 
      
     When a node sends out a DAD packet note down the control    
     information such as Target address, DAD send counter, and DAD  
     receive counter. 


   
  Park, Syam, OLN                Informational                  [Page 3] 
   
  Internet Draft            IPv6 Packets over WiFi         February 2004 
   
   
   
         
     Target Address   = Address for which DAD is performed 
     DAD Send Counter = No. of DAD-NS sent for Target 
     DAD Recv Counter = No. of DAD-NS received for Target 
         
     When ever a node sends out a DAD packet DAD-Send counter is 
     incremented for that target.  Similarly, whenever a node  
     receives a DAD packet DAD-Receive counter is incremented. 
         
     Whenever DAD-Recv counter becomes greater than DAD-Sent counter,   
     the node can conclude that the DAD has failed.  Also, when DAD-Sent    
     counter reaches DupAddrTransmits and DAD Wait timer times out, node    
     can conclude that the DAD has succeeded and the address is unique. 
      
     However the above solution has two limitations. One, it requires L2   
     support for disabling source address based packet filtering which   
     may not be supported by all the hardware implementations. Second,   
     the WiFi end station will receive all the packets that it originates,   
     this may require substantial processing at layer 3. 
      
     To overcome these issues, the following DAD procedure is recommended   
     in WiFi networks. 
      
     Whenever a node sends DAD packet (i.e. DAD-NS or DAD-NA), it MUST 
     send the packet with Unspecified (all zeros) Source Address in Layer 
     2 Header field so that it will not be filtered at L2 and rest of the 
     procedure for Duplicate Address Detection is same as above. 
      
     In this case the originating station receives only its DAD packets 
     and other packets get filtered at layer 2 as usual. 
      
      
  5. Link-Local Addresses 
      
     Same as described in [IPv6oE]. 
      
      
  6. Address Mapping -- Unicast 
      
     Same as described in [IPv6oE]. 
      
      
  7. Address Mapping -- Multicast 
      
     Same as described in [IPv6oE]. 


   
  Park, Syam, OLN                Informational                  [Page 4] 
   
  Internet Draft            IPv6 Packets over WiFi         February 2004 
   
   
   
      
      
  8. Security Considerations 
      
     The method of derivation of Interface Identifiers from MAC addresses   
     is intended to preserve global uniqueness when possible.  However,   
     there is no protection from duplication through accident or forgery. 
      
     <Any Others> 
      
      
  References 
      
     [ACONF]  Thomson, S. and T. Narten, "IPv6 Stateless Address 
              Autoconfiguration", RFC 2462, December 1998. 
      
     [EUI64]  "Guidelines For 64-bit Global Identifier (EUI-64)",   
              http://standards.ieee.org/db/oui/tutorials/EUI64.html 
      
     [IPV6]   Deering, S. and R. Hinden, "Internet Protocol, Version 6 
              (IPv6) Specification", RFC 2460, December 1998. 
      
     [IPv6oE] Crawford M., "Transmission of IPv6 Packets over Ethernet 
              Networks", RFC 2464, December 1998. 
      
     [KEYWORDS]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate 
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997. 
      
     [NDP]    Narten, T., Nordmark, E. and W. Simpson, "Neighbor 
              Discovery for IP Version 6 (IPv6)", RFC 2461, December 1998. 
      
     [PROCESS]Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process", BCP 9, RFC  
              2026, October 1996. 
      
     [WLAN]  "Part 11: Wireless LAN Medium Access Control (MAC) and 
              Physical Layer (PHY) Specifications, IEEE Computer Society, 
              ANSI/IEEE 802.11, 1999 Edition. 
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      


   
  Park, Syam, OLN                Informational                  [Page 5] 
   
  Internet Draft            IPv6 Packets over WiFi         February 2004 
   
   
   
  Authors' Addresses 
      
     Soohong Daniel Park, 
     Mobile Platform Laboratory, SAMSUNG Electronics, 
     Korea 
     Phone: +82 31 200 4508 
     EMail: Soohong.Park@samsung.com 
      
      
     O.L.N.Rao, Network Systems Division, 
     Samsung India Software Operations, 
     3/1, JP Techno Parks, Millers Road, 
     Bangalore - 560 052 
      
     Phone: +91 80 51197777 
     EMail: OLNRao@samsung.com 
      
      
     Syam Madanapalli, Network Systems Division, 
     Samsung India Software Operations, 
     3/1, JP Techno Parks, Millers Road, 
     Bangalore - 560 052 
      
     Phone: +91 80 51197777  
     EMail: Syam@samsung.com 
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      


   
  Park, Syam, OLN                Informational                  [Page 6] 
   
  Internet Draft            IPv6 Packets over WiFi         February 2004 
   
   
   
  Intellectual Property Statement  
            
     The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any      
     intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to      
     pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in 
     this document or the extent to which any license under such rights 
     might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it 
     has made any effort to identify any such rights. Information on the 
     IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and 
     standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11. Copies of 
     claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances 
     of licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made 
     to obtain a general license or permission for the use of such  
      
     proprietary rights by implementors or users of this specification      
     can be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.  
            
     The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
     copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
     rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice 
     this standard. Please address the information to the IETF Executive 
     Director.  
      
      
    Full Copyright Statement  
         
     Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).  All Rights Reserved. 
      
     This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
     others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 
     or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published 
     and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any 
     kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph 
     are included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this 
     document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
     the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
     Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
     developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for 
     copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be 
     followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than 
     English.  
            
     The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be 
     revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.  
            


   
  Park, Syam, OLN                Informational                  [Page 7] 
   
  Internet Draft            IPv6 Packets over WiFi         February 2004 
   
   
   
     This document and the information contained herein is provided on an 
     "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING 
     TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING 
     BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION 
     HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF 
     MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  
      
    Acknowledgement 
         
      Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the  
      Internet Society. 




































   
  Park, Syam, OLN                Informational                  [Page 8] 


