
Internet Draft                                            M. Stiemerling
Document: draft-stiemerling-hip-nat-00.txt                    J. Quittek
Expires: August 2004                                     NEC Europe Ltd.

                                                           February 2004



   Problem Statement: HIP operation over Network Address Translators

                   <draft-stiemerling-hip-nat-00.txt>

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC 2026.  Internet-Drafts are
   working documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its
   areas, and its working groups.  Note that other groups may also
   distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

   Distribution of this document is unlimited.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).  All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   This memo investigates issues for Host Identity Protocol (HIP) nodes
   that communicate over a network path that inlcudes Network Address
   Translators (NATs).  There are two groups of issues: Operating HIP
   itself across NATs and operating the IPsec-based data transmission
   initiated by HIP across NATs.  For both groups problems are
   summarized.







Stiemerling, Quittek                                            [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                 HIP and NAT                 February 2004


Table of Contents

   1 Introduction .................................................    3
   2 Terminology ..................................................    3
   3 HIP Network Environment ......................................    4
   4 Problems with operating HIP across NATs ......................    5
   4.1 HIP Base Exchange ..........................................    5
   4.1.1 HIP over IPv6 ............................................    6
   4.1.2 HIP over IPv4 ............................................    6
   4.2 IPSec Data Exchange ........................................    7
   5 Extensions to HIP ............................................    7
   6 Extension to NATs ............................................    8
   7 Security Considerations ......................................    8
   8 Acknowledgements .............................................    8
   9 References ...................................................    8
   10 Authors' Addresses ..........................................   10
   11 IPR Notices .................................................   10
   12 Full Copyright Statement ....................................   11


































Stiemerling, Quittek                                            [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                 HIP and NAT                 February 2004


1.  Introduction

   The Host Identity Protocol (HIP) architecture [HIP-ARCH] introduces a
   new kind of identifier for each host.  Instead of using the IP
   address as host identity, a new Host Identifier is introduced.  This
   additional namespace, separates the host identity from the routing
   information contained in the IP address.

   The current version of the HIP Architecture is based on the
   assumption of full reachability between the IP addresses assigned to
   the participating hosts.  This is usually given if both hosts have IP
   addresses belonging to the same address realm, for example if both
   have public addresses.  But if the host's addresses belong to
   different realms, for example one has a private IP address and the
   other one a public one, then network address translation must be
   provided between the realms.  So far, network address translation is
   not integrated into the HIP architecture and HIP [HIP-PROTO] does not
   have particular means to support it.

   Problems arising in conjunction with Network Address Translators
   (NATs) are two-fold.  First the HIP base exchange needs to traverse
   NATs and then the IPSec encoded transport initiated by HIP needs to
   traverse it (see [RFC2401] for an introduction to IPSec).  In
   general, both protocols may be blocked by NATs.

   This document discusses the problems encountered when using HIP in
   the presence of NATs in Section 4.  Impacts on HIP itself and the
   used IPsec mechanism are elaborated.  Section 5 discusses extensions
   to HIP that potentially can solve some of the problems.  Section 6
   suggests extensions to the functions provided by today's NATs
   complementing the HIP extensions.


2.  Terminology

   Terms used throughout this document are consistent with IPSec
   terminology [RFC2401], HIP terminology [HIP-ARCH][HIP-PROTO][HIP-MM],
   and NAT terminology [RFC2663].  For an introduction to NATs readers
   are recommended to read [RFC2663].  In this memo the term NAT refers
   to NAT and NAPT.  So-called twice-NATs are not considered, yet.












Stiemerling, Quittek                                            [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                 HIP and NAT                 February 2004


3.  HIP Network Environment

   The HIP Architecture described in [HIP-ARCH] assumes full
   reachability between the IP addresses assigned to the participating
   hosts.


               +---------+       --------      +---------+
               |   HIP   |     /          \    |   HIP   |
               |   peer  |----|  Internet  |---|   peer  |
               |    A    |     \  realm   /    |    B    |
               +---------+       --------      +---------+

               Figure 1: Assumed network environment for HIP

   This is usually given if both hosts have IP addresses belonging to
   the to the same address realm, for example if both have public
   addresses or if both have addresses belonging to the same private
   address realm as shown by Figure 1.  Within one realm, IP addresses
   provide end-to-end routing information between hosts A and B.  If A
   wants to send a packet to B, it is sufficient for A to know the IP
   address assigned to B.

   The scenario sketched by Figure 1 is an ideal one.  It does not
   (anymore) match today's current scenarios where an increasing number
   of hosts use private IP addresses, mainly, because of lack of IP
   addresses in IPv4.  Furthermore, a separation of an organization's
   network from the public Internet realm hides the organization's
   network structure and enables more flexible internal renumbering of
   IP addresses.

   If the host's addresses belong to different realms, then
   communication between these hosts requires network address
   translation between the realms.  Network Address Translators (NATs,
   [RFC2663]) provide this service.  Figure 2 shows an example of a host
   A with a private IP address and a host B with a public IP address


                                   +--+
      +---------+     --------     |  |     --------     +---------+
      |   HIP   |   /  public  \   |N |   /  private \   |   HIP   |
      |   peer  |--|  Internet  |--|A |--|  Internet  |--|   peer  |
      |    A    |   \  realm   /   |T |   \  realm   /   |    B    |
      +---------+     --------     |  |     --------     +---------+
                                   +--+

                  Figure 2: Network environment with NAT


   The translation performed by NATs affects the IP header and (in most


Stiemerling, Quittek                                            [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                 HIP and NAT                 February 2004


   existing cases) also the transport header.  IP addresses and
   transport port numbers are translated between the address realms.  In
   the scenario illustrated by Figure 2, host A would address all HIP
   messages that it intends to send to host B to a public IP address
   that is provided by the NAT.  The NAT receives the message for this
   address (typically in combination with a dynamically chosen port
   number) and replaces the destination IP address (and typically also
   the TCP or UPD port number) before it forwards the packet into the
   private realm.

   The public IP address (and port number) that the NAT uses for this
   translation service is in general not known to host B.  Therefore,
   applications that carry address information in their payload or
   applications that rely on static protocol header fields experience
   severe problems.  Often, the application-level signaling can traverse
   NATs, but subsequent data exchange fails (see [NATP2P]).

   NATs are heavily used in IPv4 networks when there is a significant
   lack of address space.  Initially, they were expected not to be
   present in IPv6 networks, but the authors believe that NATs will also
   be used in IPv6 networks, despite the availability of a much larger
   address space.  Today, even organizations owning a sufficiently large
   IPv4 address space tend to use private Internet realms, because this
   hides their internal network structure and allows to renumber the
   internal network addresses without communicating this to the public
   network.


4.  Problems with operating HIP across NATs

   HIP operation can be divided into two phases. The first one is the
   HIP base exchange using HIP only.  The second one is the actual
   application data exchange via IPSec.  This section separately
   describes the problems that occur in each of the phases when network
   address translation is integrated into the HIP architecture.

4.1.  HIP Base Exchange

   The HIP base exchange uses different transport mechanisms for IPv6
   and IPv4.

    o   IPv6
        When IPv6 is used, a HIP-specific IPv6 extension header carries
        all information necessary (see Section 6 of [HIP-PROTO]).

    o   IPv4
        When IPv4 is used, HIP messages are transmitted as UDP payload.
        (see Appendix E of [HIP-PROTO]).




Stiemerling, Quittek                                            [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                 HIP and NAT                 February 2004


4.1.1.  HIP over IPv6

   Current implementations use plain IPv6 packets without any payload
   other than the HIP extension header.  This causes problems in
   combination with NATs that multiplex many private IP addresses into a
   few public addresses.  Usually, this kind of multiplexing is
   performed on a combination of IP address and TCP or UDP port number.
   In the absence of a TCP or UDP transport header, typical network
   address and port translation will fail.  Currently there is no
   specific scheme defined for translating IPv6 HIP extension headers in
   the absence of TCP or UDP headers.

   Another problem (that also applies to IPv4) is that HIP provides no
   explicit means for transmitting the IP address used by a host other
   than using the source IP address of the packet carrying HIP messages.
   Even if a host B in Figure 2 would know the public IP address used by
   the NAT for translation, it has no means of providing this
   information to host A.


4.1.2.  HIP over IPv4

   The use of UDP encapsulation for IPv4 transmission enables the HIP
   base exchange to traverse NATs and to reach their final destination.
   This encapsulation scheme replaces the IPv6 extension header with a
   UDP header followed by a HIP header.  All HITs and HIP parameters are
   appended to this new HIP UDP header.  UDP transport suffers from many
   well known problems when traversing NATs  (compare Section 2.2 of
   [IPSEC-NAT-REQ] also for some issues on UDP traversal).  One problem
   is that often NATs are not able or do not allow to traverse UDP
   packets, they are blocked and discarded.  If NATs do allow UDP
   packets to traverse, it is not determinable which UDP port number and
   IP address is used for outgoing UDP packets.  HIP over UDP is
   mandating a fixed port number of 272 for source and destination
   ports.  NATs may change the source port number to any possible port
   number, for instance a source port of 272 may be changed by the NAT
   to 34657.

   The above paragraph implies that outgoing packets (packets origin in
   a private address realm and traversing towards the public address
   realm) are allowed to traverse, but the opposite way, incoming
   packets, is not necessary given.  Only incoming packets that are
   replies to outgoing packets are able to traverse the NAT.  For
   incoming packets, from flows originating in the public address realm,
   there is no way of traversing.  The destination address in the
   private address realm (more precise the IP address NAT binding) is
   not given, thus no address mapping is possible.  So transmissions
   originating in the public Internet are unable to traverse (or even
   reach the NAT), unless the NAT has some pre-configured
   configurations.


Stiemerling, Quittek                                            [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                 HIP and NAT                 February 2004


4.2.  IPSec Data Exchange

   IPSec secures data transmission between two HIP nodes after their
   base exchange is completed.  Well-known issues with IPSec and NAT are
   listed in [IPSEC-NAT-REQ] and apply to the IPSec use of HIP as well.
   Those issues are separated into NAT intrinsic issues, NAT
   implementation issues and helper incompatibilities.  The NAT
   intrinsic issues related to IPSec (IKE issues are omitted) are:


    1.  By using ESP all upper layer headers are invisible to the NAT.
        So changes of the IP header during NAT traversal invalidate any
        upper layer checksums that are protected within ESP after ESP
        decryption.

    2.  It is possible to use ESP encrypted packets through a NAT, but
        as [IPSEC-NAT-REQ] remarks, the used SPI values have only one-
        way significance.  Furthermore,  SPI values may collide at the
        NAT, meaning that two different peers behind the NAT are using
        the same SPI value.

    3   SPI could be use for multiplexing different IPSec flows at the
        NAT.  But since SPI have only this one-way significance, NATs
        can only learn the SPI value of outgoing ESP flows, but not the
        SPI value of the response ESP flow.

   A possible way of carrying IPSec traffic through NATs has been
   proposed in [IPSEC-UDP].  IPSec traffic is encapsulated in UDP
   packets.


5.  Extensions to HIP

   [HIP-MM][HIP-PA] propose new extensions to HIP to make it usable for
   end host mobility and multi-homing.

   Out of those proposals one extension to HIP can be used for HIP and
   NAT traversal:  HIP peers are able to notify other HIP peers about
   new addresses they have obtained with the REA packet exchange (see
   Section 4 of [HIP-MM]).  With REA a HIP node can notify other HIP
   nodes about new addresses, for instance about its new address at a
   NAT.  This functionality has been already described and can be used
   for NAT traversal.

   The issue is how to determine the publicly reachable IP address, so
   that it can be announced within the REA packet to the HIP peer.

   A possible extension of HIP for mobility and multi- homing is the
   usage of an IPSec IKE mechanism proposed in [IPSEC-NAT-T].  Since the
   checksums of upper layer protocols are invalidated (see Section


Stiemerling, Quittek                                            [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                 HIP and NAT                 February 2004


   4.2.), the receiving HIP peer needs to know the complete pseudo
   header of the sending HIP peer (see [RFC793] and [RFC768] for TCP and
   UDP pseudo header).  With the knowledge of the pseudo header, a
   receiving HIP peer can first decrypt the ESP payload and insert the
   pseudo header before passing this content to checksum computation
   (see also Section 5.2 of [IPSEC-NAT-T]).

   This extension would require a new HIP payload for carrying pseudo
   header information to be included in the REA exchange.


6.  Extension to NATs

   As described in Section 4.2, IPSec SPIs have only one-way
   significance, meaning that NATs can learn SPI values of outgoing
   packets, but they cannot learn the corresponding SPI values of
   incoming packets.  Therefore, a matching between SPI values used for
   outgoing flows to SPI values used for incoming flows is not possible.

   NATs must learn the corresponding SPI values for outgoing and
   incoming IPSec flows.  There are two ways in doing so.  First, NATs
   can monitor the HIP base exchange and learn the SPI values agreed by
   both HIP peers. Afterwards, NATs can remember these values and map
   outgoing and incoming IPSec flows accordingly.

   Second, HIP peers can use a NAT signaling protcol and signal the
   appropriate SPI values with IP addresses.  NATs can so learn the SPI
   values out of the signaling protocol.

   Both approaches require changes to NATs.  The first approach would
   require changes that are only benificial to HIP, the second one would
   be benificial for other protocols as well.  Possible solutions for
   signaling NATs SPI values are NSIS NAT/FW traversal and MIDCOM.



7.  Security Considerations

   To be done.


8.  Acknowledgements

   The authors like to thank Lars Eggert for a lot of valuable comments.


9.  References





Stiemerling, Quittek                                            [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                 HIP and NAT                 February 2004


[RFC2401]   Kent, S., and R. Atkinson, "Security Architecture for the
            Internet Protocol", RFC 2401, November 1998.

[RFC2402]   Kent, S., and R. Atkinson, "IP Authentication Header", RFC
            2402, November 1998.

[RFC2406]   Kent, S., and R. Atkinson, "IP Encapsulating Security
            Payload (ESP)", RFC 2406, November 1998.

[IPSEC-UDP] Huttunen, A., et al, "UDP Encapsulation of IPsec Packets ",
            draft-ietf-ipsec-udp-encaps-07.txt, Internet Draft ( work in
            progress), October 2003.

[IPSEC-NAT-T]
            Kivinen, T., et al, "Negotiation of NAT-Traversal in the
            IKE", draft-ipsec-nat-t-ike-07.txt, Internet Draft (work in
            progress), September 2003.

[IPSEC-NAT-REQ]
            Aboba, B., and W. Dixon, "IPsec-NAT Compatibility
            Requirements ", draft-ietf-ipsec-nat-reqts-06.txt, Internet
            Draft (work in progress), October 2003.

[HIP-ARCH]  Moskowitz, R., and P. Nikander, "Host Identity Protocol
            Architecture", draft-moskowitz-hip-arch-05.txt, Internet
            Draft (work in progress), September 2003.

[HIP-PROTO] Moskowitz, R., Nikander, P., and T. Henderson,  "Host
            Identity Protocol", draft-moskowitz-hip-08.txt, Internet
            Draft (work in progress), October 2003.

[HIP-MM]    Nikander, P., and P. Jokela, "End-Host Mobility and Multi-
            Homing with Host Identity Protocol", draft-nikander-hip-
            mm00.txt, Internet Draft (work in progress), June 2003.

[HIP-PA]    Nikander, P., Ylitalo, J., and J. Wall, "Integrating
            Security, Mobility, and Multi-Homing in a HIP way", NDSS
            2003, 2003.

[NATP2P]    Ford, B., Srisuresh, P., and D. Kegel, *(lqPeer-to-Peer
            (P2P) communication across middleboxes*(rq, draft-ford-
            midcom-p2p-01.txt, Internet Draft (work in progress),
            October 2003

[RFC2663]   Srisuresh, P., and M. Holdrege, "IP Network Address
            Translator (NAT) Terminology and Considerations", RFC 2663,
            August 1999

[RFC793]    Postel, J., "Transmission Control Protocol", RFC 793,
            September 1981


Stiemerling, Quittek                                            [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                 HIP and NAT                 February 2004


[RFC768]    Postel, J., "User Datagram Protocol", RFC 768, August 1980


10.  Authors' Addresses

     Martin Stiemerling
     NEC Europe Ltd.
     Network Laboratories
     Kurfuersten-Anlage 36
     69115 Heidelberg
     Germany

     Phone: +49 6221 90511-13
     Email: stiemerling@netlab.nec.de


     Juergen Quittek
     NEC Europe Ltd.
     Network Laboratories
     Kurfuersten-Anlage 36
     69115 Heidelberg
     Germany

     Phone: +49 6221 90511-15
     EMail: quittek@netlab.nec.de


11.  IPR Notices

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it
   has made any effort to identify any such rights.  Information on the
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11.  Copies of
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of
   licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to
   obtain a general license or permission for the use of such
   proprietary rights by implementors or users of this specification can
   be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF Executive
   Director.




Stiemerling, Quittek                                           [Page 10]

Internet-Draft                 HIP and NAT                 February 2004


12.  Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004). All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implmentation may be prepared, copied, published and
   distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any kind,
   provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the  purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

























Stiemerling, Quittek                                           [Page 11]

Internet-Draft                 HIP and NAT                 February 2004


