


Network Working Group                                         A. Schmidt
Internet-Draft                                            Fraunhofer SIT
Expires: April 22, 2005                                       T. Gondrom
                                                        IXOS Software AG
                                                             L. Masinter
                                                           Adobe Systems
                                                        October 22, 2004


                Requirements for Certification  Services
                    draft-ietf-ltans-notareqs-01.txt

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is subject to all provisions
   of section 3 of RFC 3667.  By submitting this Internet-Draft, each
   author represents that any applicable patent or other IPR claims of
   which he or she is aware have been or will be disclosed, and any of
   which he or she become aware will be disclosed, in accordance with
   RFC 3668.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 22, 2005.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).

Abstract

   This document establishes the goals and requirements for protocols
   and data structures for use with services that provide additional
   means for users to ensure and prove the validity of data, especially
   digitally signed data, in a common and reproducible way.  It



Schmidt, et al.          Expires April 22, 2005                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft         Certification Requirements           October 2004


   establishes the need for components to be used in addition to
   long-term archive services.  It provides some use cases and
   scenarios, and establishes technical requirements for protocols and
   data structures to support them.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  General Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3.  Use cases  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   4.  Specific workflows . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     4.1   Record transactions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   5.  Technical Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   6.  Operational Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   7.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   8.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   9.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
       Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   A.  Previous 'Technical Requirements' section  . . . . . . . . . .  8
     A.1   Enable submission, retrieval and deletion  . . . . . . . .  8
     A.2   Provide services . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     A.3   Support Demonstration of Service Integrity and Trust . . .  9
     A.4   Operation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     A.5   Data confidentiality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
       Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . 11


























Schmidt, et al.          Expires April 22, 2005                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft         Certification Requirements           October 2004


1.  Introduction

   [NOTE: This document contains comments by the editors, delimited in
   square brackets, primarily to note areas for subsequent discussion in
   the LTANS working group.]

   In many scenarios, users need to be able to ensure and prove the
   existance and validity of documents and data, including digitally
   signed data, in a common and reproducible way, over a long period of
   time.  A long-term archive service[1] may provide assurances about
   the integrity of data and past validity of digital signatures.
   However, additional mechanisms are required, in real workflows, to
   provide the technical means to satisfy user requirements.

   Usually, these mechanisms involve a trusted third party who is
   willing, over a period of time, to accept data and validate it, or
   witness events, and subsequently make assertions about those events
   or data.  In many legal jurisdictions, a 'notary' is a person with
   credentials, recognized by that jurisdiction to perform these
   services, in a way that gives their certification a special legal
   standing.  Indeed, some types of transactions may require an official
   certification by someone with specific notary credentials.

   This document establishes the goals and requirements for protocols
   and data structures for use with services that provide additional
   means for users to ensure and prove the validity of data, especially
   digitally signed data, in a common and reproducible way.  It provides
   some use cases and scenarios, and establishes technical requirements
   for protocols and data structures to support them.

2.  General Requirements

   It is desirable that the protocols and data structures established be
   usable by an official notary to provide appropriate assertions for
   electronic documents.  Of course, nothing in a technical document can
   provide for legal standing of any such assertions.

   Requirements for data certification services may vary widely across
   different processes and jurisdictions.  For this reason, the
   technical standards for data certification should provide a common
   base of mechanisms, useful across jurisdictions and work processes,
   and the means for extending these to support particular additional
   workflows.

3.  Use cases

   This section gives some examples workflows where data certification
   services and assertions by trusted third parties might be used, as a



Schmidt, et al.          Expires April 22, 2005                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft         Certification Requirements           October 2004


   way of motivating the subsequent requirements.
   record transactions:  In the case of an agreement between two (or
      more) parties, a trusted third party records the transaction, and
      the fact that all of the parties agreed to the final documents and
      that all of the necessary information has been provided to all of
      the involved parties.  The trusted third party acts as a witness
      to the agreement at the time it is made, and, at a later date, may
      be called upon to attest to the validity of the agreement.  This
      kind of service might be used for a contract between individuals,
      e.g., a private transfer of ownership of private property, or a
      public transfer of ownership of land.
   negotiation support:  In some cases, a trusted third party is used
      during the negotiation of a complex agreement in order to support
      the mechanisms of coming to the agreement.  For example, a trusted
      third party might gather and store the documents during the course
      of a negotiation, making it impossible for any party to delete the
      document or repudiate a partial agreement; there might be time
      deadlines established for submitting information or approvals, or
      information may be held back from release until a particular time.
      For example, this kind of service might be used for the awarding
      of public contracts based on private bids.
   certification of copies and conversions:  In many cases, a trusted
      third party or service is used to certify the validity of a
      transformation or translation of a document from one form to
      another.  Classically, a notary might attest to the validity of a
      paper copy of a document.  The ability to attest to the validity
      of a wide variety of transformations are important, including the
      transformation of documents from one electronic format to another,
      or possibly the validity of conversion between paper and
      electronic forms.  The third party should be able to attest that
      one document contains the same information as another and the
      validity of all contained digital signatures and the identity of
      the signers.
   record events:  In this case, a trusted third party or service is
      used to document and later provide proof that a certain event has
      happened.  Initially, the service identifies the involved entities
      and verifies that all necessary preconditions are met.  After
      this, an event or ceremony is held; during the event, the service
      ensures that all entities understood and received all appropriate
      information about the event and its consequences.  After the
      event, a record of the event is issued to all of the entities;
      additional copies are retained for later documentation.
   administering of oaths:  In some cases, the 'event' being recorded is
      the performance, by an individual, of a particular agreement or
      'oath'.  The trusted third party is used to document and later
      provide proof that an individual has made a particular statement
      or agreement, in a specified ceremony or event.




Schmidt, et al.          Expires April 22, 2005                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft         Certification Requirements           October 2004


4.  Specific workflows

   This sections describes some concrete scenarios based on the use
   cases introduced in the previous section.  [LMM: This section was
   added without working group discussion; please review.  We're
   expecting more than one of these.]

4.1  Record transactions

   The following example will show the additional benefits of a
   certification service in the case of private transactions.  We start
   with a basic protocol that achieves, upon completion, a state of
   mutual non-repudiation between two parties, A and B.  Suppose, A
   wants to offer an electronic contract (contract_A) to B, where
   "contract_A" means that A has digitally signed the contract with her
   private key.  This is sent as an offer to B:
   contract_A -> B

   B, after receiving and accepting contract_A, counter-signs the
   contract and sends it back to A as an acceptance of A's offer:
   (contract_A)_B -> A

   Now, A has to confirm reception of the acceptance.  He signs
   (contract_A)_B and sends it back to B:
   ((contract_A)_B)_A -> B

   After that, both parties have a document with at least two
   signatures, and neither party can succeed in repudiating the validity
   of the contract.

   Now let's see what happens when we put a certification service N as a
   trusted third party between A and B.  When B gets the contract from A
   and accepts it, he signs the contract and sends it to N:
   (contract_A)_B -> N

   The certification service confirms receipt of the contract with a
   signature and sends it to both A and B:
   ((contract_A)_B)_N -> A, B

   After that, both parties have a document signed by A, B, and N.
   Since N is trusted, A and B can be sure that the other party has a
   contract which is signed by both.  We have the same level of trust as
   in the scenario without the certification service.  However, an
   additional benefit of using a certification service in this case can
   be the archiving of the contract, as may be required by the law for
   certain types of contracts.

   In order to allow for N to provide documentation that all necessary



Schmidt, et al.          Expires April 22, 2005                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft         Certification Requirements           October 2004


   information has been provided to both parties, the scenario can be
   extended as follows:

   When A and B get the confirmation ((contract_A)_B)_N from N, both A
   and B send an acknowledgement to N:
   ack_A -> N ack_B -> N

   After N received the two acknowledgements he sends a notification to
   both A and B that confirms that the transaction is completed:
   not_N -> A, B

   For both ack_A/B and not_N it suffices to contain (sufficiently
   secure) hash values of the pertaining original documents, and the
   same is true for the third message sent from the notary in the
   protocol above, but not for the second one, if the contract is to be
   archived by the notary.

   The utility of notary services in these generic scenarios is twofold:
   They can accomplish the fulfillment of technical requirements, e.g.,
   archiving of transaction records, which may in turn be entailed by
   legal requirements.  And they can be instrumental in the fulfillment
   of genuine legal requirements, like documentation that all necessary
   information has been provided to all involved parties.

5.  Technical Requirements

   This section describes some of technical requirements associated with
   certification services.  [LMM: Note that currently the previous
   contents of 'technical requirements' have been moved to Appendix A].

   The primary technical requirement is for a data structure that can
   represent the assertion, by the certification service, that a
   particular service has been performed.  The data structure should
   include the identity (as known) of the participants, the credentials
   of the certification service and its operator, the date and time that
   the service was performed, and other information relevant to the
   acknowledgement of the service.  The data structure should be signed
   by the certification service.

   Secondarily, there should be protocols for requesting services,
   monitoring the progress of the service, participating in services
   that require contemporaneous participation, cancelling ongoing
   services.

   Some services also require the certification service to maintain a
   long-term archive of records of events that it has certified; the
   users of a certification service may request operations that cause
   archived certificates to be accessed, forwarded, or possibly even



Schmidt, et al.          Expires April 22, 2005                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft         Certification Requirements           October 2004


   deleted.

6.  Operational Considerations

   A certification service must be able to work efficiently even for
   large amounts of data objects and requests.

   In order to limit expenses and to achieve high performance, the
   involvement of other trusted third parties should be minimized.

7.  Security Considerations

   [LM: This section should contain a threat analysis for certification
   services, and the ways in which those threats can be guarded
   against.] Trust is the principal asset of a certification service.
   The implementation of such a service must be very careful so that no
   data integrity can be lost or manipulation of the system can be done.

8.  Acknowledgements

   Thanks to members of the LTANS mailing list for review of earlier
   drafts and many suggestions.

9  Informative References

   [1]  Wallace, "Long-term Archive Service Requirements", May 2004.


Authors' Addresses

   Andreas U. Schmidt
   Fraunhofer SIT
   Dolivostrasse 15
   Darmstadt  64293
   Germany

   Phone: +49 (6151) 869 60 227
   Fax:   +49 (6151) 869 704
   EMail: Andreas.U.Schmidt@sit.franhofer.de
   URI:   http://www.math.uni-frankfurt.de/~aschmidt











Schmidt, et al.          Expires April 22, 2005                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft         Certification Requirements           October 2004


   Tobias Gondrom
   IXOS Software AG
   Bretonischer Ring 12
   Grasbrunn, Munich  85630
   Germany

   Fax:   +49 (89) 4629-33-1816
   EMail: tobias.gondrom@ixos.de


   Larry Masinter
   Adobe Systems
   345 Park Ave
   San Jose, CA  95110
   US

   Phone: +1 408 536 3024
   EMail: LMM@acm.org
   URI:   http://larry.masinter.net

Appendix A.  Previous 'Technical Requirements' section

   [LMM: For the record, this was the previous content of 'technical
   requirements'; it's been temporarily moved to the appendix, while the
   working group figures out the requirements based on the use cases
   above.]

   This section describes a (technical) system delivering notary
   services.  Possible services MUST support at least one use case
   completely but NEED NOT support all possible use cases for notary
   systems and services.  This way one can have a self-contained system
   for each separate task.

A.1  Enable submission, retrieval and deletion

   A notary service must permit entities to perform the following basic
   operations:
   o  submit data
   o  retrieve data
   o  delete data (if the notary services is authorised to allow
      deletion at a given point in time)

   Users must be able to request a specific service they want to access,
   and receive an attestation (possibly a digitally signed document)
   after the completion of the service.  The format for the
   acknowledgements must allow the identification of the notary service
   provider; in specific cases also the identity of the individual human
   notary.  The acknowledgement of a successful execution of the notary



Schmidt, et al.          Expires April 22, 2005                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft         Certification Requirements           October 2004


   service should permit the submitter to verify that the correct data
   was received by the service and the correct kind of service was
   executed.

   All requests to a notary service MUST be authenticated.

   Following submission, the service must start a workflow to enable the
   human notary to fulfill and supervise its work.  If supervision or a
   response within a given timeframe is not possible the service must
   report an error to the user.

   After submission and before completion of the service the user SHOULD
   always be able to receive information about the status of the
   process.  The access to the status information MUST only be
   accessible to authorised entities.

   Deletion requests also MUST be authorised and additionally there MUST
   be a kind of authorisation policy which controls that the notary
   service does not delete information that must be kept.

   It must be possible to authenticate requests and responses.  This may
   be accomplished using transport security mechanisms.

A.2  Provide services

   All services must be well documented and the notary service MUST
   create reports whose autheniticity can be verified by an initial
   client and any other interested authorised party, for a long time
   after the creation of the report.

   Depending on the kind of service online interaction between the
   participants MUST be possible.

A.3  Support Demonstration of Service Integrity and Trust

   A notary service MUST be able to demonstrate that the clients and
   users can trust it.  For this evaluation records by other trusted
   parties (e.g.  government authorities), the identity of members of
   the notary office and further documentation MUST be easily accessible
   to the client.  For every user and client it MUST be obvious if
   systems have been tampered with or manipulated.

A.4  Operation

   The operation of the notary service must be under the complete and
   unconditional control of the notary office.  It MUST be impossible to
   manipulate the system without the human notaries from the office
   noticing it.



Schmidt, et al.          Expires April 22, 2005                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft         Certification Requirements           October 2004


A.5  Data confidentiality

   The notary service MUST allow to respect the confidentiality
   requirement of a particular procedure to be executed.

   If information is deployed on systems outside the direct supervision
   of the notary office it is MANDATORY to encrypt the information with
   maximum security.  If encryption becomes weak due to improvements in
   cryptography, the notary office has to be informed and all
   information has to be re-encrypted with better algorithms.

   All communications with a notary service MUST be encrypted.  (e.g.
   SSL) Traditional standardized encrypting methods and formats, e.g.
   CMS, should be supported.





































Schmidt, et al.          Expires April 22, 2005                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft         Certification Requirements           October 2004


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Schmidt, et al.          Expires April 22, 2005                [Page 11]


