

   MobOpts Research Group                             Thomas C. Schmidt 
   Internet Draft                                           HAW Hamburg 
   Category: Informational                           Matthias Waehlisch 
   Expires: May 2008                                           link-lab 
                                                          November 2007 
    
    
      Multicast Mobility in MIPv6: Problem Statement and Brief Survey 
                  <draft-irtf-mobopts-mmcastv6-ps-02.txt> 
    
IPR Statement 
    
   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any 
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware 
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes      
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79 [1]. 
    
Status of this Memo 
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that      
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
   This document is a submission of the IRTF MobOpts RG. Comments should 
   be directed to the MobOpts RG mailing list, mobopts@irtf.org. 
    
Abstract 
    
   In this document we discuss current mobility extensions to IP layer 
   multicast solutions. Problems arising from mobile group communication 
   in general, in the case of multicast listener mobility and for mobile 
   Any Source Multicast as well as Source Specific Multicast senders are 
   documented. Characteristic aspects of multicast routing and 
   deployment issues for fixed IPv6 networks are summarized. The 
   principal approaches to the multicast mobility problems are outlined 
   subsequently. In addition to providing a comprehensive exploration of 
   the mobile multicast problem and solution space, this document 
   attempts to outline a conceptual roadmap for initial steps in 

 
                         
Schmidt, Waehlisch        Expires - May 2008                  [Page 1] 
                             MMCASTv6-PS                November 2007 
 
 
   standardization for the use of future mobile multicast protocol 
   designers. 
    
    
Table of Contents 
    

   1. Introduction and Motivation....................................3 
     1.1 Document Scope..............................................4 

   2. Problem Description............................................5 
     2.1 Generals....................................................5 
     2.2 Multicast Listener Mobility.................................7 
     2.3 Multicast Source Mobility...................................7 
         2.3.1 Any Source Multicast Mobility.........................7 
         2.3.2 Source Specific Multicast Mobility....................8 
     2.4 Deployment Issues...........................................9 

   3. Characteristics of Multicast Routing Trees under Mobility.....10 

   4. Layer 2 Aspects...............................................11 
     4.1 General Background.........................................11 
     4.2 Multicast for Specific Technologies........................12 
         4.2.1 802.11 WLAN..........................................12 
         4.2.2 802.16 WIMAX.........................................12 
         4.2.3 3GPP.................................................13 
         4.2.4 DVB-H / DVB-IPDC.....................................14 
     4.3 Vertical Multicast Handovers...............................15 

   5. Solutions.....................................................15 
     5.1 General Approaches.........................................15 
     5.2 Solutions for Multicast Listener Mobility..................16 
         5.2.1 Agent Assistance.....................................16 
         5.2.2 Hybrid Architectures.................................17 
         5.2.3 MLD Extensions.......................................17 
     5.3 Solutions for Multicast Source Mobility....................18 
         5.3.1 Any Source Multicast Mobility Approaches.............18 
         5.3.2 Source Specific Multicast Mobility Approaches........18 

   6. Security Considerations.......................................20 

   7. Summary and Future Steps......................................20 

   8. IANA Considerations...........................................21 

   Appendix A. Implicit Source Notification Options.................21 

   9. References....................................................21 

 
 
Schmidt, Waehlisch        Expires - May 2008                  [Page 2] 
                             MMCASTv6-PS                November 2007 
 
 
   Acknowledgments..................................................27 

   Author's Addresses...............................................27 

   Intellectual Property Statement..................................28 

   Copyright Notice.................................................28 

   Disclaimer of Validity...........................................28 

   Acknowledgement..................................................28 

    
 
    
1. Introduction and Motivation 
    
   Group communication forms an integral building block of a wide 
   variety of applications, ranging from content broadcasting and 
   streaming over voice and video conferencing, collaborative 
   environments and massive multiplayer gaming up to the self-
   organization of distributed systems, services or autonomous networks. 
   Network layer multicast support will be needed, whenever globally 
   distributed, scalable, serverless or instantaneous communication is 
   required. As broadband media delivery more and more emerges to be a 
   typical mass scenario, scalability and bandwidth efficiency of 
   multicast routing continuously gains relevance. The idea of Internet 
   multicasting already arose in the early days [2], soon leading to 
   Deering's widely adopted host group model [3]. Its realization will 
   be of particular importance to mobile environments, where users 
   commonly share frequency bands of limited capacity. The rapidly 
   increasing mobile reception of 'infotainment' streams may soon 
   require a wide deployment of mobile multicast services. Multicast 
   mobility consequently has been a concern for about ten years [4] and 
   has led to numerous proposals, but no generally accepted solution. 
    
   The fundamental approach to deal with mobility in IPv6 [5] is stated 
   in the Mobile IPv6 RFCs [6,7]. MIPv6 [6] only roughly treats 
   multicast mobility, in a pure remote subscription approach or through 
   bi-directional tunneling via the Home Agent. Whereas the remote 
   subscription suffers from slow handovers, as it relies on multicast 
   routing to adapt to handovers, bi-directional tunneling introduces 
   inefficient overheads and delays due to triangular forwarding. 
   Therefore none of the approaches can be considered solutions for a 
   deployment on large scale. A mobile multicast service for a future 
   Internet should admit 'close to optimal' routing at predictable and 
   limited cost, robustness combined with a service quality compliant to 
   real-time media distribution.  

 
 
Schmidt, Waehlisch        Expires - May 2008                  [Page 3] 
                             MMCASTv6-PS                November 2007 
 
 
    
   Intricate multicast routing procedures, though, are not easily 
   extensible to comply with mobility requirements. Any client 
   subscribed to a group while in motion, requires delivery branches to 
   pursue its new location; any mobile source requests the entire 
   delivery tree to adapt to its changing positions. Significant effort 
   has already been invested in protocol designs for mobile multicast 
   receivers; only limited work has been dedicated to multicast source 
   mobility, which poses the more delicate problem [53]. 
    
   In multimedia conference scenarios, games or collaborative 
   environments each member commonly operates as receiver and as sender 
   for multicast based group communication. In addition, real-time 
   communication such as voice or video over IP places severe temporal 
   requirement on mobility protocols: Seamless handover scenarios need 
   to limit disruptions or delay to less than 100 ms. Jitter 
   disturbances are not to exceed 50 ms. Note that 100 ms is about the 
   duration of a spoken syllable in real-time audio. 
    
   It is the aim of this document, to specify the problem scope for a 
   multicast mobility management as to be elaborated in future work. The 
   attempt is made to subdivide the various challenges according to 
   their originating aspects and to present existing proposals for 
   solution, as well as major bibliographic references. 
    
1.1 Document Scope 
    
   When considering multicast node mobility, two basic scenarios are of 
   interest: Single-hop mobility as shown in figure 1.a) and multi-hop 
   mobile routing as visualized in figure 1.b). This document adopts 
   single-hop mobility as focal scenario, which coincides with the 
   perspective of MIPv6 [6]. All key issues of mobile multicast 
   membership control, as well as the interplay of mobile and multicast 
   routing will become apparent within this simpler environment. 
    
   Multi-hop network mobility is only regarded as subsidiary setting. 
   All major aspects are inherited from the single-hop problem, while 
   additional complexity incurred from traversing a mobile cloud is 
   mainly solved by encapsulation or flooding (cf. [8] for a general 
   overview). Dedicated issues arising from (nested) tunneling or 
   flooding, especially those of preserving address transparency, 
   require an analogous treatment to MIPv6 case. 
    
    
                                           +------+           +------+ 
                                           |  MN  |  =====>   |  MN  | 
                                           +------+           +------+ 
                                              |                  . 
                                              |                  . 
 
 
Schmidt, Waehlisch        Expires - May 2008                  [Page 4] 
                             MMCASTv6-PS                November 2007 
 
 
                                              |                  . 
                                           +-------+          +-------+ 
                                           | LAR 1 |          | LAR 2 | 
                                           +-------+          +-------+ 
                                                    \        / 
                                                ***  ***  ***  *** 
                                               *   **   **   **   * 
       +------+           +------+            *                    * 
       |  MN  |  =====>   |  MN  |             *  Mobile Network  * 
       +------+           +------+            *                    * 
          |                  .                 *   **   **   **   * 
          |                  .                  ***  ***  ***  *** 
          |                  .                  |                 . 
       +-------+          +-------+         +-------+          +-------+ 
       | AR 1  |          | AR 2  |         | AR 1  |  =====>  | AR 2  | 
       +-------+          +-------+         +-------+          +-------+ 
           |                |                   |                | 
           ***  ***  ***  ***                   ***  ***  ***  *** 
          *   **   **   **   *                 *   **   **   **   * 
         *                    *               *                    * 
          *  Fixed Internet  *                 *  Fixed Internet  * 
         *                    *               *                    * 
          *   **   **   **   *                 *   **   **   **   * 
           ***  ***  ***  ***                   ***  ***  ***  *** 
    
         a) Single-Hop Mobility                  b) Multi-Hop Mobility 
    
                      Figure 1: Mobility Scenarios 
    
    
2. Problem Description 
    
2.1 Generals 
    
   Multicast mobility must be considered as a generic term, which 
   subsumes a collection of quite distinct functions. At first, 
   multicast communication divides into Any Source Multicast (ASM) [3] 
   and Source Specific Multicast (SSM) [9,10]. At second, the roles of 
   senders and receivers are asymmetric and need distinction. Both may 
   individually be mobile. Their interaction is facilitated by a 
   multicast routing function such as DVMRP [11], PIM-SM/SSM [12,13], 
   Bi-directional PIM [14], CBT [15], BGMP [16] or inter-domain 
   multicast prefix advertisements via MBGP [17] and the multicast 
   listener discovery protocol [18,19]. 
    
   Any multicast mobility solution must account for all of these 
   functional blocks. It should enable seamless continuity of multicast 
   sessions when moving from one IPv6 subnet to another. It should 
   preserve the multicast nature of packet distribution and approximate 
 
 
Schmidt, Waehlisch        Expires - May 2008                  [Page 5] 
                             MMCASTv6-PS                November 2007 
 
 
   optimal routing. It should support per flow handover for multicast 
   traffic, as properties and designations of flows may be of distinct 
   nature. 
    
   The host group model extends network layer unicast service 
   capabilities. In concordance with the architecture of fixed networks, 
   multicast mobility management should transparently utilize or 
   smoothly extend the unicast functions of MIPv6 [6], its security 
   extensions [7,20], its expediting schemes FMIPv6 [21] and HMIPv6 
   [22], its context transfer protocols [23] and its multihoming 
   capabilities [24,25]. It is desirable to avoid multicast-specific 
   solutions, whenever a general approach jointly supporting unicast and 
   multicast can be derived.  
    
   Multicast routing dynamically adapts to session topologies, which 
   then may change under mobility. However, depending on the topology 
   and the protocol in use, routing convergence may arrive at a time 
   scale close to seconds, or even minutes and is far too slow to 
   support seamless handovers for interactive or real-time media 
   sessions. The actual temporal behavior strongly depends on the 
   routing protocol in use and on the geometry of the current 
   distribution tree. A mobility scheme that arranges for adjustments, 
   i.e., partial changes or full reconstruction of multicast trees, is 
   forced to comply with timing sufficiently tolerant for protocol 
   convergence. Special attention is needed with a possible rapid 
   movement of the mobile node, as this may occur at much higher rates 
   than compatible with protocol convergence.  
    
   IP layer multicast packet distribution is an unreliable service, 
   which is bound to connectionless transport protocols. Packet loss 
   thus will not be handled in a predetermined fashion. Mobile multicast 
   handovers should not cause significant packet drops. Due to 
   statelessness, the bi-casting of multicast flows does not cause 
   foreseeable degradations at the transport layer.  
    
   Group addresses in general are location transparent, even though 
   there are proposals to embed unicast prefixes or Rendezvous Point 
   addresses [26]. Addresses of sources contributing to a multicast 
   session are interpreted by the routing infrastructure and by receiver 
   applications, which frequently are source address aware. Multicast 
   therefore inherits the mobility address duality problem for source 
   addresses, being a logical node identifier, i.e., the home address 
   (HoA) at the one hand, and a topological locator, the care-of-address 
   (CoA) at the other. The network layer of group members, i.e., 
   multicast senders, forwarders and receivers, needs to carefully 
   account for address duality issues by means of binding caches, 
   extended multicast states or signaling. 
    

 
 
Schmidt, Waehlisch        Expires - May 2008                  [Page 6] 
                             MMCASTv6-PS                November 2007 
 
 
   Multicast sources in general operate decoupled from their receivers 
   in the following sense: A multicast source submits data to a group of 
   unknown receivers and thus operates without any feedback channel. It 
   neither has means to inquire on properties of its delivery trees, nor 
   will it be able to learn about the state of its receivers. In the 
   event of an inter-tree handover, a mobile multicast source therefore 
   is vulnerable to loosing receivers without taking notice. (Cf. 
   Appendix A for implicit source notification approaches). Applying a 
   MIPv6 mobility binding update or return routability procedure will 
   likewise break the semantic of a receiver group remaining 
   unidentified by the source and thus cannot be applied in unicast 
   analogy. 
    
2.2 Multicast Listener Mobility 
    
   A mobile multicast listener entering a new IP subnet faces the 
   problem of transferring the multicast membership context to its new 
   point of attachment. This can either be achieved by (re-)establishing 
   a tunnel or by transferring the MLD Listening State information of 
   MN's moving interface(s) to the new access router(s). In the latter 
   case it may encounter either one of the following conditions: The new 
   network may not be multicast enabled or the specific multicast 
   service in use may be unsupported or prohibited. Alternatively, the 
   requested multicast service may be supported and enabled in the new 
   network, but the multicast groups under subscription may not be 
   forwarded to it. Then current distribution trees for the desired 
   groups may reside at large routing distance. It may as well occur 
   that data of some or all groups under subscription of the mobile node 
   are received by one or several local group members at the instance of 
   arrival and that multicast streams flow natively. 
    
   The problem of achieving seamless multicast listener handovers is 
   thus threefold: 
     o Ensure multicast reception even in visited networks without  
       appropriate multicast support. 
     o Expedite primary multicast forwarding to comply with a seamless 
       timescale at handovers. 
     o Realize native multicast forwarding whenever applicable to  
       preserve network resources and avoid data redundancy. 
    
   Additional implications for the infrastructure remain. In changing 
   its point of attachment a mobile receiver may not have enough time to 
   leave groups in the previous network. Also, packet duplication and 
   disorder may result from the change of topology.  
    
2.3 Multicast Source Mobility 
    
2.3.1 Any Source Multicast Mobility 
    
 
 
Schmidt, Waehlisch        Expires - May 2008                  [Page 7] 
                             MMCASTv6-PS                November 2007 
 
 
   A node submitting data to an ASM group either defines the root of a 
   source specific shortest path tree (SPT), distributing data towards a 
   rendezvous point or receivers, or it forwards data directly down a 
   shared tree, e.g., via encapsulated PIM register messages. Aside from 
   tunneling or shared trees, forwarding along source specific delivery 
   trees will be bound to a topological network address due to reverse 
   path forwarding (RPF) checks. A mobile multicast source moving away 
   is solely enabled to either inject data into a previously established 
   delivery tree, which may be a rendezvous point based shared tree, or 
   to (re-)define a multicast distribution tree compliant to its new 
   location. In pursuing the latter the mobile sender will have to 
   proceed without control of the new tree construction due to 
   decoupling of sender and receivers. 
    
   A mobile multicast source consequently must meet address transparency 
   at two layers: In order to comply with RPF checks, it has to use an 
   address within the IPv6 basic header's source field, which is in 
   topological concordance with the employed multicast distribution 
   tree. For application transparency the logical node identifier, 
   commonly the HoA, must be presented as packet's source address to the 
   socket layer at the receiver side.  
    
   Conforming to address transparency and temporal handover constraints 
   will be major problems for any route optimizing mobility solution. 
   Additional issues arrive from possible packet loss and from multicast 
   scoping. A mobile source away from home must attend scoping 
   restrictions, which arise from its home and its visited location [6]. 
    
   Within intra-domain multicast routing the employment of shared trees 
   may considerably relax mobility related complexity. Relying upon a 
   static rendezvous point, a mobile source may continuously submit data 
   by encapsulating packets with its previous topologically correct or 
   home source address. Constraints even weaken, when bi-directional PIM 
   is used. Intra-domain mobility is transparently covered by bi-
   directional shared domain-spanning trees, eliminating the need for 
   tunneling data to reach a rendezvous point. 
    
   However, issues arise in inter-domain multicast scenarios, whenever 
   notification of source addresses is required between distributed 
   instances of shared trees. A new CoA acquired after a mobility 
   handover will necessarily be subject to inter-domain record exchange. 
   In presence of embedded rendezvous point addresses [26], e.g., for 
   inter-domain PIM-SM, the primary rendezvous point will be globally 
   appointed and the signaling requirements obsolete. 
    
2.3.2 Source Specific Multicast Mobility 
    
   Fundamentally, Source Specific Multicast has been designed for static 
   addresses of multicast senders. Source addresses in client 
 
 
Schmidt, Waehlisch        Expires - May 2008                  [Page 8] 
                             MMCASTv6-PS                November 2007 
 
 
   subscription to SSM groups are directly used for route 
   identification. Any SSM subscriber is thus forced to know the 
   topological address of its group contributors. SSM source 
   identification invalidates, when source addresses change under 
   mobility. Hence client implementations of SSM source filtering MUST 
   be MIPv6 aware in the sense that a logical source identifier (HoA) is 
   correctly mapped to its current topological correspondent (CoA). 
    
   Consequently source mobility for SSM packet distribution requires a 
   dedicated conceptual treatment in addition to the problems of mobile 
   ASM. As a listener is subscribed to an (S,G) channel membership and 
   as routers have established an (S,G)-state shortest path tree rooted 
   at source S, any change of source addresses under mobility requests 
   for state updates at all routers and all receivers. On source 
   handover a new SPT needs to be established, which partly will 
   coincide with the previous SPT, e.g., at the receiver side. As the 
   principle multicast decoupling of a sender from its receivers 
   likewise holds for SSM, client updates needed for switching trees 
   turns into a severe problem. 
    
   An SSM listener subscribing to or excluding any specific multicast 
   source, may want to rely on the topological correctness of network 
   operations. The SSM design permits trust in equivalence to the 
   correctness of unicast routing tables. Any SSM mobility solution 
   should preserve this degree of confidence. Binding updates for SSM 
   sources thus should have to prove address correctness in the unicast 
   routing sense, which is equivalent to binding update security with a 
   correspondent node in MIPv6 [6]. 
    
   All of the above severely add complexity to a robust SSM mobility 
   solution, which should converge to optimal routes and, for the sake 
   of efficiency, should avoid data encapsulation, as well. Like in ASM 
   handover delays are to be considered critical. The routing distance 
   between subsequent points of attachment, the 'step size' of the 
   mobile from previous to next designated router, may serve as an 
   appropriate measure of complexity [27,28]. 
    
   Finally, Source Specific Multicast has been designed as a light-
   weight approach to group communication. In adding mobility 
   management, it is desirable to preserve the principle leanness of SSM 
   by minimizing additional signaling overheads. 
    
2.4 Deployment Issues 
    
   IP multicast deployment in general has been hesitant over the past 15 
   years, even though all major router vendors and operating systems 
   offer a wide variety of implementations to support multicast [29]. 
   While many (walled) domains or enterprise networks operate multicast, 
   group service rollout has been largely limited in public inter-domain 
 
 
Schmidt, Waehlisch        Expires - May 2008                  [Page 9] 
                             MMCASTv6-PS                November 2007 
 
 
   scenarios [30]. A dispute arose on the appropriate layer, where group 
   communication service should reside, and the focus of the research 
   community turned towards application layer multicast. This debate on 
   "efficiency versus deployment complexity" now overlaps into the 
   mobile multicast domain [31]. Hereunto Garyfalos and Almeroth [32] 
   derived from fairly generic principles that when mobility is 
   introduced the performance gap between IP and application layer 
   multicast widens in different metrics up to a factor of four. 
    
   Facing deployment complexity it is desirable that any solution to 
   mobile multicast should leave routing protocols unchanged. Mobility 
   management in such deployment-friendly schemes should preferably be 
   handled at edge nodes, preserving the routing infrastructure in 
   mobility agnostic condition. Regarding the current state of 
   proposals, the urge remains open to search for such simple, 
   infrastructure transparent solutions, even though there are 
   reasonable doubts, whether the desired can be achieved in all cases.  
    
   Nevertheless, multicast services in mobile environments may soon 
   become indispensable, when multimedia distribution services such as 
   DVB-H or IPTV will develop as a strong business cases for IP 
   portables. As IP mobility will unfold dominance and as efficient link 
   utilization will show a larger impact in costly radio environments, 
   the evolution of multicast protocols will naturally follow mobility 
   constraints. 
    
3.Characteristics of Multicast Routing Trees under Mobility 
    
   Multicast distribution trees have been studied well under the focus 
   of network efficiency. Grounded on empirical observations Chuang and 
   Sirbu [33] proposed a scaling power-law for the total number of links 
   in a multicast shortest path tree with m receivers (prop. m^k). The 
   authors consistently identified the scale factor to attain the 
   independent constant k = 0.8. The validity of such universal, heavy-
   tailed distribution suggests that multicast shortest path trees are 
   of self-similar nature with many nodes of small, but few of higher 
   degrees. Trees consequently would be shaped rather tall than wide. 
    
   Subsequent empirical and analytical work, cf. [34,35], debated the 
   applicability of the Chuang and Sirbu scaling law. Van Mieghem et al. 
   [34] proved that the proposed power law cannot hold for an increasing 
   Internet or very large multicast groups, but is indeed applicable for 
   moderate receiver numbers and the current Internet size N = 10^5 core 
   nodes. Investigating on self-similarity Janic and Van Mieghem [36] 
   semi-empirically substantiated that multicast shortest path trees in 
   the Internet can be modeled with reasonable accuracy by uniform 
   recursive trees (URT) [37], provided m remains small compared to N. 
    

 
 
Schmidt, Waehlisch        Expires - May 2008                 [Page 10] 
                             MMCASTv6-PS                November 2007 
 
 
   The mobility perspective on shortest path trees focuses on their 
   alteration, i.e., the degree of topological changes induced by 
   movement. For receivers, and more interestingly for sources this may 
   serve as an outer measure for routing complexity. Mobile listeners 
   moving to neighboring networks will only alter tree branches 
   extending over a few hops. Source specific multicast trees 
   subsequently generated from source handover steps are not 
   independent, but highly correlated. They most likely branch to the 
   identical receivers at one or several intersection points. By the 
   self-similar nature, the persistent subtrees (of previous and next 
   distribution tree), rooted at any such intersection point, exhibit 
   again the scaling law behavior, are tall-shaped with nodes of mainly 
   low degree and thus likely to coincide. Tree alterations under 
   mobility have been studied in [28], both analytically and by 
   simulations. It was found that even in large networks and for 
   moderate receiver numbers more than 80 % of the multicast router 
   states remain invariant under a source handover. 
    
    
4. Layer 2 Aspects 
    
4.1 General Background 
    
   Scalable group data distribution admits highest potentials in leaf 
   networks, where large numbers of end systems reside. Consequently, it 
   is not surprising that most LAN network access technologies natively 
   support point-to-multipoint or multicast services. Of focal interest 
   to the mobility domain are wireless access technologies, which always 
   operate on a shared medium of limited frequencies and bandwidth. 
    
   Several aspects need consideration. At first, dissimilar network 
   access radio technologies cause distinct group traffic transmissions. 
   There are  
    
    o connectionless link services of broadcast type, which mostly are 
   bound to limited reliability; 
    
    o connection oriented link services of point-to-multipoint type, 
   which require more complex control and frequently admit reduced 
   efficiency; 
    
    o connection oriented link services of broadcast type, which are 
   restricted to unidirectional data transmission. 
    
   At second, point-to-multipoint service activation at the network 
   access layer requires a mapping mechanism from network layer 
   requests. This function is commonly achieved by L3 awareness, i.e., 
   IGMP/MLD snooping [55], which occasionally is complemented by 
   Multicast VLAN Registration (MVR). MVR allows sharing of a single 
 
 
Schmidt, Waehlisch        Expires - May 2008                 [Page 11] 
                             MMCASTv6-PS                November 2007 
 
 
   multicast IEEE 802.1Q Virtual LAN in the network, while subscribers 
   remain in separate VLANs. This layer 2 separation of multicast and 
   unicast traffic can be employed as a workaround for point-to-point 
   link models to establish a common multicast link. 
    
   Thirdly, an address mapping between the layers is needed for common 
   group identification. Address resolution schemes depend on framing 
   details for the technologies in use, but commonly cause a significant 
   address overlap at the lower layer. 
    
4.2 Multicast for Specific Technologies 
    
4.2.1 802.11 WLAN 
    
   IEEE 802.11 WLAN is a broadcast network of Ethernet type, which 
   inherits multicast address mapping concepts from 802.3. In 
   infrastructure mode an access point operates as repeater, only 
   bridging data between the Base (BSS) and the Extended Service Set 
   (ESS). A mobile node submits multicast data to an access point in 
   point-to-point acknowledged unicast mode (ToDS bit on). An access 
   point receiving multicast data from a MN simply repeats multicast 
   frames to the BSS and propagates them to the ESS as unacknowledged 
   broadcast. Multicast frames received from the ESS are treated 
   likewise. 
    
   Multicast frame delivery is burdened with the following issues: 
    
    o As an unacknowledged service it attains limited reliability. 
   Frames admit increased loss probability due to interferences, 
   collisions, or time-varying channel properties. 
    
    o Data distribution may be delayed, as unicast power save 
   synchronization via Traffic Indication Messages (TIM) does not apply. 
   Access points buffer multicast packets while waiting for a larger 
   DTIM interval, whenever stations are using power saving mode.  
    
    o Multipoint data may cause congestion, as the distribution system 
   experiences multicast as flooding. Without further control, all 
   access points of the same subnet replicate multicast frames. 
    
   To limit or prevent the latter, many vendors have implemented a 
   configurable rate limiting for multicast packets. Additionally, 
   IGMP/MLD snooping may be active at the bridging layer between BSS and 
   ESS or at switches interconnecting access points. 
    
4.2.2 802.16 WIMAX 
    
   IEEE 802.16 WIMAX combines a family of connection oriented radio 
   transmission services, operating in distinguished, unidirectional 
 
 
Schmidt, Waehlisch        Expires - May 2008                 [Page 12] 
                             MMCASTv6-PS                November 2007 
 
 
   channels. The channel assignment is controlled by Base Stations, 
   which assign channel IDs (CIDs) within service flows to the 
   subscriber stations. Service flows may provide an optional Automatic 
   Repeat Request (ARQ) to improve reliability and may operate in point-
   to-point or point-to-multipoint (without ARQ) mode. 
    
   A WIMAX Base Station operates as L2 switch in full duplex mode, where 
   switching is based on CIDs. Two possible IPv6 link models for mobile 
   access deployment scenarios exist: Shared IPv6 prefix and point-to-
   point link model [38]. The latter treats each connection to a mobile 
   node as a single link, which on the IP layer conflicts a consistent 
   group distribution via a shared medium (cf. section 4.1 for a 
   workaround). 
    
   To invoke a multipoint data channel, the base station assigns a 
   common CID to all Subscriber Stations of that group. IPv6 multicast 
   address mapping to these 16 bit IDs is proposed for copying either 
   the 4 lowest bits, while sustaining the scope field, or by utilizing 
   the 8 lowest bits derived from Multicast on Ethernet CS [39]. For 
   selecting group members, a Base Station may implement IGMP/MLD 
   snooping or even IGMP/MLD proxying as foreseen in 802.16e-2005.  
    
   A Subscriber Station will issue multicast data to a Base Station as 
   point-to-point unicast stream, which is passed on and discovered as 
   such at the access router. The access router may return multicast 
   data by feeding into a multicast service channel. On the reception 
   side a Subscriber Station cannot distinguish multicast from unicast 
   streams.  
    
   Multicast services bear the following issues: 
    
    o The mapping of multicast addresses to CIDs needs standardization, 
   as different entities (Access Router, Base Station) may have to 
   perform the mapping.  
    
    o CID collisions for different multicast groups are very likely due 
   to the short ID space. As a consequence, multicast data transmission 
   may occur in joint point-to-multipoint groups of reduced 
   selectiveness.  
    
    o The point-to-point link model for mobile access contradicts a 
   consistent mapping of IP layer multicast onto 802.16 point-to-
   multipoint services. 
    
    o Multipoint channels cannot operate ARQ service and thus experience 
   a reduced reliability. 
    
4.2.3 3GPP 
    
 
 
Schmidt, Waehlisch        Expires - May 2008                 [Page 13] 
                             MMCASTv6-PS                November 2007 
 
 
   The 3GPP System architecture spans a circuit switched (CS) and a 
   packet switched (PS) domain, the latter General Packet Radio Services 
   (GPRS) incorporates the Internet Multimedia Subsystem (IMS). 3GPP PS 
   is connection oriented and based on the concept of Packet Data 
   Protocol (PDP) Contexts. PDPs define point-to-point links between the 
   Mobile Terminal and the Gateway GPRS Support Node (GGSN). Internet 
   service types are PPP, IPv4 and IPv6, where the recommendation for 
   IPv6 address assignment associates a prefix to each (primary) PDP 
   context [40]. Current packet filtering practice causes inter-working 
   problems between Mobile IPv6 nodes connected via GPRS [41]. 
    
   As of UMTS Rel. 6 the IMS has been extended to include Multimedia 
   Broadcast and Multicast Services (MBMS). A point-to-multipoint GPRS 
   connection service is operated on radio links, while the gateway 
   service to Internet multicast is handled at the IGMP/MLD-aware GGSN. 
   Local multicast packet distribution is used within the GPRS IP 
   backbone resulting in the common double encapsulation at GGSN: global 
   IP multicast datagrams over GTP (with multipoint TID) over local IP 
   multicast.  
    
   The 3GPP MBMS bears the following issues: 
    
    o There is no immediate layer 2 source-to-destination transition, 
   resulting in transition of all multicast traffic at GGSN. 
    
    o As GGSN commonly are regional, distant entities, triangular 
   routing and encapsulation may cause a significant degradation of 
   efficiency.  
    
4.2.4 DVB-H / DVB-IPDC 
    
   Digital Video Broadcasting for Handhelds (DVB-H) is a unidirectional 
   physical layer broadcasting specification for the efficient delivery 
   of broadband, IP-encapsulated data streams. It was formally adopted 
   as ETSI standard (EN 203 204, see http://www.dvb-h.org). DVB uses a 
   mechanism called multi-protocol encapsulation, which enables a 
   transport of network layer protocols on top of a link layer built 
   from MPEG-2 transport streams and includes a forward error correction 
   (FEC). Thereby DVB cannot only support TV broadcasting, but offers an 
   IP Datacast Service. DVB-IPDC consists of a number of individual, 
   application layer specifications, some of which still under 
   development. Transport Streams (TS) form the basic logical channels, 
   identified by a 13 bit TS ID (PID). This together with a multiplex 
   service ID is used for selective traffic filtering at receivers. 
   Upstream channels may complement DVB-H by means of alternative 
   technologies. 
    
   Multicast distribution services are defined by a mapping of groups 
   onto appropriate PIDs, which is managed at the IP Encapsulator [42]. 
 
 
Schmidt, Waehlisch        Expires - May 2008                 [Page 14] 
                             MMCASTv6-PS                November 2007 
 
 
   To increase flexibility and avoid collisions, this address resolution 
   is facilitated by dynamic tables, provided within the self-consistent 
   MPEG-2 TS. Mobility is supported in the sense that changes of cell 
   ID, network ID or Transport Stream ID are foreseen [43]. A multicast 
   receiver thus needs to re-locate multicast services it is subscribed 
   to, which is to be done in the synchronization phase, and update its 
   service filters. Its handover decision may depend on service 
   availability. An active service subscription (multicast join) will 
   need initiation at the IP Encapsulator / DVB-H Gateway, which cannot 
   be achieved in a pure DVB-H network setup.  
    
4.3 Vertical Multicast Handovers 
    
   A mobile multicast node may operate homogeneous (horizontal) or 
   heterogeneous (vertical) layer 2 handovers with or without layer 3 
   network changes. Consequently, multicast configuration context 
   transfer at network access' needs dedicated treatment. Media 
   Independent Handover (MIH) is addressed in IEEE 802.21, but continues 
   to admit relevance beyond IEEE protocols. Mobility services transport 
   for MIH naturally reside on the network layer and are currently under 
   preparation [44]. 
    
   MIH need to assist in more than service discovery. Keeping in mind 
   complex, media dependent multicast adaptations, a possible absence of 
   MLD signaling in L2-only transfers and requirements originating from 
   predictive handovers, a multicast mobility services transport needs 
   to be sufficiently comprehensive and abstract to initiate a seamless 
   multicast handoff at the network access. 
    
   Functions required for MIH read: 
    
    o Service discovery 
    o Service context transformation 
    o Service context transfer 
    o Service invocation. 
    
5. Solutions 
    
5.1 General Approaches 
    
   Three approaches to mobile Multicast are commonly around [45]:  
    
    o Bi-directional Tunnelling guides the mobile node to tunnel all 
   multicast data via its home agent. This fundamental multicast 
   solution hides all movement and results in static multicast trees. It 
   may be employed transparently by mobile multicast listeners and 
   sources, on the price of triangular routing and possibly significant 
   performance degradations due to widely spanned data tunnels. 
    
 
 
Schmidt, Waehlisch        Expires - May 2008                 [Page 15] 
                             MMCASTv6-PS                November 2007 
 
 
    o Remote Subscription forces the mobile node to re-initiate 
   multicast distribution subsequent to handover by submitting an MLD 
   listener report within the subnet it newly attached to. This approach 
   of tree discontinuation relies on multicast dynamics to adapt to 
   network changes. It not only results in rigorous service disruption, 
   but leads to mobility driven changes of source addresses, and thus 
   disregards session persistence under multicast source mobility. 
    
    o Agent-based solutions attempt to balance between the previous two 
   mechanisms. Static agents typically act as local tunnelling proxies, 
   allowing for some inter-agent handover while the mobile node moves 
   away. A decelerated inter-tree handover, i.e. tree walking, will be 
   the outcome of agent-based multicast mobility, where some extra 
   effort is needed to sustain session persistence through address 
   transparency of mobile sources. 
    
   MIPv6 [6] introduces bi-directional tunnelling as well as remote 
   subscription as minimal standard solutions. Various publications 
   suggest utilizing remote subscription for listener mobility, only, 
   while advising bi-directional tunnelling as the solution for source 
   mobility. Such approach avoids the 'tunnel convergence' or 
   'avalanche' problem [45], which denotes the home agent responsibility 
   to multiply and encapsulate packets for many receivers of the same 
   group, even if they are located within the same subnetwork. However, 
   it suffers from the drawback that multicast communication roles are 
   not explicitly known at the network layer and may change or mix 
   unexpectedly. 
    
   It should be noted that none of the above approaches address SSM 
   source mobility, except the bi-directional tunnelling. 
    
    
5.2 Solutions for Multicast Listener Mobility 
    
5.2.1 Agent Assistance 
    
   There are proposals of agent assisted handovers for host based 
   mobility, compliant to the unicast real-time mobility infrastructure 
   of Fast MIPv6 [21], the M-FMIPv6 [46,47], and of Hierarchical MIPv6 
   [22], the M-HMIPv6 [48], and to context transfer [49], which have 
   been thoroughly analyzed in [27,50].  
   Network based mobility management, PMIPv6 [51], at its current stage 
   remains multicast transparent, as the MN experiences a point-to-point 
   home link fixed at its local mobility anchor (LMA). A PMIPv6 domain 
   thereby inherits the tunnel convergence problem; future optimisations 
   and extensions to shared links should foresee native multicast 
   distribution towards the edge network, including context transfer 
   between access gateways to aid the IP-mobility-agnostic MNs.  

 
 
Schmidt, Waehlisch        Expires - May 2008                 [Page 16] 
                             MMCASTv6-PS                November 2007 
 
 
   An approach based on dynamically negotiated inter-agent handovers is 
   presented in [52]. Aside from IETF work, countless publications 
   present proposals for seamless multicast listener mobility, cf. [53] 
   for a comprehensive overview. 
    
5.2.2 Hybrid Architectures 
    
   Stimulated by avoidance of deployment complexity at the Internet core 
   network, application layer and overlay proposals for (mobile) 
   multicast raised interest in recent times. The prospect on 
   integrating multicast distribution on the overlay into the network 
   layer is taken by the IRTF Scalable Adaptive Multicast Research Group 
   (SAM). 
    
   An early hybrid architecture of reactively operating proxy-gateways 
   located at the Internet edges is introduced by Garyfalos and Almeroth 
   in [32]. The authors present Intelligent Gateway Multicast as a 
   bridge between mobility aware native multicast management in access 
   networks and mobility group distribution services in the Internet 
   core, which may be operated on the network or application layer. 
    
   Currently SAM is developing general architectural approaches for 
   hybrid multicast solutions [54], which require detailed design in 
   future work. 
    
5.2.3 MLD Extensions 
    
   MLD timer defaults [19] cause slow reactions of the multicast routing 
   infrastructure as well as of layer-3-aware access devices [55] on 
   client leaves, which may be disadvantageous for wireless links. This 
   tardy adaptation may be improved by carefully adjusting the Query 
   Interval. Alternatively, vendors have implemented listener node 
   tables at access routers to eliminate query timeouts on leaves.  
    
   MNs operating predictive handovers may submit an early Done, which 
   will allow for a possible withdrawal in case of an erroneous 
   prediction. Backward context transfer may be used to ensure leave 
   signalling, otherwise. A further optimisation is introduced by Jelger 
   and Noel [56] for the special case of the HA being a multicast 
   router. A Done message received through a tunnel established to a 
   mobile end node (in general, via a point-to-point link directly 
   connecting the MN) should not initiate a membership query with 
   subsequent timeout according to the MLD standard. These steps may be 
   suppressed with the result of traffic reduction and significant 
   acceleration of the control protocol. 
    
   While away, a MN may want to rely on a proxy or standby multicast 
   membership service, as facilitated by a HA or proxy agent. Such 
   function relies on the ability to restart fast packet forwarding; it 
 
 
Schmidt, Waehlisch        Expires - May 2008                 [Page 17] 
                             MMCASTv6-PS                November 2007 
 
 
   may be desirable for the proxy router to remain part of the multicast 
   delivery tree, even though transmission of group data is paused. To 
   enable such proxy control, the authors in [56] propose to extend MLD 
   by a Listener Hold message exchanged between MN and HA. This idea has 
   been taken up in [48] and further developed to a multicast router 
   attendance control, allowing for a general deployment of group 
   membership proxies. 
    
5.3 Solutions for Multicast Source Mobility 
    
5.3.1 Any Source Multicast Mobility Approaches 
    
   Solutions for the multicast source mobility problem can be sorted in 
   three categories: 
    
    o Statically Rooted Distribution Trees:  
    
   Following a shared tree approach, Romdhani et al. [57] propose to 
   employ Rendezvous Points of PIM-SM as mobility anchors. Mobile 
   senders tunnel their data to these "Mobility-aware Rendezvous Points" 
   (MRPs), whence in restriction to a single domain this scheme is 
   equivalent to the bi-directional tunneling. Focusing on interdomain 
   mobile multicast, the authors design a tunnel- or SSM-based backbone 
   distribution of packets between MRPs. 
    
    o Reconstruction of Distribution Trees:  
    
   Several authors propose to construct a completely new distribution 
   tree after the movement of a mobile source and thereby have to 
   compensate routing delays. M-HMIPv6 [48] tunnels data into previously 
   established trees rooted at mobility anchor points to compensate for 
   routing delays until a protocol dependent timer expires. The RBMoM 
   protocol [58] introduces additional Multicast Agents (MA), which 
   advertise their service range. The mobile source registers with the 
   closest MA and tunnels its data through it. When moving out of the 
   previous service range, it will perform a MA discovery, a re-
   registration and continue data tunneling with its newly established 
   Multicast Agent in its current vicinity. 
    
    o Tree Modification Schemes:  
    
   In the case of DVMRP routing, Chang and Yen [59] propose an algorithm 
   to extend the root of a given delivery tree for incorporating a new 
   source location in ASM. To fix DVMRP forwarding states and heal 
   reverse path forwarding (RPF) check failures, the authors rely on a 
   complex additional signaling protocol. 
    
5.3.2 Source Specific Multicast Mobility Approaches 
    
 
 
Schmidt, Waehlisch        Expires - May 2008                 [Page 18] 
                             MMCASTv6-PS                November 2007 
 
 
   The shared tree approach of [57] has been extended to SSM mobility by 
   introducing the HoA address record to Mobility-aware Rendezvous 
   Points. These MRPs operate on extended multicast routing tables, 
   which simultaneously hold HoA and CoA and are thus enabled to 
   logically identify the appropriate distribution tree. Mobility thus 
   re-introduces rendezvous points to SSM routing. 
    
   Approaches of reconstructing SPTs in SSM have to rely on client 
   notification for initiating new router state establishment. At the 
   same time they need to preserve address transparency to the client. 
   To account for the latter, Thaler [60] proposes to employ binding 
   caches and to obtain source address transparency analogous to MIPv6 
   unicast communication. Initial session announcements and changes of 
   source addresses are to be distributed periodically to clients via an 
   additional multicast control tree based at the home agent. Source 
   tree handovers are then activated on listener requests.  
   Jelger and Noel [61] suggest handover improvements by employing 
   anchor points within the source network, supporting a continuous data 
   reception during client initiated handovers. Client updates are to be 
   triggered out of band, e.g. by SDR. Receiver oriented tree 
   construction in SSM thus remains unsynchronized with source 
   handovers. 
    
   To address this synchronization problem at the routing layer, several 
   proposals concentrate on direct modification of distribution trees. 
   Based on a multicast Hop-by-Hop protocol, a recursive scheme of loose 
   unicast source routes with branch points, Vida et al [62] optimize 
   SPTs for moving sources on the path between source and first 
   branching point. O'Neill [63] suggests a scheme to overcome RPF check 
   failures originating from multicast source address changes in a 
   rendezvous point scenario by introducing extended routing 
   information, which accompanies data in a Hop-by-Hop option "RPF 
   redirect" header. The Tree Morphing approach of Schmidt and Waehlisch 
   [64] uses source routing to extend the root of a previously 
   established SPT, thereby injecting router state updates in a Hop-by-
   Hop option header. Using extended RPF checks the elongated tree 
   autonomously initiates shortcuts and smoothly reduces to a new SPT 
   rooted at the relocated source. Lee et al. [65] introduce a state 
   update mechanism for re-using major parts of established multicast 
   trees. The authors start from initially established distribution 
   states centered at the mobile source's home agent. A mobile leaving 
   its home network will signal a multicast forwarding state update on 
   the path to its home agent and, subsequently, distribution states 
   according to the mobile source's new CoA are implemented along the 
   previous distribution tree. Multicast data then is intended to 
   natively flow in triangular routes via the elongation and updated 
   tree centered at the home agent. 
    
    
 
 
Schmidt, Waehlisch        Expires - May 2008                 [Page 19] 
                             MMCASTv6-PS                November 2007 
 
 
6. Security Considerations 
    
   This document discusses multicast extensions to mobility. Security 
   issues arise from source address binding updates, specifically in the 
   case of source specific multicast. Threats of hijacking unicast 
   sessions will result from any solution jointly operating binding 
   updates for unicast and multicast sessions. Admission control issues 
   may arise with new CoA source addresses being introduced to SSM 
   channels (cf. [66] for a comprehensive discussion). Due to lack of 
   feedback, admissions [67] and binding updates [68] of mobile 
   multicast sources require self-consistent authentication as 
   achievable by CGAs. Future solutions must address the security 
   implications. 
    
    
7.Summary and Future Steps 
    
   This memo is intended to support a future mobile multicast protocol 
   design by 
    
        o providing a structured overview of the problem space that 
          multicast and mobility jointly generate on the IPv6 layer; 
    
        o giving reference to implications and constraints  
          inherited from lower and upper layers or deployment; 
    
        o briefly surveying conceptual ideas for solution as  
          currently available; 
    
        o including a comprehensive bibliographic reference base. 
    
   Future steps in extending mobility services to multicast support are 
   advised to proceed along the lines of unicast mobility schemes: 
    
     1. Multicast listener support should be added to unicast mobility  
        optimization protocols, e.g., FMIPv6 and HMIPv6, which appear  
        achievable with limited extensions. 
    
     2. Mobility related aspects and requirements should be actively  
        contributed to the further development of MLD, context transfer  
        - including vertical layer 2 handoffs - and of (hybrid) global  
        multicast architectures.  
    
     3. The more difficult transparent mobility management of ASM and 
        SSM senders may succeed receiver solutions, whenever multicast  
        routing protocols do not inherently assist mobility.  
    
    

 
 
Schmidt, Waehlisch        Expires - May 2008                 [Page 20] 
                             MMCASTv6-PS                November 2007 
 
 
8. IANA Considerations 
    
   There are no IANA considerations introduced by this draft. 
    
    
Appendix A. Implicit Source Notification Options 
    
   A multicast source will transmit data to a group of receivers without 
   any option of an explicit feedback channel. There are attempts though 
   to implicitly obtain information on listening group members. One 
   approach has been dedicated to inquire designated routers on the pure 
   existence of receivers. Based on an extension of IGMP, the Multicast 
   Source Notification of Interest Protocol (MSNIP) [69] was designed to 
   allow for the multicast source querying its designated router. 
   However, work on MSNIP has been terminated by IETF.  
    
   A majority of real-time applications employ RTP [70] as its 
   application layer transport protocol, which is accompanied by its 
   control protocol RTCP. RTP is capable of multicast group distribution 
   and RTCP receiver reports are submitted to the same group in the 
   multicast case. Thus RTCP may be used to monitor, manage and control 
   multicast group operations, as it provides a fairly comprehensive 
   insight into group member statuses. However, RTCP information is 
   neither present at the network layer nor does multicast communication 
   presuppose the use of RTP. 
    
    
9. References 
 
Normative References 
                     
   1  S. Bradner "Intellectual Property Rights in IETF Technology", BCP 
      79, RFC 3979, March 2005. 
    
   2  Aguilar, L. "Datagram Routing for Internet Multicasting", In ACM 
      SIGCOMM '84 Communications Architectures and Protocols, pp. 58-63, 
      ACM Press, June, 1984. 
    
   3  S. Deering "Host Extensions for IP Multicasting", RFC 1112, August 
      1989. 
    
   4  G. Xylomenos and G.C. Plyzos "IP Multicast for Mobile Hosts", IEEE 
      Communications Magazine, 35(1), pp. 54-58, January 1997. 
    
   5  R. Hinden and S. Deering "Internet Protocol Version 6 
      Specification", RFC 2460, December 1998. 
    


 
 
Schmidt, Waehlisch        Expires - May 2008                 [Page 21] 
                             MMCASTv6-PS                November 2007 
 
 
                                                                         
   6  D.B. Johnson, C. Perkins and J. Arkko "Mobility Support in IPv6", 
      RFC 3775, June 2004. 
    
   7  V. Devarapalli and F. Dupont "Mobile IPv6 Operation with IKEv2 and 
      the Revised IPsec Architecture", RFC 4877, April 2007. 
    
    
   Informative References 
    
   8  Akyildiz, I and Wang, X. "A Survey on Wireless Mesh Networks", 
      IEEE Communications Magazine, 43(9), pp. 23-30, September 2005. 
    
   9  S. Bhattacharyya "An Overview of Source-Specific Multicast (SSM)", 
      RFC 3569, July 2003. 
    
   10 H. Holbrook, B. Cain "Source-Specific Multicast for IP", RFC 4607, 
      August 2006. 
    
   11 D. Waitzman, C. Partridge, S.E. Deering "Distance Vector Multicast 
      Routing Protocol", RFC 1075, November 1988. 
    
   12 D. Estrin, D. Farinacci, A. Helmy, D. Thaler, S. Deering, M. 
      Handley, V. Jacobson, C. Liu, P. Sharma, L. Wei "Protocol 
      Independent Multicast-Sparse Mode (PIM-SM): Protocol 
      Specification", RFC 2362, June 1998. 
    
   13 B. Fenner, M. Handley, H. Holbrook, I. Kouvelas: "Protocol 
      Independent Multicast - Sparse Mode PIM-SM): Protocol 
      Specification (Revised)", RFC 4601, August 2006. 
    
   14 M. Handley, I. Kouvelas, T. Speakman, L. Vicisano "Bidirectional 
      Protocol Independent Multicast (BIDIR-PIM)", RFC 5015, October 
      2007. 
    
   15 A. Ballardie "Core Based Trees (CBT version 2) Multicast Routing", 
      RFC 2189, September 1997. 
    
   16 D. Thaler "Border Gateway Multicast Protocol (BGMP): Protocol 
      Specification", RFC 3913, September 2004. 
    
   17 T. Bates et al. "Multiprotocol Extensions for BGP-4", RFC 4760, 
      January 2007. 
    
   18 S. Deering, W. Fenner and B. Haberman "Multicast Listener 
      Discovery (MLD) for IPv6", RFC 2710, October 1999. 
    


 
 
Schmidt, Waehlisch        Expires - May 2008                 [Page 22] 
                             MMCASTv6-PS                November 2007 
 
 
                                                                         
   19 R. Vida and L. Costa (Eds.) "Multicast Listener Discovery Version 
      2 (MLDv2) for IPv6", RFC 3810, June 2004. 
    
   20 Arkko, J., Vogt, C., Haddad, W. "Enhanced Route Optimization for 
      Mobile IPv6", RFC 4866, May 2007. 
    
   21 Koodli, R. "Fast Handovers for Mobile IPv6", RFC 4068, July 2005. 
    
   22 Soliman, H., Castelluccia, C., El-Malki, K., Bellier, L. 
      "Hierarchical Mobile IPv6 mobility management", RFC 4140, August 
      2005. 
    
   23 Loughney, J., Nakhjiri, M., Perkins, C., Koodli, R. "Context 
      Transfer Protocol (CXTP)", RFC 4067, July 2005. 
    
   24 Montavont, N., et al. "Analysis of Multihoming in Mobile IPv6", 
      draft-ietf-monami6-mipv6-analysis-03.txt, Internet Draft - (work 
      in progress), July 2007. 
    
   25 Narayanan, V., Thaler, D., Bagnulo, M., Soliman, H. "IP Mobility 
      and Multi-homing Interactions and Architectural Considerations", 
      draft-vidya-ip-mobility-multihoming-interactions-01.txt, Internet 
      Draft - (work in progress), July 2007. 
    
   26 Savola, P., Haberman, B. "Embedding the Rendezvous Point (RP) 
      Address in an IPv6 Multicast Address", RFC 3956, November 2004. 
    
   27 Schmidt, T.C. and Waehlisch, M. "Predictive versus Reactive - 
      Analysis of Handover Performance and Its Implications on IPv6 and 
      Multicast Mobility", Telecommunication Systems, 30(1-3), pp. 123-
      142, November 2005. 
    
   28 Schmidt, T.C. and Waehlisch, M. "Morphing Distribution Trees - On 
      the Evolution of Multicast States under Mobility and an Adaptive 
      Routing Scheme for Mobile SSM Sources", Telecommunication Systems, 
      Vol. 33, No. 1-3, pp. 131-154, Berlin Heidelberg: Springer, 
      December 2006. 
    
   29 Diot, C. et al. "Deployment Issues for the IP Multicast Service 
      and Architecture", IEEE Network Magazine, spec. issue on 
      Multicasting 14(1), pp. 78-88, 2000. 
    
   30 Eubanks, M.: http://multicasttech.com/status/, 2007. 
    
   31 Garyfalos, A., Almeroth, K. and Sanzgiri, K. "Deployment 
      Complexity Versus Performance Efficiency in Mobile Multicast", 
      Intern. Workshop on Broadband Wireless Multimedia: Algorithms, 

 
 
Schmidt, Waehlisch        Expires - May 2008                 [Page 23] 
                             MMCASTv6-PS                November 2007 
 
 
                                                                         
      Architectures and Applications (BroadWiM), San Jose, California, 
      USA, October 2004. Online: http://imj.ucsb.edu/papers/BROADWIM-
      04.pdf.gz 
    
   32 Garyfalos, A., Almeroth, K. "A Flexible Overlay Architecture for 
      Mobile IPv6 Multicast", IEEE Journ. on Selected Areas in Comm., 23 
      (11), pp. 2194-2205, November 2005. 
    
   33 Chuang, J. and Sirbu, M. "Pricing Multicast Communication: A Cost-
      Based Approach", Telecommunication Systems 17(3), 281-297, 2001. 
      Presented at the INET'98, Geneva, Switzerland, July 1998. 
    
   34 Van Mieghem, P., Hooghiemstra, G., Hofstad, R. "On the Efficiency 
      of Multicast", Transactions on Networking, 9, 6, pp. 719-732, 
      December 2001. 
    
   35 Chalmers, R.C. and Almeroth, K.C., "On the topology of multicast 
      trees", IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw. 11(1), 153-165, 2003. 
    
   36 Janic, M. and Van Mieghem, P. "On properties of multicast routing 
      trees", Int. J. Commun. Syst. 19(1), pp. 95-114, 2006. 
    
   37 Van Mieghem, P. "Performance Analysis of Communication Networks 
      and Systems", Cambridge University Press, 2006. 
    
   38 Shin, M. et al. "IPv6 Deployment Scenarios in 802.16 Networks", 
      draft-ietf-v6ops-802-16-deployment-scenarios-04, (work in 
      progress), April 2007. 
    
   39 Kim, S. et al. "Multicast Transport on IEEE 802.16 Networks", 
      draft-sekim-802-16-multicast-01, (work in progress), July 2007. 
    
   40 Wasserman, M. "Recommendations for IPv6 in Third Generation 
      Partnership Project (3GPP) Standards", RFC 3314, September 2002. 
    
   41 Chen, X., Rinne, J. and Wiljakka, J. "Problem Statement for MIPv6 
      Interactions with GPRS/UMTS Packet Filtering", draft-chen-mip6-
      gprs-07.txt, (work in progress), January 2007. 
    
   42 Montpetit, M. et al. "A Framework for Transmission of IP Datagrams 
      over MPEG-2 Networks", RFC 4259, November 2005. 
    
   43 Yang, X., Vare, J., Owens, T. "A Survey of Handover Algorithms in 
      DVB-H", IEEE Comm. Surveys, 8(4), 2006. 
    
   44 Melia, T. et al. "Mobility Services Transport: Problem Statement", 
      draft-ietf-mipshop-mis-ps-03, (work in progress), August 2007. 

 
 
Schmidt, Waehlisch        Expires - May 2008                 [Page 24] 
                             MMCASTv6-PS                November 2007 
 
 
                                                                         
    
   45 Jannetau, C., Tian, Y., Csaba, S. et al "Comparison of Three 
      Approaches Towards Mobile Multicast", IST Mobile Summit 2003, 
      Aveiro, Portugal, 16-18 June 2003, online http://www.comnets.rwth- 
      aachen.de/~o_drive/publications/ist-summit-2003-IPMobileMulticast- 
      paperv2.0.pdf. 
    
   46 Suh, K., Kwon, D.-H., Suh, Y.-J. and Park, Y. "Fast Multicast 
      Protocol for Mobile IPv6 in the fast handovers environments", 
      Internet Draft - (work in progress, expired), February 2004. 
    
   47 Xia, F. and Sarikaya, B. "FMIPv6 extensions for Multicast 
      Handover", draft-xia-mipshop-fmip-multicast-00.txt, (work in 
      progress), September 2006. 
    
   48 Schmidt, T.C. and Waehlisch, M. "Seamless Multicast Handover in a 
      Hierarchical Mobile IPv6 Environment(M-HMIPv6)", draft-schmidt-
      waehlisch-mhmipv6-04.txt, (work in progress, expired), December 
      2005. 
    
   49 Jonas, K. and Miloucheva, I. "Multicast Context Transfer in mobile 
      IPv6", draft-miloucheva-mldv2-mipv6-00.txt, (work in progress, 
      expired), June 2005. 
    
   50 Leoleis, G., Prezerakos, G., Venieris, I. "Seamless multicast 
      mobility support using fast MIPv6 extensions", Computer Comm. 29, 
      pp. 3745-3765, 2006. 
    
   51 Gundavelli, S., et al. "Proxy Mobile IPv6", draft-ietf-netlmm-
      proxymip6, (work in progress), September 2007. 
    
   52 Zhang, H. et al "Mobile IPv6 Multicast with Dynamic Multicast 
      Agent", draft-zhang-mipshop-multicast-dma-03.txt, (work in 
      progress), January 2007. 
    
   53 Romdhani, I., Kellil, M., Lach, H.-Y. et. al. "IP Mobile 
      Multicast: Challenges and Solutions", IEEE Comm. Surveys, 6(1), 
      2004. 
    
   54 Buford, J. "Hybrid Overlay Multicast Framework", draft-irtf-sam-
      hybrid-overlay-framework-01.txt, Internet Draft (work in 
      progress), January 2007. 
    
   55 Christensen, M., Kimball, K. and Solensky, F. "Considerations for 
      Internet Group Management Protocol (IGMP) and Multicast Listener 
      Discovery (MLD) Snooping Switches", RFC 4541, May 2006. 
    

 
 
Schmidt, Waehlisch        Expires - May 2008                 [Page 25] 
                             MMCASTv6-PS                November 2007 
 
 
                                                                         
   56 Jelger, C., Noel, T. "Multicast for Mobile Hosts in IP Networks: 
      Progress and Challenges", IEEE Wirel. Comm., pp 58-64, Oct. 2002. 
    
   57 Romdhani, I., Bettahar, H. and Bouabdallah, A. "Transparent 
      handover for mobile multicast sources", in P. Lorenz and P. Dini, 
      eds, 'Proceedings of the IEEE ICN'06', IEEE Press, 2006. 
    
   58 Lin, C.R. et al., "Scalable Multicast Protocol in IP-Based Mobile 
      Networks", Wireless Networks and Applications, 5, pp. 259-271, 
      2000. 
    
   59 Chang, R.-S. and Yen, Y.-S. "A Multicast Routing Protocol with 
      Dynamic Tree Adjustment for Mobile IPv6", Journ. Information 
      Science and Engineering 20, 1109-1124, 2004. 
    
   60 Thaler, D. "Supporting Mobile SSM Sources for IPv6", Proceedings 
      of ietf meeting Dec. 2001, individual.  
      URL: www.ietf.org/proceedings/01dec/slides/magma-2.pdf 
    
   61 Jelger, C. and Noel, T. "Supporting Mobile SSM sources for IPv6 
      (MSSMSv6)", Internet Draft (work in progress, expired), January 
      2002. 
    
   62 Vida, R., Costa, L., Fdida, S. "M-HBH - Efficient Mobility 
      Management in Multicast", Proc. of NGC '02, pp. 105-112, ACM Press 
      2002. 
    
   63 O'Neill, A. "Mobility Management and IP Multicast", draft-oneill-
      mip-multicast-01.txt, (work in progress, expired), July 2002. 
    
   64 Schmidt, T. C. and Waehlisch, M. "Extending SSM to MIPv6 - 
      Problems, Solutions and Improvements", Computational Methods in 
      Science and Technology 11(2), pp. 147-152. Selected Papers from 
      TERENA Networking Conference, Poznan, May 2005. 
    
   65 Lee, H., Han, S. and Hong, J. "Efficient Mechanism for Source 
      Mobility in Source Specific Multicast", in K. Kawahara and I. 
      Chong, eds, "Proceedings of ICOIN2006", LNCS vol. 3961, pp. 82-91, 
      Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2006. 
    
   66 Kellil, M., Romdhani, I., Lach, H.-Y., Bouabdallah, A. and 
      Bettahar, H. "Multicast Receiver and Sender Access Control and its 
      Applicability to Mobile IP Environments: A Survey", IEEE Comm. 
      Surveys & Tutorials 7(2), pp. 46-70, 2005. 
    



 
 
Schmidt, Waehlisch        Expires - May 2008                 [Page 26] 
                             MMCASTv6-PS                November 2007 
 
 
                                                                         
   67 Castellucia, C., Montenegro, G. "Securing Group Management in IPv6 
      with Cryptographically Based Addresses", Proc. 8th IEEE Int'l 
      Symp. Comp. and Commun., Turkey, July 2003, pp. 588-93. 
    
   68 Christ, O., Schmidt, T.C., Waehlisch, M. "A Light-Weight 
      Implementation Scheme of the Tree Morphing Protocol for Mobile 
      Multicast Sources ", Proc. of 33rd Euromicro Conf., pp. 149-156, 
      IEEE/CS Press, Sept. 2007. 
    
   69 Fenner, B. et al. "Multicast Source Notification of Interest 
      Protocol", draft-ietf-idmr-msnip-05.txt, (work in progress, 
      expired), March 2004. 
    
   70 Schulzrinne, H. et al. "RTP: A Transport Protocol for Real-Time 
      Applications", RFC 3550, July 2003. 
    
    
    
    
Acknowledgments 
    
   Work on exploring the problem space for mobile multicast has been 
   pioneered by Greg Daley and Gopi Kurup within their early draft 
   "Requirements for Mobile Multicast Clients" (draft-daley-magma-
   mobile). 
    
   Since then, many people have actively discussed the different issues 
   and contributed to the enhancement of this memo. The authors would 
   like to thank (in alphabetical order) Kevin C. Almeroth, Hans L. 
   Cycon, Hui Deng, Gorry Fairhurst, Zhigang Huang, Christophe Jelger, 
   Rajeev Koodli, Mark Palkow, Imed Romdhani, Hesham Soliman and last 
   but not least very special thanks to Stig Venaas for his frequent and 
   thorough advices. 
    
    
Author's Addresses 
    
   Thomas C. Schmidt 
   HAW Hamburg, Dept. Informatik 
   Berliner Tor 7 
   D-20099 Hamburg, Germany 
   Phone: +49-40-42875-8157 
   Email: Schmidt@informatik.haw-hamburg.de 
     
    
   Matthias Waehlisch 
   link-lab 

 
 
Schmidt, Waehlisch        Expires - May 2008                 [Page 27] 
                             MMCASTv6-PS                November 2007 
 
 
   Hoenower Str. 35 
   D-10318 Berlin, Germany 
   Email: mw@link-lab.net 
    
    
    
    
Intellectual Property Statement 
    
   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to 
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in 
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights 
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has 
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights. Information 
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be 
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 
    
   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of 
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 
    
   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at ietf-
   ipr@ietf.org. 
    
Copyright Notice 
 
   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007) This document is subject to the 
   rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and except as 
   set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights. 
    
Disclaimer of Validity 
    
   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an 
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS 
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND 
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS 
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF 
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED 
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
    
Acknowledgement 
    
 
 
Schmidt, Waehlisch        Expires - May 2008                 [Page 28] 
                             MMCASTv6-PS                November 2007 
 
 
   Funding of the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the 
   Internet Society. 
    














































 
 
Schmidt, Waehlisch        Expires - May 2008                 [Page 29] 

