

Network Working Group                                      S. Trowbridge
Internet-Draft                                       Lucent Technologies
Expires: August 1, 2004                                       S. Bradner
                                                      Harvard University
                                                                F. Baker
                                                           Cisco Systems
                                                           February 2004


   Procedure for Handling Liaison Statements Between Standards Bodies
                   draft-baker-liaison-statements-00

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at http://
   www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 1, 2004.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004). All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   This document describes the procedure for proper handling of incoming
   liaison statements from other standards development organizations
   (SDOs), consortia, and industry fora, and for generating liaison
   statements to be transmitted from IETF/ISOC to other SDOs, consortia
   and industry fora. This procedure allows IETF to effectively
   collaborate with other organizations in the international standards
   community.

   Liaison Statements are only exchanged within the context of



Trowbridge, et al.       Expires August 1, 2004                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft       Handling of Liaison Statements        February 2004


   established liaison relationships, which are managed by the IAB.

Table of Contents

   1.    Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.    Liaison Statements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.1   Contents of a Liaison Statement  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.1.1 From:  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.1.2 To:  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.1.3 Title: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.1.4 Response Contact:  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.1.5 Technical Contact: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.1.6 Purpose: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.1.7 Deadline:  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   2.1.8 Body:  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   2.1.9 Attachments: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   2.2   Addressee Responsibilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   3.    Liaison Statements from other SDOs, Consortia, and Fora
         to IETF  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   3.1   Liaison Statement Submission . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   3.2   Web Page for displaying Liaison Statements . . . . . . . . .  8
   4.    Communicating IETF information to other SDOs, consortia,
         and fora . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   4.1   Spontaneously generating Liaison Statements to other
         organizations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   4.1.1 Transmitting IETF documents to other organizations . . . . .  9
   4.1.2 Requests for Information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   4.1.3 Requesting comments on Work in Progress  . . . . . . . . . . 10
   4.1.4 Requests for Other Actions (besides comments on IETF
         drafts)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   4.2   Responding to Incoming Liaison Statements  . . . . . . . . . 10
   4.2.1 Responding to Requests for Information . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   4.2.2 Responding to Requests for Comments  . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   4.2.3 Responding to Request for Action . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   4.2.4 Tool for generating liaison statements . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   4.3   Approval and Transmission of Liaison Statements  . . . . . . 12
   4.4   Indication on Outgoing Liaison Statements about how to
         Respond  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   5.    IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   6.    Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   7.    Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
         Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
         Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
         Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . 19







Trowbridge, et al.       Expires August 1, 2004                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft       Handling of Liaison Statements        February 2004


1. Introduction

   This document describes the procedure for proper handling of incoming
   liaison statements and for generating liaison statements from IETF/
   ISOC, so that IETF can effectively collaborate with other
   organizations in the international standards community. These liaison
   statements can be exchanged between IETF/ISOC and organizations with
   whom the IAB has created a liaison relationship (see[4]).











































Trowbridge, et al.       Expires August 1, 2004                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft       Handling of Liaison Statements        February 2004


2. Liaison Statements

   A Liaison Statement is a business letter sent by one standards
   organization to another. These organizations may be at any level
   (working group, area, etc); generally, the sender and receiver are
   peer organizations. A liaison statement may have any purpose, but
   generally the purpose is to solicit information, comment, or action.

2.1 Contents of a Liaison Statement

   Liaison statements may be very formal or quite informal, depending on
   the rules of the body generating them. Any liaison statement,
   however, will always contain certain information, much as an business
   letter does. This information will include the following,

2.1.1 From:

   The statement will indicate what body it is from; it may be from, for
   example, an IETF working group or area, An ITU-T Study Group, Working
   Party, or Question, etc. In this document, this body is the "sender".

2.1.2 To:

   The statement will indicate what body it is to. In this document,
   this body is the "addressee".

2.1.3 Title:

   The statement will contain a short (single line) statement of its
   context and content.

2.1.4 Response Contact:

   The sender will indicate the electronic mail address that any
   response should be sent to.

2.1.5 Technical Contact:

   The sender will indicate one or more electronic mail addresses
   (persons or lists) that may be contacted for clarification of the
   liaison statement.

2.1.6 Purpose:

   While others are possible, a liaison statement generally has one of
   three purposes, and will clearly state its purpose using one of these
   labels:




Trowbridge, et al.       Expires August 1, 2004                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft       Handling of Liaison Statements        February 2004


   For Information The liaison statement is to inform the addressee of
      something, and expects no response.

   For Comment The liaison statement requests commentary from the
      addressee, usually within a stated time frame.

   For Action The liaison statement requests that the addressee do
      something on the sender's behalf.


2.1.7 Deadline:

   Liaison Statements that request comment or action will indicate when
   the comment or action is required. If the addressee cannot accomplish
   the request within the stated period, courtesy calls for a response
   offering a more doable deadline or an alternative course of action.

2.1.8 Body:

   As with any business letter, the liaison statement contains
   appropriate content.

2.1.9 Attachments:

   Attachments, if enclosed, may be in the form of documents sent with
   the liaison statement or may be URLs to similar documents including
   Internet Drafts. If these are in formats not used in the Internet
   Draft directory, the sending organization should assume that some
   IETF participants may  be unable to read them.

2.2 Addressee Responsibilities

   The responsibilities of the addressee of a liaison statement are the
   same as the responsibilities of any business letter. A liaison
   statement calls for appropriate consideration of its contents, and if
   a reply is requested, a courteous reply within the expected time
   frame. The reply may be that the information was useful, that it was
   not useful, that the requested action has been accomplished, it be
   accomplished by a specified date, it will not be done for a specific
   reason, or any other appropriate reply.

   A liaison statement, like any other temporary document, must be
   considered in terms of its relevance, importance, and its urgency.

   One hopes that a liaison statement will be sent to the right
   organization, but this cannot be assured; an SDO might send a liaison
   statement to a specific IETF area which the area director deems is
   better handled by one of the working groups, or it might be sent to



Trowbridge, et al.       Expires August 1, 2004                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft       Handling of Liaison Statements        February 2004


   one working group when it should have gone to another. If a liaison
   statement arrives which appears misdirected, the assignee should
   promptly redirect it, by reassigning it in the ID Tracker and
   forwarding the associated email appropriately. In some cases, a
   liaison statement may require consideration by multiple bodies; in
   such cases, one takes the lead and responsibility.

   Liaison Statements are always important to the body that sent them.
   Having arrived at the appropriate body, the liaison statement may be
   more or less important to the addressee depending on the contents of
   the liaison statement and the expertise of the sender. If the liaison
   statement seeks to influence the direction of a working group's
   development, it should get the same consideration that any temporary
   document receives. The working group chair may request the sender's
   contacts to make their case to the IETF working group in the same
   manner and on the same basis that an internet draft author makes his
   case.

   The urgency of a liaison statement is usually reflected in its
   deadline. A liaison statement for informational purposes will have no
   deadline; a courteous "thank you" is called for, after which the
   working group may inform itself of the contents and close the
   document. A liaison statement specifying a deadline, however, gives
   the addressee a finite opportunity to influence the activity of
   another body; if it fails to react in a timely fashion, it may miss
   this opportunity.

























Trowbridge, et al.       Expires August 1, 2004                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft       Handling of Liaison Statements        February 2004


3. Liaison Statements from other SDOs, Consortia, and Fora to IETF

   The process of handling a liaison statement is a little heavier than
   the handling of a business letter, however, because it is important
   to a relationship with another SDO established by the IAB. To manage
   liaison statements, the IETF will offer three web-accessible
   facilities: a form for submission of liaison statements, a web page
   organizing their contents and making them accessible, and a tracking
   system.

3.1 Liaison Statement Submission

   The IETF Secretariat will offer a liaison statement submission web
   page. This web page is accessible if and only if the person accessing
   it is authenticated by a specified certificate or cookie. The
   mechanism for distributing the authentication information is outside
   the scope of this document.

   The liaison statement submission web page is a form that requests
   the information listed in Section 2.1 from the authenticated user.
   Additionally, it has a button marked "reply" and if a reply has been
   generated, a pointer to the reply liaison statement page.

   Submission of that information results in the following automated
   actions:

   o  the addition of a URL to the "outstanding liaison statements"
      summary web page,

   o  creation of a display web page,

   o  a tickler/status entry in the ID tracker, assigned to the relevant
      chair or AD

   o  an email to the assignee, copying the liaison statement's
      technical contacts and an alias associated with the target (WG/BOF
      or other open  mailing list, area directorate, IESG, IAB, etc.)
      that contains the URL to said web page and indicates that the
      liaison statement has arrived, requests appropriate consideration,
      and if a deadline is specified, a reply by the deadline.

   The assignee has the capability of interacting with the ID tracker,
   including changing dates, reassignment, closing the liaison statement
   process, etc.

   The ID Tracker's "tickle" function periodically reminds assignee by
   email that the liaison statement has not yet been closed. It copies
   all of the above except the associated mailing list.



Trowbridge, et al.       Expires August 1, 2004                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft       Handling of Liaison Statements        February 2004


   Since a liaison statement is a temporary document, it lives by the
   rules similar to those for IETF temporary documents: the liaison
   statement remains posted until six months after having been closed.

3.2 Web Page for displaying Liaison Statements

   The IETF site contains a section for current liaison statement
   activity. This consists of

   o  A summary web page,

   o  A status/summary web page for each active or recently closed
      liaison statement, and

   o  zero or more associated files.

   The summary web page contains a simple frame, showing the title of
   the liaison statement, the URL for its web page, and the
   organizations it is from and to.

   The web page for the liaison statement contains the information
   entered during liaison statement submission, plus URLs for the
   various associated files. It also contains the current status of the
   liaison statement: who it is assigned to, its due date, and its
   status. It also contains a pointer to the ID Tracker entry for the
   liaison statement. [consideration: if the ID Tracker primarily
   contains assignee, status, etc, it may be worthwhile to leave the
   information found in the ID Tracker there and refer to it using this
   URL]






















Trowbridge, et al.       Expires August 1, 2004                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft       Handling of Liaison Statements        February 2004


4. Communicating IETF information to other SDOs, consortia, and fora

   This includes liaison statements sent in reply to liaison statements
   sent by other bodies, and liaison statements being sent by the IETF.

4.1 Spontaneously generating Liaison Statements to other organizations

   Liaison Statements can be generated at a WG, Area, or IETF level to
   another organization. The respective (co)chair(s) are responsible for
   judging the degree of consensus for sending the particular liaison
   statement  and what the content should be. The amount of consensus
   required to send a liaison statement varies greatly depending on its
   content. This section gives some rough guidance about how much
   consensus should be sought before sending a liaison statement to
   another organization.

4.1.1 Transmitting IETF documents to other organizations

   The simplest case of approving sending of a liaison statement from
   IETF is where the information that is being transmitted consists of
   an IETF document that has some level of agreement within the IETF.
   The process that the document has already gone through to achieve its
   current status assures the necessary level of consensus. Any
   Standards Track RFC (Draft Standard, Proposed Standard, Internet
   Standard, BCP), and any working group document expected to be placed
   on the standards track, may be transmitted without concern.

   Informational documents may also be exchanged readily when they
   represent a working group position or consensus, such as a
   requirements or architecture document.

   In all cases, the document status must be appropriately noted. In the
   case of a Working Group Internet Draft, it must be clear that the
   existence of the draft only indicates that the Working Group has
   accepted the work item and, as the standard disclaimer says, the
   actual content can be treated as nothing more than Work in Progress.

   Individual Internet Drafts, Experimental or Historical RFCs, and
   non-working group informational documents should not be transmitted
   without developing further consensus within the relevant group, as
   these documents cannot be truthfully represented as any kind of IETF
   position.

4.1.2 Requests for Information

   Another type of liaison statement that can be generated without the
   need for extensive consensus building on the email list is a request
   for information. The (co)chairs(s) can generate such a liaison



Trowbridge, et al.       Expires August 1, 2004                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft       Handling of Liaison Statements        February 2004


   statement when they recognize from the activities of the group that
   some additional information would be helpful, for example, to resolve
   an impasse (i.e., don't waste time arguing over what the real meaning
   or intent of another SDOs document is, just ask the other SDO and
   base further work on the "official" answer).

   Other requests for information may be to request access to certain
   documents of other organizations that are not publicly available.

4.1.3 Requesting comments on Work in Progress

   There may be cases where people feel that a document under
   development in the IETF would benefit from the input of experts in
   another relevant SDO, consortium, or forum. Generally, this is done
   before the text is "fully cooked" so that input from experts in
   another organization can be included in the final result. Comments
   would generally be solicited for a standards track working group
   Internet Draft and some level of consensus should be reached on the
   working group or other open mailing list that it is appropriate to
   ask another organization for comments on an IETF draft.

4.1.4 Requests for Other Actions (besides comments on IETF drafts)

   There are a number of other kinds of actions that might reasonably be
   requested of another organization:

   o  In the case of overlapping or related work in another
      organization, a request could be made that the other organization
      change something to align with the IETF work.

   o  A request could be made for another organization to start a new
      work item (on behalf of IETF).

   o  A request could be made for another organization to stop a work
      item (presumably because it overlaps or conflicts with other work
      in the IETF).

   These sorts of requests are quite serious. They can certainly be made
   where appropriate, but these kinds of requests should only be made
   where there is the clearest possible consensus within the particular
   Working Group, Area, or within the IETF at large.

4.2 Responding to Incoming Liaison Statements

   Any incoming liaison statement that indicates that it is for
   "Comment" or for "Action" requires a response by the deadline; other
   liaison statements may also be replied to, although a reply is
   generally optional. It is the responsibility of the (co)chair(s) of



Trowbridge, et al.       Expires August 1, 2004                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft       Handling of Liaison Statements        February 2004


   the addressed organization to make sure that a response is generated
   by the deadline.

4.2.1 Responding to Requests for Information

   If another organization requests information that can be found in an
   IETF document of the types indicated in Section 4.1.1, this can be
   transmitted by the (co)chair(s) of the addressed group, indicating
   the level of agreement for the relevant document.

4.2.2 Responding to Requests for Comments

   If an incoming liaison statement requests comments on a document from
   another organization, a discussion will occur on the mailing list
   where participants can provide their comments.

   If a clear consensus is evident from the pattern of comments made to
   the mailing list, the (co)chair(s) can summarize the conclusions in a
   reply liaison statement back to the originating organization.

   If no clear consensus is evident from the pattern of comments on the
   mailing list, a response is still due to the originator. A summary of
   the email comments can be created and sent to the originator, and
   represented as "collected comments" rather than as a consensus of the
   IETF group to which the liaison statement was addressed. It is
   possible to send this kind of a reply even if some of the comments
   are contradictory.

4.2.3 Responding to Request for Action

   A request for Action is a fairly serious thing. Examples of the kinds
   of actions that may be expected are:

   o  In the case of overlapping or related work in another
      organization, another organization may request that the IETF align
      its work with that of the other organization.

   o  A request could be made for IETF to undertake a new work item.

   o  A request could be made for IETF to stop a work item (presumably
      because it overlaps or conflicts with other work in the
      originating organization).

   Consensus of the receiving group within IETF is clearly necessary to
   be able to fulfill the request. Fulfilling the request may require a
   great deal of time and multiple steps, for example, if initiating or
   stopping a work item requires a charter change.




Trowbridge, et al.       Expires August 1, 2004                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft       Handling of Liaison Statements        February 2004


   There is, of course, no requirement that IETF perform the action that
   was requested. But the request should always be taken seriously, and
   a response is required. The originating organization must always be
   informed of what, if anything, the IETF has decided to do in response
   to the request. If the IETF decides not to honor the request, or to
   honor it with modifications, the response should include the reasons
   and, if applicable, the alternate course of action.

   For tasks that require a great deal of time, it may be necessary that
   several liaison statements be sent back to the originating
   organization to report the status of the work and the anticipated
   completion time. The first of these liaison statements must be
   generated by the deadline indicated in the incoming liaison
   statement.

4.2.4 Tool for generating liaison statements

   The liaison statement page described in Section 3 may be used to
   generate a reply. If an authenticated person (usually a working group
   char or AD) selects "reply", a new liaison statement page is
   generated from the existing one, to send the reply using. The
   "reply-to" email address is used as a target rather than the
   selection of working groups and areas, and the selection of working
   groups and areas is displayed as a "from" field. In the case that the
   IETF is originating the liaison statement, the appropriate target
   must be.

4.3 Approval and Transmission of Liaison Statements

   It is important that appropriate leadership review be made of
   proposed IETF liaison statements and that those who write such
   statements who claim to be speaking on behalf of IETF are truly
   representing IETF views.

   All outgoing liaison statements will be copied to IETF Secretariat by
   the liaison statement page. Copying liaison statements to the
   Secretariat is to ensure posting of the outgoing liaison statements
   as described in section 5.

   For a liaison statement generated on behalf of an IETF working group,
   the working group chair(s) must have generated, or must agree with
   the sending of the liaison statement, and must advise the Area
   Director(s) that the liaison statement has been sent by copying the
   appropriate Area Directors on the message.

   For a liaison statement generated on behalf of an IETF Area, the Area
   Director(s) must have generated or must agree with the sending of the
   liaison statement. If the liaison statement is not sent by the Area



Trowbridge, et al.       Expires August 1, 2004                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft       Handling of Liaison Statements        February 2004


   Directors then their agreement is indicated by copying the Area
   Directors on the message.

   For a liaison statement generated on behalf of the IETF as a whole,
   the IETF Chair must have generated or must agree with the sending of
   the liaison statement. If the liaison statement is not sent by the
   IETF Chair then his or her agreement is indicated by copying the IETF
   Chair on the message.

4.4 Indication on Outgoing Liaison Statements about how to Respond

   All outgoing liaison statements should indicate how to respond. This
   is standard text which can be appended by the secretariat when the
   liaison statement is sent. This text should read:

   Please send any responses to this liaison statement via email to
   statements@ietf.org, indicating

        Attention: (xxx Working Group)|(xxx Area)|IETF
































Trowbridge, et al.       Expires August 1, 2004                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft       Handling of Liaison Statements        February 2004


5. IANA Considerations

   This document makes no requests to IANA.

   Note to RFC Editor: during publication, this section may be removed.














































Trowbridge, et al.       Expires August 1, 2004                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft       Handling of Liaison Statements        February 2004


6. Security Considerations

   One of the key considerations in developing this process has been the
   possibility of a denial of service attack on the IETF and its
   processes. Historically, the IETF has not handled liaison statements
   effectively, resulting in people working in other organizations
   becoming frustrated with it. Various organizations have also used the
   liaison statement process to attempt to impose deadlines on IETF
   activities, which has been frustrating for all concerned - the IETF
   because it does not accept such, and the other organizations because
   they feel ignored.

   This is the reason that the submission process is automated, and
   restricted to authenticated submitters. While the IETF cannot
   rate-limit the submitters it authenticates, it can control who it
   authenticates, and it can manage its internal pipelines.



































Trowbridge, et al.       Expires August 1, 2004                [Page 15]

Internet-Draft       Handling of Liaison Statements        February 2004


7. Acknowledgements

   This text has been prompted by discussions with numerous individuals
   within IETF and other Standards Development Organizations and Fora,
   including Gary Fishman and Bert Wijnen. Personal experiences and some
   "miscues" in coordinating work across ITU-T Study Group 15 and the
   IETF Sub-IP Area have also motivated this work. Some drafts
   addressing individual problems (e.g.,
   draft-andersson-mpls-g-chng-proc-00.txt and RFC 3427) make it clear
   that a more general, consistent solution is needed for dealing with
   outside organizations. Certain ideas have been borrowed from these
   texts.







































Trowbridge, et al.       Expires August 1, 2004                [Page 16]

Internet-Draft       Handling of Liaison Statements        February 2004


Normative References

   [1]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
        Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [2]  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3", BCP
        9, RFC 2026, October 1996.

   [3]  Fishman, G. and S. Bradner, "Internet Engineering Task Force and
        International Telecommunication Union - Telecommunications
        Standardization Sector Collaboration Guidelines", RFC 3356,
        August 2002.

   [4]  Daigle, L., "IAB Processes for management of liaison
        relationships", draft-iab-liaison-mgt-00 (work in progress),
        December 2003.

   [5]  International Telecommunications Union, "IETF and ITU-T
        collaboration guidelines, Supplement 3, http://www.itu.int/
        dms_pub/itu-t/rec/a/T-REC-A.Sup3-200111-I!!PDF-E.pdf", ITU-T
        SERIES A: ORGANIZATION OF THE WORK OF ITU-T, November 2001.


Authors' Addresses

   Stephen J. Trowbridge
   Lucent Technologies
   1200 West 120th Avenue, Suite 232, Room 34W34
   Westminster, Colorado  80234-2795
   USA

   Phone: +1 303 920 6545
   Fax:   +1 303 920 6553
   EMail: sjtrowbridge@lucent.com


   Scott Bradner
   Harvard University
   29 Oxford St.
   Cambridge, Massachusetts  02138
   USA

   Phone: +1 617 495 3864
   Fax:
   EMail: sob@harvard.edu






Trowbridge, et al.       Expires August 1, 2004                [Page 17]

Internet-Draft       Handling of Liaison Statements        February 2004


   Fred Baker
   Cisco Systems
   1121 Via Del Rey
   Santa Barbara, California  93117
   USA

   Phone: +1-408-526-4257
   Fax:   +1-413-473-2403
   EMail: fred@cisco.com










































Trowbridge, et al.       Expires August 1, 2004                [Page 18]

Internet-Draft       Handling of Liaison Statements        February 2004


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it
   has made any effort to identify any such rights. Information on the
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11. Copies of
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of
   licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to
   obtain a general license or permission for the use of such
   proprietary rights by implementors or users of this specification can
   be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice
   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF Executive
   Director.


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004). All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assignees.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION



Trowbridge, et al.       Expires August 1, 2004                [Page 19]

Internet-Draft       Handling of Liaison Statements        February 2004


   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.











































Trowbridge, et al.       Expires August 1, 2004                [Page 20]

