



Network Working Group                                      M. Nottingham
Internet-Draft                                           8 December 2021
Intended status: Informational                                          
Expires: 11 June 2022


                    Avoiding Internet Centralization
          draft-nottingham-avoiding-internet-centralization-00

Abstract

   Avoiding centralization is an important goal for Internet protocols.
   This document offers a definition of centralization, discusses why it
   is necessary for Internet protocol designers to consider its risks,
   identifies different kinds of centralization, catalogues some
   limitations of current approaches to controlling it, and recommends
   best practices for protocol designers.

About This Document

   This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.

   Status information for this document may be found at
   https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-nottingham-avoiding-internet-
   centralization/.

   Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
   https://github.com/mnot/avoiding-internet-centralization.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 11 June 2022.






Nottingham                Expires 11 June 2022                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft      Avoiding Internet Centralization       December 2021


Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2021 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     1.1.  Notational Conventions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   2.  Why Avoid Centralization  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   3.  Kinds of Centralization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     3.1.  Direct Centralization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     3.2.  Necessary Centralization  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     3.3.  Indirect Centralization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     3.4.  Inherited Centralization  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     3.5.  Platform Centralization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   4.  The Limits of Decentralization  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     4.1.  Federation isn't Enough . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     4.2.  Multi-Stakeholder Administration is Hard  . . . . . . . .  10
     4.3.  Blockchains Are Not Magical . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   5.  Guidelines for Protocol Designers . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
     5.1.  Allow Intermediation Sparingly  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
     5.2.  Encrypt, Always . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
     5.3.  Reuse Existing Tools  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
     5.4.  Accomodate Limited Domains Warily . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
     5.5.  Target Extensibility  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
     5.6.  Acknowledge the Limits of Protocol Design . . . . . . . .  16
   6.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
   7.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
     7.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
     7.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
   Appendix A.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19









Nottingham                Expires 11 June 2022                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft      Avoiding Internet Centralization       December 2021


1.  Introduction

   The Internet is successful in no small part because of its purposeful
   avoidance of any single controlling entity.  While originally this
   may have been due to a desire to prevent a single technical failure
   from having wide impact, it has also enabled the rapid adoption and
   broad spread of the Internet, because internetworking does not
   require obtaining permission from or ceding control to another entity
   -- thereby accommodating a spectrum of requirements and positioning
   the Internet as a public good.

   As a result, Internet protocols share a common design goal: avoiding
   centralization, which we define as the ability of a single person,
   company, or government -- or a small group of them -- to observe,
   control, or extract rent from the protocol's operation or use.

   At the same time, the utility of many Internet protocols is enabled
   or significantly enhanced by ceding some aspect of communication
   between two parties to a third party -- often, in a manner that has
   centralization risk.  For example, there might be a need for a
   'single source of truth' or a rendezvous facility to allow endpoints
   to find each other.  How should such protocols be designed?

   Furthermore, many successful proprietary protocols and applications
   on the Internet are de facto centralized.  Some have become so well-
   known that they are commonly mistaken for the Internet itself.  In
   other cases, Internet protocols seem to favour centralized
   deployments due to economic and social factors.  Should standards
   efforts attempt to mitigate centralization in these cases, and if so,
   how?

   Finally, some autonomous networks have requirements to control the
   operation of Internet protocols internally, and some users or groups
   of users might cede control of some aspect of how they use the
   Internet to a central authority, either voluntarily or under legal
   compulsion.  In both of these cases, should Internet protocols
   accommodate such requirements, and if so, how?














Nottingham                Expires 11 June 2022                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft      Avoiding Internet Centralization       December 2021


   This document discusses aspects of centralization with regard to
   Internet protocol design (note that 'protocol' is used somewhat
   loosely here, to also encompass what could be considered an
   application).  Section 2 explains why it is necessary for Internet
   protocols to avoid centralization when possible.  Section 3 surveys
   the different kinds of centralization that Internet protocols might
   be involved in.  Section 4 then catalogues current high-level
   approaches to mitigating centralization and discusses their
   limitations.  Finally, Section 5 discusses cross-cutting interactions
   between centralization and protocol design, recommending best
   practices where appropriate.

   Engineers who design and standardize Internet protocols are the
   primary audience for this document.  However, designers of
   proprietary protocols can benefit from considering aspects of
   centralization, especially if they intend their protocol to be
   considered for standardisation.  Likewise, policymakers can use this
   document to help identify and remedy inappropriately centralized
   protocols and applications.

1.1.  Notational Conventions

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in BCP
   14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

2.  Why Avoid Centralization

   Centralization is undesirable in the design of Internet protocols for
   many reasons -- in particular, because it is counter to the nature of
   the Internet, because it violates the purpose of the Internet from
   the perspective of its end users, and because of the many negative
   effects it can have on the networks operation and evolution.

   By its very nature, the Internet must avoid centralization.  As a
   'large, heterogeneous collection of interconnected systems' [BCP95]
   the Internet is often characterised as a 'network of networks'.  As
   such, these networks relate as peers who agree to facilitate
   communication, rather than having a relationship of subservience to
   others' requirements or coercion by them.

   However, many Internet protocols allow a third party to be interposed
   into communication between two other parties.  In some cases, this is
   not intended by the protocol's designers; for example, intervening
   networks have taken advantage of unencrypted deployment of HTTP
   [HTTP] to interpose 'interception proxies' (also known as



Nottingham                Expires 11 June 2022                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft      Avoiding Internet Centralization       December 2021


   'transparent proxies') to cache, filter, track, or change traffic.
   In cases where interposition of a third party is a designed feature
   of the protocol, it is often characterised as _intermediation_, and
   is typically used to help provide the protocol's functions --
   sometimes including those that are necessary for it to operate.

   Whether or not interposition of a third party into communication is
   intentional, the 'informational and positional advantages'
   [INTERMEDIARY-INFLUENCE] gained can be used to observe behavior (the
   'panopticon effect') and shape or even deny behaviour (the
   'chokepoint effect') -- which can be used those parties (or the
   states that have authority over them) for coercive ends.
   [WEAPONIZED-INTERDEPENDENCE]

   As Internet protocols' first duty is to the end user [RFC8890],
   allowing such power to be concentrated into few hands is counter to
   the IETF's mission of creating an Internet that 'will help us to
   build a better human society.'  [BCP95]

   Additionally, concentration of power has deleterious effects on the
   Internet itself, including:

   *  _Limiting Innovation_: Centralization can preclude the possibility
      of 'permissionless innovation' -- the ability to deploy new,
      unforeseen applications without requiring coordination with
      parties other than those you are communicating with.

   *  _Constraining Competition_: The Internet and its users benefit
      from robust competition when applications and services are
      available from many different providers -- especially when those
      users can build their own applications and services based upon
      interoperable standards.  When dependencies are formed on a
      centralized service or platform, it effectively becomes an
      essential facility, which encourages abuse of power.

   *  _Reducing Availability_: The Internet's availability (as well as
      applications and services built upon it) improves when there are
      many ways to obtain access to it.  While centralized services
      typically benefit from the focused attention that their elevated
      role requires, when they do fail the resulting loss of
      availability can have disproportionate impact.

   *  _Creating Monoculture_: At the scale available to a centralized
      service or application, minor flaws in features such as
      recommendation algorithms can be magnified to a degree that can
      have broad (even societal) consequences.  Diversity in these
      functions is significantly more robust, when viewed systemically.
      [POLYCENTRIC]



Nottingham                Expires 11 June 2022                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft      Avoiding Internet Centralization       December 2021


   *  _Self-Reinforcement_: As widely noted (see, eg., [ACCESS]), a
      centralized service benefits from access to data which can be used
      to further improve its offerings, while denying such access to
      others.

   To summarize, we avoid centralization because it would allow the
   Internet (or some part of it) to be captured, effectively turning it
   into a 'walled garden' that fails to meet both architectural design
   goals and users' expectations, while endangering the viability of the
   Internet at the same time.

3.  Kinds of Centralization

   Not all centralization of Internet protocols is equal; there are
   several different types, each with its own properties.  The
   subsections below list some.

3.1.  Direct Centralization

   The most straightforward kind of centralized protocol creates a fixed
   role for a specific party.

   For example, most proprietary messaging, videoconferencing, chat, and
   simliar protocols operate in this fashion.

   While it has been argued that such protocols are simpler to design,
   more amenable to evolution, and more likely to meet user
   needs,[MOXIE] this approach most often reflects commercial goals --
   in particular, a strong desire to capture the financial benefits of
   the protocol by 'locking in' users to a proprietary service.

   Directly centralised protocols and applications are not considered to
   be part of the Internet per se; instead, they are more properly
   characterized as proprietary protocols that are built on top of the
   Internet.  As such, they are not regulated by the Internet
   architecture or standards, beyond the constraints that the underlying
   protocols (e.g., TCP, IP, HTTP) impose.

3.2.  Necessary Centralization

   Some protocols require the introduction of centralization risk that
   is unavoidable by nature.

   For example, when there is a need a single, globally coordinated
   'source of truth', that facility is by nature centralized.  The most
   obvious instance is seen in the Domain Name System (DNS), which
   allows human-friendly naming to be converted into network addresses
   in a globally consistent fashion.



Nottingham                Expires 11 June 2022                  [Page 6]

Internet-Draft      Avoiding Internet Centralization       December 2021


   Allocation of IP addresses is another example of a necessary facility
   being a centralization risk.  Internet routing requires addresses to
   be allocated uniquely, but if the addressing function were captured
   by a single government or company, the entire Internet would be at
   risk of abuse by that entity.

   Similarly, the need for coordination in the Web's trust model brings
   centralization risk, because a Certificate Authority (CA) can control
   communication between the Web sites that they sign certificates for
   and users whose browsers trust the CA's root certificates.

   Protocols that need to solve the 'rendezvous problem' to coordinate
   communication between two parties that are not in direct contact also
   suffer from this kind of centralization risk.  For example, chat
   protocols need a way to coordinate communication between two parties
   that wish to talk; while the actual communication can be direct
   between them (so long as the protocol facilitates that), the
   endpoints' mutual discovery typically requires a third party.

   Internet protocols currently tend to mitigate necessary
   centralization using measures such as mandated federation Section 4.1
   and multi-stakeholder administration Section 4.2.

3.3.  Indirect Centralization

   Even when a protocol avoids direct centralization and does not
   exhibit any necessary centralization, it might become centralized in
   practice when external factors influence its deployment.

   Indirect centralization can be caused by factors that encourage use
   of a central facility despite the absence of such a requirement in
   the protocol itself.  Such factors might be economic, social, or
   legal.

   For example, cloud computing is used to deploy many Internet
   protocols.  Although the base concepts and control protocols for it
   avoid centralization in the sense that there is no need for a single,
   central cloud provider, the economics of providing compute at scale
   as well as some social factors regarding developer familiarity and
   comfort encourage convergence on a small number of cloud providers.

   Often, the factors driving indirect centralization are related to the
   network effects that are so often seen on the Internet.  While in
   theory every node on the Internet is equal, in practice some nodes
   are much more connected than others: for example, just a few sites
   drive much of the traffic on the Web. While expected and observed in
   many kinds of networks [SCALE-FREE], network effects award asymmetric
   power to nodes that act as intermediaries to communication.



Nottingham                Expires 11 June 2022                  [Page 7]

Internet-Draft      Avoiding Internet Centralization       December 2021


   Left unchecked, these factors can cause a potentially decentralized
   application to become directly centralised, because the central
   facility has leverage to 'lock in' users.  For example, social
   networking is an application that is currently supplied by a small
   number of directly centralized, proprietary platforms despite
   standardization efforts (see, e.g.,
   [W3C.CR-activitystreams-core-20161215]), due to the powerful network
   effects associated.

   By its nature, indirect centralization is difficult to avoid in
   protocol design, and federated protocols are particularly vulnerable
   to it (see Section 4.1).

3.4.  Inherited Centralization

   Most Internet protocols depend on other, 'lower-layer' protocols.
   The features, deployment, and operation of these dependencies can
   surface centralization risk into protocols operating 'on top' of
   them.

   For example, the network between endpoints can introduce
   centralization risk to application-layer protocols, because it is
   necessary for communication and therefore has power over it.  A given
   network might block access to, slow down, or modify the content of
   various application protocols or specific services for financial,
   political, operational, or criminal reasons, thereby creating
   pressure to use other services, which can in turn result in
   centralization.

   Inherited centralization risk is only present when users cannot use
   an alternative means of accessing the desired service.  For example,
   users often have flexibility in choice of Internet access, so they
   could just 'route around' a network that impacts their chosen
   service.  However, such choices are often not available in the
   moment, and the Internet's topology means that a 'choke point'
   upstream could still affect their Internet access.

   Usually, inherited centralization -- both existing and anticipated --
   is a factor to work around in protocol design, just as any other
   constraint would be.  One effective tool for doing so is encryption,
   discussed further in Section 5.2.

3.5.  Platform Centralization

   The complement to inherited centralization is platform centralization
   -- where a protocol does not directly define a central role, but
   could facilitate centralization in the applications it supports.




Nottingham                Expires 11 June 2022                  [Page 8]

Internet-Draft      Avoiding Internet Centralization       December 2021


   For example, HTTP [HTTP] in itself is not considered a centralized
   protocol; interoperable servers are relatively easy to instantiate,
   and multiple clients are available.  It can be used without central
   coordination beyond that provided by DNS, as discussed above.

   However, applications built on top of HTTP (as well as the rest of
   the 'Web Platform') often exhibit centralization.  As such, HTTP is
   an example of a platform for centralization -- while the protocol
   itself is not centralized, it does facilitate the creation of
   centralized services and applications.

   Like indirect centralization, platform centralization is difficult to
   completely avoid in protocol design.  Because of the layered nature
   of the Internet, most protocols are designed to allow considerable
   flexibility in how they are used, often in a way that it becomes
   attractive to form a dependency on one party's operation.  Notably,
   this can happen even if the protocol does not accommodate
   intermediation explicitly.

4.  The Limits of Decentralization

4.1.  Federation isn't Enough

   A widely known technique for avoiding centralization in Internet
   protocols is federation - that is, designing them in such a way that
   new instances of any intermediary or otherwise centralized function
   are relatively easy to create, and they are able to maintain
   interoperability and connectivity with other instances.

   For example, SMTP [RFC5321] is the basis of the e-mail suite of
   protocols, which has two functions that are necessarily centralized:

   1.  Giving each user a globally unique address, and

   2.  Routing messages to the user, even when they change network
       locations or are disconnected for long periods of time.

   E-mail reuses DNS to mitigating first risk (see Section 5.3).  To
   mitigate the second, it defines an intermediary role for routing
   users' messages, the Message Transfer Agent (MTA).  By allowing
   anyone to deploy a MTA and defining rules for interconnecting them,
   the protocol's users avoid the need for a single, central router.









Nottingham                Expires 11 June 2022                  [Page 9]

Internet-Draft      Avoiding Internet Centralization       December 2021


   Users can (and often do) choose to delegate that role to someone
   else, or run their own MTA.  However, running your own mail server
   has become difficult, due to the likelihood of a small MTA being
   classified as a spam source.  Because large MTA operaters are widely
   known and have greater impact if their operation is affected, they
   are less likely to be classified as such, thereby indirectly
   centralizing the protocol's operation (see Section 3.3).

   This illustrates that while federation can be effective at avoiding
   direct centralization and managing necessary centralization,
   federated protocols are still vulnerable to indirect centralization,
   and may exhibit platform centralization.

   Another example of a federated Internet protocol is XMPP [RFC6120],
   supporting 'instant messaging' and similar functionality.  Like
   e-mail, it reuses DNS for naming and requires federation to
   facilitate rendezvous of users from different systems.

   While some deployments of XMPP do support truly federated messaging
   (i.e., a person using service A can interoperably chat with someone
   using service B), many of the largest do not.  Because federation is
   voluntary, some operators made a decision to capture their users into
   a single service, rather than provide the benefits of global
   interoperability.

   The examples above show that federation can be a useful technique to
   avoid direct centralization, but on its own is not sufficient to
   avoid indirect centralization.  If the value provided by a protocol
   can be captured by a single entity, they may use the protocol as a
   platform to obtain a 'winner take all' outcome -- a significant risk
   with many Internet protocols, since network effects often promote
   such outcomes.  Likewise, external factors (such as spam control)
   might naturally 'tilt the table' towards a few operators of these
   protocols.

4.2.  Multi-Stakeholder Administration is Hard

   Delegating the administration of a necessarily centralized function
   (see Section 3.2) to a multi-stakeholder body is an onerous but
   sometimes necessary way to mitigate the undesirable effects.

   A multi-stakeholder body is an institution that includes
   representatives of the different kinds of parties that are affected
   by the system's operation ('stakeholders') in an attempt to make
   well-reasoned, broadly agreed-to, and authoritative decisions.






Nottingham                Expires 11 June 2022                 [Page 10]

Internet-Draft      Avoiding Internet Centralization       December 2021


   The most relevant example of this technique is the administration of
   the Domain Name System [RFC1035], which as a 'single source of truth'
   requires centralization of the naming function.  To mitigate
   centralization, this task is carried out by multiple root servers
   that are administered by separate operators -- themselves diverse in
   geography and a selection of corporate entities, non-profits and
   government bodies from many jurisdictions and affiliations.
   Furthermore, those operators are regulated by ICANN
   (https://www.icann.org/resources/pages/governance/governance-en),
   which is defined as a globally multi-stakeholder body with
   representation from a end users, governments, operators, and others.

   Another example of multi-stakeholderism is the standardization of
   Internet protocols themselves.  Because a specification effectively
   controls the behavior of implementations that are conformant with it,
   the standardization process can be seen as a single point of control.
   As a result, Internet standards bodies like the IETF allow open
   participation and contribution, make decisions in an open and
   accountable way, have a well-defined process for making (and when
   necessary, appealing) decisions, and take into account the views of
   different stakeholder groups [RFC8890].

   Yet another example is the administration of the Web's trust model,
   implemented by Web browsers as relying parties and Certificate
   Authorities as trust anchors.  To assure that all parties meet the
   operational and security requirements necessary to provide the
   desired properties, the CA/Browser Forum (https://cabforum.org) was
   established as an oversight body that involves both of those parties
   as stakeholders.

   In each of these examples, setup and ongoing operation of a multi-
   stakeholder organization is not trivial.  This is the major downside
   of such an approach.  Additionally, the legitimacy of such an
   organization cannot be assumed, and may be difficult to establish and
   maintain (see, eg, [LEGITIMACY-MULTI]).  This concern is especially
   relevant if the function being coordinated is broad, complex, and/or
   contentious.

4.3.  Blockchains Are Not Magical

   Increasingly, distributed consensus technologies such as the
   blockchain are touted as a solution to centralization issues.  A
   complete survey of this rapidly-changing area is beyond the scope of
   this document, but at a high level, we can generalise about their
   properties.






Nottingham                Expires 11 June 2022                 [Page 11]

Internet-Draft      Avoiding Internet Centralization       December 2021


   These techniques avoid centralization risk by distributing
   intermediary or otherwise potentially centralized functions to
   members of a large pool of protocol participants.  Verification of
   proper performance of a function is typically guaranteed using
   cryptographic techniques (often, an append-only transaction ledger).
   The assignment of a particular task to a node for handling usually
   cannot be predicted or controlled.  To assure diversity in the pool
   of participants (thereby preventing Sybil attacks), techniques such
   as proof-of-work (where each participant has to demonstrate
   significant consumption of resources) or proof-of-stake (where each
   participant has some other incentive to execute correctly) are used.

   As such, these techniques purposefully disallow direct centralization
   and are robust against inherited centralization.  Depending upon the
   application in question, indirect and platform centralization may
   still be possible, but in general these techniques do not lend
   themselves to these ends as readily as federated systems do.

   However, distributed consensus technologies have several potential
   shortcomings that may make them inappropriate -- or at least
   difficult to use -- for many Internet applications, because their use
   conflicts with other important goals:

   1.  Distributed consensus protocols can have significant implications
       for privacy.  Because activity (such as queries or transactions)
       are shared with many unknown parties, they have very different
       privacy properties than traditional client/server protocols.
       Mitigations (e.g., Private Information Retrieval; see, eg, [PIR])
       are still not suitable for broad deployment.

   2.  Their complexity and 'chattiness' typically results in
       significantly less efficient use of the network.  When
       distributed consensus protocols use proof-of-work, energy
       consumption can become significant (to the point where some
       jurisdictions have banned its use).

   3.  Distributed consensus protocols are still not proven to scale to
       the degree expected of successful Internet protocols.  In
       particular, relying on unknown third parties to deliver
       functionality can introduce variability in latency, availability,
       and throughput.  This is a marked change for applications with
       high expectations for these properties (e.g., commercial Web
       services).








Nottingham                Expires 11 June 2022                 [Page 12]

Internet-Draft      Avoiding Internet Centralization       December 2021


   4.  By design, distributed consensus protocols diffuse responsibility
       for a function among several, difficult-to-identify parties.
       While this may be an effective way to prevent many kinds of
       centralization, it also means that making someone accountable for
       how the function is performed is impossible, beyond the bounds of
       the protocol's design.

   It is also important to recognise that a protocol can use distributed
   consensus for some functions, but still have centralization risk
   elsewhere.  Even when distributed consensus is used exclusively
   (which is uncommon, due to the associated costs), some degree of
   coordination is still necessary -- whether that be through governance
   of the function itself, creation of shared implementations, or
   documentation of shared wire protocols.  That represents
   centralization risk, just at a different layer (inherited or
   platform, depending on the circumstances).

   These potential shortcomings do not rule out the use of distributed
   consensus technologies for every use case.  They do, however, caution
   against relying upon these technologies uncritically.

5.  Guidelines for Protocol Designers

   While the following recommendations are not a complete guide, they
   can be a starting point for avoiding or mitigating centralization in
   Internet protocols.

5.1.  Allow Intermediation Sparingly

   The introduction of an intermediary role -- i.e., one that performs a
   function but is not a first party to communication -- adds
   centralization risk to Internet protocols, because it brings
   opportunities for control and observation.  Even when the protocol is
   federated (see Section 4.1) to avoid direct centralization,
   significant indirect centralization risks exist when intermediation
   is allowed.

   However, intermediation can sometimes add significant value to a
   protocol, or enable what is considered a necessary function.  In such
   cases, the centralized function SHOULD be as minimal as possible, and
   expose only the information and pontential for control necessary for
   that function to be performed.  Protocol designers SHOULD consider
   the likely deployment patterns for those intermediaries and how
   network effects and other factors will influence them.







Nottingham                Expires 11 June 2022                 [Page 13]

Internet-Draft      Avoiding Internet Centralization       December 2021


   Such predictions can be difficult.  For example, an intermediary
   interposed by the end user of a protocol might allow them to delegate
   functions to a party they trust, thereby empowering them.  However,
   if an intervening network is able to force users to delegate to a
   particular intermediary, inherited centralization could result.

   When carefully considered, intermediation can be a powerful way to
   enforce functional boundaries -- for example, to reduce the need for
   users to trust potentially malicious endpoints, as seen in the so-
   called 'oblivious' protocols currently in development (e.g.,
   [I-D.pauly-dprive-oblivious-doh]) that allow end users to hide their
   identity from services, while still accessing them.

   The same advice applies in these cases; the observation and control
   potential SHOULD be as minimal as possible, while still meeting the
   design goals of the protocol.

   See [I-D.thomson-tmi] for more guidance.

5.2.  Encrypt, Always

   When deployed at scale, encryption can be an effective technique to
   reduce many inherited centralization risks.  By reducing the number
   of parties who have access to content of communication, the ability
   of lower-layer protocols and intermediaries at those layers to
   interfere with or observe is precluded.  Even when they can still
   prevent communication, the use of encryption makes it more difficult
   to discriminate the target from other traffic.

   Note that the benefits are most pronounced when the majority (if not
   all) traffic is encrypted.  As a result, protocols SHOULD be
   encrypted by default.

   See also [RFC7258].

5.3.  Reuse Existing Tools

   When a protocol function has necessary centralization risk and there
   exists an already-deployed solution with appropriate mitigations,
   that solution should be reused in favour of inventing a new one.

   For example, if a protocol requires a coordinated, global naming
   function, reusing the Domain Name System is preferable to
   establishing a new system, because its centralization risk is known
   and understood (see Section 4.2).






Nottingham                Expires 11 June 2022                 [Page 14]

Internet-Draft      Avoiding Internet Centralization       December 2021


5.4.  Accomodate Limited Domains Warily

   [RFC8799] explores a class of protocols that operate in 'limited
   domains' -- that is, they are not intended to be 'full' Internet
   protocols with broad applicability, but instead operation within a
   particular network or other constrained environment.

   Often, limited-domain protocols address network requirements -- for
   example, imposing security policy, integrating services or
   application functions into the network, or differentiating different
   classes of network services.

   Such network-centric requirements can introduce the risk of inherited
   centralization when they allow the network to interpose itself and
   its requirements between the endpoints of a given communication.

   These risks can be partially mitigated by requiring such functions to
   be opted into by one or both endpoints (once both the network and the
   endpoint are authenticated to each other), so that the network is
   acting on their behalf.  However, this approach is still vulnerable
   to indirect centralization, because the endpoints may be pressured to
   acquiesce to a network's demands.

5.5.  Target Extensibility

   An important feature of Internet protocols is their ability to evolve
   over time, so that they can meet new requirements and adapt to new
   conditions without requiring a 'flag day' to convert users.
   Typically, protocol evolution is accommodated through extension
   mechanisms, where optional features can be added over time in an
   interoperable fashion.

   Protocol extensions can bring risk of platform centralization if a
   powerful entity can change the target for meaningful interoperability
   by adding proprietary extensions to a standard protocol.  This is
   especially true when the core standard does not itself provide
   sufficient utility to be appealing on its own.

   For example, the SOAP protocol [SOAP] was an extremely flexible
   framework, allowing vendors to attempt to capture the market by
   requiring use of their preferred extensions to interoperate.

   This kind of centralization risk can be mitigated in a few ways.
   First and foremost, Internet protocols SHOULD provide concrete
   utility to the majority of their users as published; 'framework'
   standards facilitate this kind of risk.





Nottingham                Expires 11 June 2022                 [Page 15]

Internet-Draft      Avoiding Internet Centralization       December 2021


   Furthermore, Internet protocols SHOULD NOT make every aspect of their
   operation extensible; extension points SHOULD be reasoned,
   appropriate boundaries for flexibility and control.  When extension
   points are defined, they SHOULD NOT allow an extension to declare
   itself to be mandatory-to-interoperate, as that pattern invites
   abuse.

5.6.  Acknowledge the Limits of Protocol Design

   Centralization cannot be prevented through protocol design and
   standardization efforts alone.  While the guidelines above may
   forestall some types of centralization, indirect and platform
   centralization are often outside the control of a protocol's
   architecture.

   Thankfully, architecture is not the only form of regulation; legal
   mechanisms combined with changing norms and the resulting market
   forces have their own regulatory effects.  [NEW-CHICAGO]

   In this view, the job of a protocol designer is to avoid
   centralization with architecture where possible, but where it is not,
   to create affordances for these other regulating forces.

6.  Security Considerations

   This document does not have direct security impact on Internet
   protocols.  However, failure to consider centralization risks might
   result in a myriad of security issues.

7.  References

7.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2119>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8174>.

7.2.  Informative References








Nottingham                Expires 11 June 2022                 [Page 16]

Internet-Draft      Avoiding Internet Centralization       December 2021


   [ACCESS]   Vestager, M., "Defending Competition in a Digitised World,
              Address at the European Consumer and Competition Day",
              April 2019, <https://wayback.archive-
              it.org/12090/20191129202059/https://ec.europa.eu/
              commission/commissioners/2014-2019/vestager/announcements/
              defending-competition-digitised-world_en>.

   [BCP95]    Alvestrand, H., "A Mission Statement for the IETF",
              BCP 95, RFC 3935, October 2004.

              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/bcp95>

   [HTTP]     Fielding, R. T., Nottingham, M., and J. Reschke, "HTTP
              Semantics", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-ietf-
              httpbis-semantics-19, 12 September 2021,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-httpbis-
              semantics-19>.

   [I-D.pauly-dprive-oblivious-doh]
              Kinnear, E., McManus, P., Pauly, T., Verma, T., and C. A.
              Wood, "Oblivious DNS Over HTTPS", Work in Progress,
              Internet-Draft, draft-pauly-dprive-oblivious-doh-08, 3
              December 2021, <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/
              draft-pauly-dprive-oblivious-doh-08>.

   [I-D.thomson-tmi]
              Thomson, M., "Principles for the Involvement of
              Intermediaries in Internet Protocols", Work in Progress,
              Internet-Draft, draft-thomson-tmi-02, 6 July 2021,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-thomson-tmi-
              02>.

   [INTERMEDIARY-INFLUENCE]
              Judge, K., "Intermediary Influence", 2014,
              <https://scholarship.law.columbia.edu/
              faculty_scholarship/1856>.

   [LEGITIMACY-MULTI]
              Palladino, N. and N. Santaniello, "Legitimacy, Power, and
              Inequalities in the Multistakeholder Internet Governance",
              2020.

   [MOXIE]    Marlinspike, M., "Reflections: The ecosystem is moving",
              May 2016,
              <https://signal.org/blog/the-ecosystem-is-moving/>.

   [NEW-CHICAGO]
              Lessig, L., "The New Chicago School", June 1998.



Nottingham                Expires 11 June 2022                 [Page 17]

Internet-Draft      Avoiding Internet Centralization       December 2021


   [PIR]      Olumofin, F. and I. Goldberg, "Revisiting the
              Computational Practicality of Private Information
              Retrieval", 2010.

   [POLYCENTRIC]
              Aligia, P.D. and V. Tarko, "Polycentricity: From Polanyi
              to Ostrom, and Beyond", April 2012.

   [RFC1035]  Mockapetris, P., "Domain names - implementation and
              specification", STD 13, RFC 1035, DOI 10.17487/RFC1035,
              November 1987, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc1035>.

   [RFC5321]  Klensin, J., "Simple Mail Transfer Protocol", RFC 5321,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC5321, October 2008,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc5321>.

   [RFC6120]  Saint-Andre, P., "Extensible Messaging and Presence
              Protocol (XMPP): Core", RFC 6120, DOI 10.17487/RFC6120,
              March 2011, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc6120>.

   [RFC7258]  Farrell, S. and H. Tschofenig, "Pervasive Monitoring Is an
              Attack", BCP 188, RFC 7258, DOI 10.17487/RFC7258, May
              2014, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7258>.

   [RFC8799]  Carpenter, B. and B. Liu, "Limited Domains and Internet
              Protocols", RFC 8799, DOI 10.17487/RFC8799, July 2020,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8799>.

   [RFC8890]  Nottingham, M., "The Internet is for End Users", RFC 8890,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC8890, August 2020,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8890>.

   [SCALE-FREE]
              Albert, R., "Emergence of Scaling in Random Networks",
              October 1999, <https://barabasi.com/f/67.pdf>.

   [SOAP]     Mitra, N. and Y. Lafon, "SOAP Version 1.2 Part 0: Primer
              (Second Edition)", World Wide Web Consortium
              Recommendation REC-soap12-part0-20070427, 27 April 2007,
              <https://www.w3.org/TR/2007/REC-soap12-part0-20070427>.

   [W3C.CR-activitystreams-core-20161215]
              Snell, J. and E. Prodromou, "Activity Streams 2.0", World
              Wide Web Consortium CR CR-activitystreams-core-20161215,
              15 December 2016, <https://www.w3.org/TR/2016/CR-
              activitystreams-core-20161215>.





Nottingham                Expires 11 June 2022                 [Page 18]

Internet-Draft      Avoiding Internet Centralization       December 2021


   [WEAPONIZED-INTERDEPENDENCE]
              Farrell, H. and A.L. Newman, "Weaponized Interdependence:
              How Global Economic Networks Shape State Coercion", 2019,
              <https://doi.org/10.1162/ISEC_a_00351>.

Appendix A.  Acknowledgements

   This document benefits from discussions with Brian Trammell during
   our shared time on the Internet Architecture Board.

Author's Address

   Mark Nottingham
   Prahran
   Australia

   Email: mnot@mnot.net
   URI:   https://www.mnot.net/

































Nottingham                Expires 11 June 2022                 [Page 19]
