Network Working Group                                         A. Mankin 
Internet Draft                                            Shinkuro, Inc 
Expires: September 2006                                        S. Hayes 
                                                                Ericsson  
                                                           March 4, 2006 
 
                                      
            Requirements for IETF Technical Publication Service 
                        draft-mankin-pub-req-05.txt 


    

Status of this Memo 

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any 
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware 
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes 
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79. 

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html 

   This Internet-Draft will expire on July 4, 2006. 

  

Abstract 

   The work of the IETF is to discuss, develop, and disseminate 
   technical specifications to support the Internet's operation.  
   Technical publication is the process by which that output is 
   disseminated to the community at large. As such, it is important to 
   understand the requirements on the publication process. 



 
 
 
Mankin & Hayes            Expires September 4, 2006                  [Page 1] 

Internet-Draft          draft-mankin-techspec-pubreq-05             March 2006 
    

Conventions used in this document 

   Requirements are designated as either current requirements (Current 
   Req-xx) to indicate requirements that seem to currently exist and 
   potential requirements (Potential Req-xx) to indicate requirements 
   that are speculative. 

Table of Contents 

    
   1. Introduction...................................................3 
   2. Scope..........................................................3 
      2.1. Stages in the Technical Specification Publication Lifetime4 
   3. Technical Publication Tasks and Requirements...................5 
      3.1. Pre-approval review or editing............................6 
      3.2. Preliminary Specification Availability....................7 
      3.3. Post-Approval Editorial Cleanup (non-Author Editing)......7 
      3.4. Validation of references..................................9 
      3.5. Validation of formal languages............................9 
      3.6. Assignment of Parameter Values............................9 
      3.7. Post Approval, Pre-Publication Technical Corrections.....10 
      3.8. Allocation of Permanent Stable Identifiers...............11 
      3.9. Document Format Conversions..............................11 
      3.10. Language Translation....................................12 
      3.11. Publication Status Tracking.............................12 
      3.12. Expedited Handling......................................13 
      3.13. Exception Handling......................................14 
      3.14. Notification of publication.............................14 
      3.15. Post Publication Corrections............................14 
      3.16. Indexing: maintenance of the catalog....................15 
      3.17. Access to Published Documents...........................16 
      3.18. Maintenance of a Vocabulary Document....................16 
      3.19. Providing Publication Statistics and Status Reports.....17 
      3.20. Process and Document Evolution..........................17 
      3.21. Tutorial and Help Services..............................17 
   4. Technical Publisher Performance Metrics.......................18 
      4.1. Post-approval timeframes.................................18 
      4.2. Publication Throughput...................................19 
      4.3. Non author changes Generated during Publication..........20 
      4.4. Author changes generated during publication..............20 
   5. IETF Implications of Technical Publication Requirements.......21 
   6. IANA Considerations...........................................22 
   7. Security Considerations.......................................22 
   8. Acknowledgments...............................................22 
   9. Informative References........................................22 
   Author's Addresses...............................................23 
   Intellectual Property Statement..................................23 
 
 
Mankin & Hayes            Expires September 4, 2006                  [Page 2] 

Internet-Draft          draft-mankin-techspec-pubreq-05             March 2006 
    

   Disclaimer of Validity...........................................24 
   Copyright Statement..............................................24 
   Acknowledgment...................................................24 
    
1. Introduction 

   The work of the IETF is to discuss, develop, and disseminate 
   technical specifications to support the Internet's operation.  An 
   important output of the IETF, then, is published technical 
   specifications. The IETF technical publisher is responsible for the 
   final steps in the production of the published technical 
   specifications.  This document sets forth requirements on the duties 
   of the IETF technical publisher and how it interacts with the IETF in 
   the production of those publications. 

   The term "technical specification" is used here purposefully to refer 
   to the technical output of the IETF. This document does not engage in 
   the debate about whether it is expressed as RFCs or ISDs, what "is" 
   an RFC, how to classify them, etc.  These issues are considered out 
   of scope. 

   The intention of this document is to clarify the IETF's consensus on 
   its requirements for its technical publication service.  This 
   document is not a discussion of how well the RFC Editor fulfils those 
   requirements. 

2. Scope 

   The scope of this document is the requirements for the technical 
   publication process for IETF.  Requirements on a technical publisher 
   can be expressed in terms of both what tasks the IETF technical 
   publisher is responsible for and performance targets the IETF 
   technical publisher should meet. 

   This draft only addresses those documents published by the IETF 
   family. These include IETF documents processed by the IESG, IAB 
   documents, and IRTF documents processed by the IRSG.  It 
   specifically excludes independent submissions that go directly to 
   the Technical Publisher.  The handling of independent submissions 
   may well be a requirement on the technical publisher, but it is not 
   one associated with the IETF publication process and hence is 
   outside the scope of this document 

   The list of potential technical publication tasks was derived by 
   considering the tasks currently performed by the RFC editor as well 
   as the responsibilities of the technical publishers in other 
   standards organizations including 3GPP, ATIS, ETSI, IEEE, and ITU. 
 
 
Mankin & Hayes            Expires September 4, 2006                  [Page 3] 

Internet-Draft          draft-mankin-techspec-pubreq-05             March 2006 
    

   This requirements documents focuses on process issues in how the IETF 
   technical editor serves the IETF.  There are related issues regarding 
   non-technical aspects of document content that are not addressed in 
   this requirements document.  Issues not addressed in this document 
   are: 

   o  Policies governing the acceptable input and output document 
      formats (including figures, etc.), 

   o  Policies governing the acceptable character sets 
      (internationalization) 

   o  Policies governing the layout and style of published documents 

   o  Policies governing the contents of non-technical sections 
      (acknowledgement sections, reference classifications, etc.) 

   To allow progress on developing the process requirements, this 
   document assumes the policies for document format, etc. as are 
   currently defined in [1].   

   It is realized that the above policies are also an important aspect 
   in determining the final published product from IETF.  These policies 
   are likely to evolve as part of the ongoing IETF dialog.  The IETF 
   technical publisher must be part of the discussions of these policies 
   and be prepared to implement and facilitate policy changes as they 
   are determined by IETF consensus.  This requirement is captured under 
   the discussion of process and document evolution. 

2.1. Stages in the Technical Specification Publication Lifetime 

   Figure 1 below provides a useful summary of where technical 
   publication falls in the current lifetime of a document in the IETF.  
   This figure shows a working group document and the review includes an 
   IETF Last Call (LC).  The lifetime is very similar for AD-sponsored 
   IETF documents, such as document that update IETF protocols where 
   there is no longer a working group, or documents on interdisciplinary 
   topics. 









 
 
Mankin & Hayes            Expires September 4, 2006                  [Page 4] 

Internet-Draft          draft-mankin-techspec-pubreq-05             March 2006 
    

    
            |  Author    | WGLC      | IESG,      |    |  Tech 
    Actors  |  or        | AD        | Shepherd,  |  A |  Publisher, 
            |  Editor    | IETF LC   | Editor,    |  P |  input from 
            |            | IANA      | WG         |  P |  authors, et al 
            |            | IESG      |            |  R | 
    Actions |  Creation  |           | Resolution |  O |  non-author 
            |  and       | Formal    | of all     |  V |  editing, 
            |  Editing   | Reviewing | reviews    |  A |  other 
            |            |           |            |  L |  publication 
    
            |---------------| |---------------------| |----------------| 
    
                  In WG               Out of WG          Post-Approval 
    
               Figure 1: Stages of a Working Group Document 

3. Technical Publication Tasks and Requirements 

   Standards development organizations all have technical publication as 
   part of their process.  However, the boundaries between what is done 
   by the technical committees and the technical publisher vary.  

   The following are potential tasks of a technical publisher.  The 
   following list was derived after analyzing the technical publication 
   policies of the IETF and other standards development organizations.  
   For each of these tasks we discuss its relevance to IETF and how it 
   is realized within the IETF processes.  Based upon this information 
   we derive current or potential requirements on the IETF technical 
   editor: 

   1. Pre-approval review or editing 

   2. Preliminary specification availability 

   3. Post-approval editorial cleanup 

   4. Validation of references 

   5. Validation of formal languages 

   6. Assignment of parameter values 

   7. Post approval, pre-publication corrections 

   8. Allocation of permanent stable identifiers 

 
 
Mankin & Hayes            Expires September 4, 2006                  [Page 5] 

Internet-Draft          draft-mankin-techspec-pubreq-05             March 2006 
    

   9. Document format conversions 

   10.Language translation 

   11.Publication status tracking 

   12.Expedited handling 

   13.Exception handling 

   14.Notification of publication 

   15.Post-publication corrections (errata) 

   16.Indexing: maintenance of the catalog 

   17.Access to published documents 

   18.Maintenance of a vocabulary document 

   19.Providing publication statistics and status reports 

   20.Process and document evolution 

   21.Tutorial and help services 

3.1. Pre-approval review or editing 

   Task Description: In many cases the technical publisher may provide a 
   review or editing service to improve document quality prior to the 
   approval of a document.  This review process would normally address 
   issues such as grammar, spelling, formatting, adherence to 
   boilerplate, document structure, proper use of keywords (RFC 2119), 
   etc.  

   The primary advantage of pre-approval review is that review of the 
   changes is handled as part of the regular review and approval 
   process. 

   Discussion: Pre-approval review is not part of the normal process 
   flow with the IETF but this concept has been explored with promising 
   results in the early copy editing experiment.   

   Derived Requirements: 



 
 
Mankin & Hayes            Expires September 4, 2006                  [Page 6] 

Internet-Draft          draft-mankin-techspec-pubreq-05             March 2006 
    

   o  Potential Req-PREEDIT-1: The IETF technical publisher should 
      perform an editorial review of documents before WG last call and 
      provide feedback to the authors to improve quality of the 
      documents.  This review should address the areas outlined in [1]. 

3.2. Preliminary Specification Availability 

   Task Description: Some standards organizations require their 
   publisher to make available a preliminary version of a document (with 
   appropriate caveats) to make the information available to the 
   industry as early as possible.  This document is provided "as is" 
   after the approval.  This document is withdrawn once the final 
   document is published. 

   Discussion: This is not required.  A final approved version is 
   available as a draft.  If publication can take more than 6 months, it 
   may be necessary to take measures to ensure the draft version remains 
   available. 

   Derived Requirements: none 

3.3. Post-Approval Editorial Cleanup (non-Author Editing) 

   Task Description: Most technical publishers do an editorial review to 
   ensure the quality of published documents.  Typically this may 
   address issues such as grammar, spelling, readability, formatting, 
   adherence to boilerplate, document structure, proper use of keywords, 
   etc.  Since any proposed changes occur after approval, a review and 
   signoff mechanism must usually be established to ensure that the 
   required changes are truly editorial.  Since such changes occur 
   outside of the normal approval process, it is desirable that such 
   changes are minimized.  Most standards organizations target "light" 
   editing due to the dangers of changing agreed text. 

   Discussion: Within IETF, the RFC Editor does post approval cleanup 
   review and editing.  The ambition level for cleanup can vary from: 

   o  Corrections to errors only, 

   o  Light rewriting, 

   o  Significant editing of documents with less skillful WG editors, 
      and minimal editing when the WG editors were skilled, 

   o  Rewriting of all documents to the dictates of a style manual 


 
 
Mankin & Hayes            Expires September 4, 2006                  [Page 7] 

Internet-Draft          draft-mankin-techspec-pubreq-05             March 2006 
    

   At times in the past year, stylistic editing has resulted in 40-100 
   substantive changes in many documents.  These changes must then be 
   vetted by all the authors followed by subsequent rounds of author 
   acceptance and re-vetting.  This can add up to a substantial delay in 
   the publication process which must be weighed against the incremental 
   gain in communication improvement accomplished by the cleanup. 

   Changes to improve readability (or possibly even grammar) can end up 
   inadvertently affecting consensus wording or technical meaning.  Note 
   that pre-approval editing to some extent avoids this problem. 

   If pre-approval editing or review is done it may be possible to 
   greatly reduce or even eliminate entirely the post-approval editing 
   task.  Pre-approval editing is generally more efficient since a 
   separate change control process is not required. 

   Derived Requirements: 

   o  Current Req-POSTEDIT-1 - The IETF technical publisher should 
      review the document for grammar, spelling, formatting, adherence 
      to boilerplate, document structure, proper use of keywords, etc. 
      as defined in [1].   

   o  Current Req-POSTEDIT-2 - All changes made to post-approval 
      documents should be tracked and the changes must be signed off on 
      by the appropriate technical representatives as defined in the 
      IETF processes. 

   o  Potential Req-POSTEDIT-3 - The IETF Technical editor should 
      refrain from stylistic changes that introduce a substantial review 
      load but only provides incremental increase in the clarity of the 
      specification.  Specific guidelines on the types of changes 
      allowed may be further specified, but ultimately restraint in 
      editing must be imposed by the IETF technical publisher.  Changes 
      for stylistic consistency should be done only when there are major 
      problems with the quality of the document. 

   o  Potential Req-POSTEDIT-4 - The IETF Technical editor should 
      refrain from changes to improve readability that may change 
      technical and consensus wording.  Specific guidelines on the types 
      of changes allowed may be further specified, but ultimately 
      restraint in editing must be imposed by the IETF technical 
      publisher. 




 
 
Mankin & Hayes            Expires September 4, 2006                  [Page 8] 

Internet-Draft          draft-mankin-techspec-pubreq-05             March 2006 
    

3.4. Validation of references 

   Task Description: Most standards organizations require that normative 
   references be publicly available.  Some technical publishers verify 
   the validity and availability of references (included referenced 
   clauses and figures).  Although some editorial clean-up of references 
   may be obvious, the issue becomes more severe when reference links 
   are broken, are not publicly available, or refer to obsoleted 
   documents.  Such faults may be viewed as a post-approval fault found 
   in the document.  Most publishers have the ability to put a document 
   on hold awaiting the publication of a reference expected to be 
   available soon. 

   Discussion: The RFC Editor may put a document on hold waiting for the 
   availability of other IETF documents.  Incorrect references are 
   handled like any other fault detected in the editorial review. 

   Derived Requirements: 

   o  Current Req-REFVAL-1 - The IETF technical publisher should ensure 
      that references within specifications are available.   

   o  Current Req-REFVAL-2 - The IETF technical publisher should delay 
      publication until all required IETF references are ready for 
      publication. 

3.5. Validation of formal languages 

   Task Description: If the Specification contains a formal language 
   section (such as a MIB), the technical publisher may be required to 
   validate this using a tool. 

   Discussion: The RFC Editor validates sections of a document 
   containing MIBs, ABNF, XML, and possibly other formal languages. 

   Derived Requirements: 

   o  Current Req-FORMALVAL-1 - The IETF technical publisher should 
      validate sections of documents containing formal languages.  In 
      particular ASN.1, ABNF, and xml should be verified using 
      appropriate tools. 

3.6. Assignment of Parameter Values 

   Task Description: The Technical Publisher is expected to work with 
   IANA (or possibly other organizations maintaining registries) to 
   populate protocol parameters when required prior to publication.  The 
 
 
Mankin & Hayes            Expires September 4, 2006                  [Page 9] 

Internet-Draft          draft-mankin-techspec-pubreq-05             March 2006 
    

   population of these parameters should not require technical expertise 
   by the technical publisher. 

   Discussion: Within IETF, IANA normally does its allocations as an 
   early step in the technical publication. 

   Derived Requirements: 

   o  Current Req-PARAMEDIT-1 - The IETF technical publisher should work 
      with IANA in the population of required parameter values into 
      documents. 

3.7. Post Approval, Pre-Publication Technical Corrections 

   Task Description: Regardless of efforts to minimize their occurrence, 
   it is always possible that technical flaws will be discovered in the 
   window between document approval and publication.  The technical 
   publisher may be requested to incorporate technical changes into the 
   document prior to publication.  Such changes necessitate a review and 
   sign-off procedure.  Another option is to disallow such corrections 
   and treat them as you would post-publication errata.  Note that this 
   task is distinct from post approval changes that might originate due 
   to editorial review because they originate from outside the technical 
   publisher.  For severe flaws, it should always be possible to 
   withdraw the document from the publication queue. 

   Discussion: IETF allows minor technical corrects during the 
   publication process.  This should ideally be a rare occurrence, but 
   as publication times increase, the number of minor technical 
   improvements increases.  Since any changes introduced during the 
   post-approval phase can lead to publication delays it is important 
   that only changes with technical merit be permitted.  In particular 
   stylistic changes should be discouraged.  IETF processes must be in 
   place to vet changes proposed by the author, but this is not 
   specifically a requirement on the technical publisher.   

   The interaction between the authors and the technical publisher must 
   be sufficiently well policed that untracked and unapproved changes 
   cannot be introduced by the author or other parties. 

   Derived Requirements: 

   o  Current Req-POSTCORR-1 - The IETF technical publisher should 
      permit the incorporation of technical changes detected after 
      approval, but pre publication.   


 
 
Mankin & Hayes            Expires September 4, 2006                 [Page 10] 

Internet-Draft          draft-mankin-techspec-pubreq-05             March 2006 
    

   o  Current Req-POSTCORR-2 - The IETF technical publisher should only 
      allow post approval technical changes which have been approved by 
      the IESG. 

   o  Potential Req-POSTCORR-3 - The IETF technical publisher should 
      have the discretion to reject post-approval corrections as too 
      late in the process and propose that it be handled as errata. 

   o  Potential Req-POSTCORR-4 - The IETF technical publisher should 
      ensure that any source documents associated with a publication 
      are also updated in concert with their associated specifications. 

3.8. Allocation of Permanent Stable Identifiers 

   Task Description: For a document to be referenced, it must have a 
   unique permanent identifier.  In some standards organization, it is 
   the technical publisher that generates this identifier.  In other 
   cases the identifier may be allocated earlier in the process.   

   Discussion: Currently, the RFC Editor allocates these numbers when 
   the document is near the end of the publication process.  When the 
   delay between technical approval and publication of a document is 
   long, this creates a problem for external standards organizations 
   that cannot reference the specification until this identifier is 
   available. 

   Derived Requirements: 

   o  Current Req-PERMID-1 - The IETF technical publisher should 
      allocate stable identifiers as part of the publication process. 

   o  Potential Req-PERMID-2 - The IETF technical publisher should 
      permit early allocation of stable identifiers for or by the IESG 
      to satisfy referencing requirements of external bodies. 

   o  Current Req-PERMID-3 - The IETF technical publisher should assign 
      additional permanent identifiers associated with various classes 
      of documents as directed by the IETF. 

3.9. Document Format Conversions 

   Task Description: The technical publisher is responsible for 
   converting the documents into one or more output formats (text, pdf, 
   ps, etc.).  In some standards organizations, the technical publisher 
   may be required to accept input documents in various formats and 
   produce a homogeneous set of output documents. 

 
 
Mankin & Hayes            Expires September 4, 2006                 [Page 11] 

Internet-Draft          draft-mankin-techspec-pubreq-05             March 2006 
    

   Discussion: Currently, the RFC Editor accepts input as an ascii text 
   file (supplemented by xml if available).  The documents are published 
   as ascii text, postscript, and pdf files. 

   Derived Requirements: 

   o  Current Req-DOCCONVERT-1 - The IETF technical publisher should 
      accept as input ascii text files and publish documents as ascii 
      text files, postscript files, and pdf files. 

   o  Potential Req-DOCCONVERT-2 - The IETF technical publisher should 
      accept as input xml2rfc files. 

   o  Potential Req-DOCCONVERT-3 - The technical publisher should 
      accept supplemental source files that may contain information 
      such as: code, formal descriptions (XML, ASN.1, etc.) graphics, 
      data files, etc. 

3.10. Language Translation 

   Task Description: Some standards organizations require publication of 
   documents in multiple languages.  This translation is the 
   responsibility of the technical publisher. 

   Discussion: IETF specifications are published only in English. 

   Derived Requirements: none 

3.11. Publication Status Tracking 

   Task Description: The technical publisher should have the ability to 
   provide status information on the status of a document.  This may 
   involve developing a process model or a checklist and providing 
   information on a document's state, outstanding issues, and 
   responsibility tokens.  Depending on the need for transparency, this 
   information may need to be available online and continuously updated. 

   Discussion: The RFC Editor currently provides status information via 
   the RFC editor queue.  Each document is attributed a status (AUTH48, 
   RFC-EDITOR, IANA, ISR, etc.)  Items may stay of the queue for a long 
   time without changing status.  This status tracking information is 
   not integrated with the IESG tracking tools.  Within the IETF, the 
   PROTO team is considering requirements for marking the token-holder 
   accurately during long waiting periods, and others are looking into 
   improved notification tools [2]. Requirements on the IETF technical 
   publisher for improved status integration and visibility could be met 

 
 
Mankin & Hayes            Expires September 4, 2006                 [Page 12] 

Internet-Draft          draft-mankin-techspec-pubreq-05             March 2006 
    

   by collaborations with these efforts, or by providing public access 
   to email logs regarding publications, or by some other proposal. 

   Derived Requirements: 

   o  Current Req-STATUSTRK-1 - The IETF technical publisher should 
      provide state information for each document in the publication 
      process. 

   o  Potential Req-STATUSTRK-2 - The IETF technical publisher should 
      integrate its state information with the IETF tools to provide 
      end-to-end status tracking of documents.  IETF documents should be 
      able to move seamlessly from the IETF tracking system into the 
      technical publication tracking system.   

   o  Potential Req-STATUSTRK-3  - The IETF technical publisher should 
      provide external visibility of not only the fact that a document 
      is in an extended waiting period, but also the token-holder and 
      circumstances of the wait. 

3.12. Expedited Handling 

   Task Description: In some cases (such as when the documents are 
   needed by another standards body), it should be possible for the 
   approving organization to request expedites publication of a 
   document.  Ideally, this should not skip any of the publication 
   steps, but allocates it higher priority in the work queue that should 
   ensure earlier publication than normal.  Expedited publication should 
   be used sparingly since as with any priority scheme, overuse will 
   negate its benefits. 

   Discussion: The fast-tracking procedure is used to expedite 
   publication of a document at the request of the IESG. Fast-tracking 
   is generally employed when an external organization has a looming 
   publication deadline and a need to reference a document currently in 
   the RFC editors queue.  Having short publication times or providing 
   stable identifiers early in the publication process would likely 
   reduce the need for fast-tracking. 

   Since fast tracking is disruptive to the workflow it is recommended 
   that expedited handling be phased out as soon as alternative ways of 
   achieving timely publication are in place. 

   Derived Requirements: 



 
 
Mankin & Hayes            Expires September 4, 2006                 [Page 13] 

Internet-Draft          draft-mankin-techspec-pubreq-05             March 2006 
    

   o  Current Req-EXPEDITE-1 - The IETF technical publisher shall 
      expedite the processing of specific documents at the request of 
      the IESG. 

3.13. Exception Handling 

   Task Description: It should be possible for various reasons for a 
   document to be withdrawn from publication or the publication put on 
   hold.  Reasons for this could be due to an appeals process, detection 
   of a serious technical flaw, or determination that the document is 
   unsuitable for publication. 

   Discussion: For various reasons a document can be withdrawn before 
   publication.   

   Derived Requirements: 

   o  Current Req-EXCEPTIONS-1 - The IETF technical publisher should 
      permit documents to be withdrawn from publication at the direction 
      of the IETF. 

   o  Current Req-EXCEPTIONS-2 - The IETF technical publisher should 
      permit documents to be put on hold awaiting the outcome of an 
      appeal. 

3.14. Notification of publication 

   Task Description: The technical publisher should provide a mechanism 
   for alerting the community at large of the availability of published 
   documents. 

   Discussion: The RFC Editor notifies of document publication on the 
   rfc-dist and ietf-announce mailing lists. 

   o  Current Req-PUBNOTIFY-1 - The IETF technical publisher should 
      announce the availability of published documents. 

3.15. Post Publication Corrections 

   Task Description: If corrections are identified after publication, 
   the technical publisher should be able to publish errata that can be 
   linked with the original document. 

   Discussion: The RFC Editor maintains a list of errata.  Pointers to 
   relevant errata are presented as output from the RFC Editor search 
   engine. 

 
 
Mankin & Hayes            Expires September 4, 2006                 [Page 14] 

Internet-Draft          draft-mankin-techspec-pubreq-05             March 2006 
    

   Derived Requirements: 

   o  Current Req-ERRATA-1 - The IETF technical publisher should 
      maintain errata for published documents. 

   o  Current Req-ERRATA-2 - The IETF technical publisher should provide 
      information on relevant errata as part of the information 
      associated with a RFC. 

3.16. Indexing: maintenance of the catalog 

   Task Description: The technical publisher normally provides and 
   maintains the master catalog of publications of that organization.  
   As the publishers of the organization's output, the technical 
   publisher is expected to be the definitive source of publications and 
   maintainer of the database of published documents.   This also 
   includes the cataloging and storage of meta-information associated 
   with documents such as its history, status (updated, obsoleted, 
   etc.), document categories (standard, draft standard, bcp, individual 
   submission etc.) 

   Discussion: The RFC Editor maintains the catalog.  The RFC editor is 
   also responsible for the permanent archival of specifications.  Meta 
   information associated with an RFC should also be maintained.  Since 
   this is the definitive archive, sufficient security should be in 
   place to prevent tampering with approved documents. 

   o  Current Req-INDEX-1 - The IETF technical publisher should maintain 
      the index of all IETF published documents. 

   o  Current Req-INDEX-2 - The IETF technical publisher should provide 
      the permanent archive for published documents. 

   o  Current Req-INDEX-3 - Meta information associated with a published 
      document must be stored and updated as its status changes. 

   o  Current Req-INDEX-4 - The archive must be sufficiently secure to 
      prevent the modification of published documents by external 
      parties. 

   o  Potential Req-INDEX-5 - The IETF technical publisher should 
      provide the permanent archival of any source documents associated 
      with a published specification. 

   o  Current Req-INDEX-6 - The IETF can indicate to the publisher that 
      it should change the status of a document (e.g., to Historical) 
      and this should be reflected in the index. 
 
 
Mankin & Hayes            Expires September 4, 2006                 [Page 15] 

Internet-Draft          draft-mankin-techspec-pubreq-05             March 2006 
    

   o  Potential Req-INDEX-7 - When an permanent ID is allocated early, 
      the technical publisher must provide a disclaimer and pointer in 
      the index to resolve searches on that permanent ID.  The post 
      approval version of the draft must be stored until the document 
      is published since it could expire before publication. 

3.17. Access to Published Documents 

   Task Description: The technical publisher should facilitate access to 
   the documents published.  It is assumed that the technical publisher 
   will provide online tools to search for and find information within 
   the archive of published documents.  These access tools should 
   facilitate understanding the state of the document (identification of 
   replacement or updated documents, linkage to pertinent errata) 

   Discussion: Documents and status may be accessed via the RFC Editor's 
   web page 

   Derived Requirements: 

   o  Current Req-PUBACCESS-1 - The IETF technical publisher should 
      provide search tools for finding published documents 

   o  Current Req-PUBACCESS-2 - The IETF technical publisher tool should 
      return relevant meta information associated with a published 
      document (e.g., category of document, type of standard (if 
      standards track), obsoleted by or updated by information, 
      associated errata) 

   o  Potential Req-PUBACCESS-3  - The IETF Technical Publication search 
      tools should be integrated with the IETF search tools. 

3.18. Maintenance of a Vocabulary Document 

   Task Description: Some standards organizations require the technical 
   publisher to maintain a vocabulary document or database containing 
   common terms and acronyms. The goal is provide consistency of 
   terminology between documents. 

   Discussion: The RFC Editor does not maintain a document or database 
   of terms or acronyms. 

   Derived Requirements: none 




 
 
Mankin & Hayes            Expires September 4, 2006                 [Page 16] 

Internet-Draft          draft-mankin-techspec-pubreq-05             March 2006 
    

3.19. Providing Publication Statistics and Status Reports 

   Task Description: The technical publisher may be required to 
   periodically or continuously measure their performance.  In many 
   standards organizations performance targets are set in terms of 
   timeliness, throughput, etc. 

   Discussion: The IETF technical publisher currently provides monthly 
   statistics on arrivals and completions of documents by category.  In 
   addition a status report is provided at each IETF meeting. 

   Derived Requirements: 

   o  Current Req-STATS-1 - The IETF technical publisher should provide 
      monthly statistics on average queue times and documents processed 
      sorted by category of document. 

   o  Current Req-STATS-2 - The IETF technical publisher should provide 
      periodic status reports to the IETF meetings to apprise the 
      community of their work and performance. 

3.20. Process and Document Evolution 

   Task Description: The guidelines and rules for an organization's 
   publication output will change over time.  New sections will be added 
   to documents, styles and conventions will change, boilerplate will be 
   changed, etc.  Similarly, the specific processes for publication of a 
   specification will change.  The technical publisher is expected to be 
   involved in these discussions and accommodate these changes as 
   required. 

   Discussion: Over time, the IETF consensus on what should be in a 
   published document has changed.  Such changes are likely to continue 
   in the future.  The RFC editor has been involved in such discussions 
   and provided guides, policies, faqs, etc. to document the current 
   expectations on published documents. 

   Derived Requirements: 

   o  Current Req-PROCESSCHG-1 - The IETF technical publisher should 
      participate in the discussions of changes to author guidelines and 
      publication process changes. 

3.21. Tutorial and Help Services 

   Task Description: The technical publisher may be required to provide 
   tutorials, mentoring, help-desks, online tools, etc. to facilitate 
 
 
Mankin & Hayes            Expires September 4, 2006                 [Page 17] 

Internet-Draft          draft-mankin-techspec-pubreq-05             March 2006 
    

   smooth interaction with the technical publisher and IETF community 
   awareness of document guidelines, procedures, etc.  In many 
   organizations the publisher maintains a style manual giving explicit 
   guidance to authors on how to write a specification. 

   Discussion: Guidelines are provided to the authors on how to write a 
   RFC as well as occasional tutorial presentations.  The RFC Editor 
   provides a help desk at IETF meetings. 

   Derived Requirements: 

   o  Current Req-PUBHELP-1 - The IETF technical publisher should 
      provide and maintain documentation giving guidance to authors on 
      the layout, structure, expectations, etc. required to develop 
      documents suitable for publication. 

   o  Current Req-PUBHELP-2 - The IETF technical publisher should 
      provide tutorials to the IETF community to educate authors on the 
      processes and expectations of the IETF technical publisher. 

4. Technical Publisher Performance Metrics 

   A Technical Publisher is typically measured not only on what they do 
   but how well they perform the tasks.  Here are some metrics that 
   could apply to the IETF technical publisher. 

   1. Post-approval timelines 

   2. Publication throughput  

   3. Non author changes generated during publication 

   4. Author changes generated during publication 

4.1. Post-approval timeframes 

   Metric Description: This is a statistical measure of the time from 
   entry into the RFC editor queue (via IESG approval, individual 
   submission, etc.) until the documents are published.  The statistics 
   should be separated by categories of documents.  It may be desirable 
   to also provide statistics along the distribution curve (90% 
   completed within x weeks, 95% completed within y weeks, etc.) 

   Discussion: Long publication times create both internal and external 
   difficulties.  Internal difficulties include the migration of authors 
   to other activities and the accumulation of tempting post-approval 
   fixes to be added to the document.  External difficulties include the 
 
 
Mankin & Hayes            Expires September 4, 2006                 [Page 18] 

Internet-Draft          draft-mankin-techspec-pubreq-05             March 2006 
    

   inability of other standards organizations to reference IETF 
   publications for lack of a RFC number. 

   Derived Requirements: 

   o  Potential Req-TIMEFRAMES-1 - The IETF technical publisher should 
      have a goal of an average publication time of no more than 4 
      weeks and at least 90% of all documents should be published 
      within 8 weeks. Documents held up due to references or due to a 
      protocol action should be excluded from this statistic. 

   o  Potential Req-TIMEFRAMES-2 - For those documents for which early 
      allocation of an identifier is requested, The IETF technical 
      publisher should have a goal of an average allocation time of no 
      more than 1 week and at least 90% of early allocation documents 
      should have a stable identifier allocated within 2 weeks of 
      approval. Allocation implies being able to resolve the reference 
      in the index. Documents held up due to references or due to a 
      protocol action should be excluded from this statistic. 

   o  Potential Req-TIMEFRAMES-3 - The IETF technical publisher should 
      have a goal of an average time for completing the pre-approval 
      editorial review of no more than 10 days and at least 90% of all 
      documents should be reviewed within 15 days.  The review interval 
      starts when the editorial review is requested and ends when the 
      review results are provided 

   NOTE: The values given in this section represent targets desired by 
   the IETF community. It is understood that the actual values are 
   subject to negotiation and will be determined as part of contractual 
   agreements. 

4.2. Publication Throughput 

   Metric Description: The count of documents published during a given 
   time period.  Some publishers also provide the data in terms of pages 
   produced.  The counts should be separated by categories of documents. 

   Discussion: The RFC currently provides monthly statistics on the 
   arrival and completion of documents onto the RFC queue.  This is 
   sorted by category of document. 

   Derived Requirements: 




 
 
Mankin & Hayes            Expires September 4, 2006                 [Page 19] 

Internet-Draft          draft-mankin-techspec-pubreq-05             March 2006 
    

   o  Current Req-THROUGHPUT-1 - The IETF technical publisher should 
      provide monthly reports giving RFC queue arrivals, completions, 
      and documents on the queue sorted by document source of the 
      document (IAB, IESG, individual submission) 

   o  Potential Req-THROUGHPUT-2 - The IETF technical publisher should 
      indicate the number of documents in each state at the end of each 
      month sorted by document source category. 

4.3. Non author changes Generated during Publication 

   Metric Description: To judge the effectiveness of the editorial 
   review and comment resolution, it is useful to provide aggregate 
   statistics on post approval changes generated (separated by type of 
   error) as well as the resolution of the comments (% rejected) 

   Discussion: To understand trends in the types of errors occurring and 
   how editing effort is being expended, it is useful to gather 
   aggregate statistics on the types of errors being uncovered by the 
   editors. 

   Derived Requirements: 

   o  Potential Req-EDITCHGSTATS-1 - The IETF technical publisher should 
      provide monthly statistics on the types of editorial corrections 
      being found during reviews as well as the percent of corrections 
      which are rejected by the authors. 

4.4. Author changes generated during publication 

   Metric Description: To judge the stability of documents during the 
   publication process it is desirable to provide aggregate statistics 
   on the number and type of changes introduced by the authors after 
   document approval. 

   Discussion: This provides a measure of the stability of the documents 
   and can indicate if the delays in publication are leading to 
   excessive changes in the documents. 

   Derived Requirements: 

   o  Potential Req-AUTHCHGSTATS-1 - The IETF technical publisher should 
      provide monthly statistics on author requested changes to 
      documents under publication. 



 
 
Mankin & Hayes            Expires September 4, 2006                 [Page 20] 

Internet-Draft          draft-mankin-techspec-pubreq-05             March 2006 
    

5. IETF Implications of Technical Publication Requirements 

   Requirements on technical publication process have so far been stated 
   in terms of requirements on the technical publisher.  However it must 
   be recognized that many of these requirements have implications on 
   the processes and tools within the IETF itself.  It is anticipated 
   that these processes will be documented in companion documents which 
   will be generated by various bodies within the IETF.  

   The following is a list of potential issues that must be addressed 
   within the IETF depending on the requirements selected for the 
   technical publisher: 

   o  Pre- vs Post-Approval Editing: If emphasis switches from post-
      approval editing to pre-approval editing, then IETF processes must 
      be adapted to make use of this service.  The processes for post-
      approval editing can also be streamlined. 

   o  Approval of post-approval, pre-publication technical corrections: 
      Since the technical publisher can only accept approved changes, it 
      must be clear who is allowed to approve technical changes.  This 
      process within the IETF needs to be decided and documented. 

   o  Allocation of Permanent Stable Identifiers: IETF needs to clearly 
      identify the naming/numbering schemes and classes of documents to 
      which those names and numbers apply.  Furthermore, the 
      responsibility for allocation of those names/numbers needs to be 
      identified. 

   o  Early allocation of Permanent Stable Identifiers: If early 
      allocation of permanent stable identifiers is agreed as a 
      requirement, then the IETF processes must be adapted to either 
      generate or use these early identifiers.   

   o  Exception Handling: If publication timelines can be reduced 
      sufficiently or permanent identifiers allocated early, then 
      expedited handling may no longer be needed.  

   o  Post Publication Corrections: Appropriate processes must be 
      defined with the IETF to ensure that errata is appropriately 
      vetted and authorized. 

   o  Indexing: Appropriate processes must be defined within the IETF 
      to decide and inform the technical publisher of status changes to 
      published documents as the result of an appeal, legal action, or 
      some other procedural action. 

 
 
Mankin & Hayes            Expires September 4, 2006                 [Page 21] 

Internet-Draft          draft-mankin-techspec-pubreq-05             March 2006 
    

   It is expected that as decisions are made on the technical 
   publication requirements, that this section will expand to include 
   any associated requirements on the IETF processes. 

6. IANA Considerations 

   Any new requirements that result from this discussion need to be 
   reviewed by IANA and the IETF to understand to what extent, if any, 
   the work flow of the documents through IANA are affected. 

   Interactions with IANA on parameter validation is discussed in 
   section 3.6. 

7. Security Considerations 

   There is a tussle between the sought-for improvements in readability 
   and the specific language that has often been negotiated carefully 
   for the security content of IETF documents.  As with other text, 
   extreme caution is needed in modifying any text in the security 
   considerations.  This issue is assumed to have been dealt with under 
   the section 3.3. 

   The processes for the publication of documents must prevent the 
   introduction of unapproved changes (see section 3.7).  Since the IETF 
   publisher maintains the index of publications, sufficient security 
   must be in place to prevent these published documents from being 
   changed by external parties (see section 3.16) 

8. Acknowledgments 

   Bert Wijnen has provided input on the early copy edit experiment and 
   made useful comments throughout the document.  Leslie Daigle has 
   contributed strongly to this text.  Steve Barclay, John Meredith, 
   Yvette Ho Sang, and Sami Trabulsi for discussions of the publication 
   practices of ATIS, ETSI, IEEE, and ITU.  Other acknowledgements to 
   date: a discussion on the wg chairs mailing list, Henning 
   Schulzrinne, Henrik Levkowetz. 

9. Informative References 

   [1]   Reynolds, J. and Braden, R., "Instructions to Request for 
         Comments (RFC) Authors", draft-rfc-editor-rfc2223bis-08 (work 
         in progress), August 2004 

   [2]   Levkowetz, H. and D. Meyer, "The PROTO Process: Working Group 
         Chair Document Shepherding", draft-ietf-proto-wgchair-doc-
         shepherding-05 (work in progress), March 2005 
 
 
Mankin & Hayes            Expires September 4, 2006                 [Page 22] 

Internet-Draft          draft-mankin-techspec-pubreq-05             March 2006 
    

    

Author's Addresses 

   Allison Mankin 
   Shinkuro, Inc. 
   1025 Vermont Avenue 
   Washington, DC 20005 
   USA 
       
   Phone: +1 301 728 7199 
   Email: mankin@psg.com 
   URI: http://www.psg.com/~mankin/ 
    

   Stephen Hayes 
   Ericsson 
   3634 Long Prairie Rd. 
   Ste 108-125 
   Flower Mound, TX 75022 
   USA 
       
   Phone: +1 469 360 8500 
   Email: stephen.hayes@ericsson.com 
 

Intellectual Property Statement 

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to 
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in 
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights 
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has 
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information 
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be 
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of 
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
 
 
Mankin & Hayes            Expires September 4, 2006                 [Page 23] 

Internet-Draft          draft-mankin-techspec-pubreq-05             March 2006 
    

   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at 
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org 

Disclaimer of Validity 

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an 
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS 
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET 
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, 
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE 
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED 
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 

Copyright Statement 

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006). 

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions 
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors 
   retain all their rights. 

Acknowledgment 

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the 
   Internet Society. 

    




















 
 
Mankin & Hayes            Expires September 4, 2006                 [Page 24] 

