Network Working Group                                         Y. Jiang
Internet-Draft                                                  X. Liu
Intended status: Informational                                  Huawei

Expires: April 2017                                   October 31, 2016


                 Gap Analysis of Deterministic Latency Networks
                      draft-jiang-dln-gap-analysis-00


Abstract

   Deterministic latency network (DLN) is needed to provide guaranteed
   deterministic latency for use cases such as Cloud VR/Gaming and etc,
   especially for latency-critical traffic. This document analyzes the
   gaps in the existing IETF work on fulfilling the control plane and
   measurement needs of DLN.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 31, 2013.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2016 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors. All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must



Jiang and et al        Expires April 31, 2017                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft              DLN Gap Analysis              October 2016


   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.



Table of Contents

   1.   Introduction .............................................. 2
      1.1. Conventions used in this document ...................... 2
      1.2. Terminology ............................................ 2
   2.   Related Standardization Work in the IETF .................. 3
      2.1. Work in the IPPM WG .................................... 3
      2.2. Work in the MPLS WG .................................... 4
      2.3. Work in the Control Protocols .......................... 5
   3.   Discussions ............................................... 5
   4.   Security Considerations ................................... 6
   5.   IANA Considerations ....................................... 6
   6.   References ................................................ 6
      6.1. Informative References ................................. 6
   7.   Acknowledgments ........................................... 7



1. Introduction

   Deterministic latency network (DLN) is needed to provide guaranteed
   deterministic latency for use cases such as Cloud VR/Gaming and etc,
   especially for latency-critical traffic. This document analyzes the
   gaps in the existing IETF work on fulfilling the control plane and
   measurement needs of DLN.



1.1. Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].



1.2. Terminology

   NTP Network Time Protocol

   PHB per-hop behavior


                                                             [Page 2]

Internet-Draft              DLN Gap Analysis              October 2016


2. Related Standardization Work in the IETF

2.1. Work in the IPPM WG

   The IPPM Work Group has developed quite a lot of RFCs which specify
   standard metrics including quality, performance and reliability that
   can be used for the IP services. These protocols are usually
   implemented as software modules, and they rely on IP and TCP protocol
   stacks, as well as elements of the Network Time Protocol (NTP).

   A One-way Delay Metric for IPPM [RFC2679] is defined for packets
   across Internet paths based on notions introduced in the IPPM
   framework [RFC2330] with detailed introduction on the measurement
   methodology, error analysis and relevant statistics. The result can
   be used to indicate the performance of specific application and the
   congestion state on the path traversed. For a given Type-P, the Src
   host continually generates the test packet stream according to the
   given methodology and place a time stamp in the Type-P packet before
   sending it towards Dst, the Dst host takes a time stamp if the packet
   arrives within a reasonable period of time and computes the one-way-
   delay.

   As a specific implementation, the One-Way Active Measurement Protocol
   (OWAMP) [RFC4656] is designed to measure unidirectional
   characteristics including one-way delay and one-way loss. OWAMP
   actually consists of two inter-related protocols: OWAMP-Control and
   OWAMP-Test.  OWAMP-Control is used to initiate, start, and stop test
   sessions and to fetch their results, whereas OWAMP-Test is used to
   exchange test packets between two measurement nodes.   OWAMP-Control
   is designed to support the negotiation of one-way active measurement
   sessions and results retrieval. At session initiation, there is a
   negotiation of sender and receiver addresses and port numbers,
   session start time, session length, test packet size, the mean
   Poisson sampling interval for the test stream, and some attributes of
   the very general [RFC2330] notion of packet type, including packet
   size and per-hop behavior (PHB) [RFC2474], which could be used to
   support the measurement of one-way network characteristics across
   differentiated services networks.

   As the difference between the one-way-delay [RFC2679] of the selected
   pair of packets, IP Packet Delay Variation Metric for IP Performance
   Metrics [RFC3393] is defined with detailed introduction on the
   measurement methodology, error analysis and relevant statistics. The
   result can be used to size play-out buffers for applications
   requiring the regular delivery of packets, or to determine the
   dynamics of queues within a network. For a given Type-P, a selection
   function is defined to select pair of packets from the stream


                                                             [Page 3]

Internet-Draft              DLN Gap Analysis              October 2016


   generated by the Src host within a specific interval (I1,I2). After
   the one-way-delay measurement is completed, the ipdv value of the
   pair of packets is obtained by subtracting the first value of one-
   way-delay form the second value.

   The Two-Way Active Measurement Protocol (TWAMP) [RFC5357] is based on
   OWAMP but adds capabilities of two-way or round-trip measurement. The
   TWAMP-Test protocol is similar to the OWAMP-test protocol [RFC4656]
   with the exception that the Session-Reflector transmits test packets
   to the Session-Sender in response to each test packet it receives.
   TWAMP defines two different test packet formats, one for packets
   transmitted by the Session-Sender and one for packets transmitted by
   the Session-Reflector. Further, the Session-Reflector does not need
   to know the Session-Sender behavior to the degree of detail as needed
   in OWAMP [RFC4656].  Additionally, the Session-Sender collects and
   records the necessary information provided from the packets
   transmitted by the Session-Reflector for measuring two-way metrics.
   The information recording based on the packet(s) received by the
   Session-Sender is implementation dependent.

2.2. Work in the MPLS WG

   The MPLS Work Group has also published some standard track RFCs which
   specify the performance monitoring mechanisms in the MPLS data plane.

   [RFC6374] "Packet Loss and Delay Measurement for MPLS Networks"
   specifies two closely related protocols, one for packet loss
   measurement (LM) and one for packet delay measurement (DM). The LM
   and DM protocols operate over the MPLS Generic Associated Channel (G-
   ACh) [RFC5586] and support measurement of loss, delay, and related
   metrics over Label Switched Paths (LSPs), pseudowires, and MPLS
   sections (links). The LM and DM protocols can be used both for
   continuous/proactive and selective/on-demand measurement. They can be
   implemented in hardware and support the higher precision IEEE 1588
   timestamps.

   In an MPLS network, MPLS OAM tools can be used to measure latency,
   delay variation, and loss as described in [RFC6374]. It should be
   noted that queuing delays is not included in the delay measurement.
   Actually, for links, such as Forwarding Adjacencies, several methods
   are proposed in [RFC7823] for measuring the associated delay while
   avoiding significant queuing delay.







                                                             [Page 4]

Internet-Draft              DLN Gap Analysis              October 2016


2.3. Work in the Control Protocols

   Delay as a traffic engineering parameter has also been considered in
   intra-domain routing protocols (e.g., IS-IS [RFC7810] and OSPF
   [RFC7471]), and other control plane protocols including [RFC7823].

   - Extension to OSPF

   [RFC7471] describes the extensions to OSPFv2 and OSPFv3 TE metric to
   support the distribution of network performance information,
   including unidirectional link delay, delay variation and etc.  The
   information distributed using OSPF TE Metric Extensions can then be
   used to make path selection decisions based on network performance.
   But the document does not specify any mechanisms for measuring
   network performance information, nor provides any algorithms for
   using the network-wide distributed information.

   - Extension to IS-IS

   Similarly, [RFC7810] describes the extensions to IS-IS TE metric to
   support the distribution of network performance information,
   including unidirectional link delay, delay variation and etc.  The
   information distributed using IS-IS TE Metric Extensions can then be
   used to make path selection decisions based on network performance.
   But the document does not specify any mechanisms for measuring
   network performance information, nor provides any algorithms for
   using the network-wide distributed information.

   - Explicit Routed LSP path selection based on performance

   [RFC7823] describes network performance criteria in selecting the
   path for an explicitly routed RSVP-TE Label Switched Path (LSP). It
   also describes how a path computation function may use network
   performance data to perform such path selections. Note that the
   mechanisms described in the above documents only disseminate
   performance information but queuing delays are not considered.

3. Discussions

   The existing measuring methodologies focus on peer to peer or end to
   end measurement of delay, the measurement result may consist of
   transmission delay, propagation delay and storing delay which may
   change dramatically when there is congestion in the path across a
   network. Little work has been done on the delay measurement of
   scheduling on a single node, which may be critical in analyzing the
   forwarding delay on a node and further improving its latency
   performance. As describe above, both OWAMP and TWAMP use special test


                                                             [Page 5]

Internet-Draft              DLN Gap Analysis              October 2016


   and control protocol to get the end to end delay of measurement
   packets along the Internet path under test. The result may be not
   enough to represent the delay of specific delay-sensitive traffic as
   the test packet may experience different congestion from the service
   packet. Meanwhile, test traffic may also aggravate network traffic
   congestion and cause higher latency in the network.

   The control plane protocols as described above are not sufficient to
   support routing and traffic engineering of the low latency service
   traffic.



4. Security Considerations

   This document analyzes the standardization work on synchronization in
   different SDOs. As no solution is proposed in this document, no
   security concerns are raised.



5. IANA Considerations

   There are no IANA actions required by this document.



6. References


6.1. Informative References

   [RFC1305] Mills, D., "Network Time Protocol (Version 3) Specification,
             Implementation and Analysis", RFC 1305, March 1992

   [RFC2330] Paxson, V., Almes, G., Mahdavi, J., and M. Mathis,
             "Framework for IP Performance Metrics", RFC 2330, May 1998,

   [RFC2679] Almes, G., Kalidindi, S., and M. Zekauskas, "A One-way
             Delay Metric for IPPM", RFC 2679, September 1999.

   [RFC3393] C. Demichelis, "IP Packet Delay Variation Metric for IP
             Performance Metrics (IPPM)", RFC 3393, November 2002.

   [RFC4656] S. Shalunov, "A One-way Active Measurement Protocol
             (OWAMP)", RFC 4656, September 2006.



                                                             [Page 6]

Internet-Draft              DLN Gap Analysis              October 2016


   [RFC5357] K. Hedayat, "A Two-Way Active Measurement Protocol (TWAMP)",
             RFC 5357, October, 2008.

   [RFC6374] Frost, D. and S. Bryant, "Packet Loss and Delay Measurement
             for MPLS Networks", RFC 6374, September 2011.



7. Acknowledgments

   TBD



Authors' Addresses

   Yuanlong Jiang
   Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd.
   Bantian, Longgang district
   Shenzhen 518129, China
   Email: jiangyuanlong@huawei.com

   Xian Liu
   Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd.
   Bantian, Longgang district
   Shenzhen 518129, China
   Email: lene.liuxian@huawei.com

















                                                             [Page 7]

