
    CCAMP Working Group Internet Draft                    Jun Kyun Choi 
    Document: draft-choi-burst-control-00.txt             Min Ho Kang 
    Expiration Date: December 2003                        Jung Yul Choi 
                                                             ICU 
                                                          Tae-Gon Noh 
                                                          Kyoo Ryon Hahm 
                                                             Samsung AIT 
                                                             
                                                             June 2003
          
          
            Requirements of Burst-Level Control in Optical Networks 
          
          
    Status of this Memo 
       
      This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
      all provisions of Section 10 of RFC-2026.  
       
      Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
      Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other 
      groups MAY also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.  
       
      Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
      and MAY be updated, replaced, or obsolete by other documents at any 
      time. It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts as reference 
      material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."  
       
      The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
      http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt  
       
      The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
      http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
       
       
    Abstract 
       
      This draft presents the requirements of burst-level control in order 
      to improve channel efficiency in optical networks. By processing and 
      control the finer granularity of burst data, the network can improve 
      its utilization than the present circuit switching based optical 
      networks. Implementation issues of transmission and switching for 
      data burst are took into consideration.  
       
       
    Conventions 
       
      The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
      "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
      document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119. 
     
     
     
     
     
    Choi, et. al.           Expires - December 2003                [Page 1] 

    draft-choi-burst-control-00.txt                               June 2003 
     
     
    Table of Contents 
       
      1. Introduction.....................................................2 
      2. Needs of burst-level control.....................................3 
      3. Consideration Issues for burst-level control.....................4 
      4. Enabling technologies for burst-level control....................5 
      4.1 Classification of data burst switching..........................5 
      4.2 Switch control for data burst switching.........................5 
      4.3 Signaling control for data burst switching......................6 
      4.3.1 Label for identifying data burst..............................6 
      4.3.2 Signaling messages for data burst switching...................6 
      5. Conclusion.......................................................7 
      6. Security Considerations..........................................7 
      References..........................................................7 
      Acknowledgement.....................................................8 
      Author's Addresses..................................................8 
      Full Copyright Statement............................................9 
       
     
       
    1. Introduction 
       
      Through the emergence of wavelength division multiplexing (WDM) 
      technology, optical networks could provide the explosively increasing 
      transmission capacity. It enables several Terabit/sec transmission 
      capacity in a single fiber which contains several tens or hundreds of 
      wavelength with multiplexing [1]. Nevertheless of the huge 
      transmission capacity of fibers, the transmission efficiency comes to 
      decrease due to diverse applications traffic from access networks and 
      resulting bursty characteristics of Internet traffic in a backbone 
      network. Therefore, the needs for new efficient transmission and 
      switching technology for bursty Internet traffic efficiently and 
      accommodation of many subscribers are required.    
       
      First of all, we will discuss the main research streams for pursuing 
      implementation of optical networks. First, wavelength routing 
      functions to establish a lightpath which is an all-optical data path 
      along which data does not need to go through any O/E/O conversion 
      before data can be sent [2]. Such lightpaths can provide a high-speed, 
      high-bandwidth pipe that is transparent to bit rate and coding format. 
      Some end users will require one or more lightpaths only for a 
      relatively short period (e.g. from minutes to weeks). WDM layer MAY 
      need to establish and tear down wavelength-routed lightpahts 
      dynamically. One of the limitations of wavelength routing is that is 
      inefficient for Internet traffic which is self-similar (or bursty at 
      all time scales). Due to bursty traffic, the bandwidth utilization of 
      a lightpath is very poor. Even though lightpaths are established 
      dynamically, the set-up time of a lightpath based on two-way 
     
     
    Choi, et. al.        Expires - December 2003                   [Page 2] 

    draft-choi-burst-control-00.txt                               June 2003 
     
      reservation may be too long for a burst which contains small size of 
      data given the high transmission rate.  
       
      Second, optical packet switching, which processes data traffic in all 
      optical domain, is recognized as an ultimate solution for 
      transmission and switching technology in optical networks [3]. 
      However, the doubt of possibility of implementation of optical packet 
      switching raises due to lack of optical buffer, difficulty of header 
      processing, and synchronization in optical domain.  
       
      Because of the above mentioned inefficiency of the present switching 
      technology and difficulty in implementation of future switching 
      technology, we need a new transmission and switching technology as an 
      implementable intermediate solution. Burst-level control is an 
      emerging technology to provide finer granularity as optical packet 
      switching and alleviate difficulty of implementation [5-9]. Burst-
      level control means that a network deals with burst data for 
      transmission and switching in order to improve network utilization. 
      It makes it possible interleaving several data burst into a single 
      link. This draft introduces the requirements of transmission and 
      switching per data burst in order to improve channel efficiency in 
      bursty Internet traffic environment. Burst-level processing will be 
      specified with the advantages, the operational mechanisms of it as 
      well as in the aspect of switch control and signaling control.  
       
       
    2. Needs of burst-level control 
       
      The circuit switching based wavelength routing is recognized to be 
      not suitable for the present Internet where traffic characteristic is 
      bursty and self-similar. Thus, even though transmission capacity is 
      increased with WDM technology, the Internet can not process the huge 
      burst traffic at an instant. Therefore, a new transmission and 
      switching technology is required to deal with the bursty Internet 
      traffic.  
       
      To deliver bursty data traffic efficiently means to increase channel 
      efficiency. So far, researches on improvement of channel efficiency 
      have been progressed in time domain and frequency domain [1,3,5-9]. 
      In frequency domain, wavelength division multiplexing is one of the 
      main results [1]. In time domain, optical packet switching, which 
      processes data packet and delivers them in all optical domain, is the 
      key issue for pursuing the ultimate solution for optical internet [3]. 
      However, due to the limitation of optical technology such as optical 
      buffer and header processing, optical packet switching is recognized 
      as a future technology. The fast circuit switching has been studied 
      to overcome the overhead of connection establishment and release of 
      the legacy circuit switching based on three-way-handshaking [4]. In 
      fast circuit switching, connection setup (or tear down) takes place 
      when the start (or end) of a burst is detected by sending a control 
      signal, and is fast since routing has already been done. Even though 
      it tries to increase channel efficiency by reducing connection 
     
     
    Choi, et. al.        Expires - December 2003                   [Page 3] 

    draft-choi-burst-control-00.txt                               June 2003 
     
      establishment overhead by one-way reservation without receiving 
      connection setup acknowledgment, its efficiency decreases when it 
      delivers short burst traffic.  
             
      As a solution of the above problems in the present Internet, a new 
      transmission and switching technology suitable for bursty Internet 
      traffic is required. For the purpose, optical burst transmission and 
      switching was suggested and they have been studied [5-9]. The main 
      feature of optical burst switching is the elimination of the round-
      trip waiting time before data burst is transmitted: the switching 
      fabric inside the switches are configured for the incoming data burst 
      as soon as the first control packet announcing the burst is received. 
      Since the switching fabric already has been configured before data 
      burst comes in the switch, the data burst will cut through the switch, 
      even without buffering themselves. Another feature of optical burst 
      switching is to transmit and switch per each data burst, contrary to 
      circuit switching which establishes a full connection for data 
      transmission. Once a connection has established in circuit switching, 
      it is not possible to interleave other data into the connection even 
      if empty space in the connection. However, in optical burst switching, 
      other data burst can be inserted into empty space among different 
      data burst in a link.  
       
      By applying burst-level control, we can get the following advantages.  
       
      - Multiplexing of data burst in a link 
      - Dynamic provisioning for data burst 
      - Short transmission delay owing to one-way reservation 
      - Improvement of link utilization 
       
       
       
    3. Consideration Issues for burst-level control 
     
      The following items should be taken into account for implementation 
      of transmission and switching per data burst. 
       
      - One-way-reservation for fast transmission. 
      - Multiplexing of data burst in a link 
      - Switch control mechanisms for setting the switch fabric to switch 
         and transmit short bursty data traffic. 
      - Signaling mechanisms to support dynamic provisioning for short 
         data burst.  
      - Route reuse scheme to use the existing established path not for 
         calculate and setup new path for burst data. 
      - Definition of new label to identify data burst. 
      - Definition of service model to support data burst. 
       
      Based on the above mentioned issues, the burst-level control will be 
      developed to support burst data in all optical domain. First of all, 
      a new label which identifies data burst SHOULD be defined. Switch 
     
     
    Choi, et. al.        Expires - December 2003                   [Page 4] 

    draft-choi-burst-control-00.txt                               June 2003 
     
      control and signaling mechanism also SHOULD be developed to support 
      data burst and systems with the burst-specific characteristics.   
       
       
       
    4. Enabling technologies for burst-level control 
     
      In chapter 4, classification of data burst switching according to the 
      reservation time and types which should be supported are presented. 
      Switch control to support them and signaling protocol to support end 
      to end burst data transmission and switching will be discussed.  
     
     
    4.1 Classification of data burst switching  
     
      Data burst switching can be categorized as the following types based 
      on the beginning and releasing time of resource reservation for data 
      burst transmission. According to how soon before the burst arrival 
      and how soon after its departure, the switching elements are made 
      available to route other data bursts. 
       
      Explicit setup - Explicit release;  
      After a switch receive the setup request for data burst the switch 
      fabric is configured for the incoming data burst immediately and 
      remains in that configuration until a release request arrives. 
       
      Explicit setup - Implicit release;  
      The setup request contains information about the length of the data 
      burst so that a release request is not needed to indicate the end of 
      the data burst.  
       
      Implicit setup - Explicit release; 
      The start of data burst is estimated based on information contained 
      in a setup request while a release request notifies the switching 
      resource to be released. 
       
      Implicit setup - Implicit release; 
      Both the start and end time of data burst are predicted based on 
      information contained in a setup request.  
       
      In the above four types, when we estimate the start and end of the 
      burst tightly with implicit notifications, there is smaller overhead 
      of keeping the switching resources configured and lower blocking 
      probability in the network. However, there is a tradeoff between 
      utilization and complexity of control.  
       
       
    4.2 Switch control for data burst switching 
       
      Optical switch is required to establish and release a connection for 
      data burst in order to transmit data burst fast without optical-
      electrical-optical conversion. For the purpose, General Switch 
     
     
    Choi, et. al.        Expires - December 2003                   [Page 5] 

    draft-choi-burst-control-00.txt                               June 2003 
     
      Management Protocol (GSMP) working group (WG) is working on 
      standardization about switch control for optical switching per data 
      burst as well as wavelength and fiber [10-11]. The work uses the 
      Reservation Request message in order to reserve switching resource 
      for data burst efficiently. According to different reservation 
      mechanisms for data burst transmission mentioned in section 4.1, the 
      switch controller tries to reserve the resource for the transmission 
      with the message. That is, by setting the start time and burst length 
      information contained in the message appropriately, resource on the 
      switch is reserved and activated for the enough bandwidth. The other 
      related to switch control follows GSMP WG documents [10-11].  
       
       
    4.3 Signaling control for data burst switching  
       
      Since the length of data burst is assumed to be short, one-way-
      reservation scheme is recommended to reserve resource for data burst 
      under the assumption that the out-of-band control channel is reliable 
      to deliver control message without transmission error or blocking. 
      The setup request to reserve resource for data burst is delivered 
      from an ingress node to an egress node. The intermediate nodes, which 
      receive the setup request, reserve the switching resource according 
      to information contained the request for data burst without sending 
      back acknowledge about the setup request. At this time, the switch 
      controller configures the switch element for the data burst switching 
      as well as reserves the switching resource. If there is inefficient 
      resource and no available output port the controller sends the 
      failure of the setup request to the ingress node.  
       
      Generalized Multi-Protocol Label Switching (GMPLS) signaling protocol, 
      such as RSVP-TE or CR-LDP, can be used as a signaling protocol to 
      transmit and switch data burst with some modification or extension. 
      GMPLS supports multiple types of switching: Packet, Layer-2, TDM, 
      Lambda, and Fiber level switch capable [12-13]. For delivery of data 
      burst, GMPLS SHOULD support optical burst switch capable interface. 
      Since the existing signaling protocols use two-way reservation for 
      establishing label switched path (LSP), the protocols SHOULD be 
      modified to support one-way reservation for data burst. A new 
      identifier is required to identify data burst as a new switching unit 
      in the signal protocol. For the purpose, "Label for optical burst" 
      SHOULD be defined to identify data burst. The label is used to 
      identify data burst of which granularity is coarser than packet (PSC) 
      and finer than wavelength (LSC).  
       
       
    4.3.1 Label for identifying data burst  
       
      This label is used to identify data burst. The format and its 
      semantic is TBD. 
       
       
    4.3.2 Signaling messages for data burst switching 
     
     
    Choi, et. al.        Expires - December 2003                   [Page 6] 

    draft-choi-burst-control-00.txt                               June 2003 
     
       
      Signaling messages are used to establish a connection for data burst 
      in one-way reservation mechanism, not like the existing signaling 
      mechanisms which is based on two-way reservation. Therefore, the 
      existing signaling mechanisms SHOULD be modified to fast transmit and 
      switch data burst. The candidate protocols are CR-LDP and RSVP-TE. 
      The format and semantic of signaling message is TBD. 
       
       
       
    5. Conclusion 
       
      This draft specifies the requirements and basic technology for burst-
      level control in order to improvement channel efficiency in optical 
      networks. For achieving higher utilization of channel, data burst 
      with a finer granularity SHOULD be processed in all optical domain. 
      Burst-level control can be implemented with GSMP for switch control 
      and GMPLS for signaling protocol with some modification and extension.  
       
       
       
    6. Security Considerations 
       
      This document does not have any security concerns. The security 
      requirements using this document are described in the referenced 
      documents. 
     
     
     
    References 
       
      [1] C.A. Bracket, "Dense Wavelength Division Multiplexing Networks, 
      Principles and Applications", IEEE JSAC, August, 1990. 
       
      [2] Zang, H., Jue, J. P., Mukherjee, B., "A Review of routing and 
      wavelength assignment approaches for wavelength routed optical WDM 
      networks", Optical Networks Magazine, 2000 
       
      [3] D. J. Blumenthal, et. at., "Photonic packet switches: 
      Architectures and experimental implementations", Proceedings of the 
      IEEE, Nov., 1994 
       
      [4] Christer, B., Markus, H., Per, L., Lars, R., Peter, S., "Fast 
      Circuit Switching for the Next Generation of High Performance 
      Networks", JSAC, 1996 
       
      [5] C. Qiao, M. Yoo, "Choice, and Feature and Issues in Optical Burst      
      Switching", Optical Net. Mag., vol.1, No.2, April 2000, pp.36-44. 
       
      [6] C. Qiao, M. Yoo, "Optical Burst Switching (OBS) - a new paradigm 
      for an optical Internet", Journal of High Speed Networks, 1999 
       
     
     
    Choi, et. al.        Expires - December 2003                   [Page 7] 

    draft-choi-burst-control-00.txt                               June 2003 
     
      [7] J. Turner, "Terabit burst switcing", Journal of High Speed 
      Networks, 1999 
       
      [8] Ilia Baldine, George N. Rouskas, Harry G. Perros, Dan Stevension, 
      "JumpStart: A Just-in-time Signaling Architecture for WDM Burst-
      Switching Networks", IEEE Comm. Mag., Feb. 2002. 
       
      [9] Illia Baldine, et. al., "JumpStart: A Just-in-Time Signaling 
      Architecture for WDM Burst-Switched Networks", IEEE Comm. Mag., Feb., 
      2002 
       
      [10] Doria, A, "GSMPv3 Base Specification", draft-ieft-gsmp-v3-base-
      spec-02.txt, June 2003. 
       
      [11] Junkyun Choi, JungYul Choi, et. al., "General Switch Management 
      Protocol (GSMP) v3 for Optical Support", draft-ietf-gsmp-optical-
      02.txt (work in progress), June 2003. 
       
      [12] Mannie, E., et. al., "Generalized Multi-Protocol Label Switching 
      (GMPLS) Architecture", draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-architecture-03.txt 
      (work in progress), August 2002.  
       
      [13] Ashwood-Smith, D., et. al., "Generalized MPLS - Signaling 
      Functional Description", RFC3471, Jan. 2003. 
       
       
       
    Acknowledgement 
       
      This work was supported in part by the Korean Science and Engineering 
      Foundation (KOSEF) through OIRC project 
       
       
       
    Author's Addresses 
       
      Jun Kyun Choi 
      Information and Communications University (ICU) 
      58-4 Hwa Ahm Dong, Yusong, Daejon  
      Korea 305-732 
      Phone: +82-42-866-6122 
      Email: jkchoi@icu.ac.kr 
       
      Min Ho Kang 
      Information and Communications University (ICU) 
      58-4 Hwa Ahm Dong, Yusong, Daejon  
      Korea 305-732 
      Phone: +82-42-866-6136 
      Email: mhkang@icu.ac.kr 
       
      Jung Yul Choi 
      Information and Communications University (ICU) 
     
     
    Choi, et. al.        Expires - December 2003                   [Page 8] 

    draft-choi-burst-control-00.txt                               June 2003 
     
      58-4 Hwa Ahm Dong, Yusong, Daejon  
      Korea 305-732 
      Phone: +82-42-866-6208 
      Email: passjay@icu.ac.kr 
       
      Tae-Gon Noh 
      Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology 
      P.O. Box 111, Suwon, Kyoungki 
      Korea, 440-600 
      Phone: +82-31-280-9621 
      Email: tgnoh@samsung.com 
        
      Kyoo Ryon Hahm 
      Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology 
      P.O. Box 111, Suwon, Kyoungki 
      Korea, 440-600 
      Phone: +82-31-280-9549 
      Email: ryonhahm@samsung.com 
       
       
    Full Copyright Statement 
       
      Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002).  All Rights Reserved. This 
      document and translations of it MAY be copied and furnished to others, 
      and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it or 
      assist in its implementation MAY be prepared, copied, published and 
      distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any kind, 
      provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are 
      included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this 
      document itself MAY not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
      the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other   
      Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
      developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for   
      copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process MUST be   
      followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than   
      English.  
       
      The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be 
      revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.     
       
      This document and the information contained herein is provided on an    
      "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING    
      TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING    
      BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION    
      HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF    
      MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
     
     
     
    Choi, et. al.        Expires - December 2003                   [Page 9] 
