



IETF                                                        N. Tomkinson
Internet-Draft                                             N. Borenstein
Intended status: Standards Track                            Mimecast Ltd
Expires: January 7, 2016                                   July 06, 2015


                     Multiple Language Content Type
                draft-tomkinson-slim-multilangcontent-01

Abstract

   This document defines an addition to the Multipurpose Internet Mail
   Extensions (MIME) standard to make it possible to send one message
   that contains multiple language versions of the same information.
   The translations would be identified by a language code and selected
   by the email client based on a user's language settings or locale.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 7, 2016.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2015 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.



Tomkinson & Borenstein   Expires January 7, 2016                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft       Multiple Language Content Type            July 2015


1.  Introduction

   Since the invention of email and the rapid spread of the internet,
   more and more people have been able to communicate in more and more
   countries and in more and more languages.  But during this time of
   technological evolution, email has remained a single language
   communication tool, whether it is English to English, Spanish to
   Spanish or Japanese to Japanese.

   Also during this time, many corporations have established their
   offices in multi-cultural cities and formed departments and teams
   that span continents, cultures and languages so the need to
   communicate efficiently with little margin for miscommunication has
   grown exponentially.

   The objective of this document is to define an addition to the
   Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions (MIME) standard, to make it
   possible to send a single message to a group of people in such a way
   that all of the recipients can read the email in their preferred
   language.  The methods of translation of the message content are
   beyond the scope of this document, but the structure of the email
   itself is defined herein.

   Whilst this document depends on identification of language in message
   parts for non-real-time communication, there is a companion document
   that is concerned with a similar problem for real-time communication:
   [I-D.gellens-slim-negotiating-human-language]

1.1.  Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].

2.  The Content-Type Header Field

   When there is a requirement to send a message in a number of
   different languages and the translations are to be embedded in the
   same message, the multipart subtype "multipart/multilingual" SHOULD
   be used to help the receiving email client make sense of the message
   structure.

   The suggested multipart subtype "multipart/multilingual" has similar
   semantics to "multipart/alternative" (as discussed in RFC 2046
   [RFC2046]) in that each of the message parts is an alternative
   version of the same information.  The primary difference between
   "multipart/multilingual" and "multipart/alternative" is that when
   using "multipart/multilingual", the message part to select for



Tomkinson & Borenstein   Expires January 7, 2016                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft       Multiple Language Content Type            July 2015


   rendering is chosen based on the values of the Content-Language field
   and the Translation-Type field instead of the ordering of the parts
   and the Content-Types.

   The syntax for this multipart subtype conforms to the common syntax
   for subtypes of multipart given in section 5.1.1. of RFC 2046
   [RFC2046].  An example "multipart/multilingual" Content-Type header
   field would look like this:

   Content-Type: multipart/multilingual; boundary=01189998819991197253

3.  The Message Parts

   A multipart/multilingual message will have a number of message parts:
   exactly one multilingual preface, one or more language message parts
   and zero or one unmatched message part.  The details of these are
   described below.

3.1.  The Multilingual Preface

   In order for the message to be received and displayed in non-
   conforming email clients, the message SHOULD contain an explanatory
   message part which MUST-NOT be marked with a Content-Language field
   and MUST be the first of the message parts.  Because non-conforming
   email clients are expected to treat the message as multipart/mixed
   (in accordance with sections 5.1.3 and 5.1.7 of RFC 2046 [RFC2046])
   they may show all of the message parts sequentially or as
   attachments.  Including and showing this explanatory part will help
   the message recipient understand the message structure.

   This initial message part SHOULD explain briefly to the message
   recipient that the message contains multiple languages and the parts
   may be rendered sequentially or as attachments.  This SHOULD be
   presented in the same languages that are provided in the subsequent
   language message parts.

   Whilst this section of the message is useful for backward
   compatibility, it SHOULD only be shown when rendered by a non-
   conforming email client because conforming email clients SHOULD only
   show the single language message part identified by the user's
   preferred language (or locale) and the language message part's
   Content-Language.

   For an example of a Multilingual Preface, see the examples in
   Section 8.






Tomkinson & Borenstein   Expires January 7, 2016                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft       Multiple Language Content Type            July 2015


3.2.  The Language Message Parts

   The language message parts are translations of the same message
   content.  These message parts MAY be ordered so that the first part
   after the multilingual preface is in the language believed to be the
   most likely to be recognised by the recipient.  All of the language
   message parts MUST have a Content-Language field and a Content-Type
   field, they SHOULD have a Subject field and MAY have a Translation-
   Type field.

   The Content-Type for each individual language part MAY be any MIME
   type (including multipart subtypes such as multipart/alternative).
   However, it is recommended that the Content-Type of the language
   parts is kept as simple as possible for interoperability with
   existing email clients.  The language parts are not required to have
   matching Content-Types or multipart structures.  For example, there
   might be an English part of type "text/html" followed by a Spanish
   part of type "application/pdf" followed by a Chinese part of type
   "image/jpeg".  Whatever the content-type, the contents SHOULD be
   composed for optimal viewing in the specified language.

3.3.  The Unmatched Message Part

   If there is content intended for the recipient to see if they have a
   preferred language other than one of those specified in the language
   parts, another part MAY be provided.  This would be useful when a
   language independent graphic is available.  When this unmatched part
   is present, it MUST be the last part, MUST NOT have a Content-
   Language field and SHOULD-NOT have a Subject field.

4.  Message Part Selection

   The logic for selecting the message part to render and present to the
   recipient is quite straightforward and is summarised in the next few
   paragraphs.

   Firstly, if the email client does not understand multipart/
   multilingual then it SHOULD treat the message as if it was multipart/
   mixed and render message parts accordingly.

   If the email client does understand multipart/multilingual then it
   SHOULD ignore the multilingual preface and select the best match for
   the user's preferred language from the language message parts
   available.  Also, the user may prefer to see the original message
   content in their second language over a machine translation in their
   first language.  The Translation-Type field value can be used for
   further selection based on this preference.  The selection of
   language part may be implemented in a variety of ways and is



Tomkinson & Borenstein   Expires January 7, 2016                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft       Multiple Language Content Type            July 2015


   dependent on how the email client manages its user preferences.  The
   ultimate goal is to render the most appropriate translation for the
   user.  Similarly, the subject should be chosen from the selected
   language message part.

   If there is no match for the user's preferred language (or there is
   no preferred language information available) the email client SHOULD
   select the unmatched part (if one exists) or the first language part
   (directly after the multilingual preface) if an unmatched part does
   not exist.  The Subject header field value should be used whenever a
   suitable translation cannot be identified.

   If there is no translation type preference information available, the
   values of the Translation-Type field may be ignored.

   Additionally, interactive implementations MAY offer the user a choice
   from among the available languages.

5.  The Content-Language Field

   The Content-Language field in the individual language message parts
   is used to identify the language in which the message part is
   written.  Based on the value of this field, a conforming email client
   can determine which message part to display (given the user's
   language settings or locale).

   The Content-Language MUST comply with RFC 3282 [RFC3282] (which
   defines the Content-Language field) and BCP 47/RFC 5646 [RFC5646]
   (which defines the structure and semantics for the language code
   values).  While RFC 5646 provides a mechanism accommodating
   increasingly fine-grained distinctions, in the interest of maximum
   interoperability, each Content-Language value SHOULD be restricted to
   the largest granularity of language tags; in other words, it is
   RECOMMENDED to specify only a Primary-subtag and NOT to include
   subtags (e.g., for region or dialect) unless the languages might be
   mutually incomprehensible without them.  Examples of this field for
   English, German and an instruction manual in Spanish and French,
   could look like the following:

   Content-Language: en

   Content-Language: de

   Content-Language: es, fr







Tomkinson & Borenstein   Expires January 7, 2016                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft       Multiple Language Content Type            July 2015


6.  The Translation-Type Field

   The Translation-Type field in the individual language message parts
   is used to identify the type of translation.  Based on the value of
   this field and the user's preferences, a conforming email client can
   determine which message part to display.

   This field can have one of three possible values: 'original', 'human'
   or 'automated' although other values may be added in the future.  A
   value of 'original' is given in the language message part that is in
   the original language.  A value of 'human' is used when a language
   message part is translated by a human translator.  A value of
   'automated' is used when a language message part has been translated
   by an electronic agent without proofreading or subsequent correction.

   Examples of this field may look like this:

   Translation-Type: original

   Translation-Type: human

7.  The Subject Field in the Language Message parts

   On receipt of the message, conforming email clients will need to
   render the subject in the correct language for the recipient.  To
   enable this the Subject field SHOULD be provided in each language
   message part.  The value for this field should be a translation of
   the email subject.

   US-ASCII and 'encoded-word' examples of this field may look like
   this:

   Subject: A really simple email subject

   Subject: =?iso-8859-1?Q?un_asunto_de_correo_electr=F3nico_sencillo?=

   See RFC 2047 [RFC2047] for the specification of 'encoded-word'.

8.  Examples

8.1.  An Example of a Simple Multiple language email message

   Below is an example of a simple multiple language email message
   formatted using the method detailed in this document.







Tomkinson & Borenstein   Expires January 7, 2016                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft       Multiple Language Content Type            July 2015


   From: Nik
   To: Nathaniel
   Subject:  example of a message in Spanish and English
   Content-Type: multipart/multilingual; boundary=01189998819991197253

   --01189998819991197253

   This is a message in two languages: English and Spanish.  It says the
   same thing in each language.  If you can read it in one language,
   you can ignore the other translations. The other translations may be
   presented as attachments or grouped together.

   Este es un mensaje en dos idiomas: Ingles y Espanol. Dice lo mismo en
   cada idioma. Si puede leerlo en un idioma, puede ignorar las otras
   traducciones. Las otras traducciones pueden presentes como archivos
   adjuntos o agrupados.

   --01189998819991197253
   Content-Language: en
   Translation-Type: original
   Content-Type: text/plain
   Subject: example of a message in Spanish and English

   Hello, this message content is provided in your language.

   --01189998819991197253
   Content-Language: es
   Translation-Type: human
   Content-Type: text/plain
   Subject: =?iso-8859-1?Q?ejemplo_pr=E1ctico_de_mensaje_
   en_espa=F1ol_e_ingl=E9s?=

   Hola, el contenido de este mensaje esta disponible en su idioma.

   --01189998819991197253
   Content-Type: image/gif

   ..GIF image showing iconic or language-independent content here..

   --01189998819991197253--

8.2.  An Example of a Complex Multiple language email message

   Below is an example of a more complex multiple language email message
   formatted using the method detailed in this document.  Note that the
   language message parts have multipart contents and would therefore
   require further processing to determine the content to display.




Tomkinson & Borenstein   Expires January 7, 2016                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft       Multiple Language Content Type            July 2015


   From: Nik
   To: Nathaniel
   Subject:  example of a message in Spanish and English
   Content-Type: multipart/multilingual; boundary=01189998819991197253

   --01189998819991197253

   This is a message in two languages: English and Spanish.  It says the
   same thing in each language.  If you can read it in one language,
   you can ignore the other translations. The other translations may be
   presented as attachments or grouped together.

   Este es un mensaje en dos idiomas: Ingles y Espanol. Dice lo mismo en
   cada idioma. Si puede leerlo en un idioma, puede ignorar las otras
   traducciones. Las otras traducciones pueden presentes como archivos
   adjuntos o agrupados.

   --01189998819991197253
   Content-Language: en
   Translation-Type: original
   Content-Type: multipart/alternative; boundary=multipartaltboundary
   Subject: example of a message in Spanish and English

   --multipartaltboundary
   Content-Type: text/plain

   Hello, this message content is provided in your language.

   --multipartaltboundary
   Content-Type: text/html

   <html><body><p>Hello, this message content is provided in your
   language.<p></body></html>

   --multipartaltboundary--

   --01189998819991197253
   Content-Language: es
   Translation-Type: human
   Content-Type: multipart/mixed; boundary=multipartmixboundary
   Subject: =?iso-8859-1?Q?ejemplo_pr=E1ctico_de_mensaje_
   en_espa=F1ol_e_ingl=E9s?=

   --multipartmixboundary
   Content-Type:application/pdf

   ..PDF file in Spanish here..




Tomkinson & Borenstein   Expires January 7, 2016                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft       Multiple Language Content Type            July 2015


   --multipartmixboundary
   Content-Type:image/jpeg

   ..JPEG image showing Spanish content here..

   --multipartmixboundary--

   --01189998819991197253
   Content-Type: image/gif

   ..GIF image showing iconic or language-independent content here..

   --01189998819991197253--

9.  Changes from Previous Versions

9.1.  Changes from draft-tomkinson-multilangcontent-01 to draft-
      tomkinson-slim-multilangcontent-00

   o  File name and version number changed to reflect the proposed WG
      name SLIM (Selection of Language for Internet Media).

   o  Replaced the Subject-Translation field in the language message
      parts with Subject and provided US-ASCII and non-US-ASCII
      examples.

   o  Introduced the language-independent unmatched message part.

   o  Many wording improvements and clarifications throughout the
      document.

9.2.  Changes from draft-tomkinson-slim-multilangcontent-00 to draft-
      tomkinson-slim-multilangcontent-01

   o  Added Translation-Type in each language message part to identify
      the source of the translation (original/human/automated).

10.  Acknowledgements

   The authors are grateful for the helpful input received from many
   people but would especially like to acknowledge the help of Harald
   Alvestrand, Stephane Bortzmeyer, Mark Davis, Doug Ewell, Randall
   Gellens, Gunnar Hellstrom, Alexey Melnikov, Fiona Tomkinson, Simon
   Tyler and Daniel Vargha.  The authors would also like to thank Luis
   de Pablo for his work on the Spanish translations.






Tomkinson & Borenstein   Expires January 7, 2016                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft       Multiple Language Content Type            July 2015


11.  IANA Considerations

   The multipart/multilingual MIME type will be registered with IANA.

12.  Security Considerations

   This document has no additional security considerations beyond those
   that apply to the standards and procedures on which it is built.

13.  References

13.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2046]  Freed, N. and N. Borenstein, "Multipurpose Internet Mail
              Extensions (MIME) Part Two: Media Types", RFC 2046,
              November 1996.

   [RFC2047]  Moore, K., "MIME (Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions)
              Part Three: Message Header Extensions for Non-ASCII Text",
              RFC 2047, November 1996.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC3282]  Alvestrand, H., "Content Language Headers", RFC 3282, May
              2002.

   [RFC5646]  Phillips, A. and M. Davis, "Tags for Identifying
              Languages", BCP 47, RFC 5646, September 2009.

13.2.  Informational References

   [I-D.gellens-slim-negotiating-human-language]
              Gellens, R., "Negotiating Human Language in Real-Time
              Communications", draft-gellens-slim-negotiating-human-
              language-02 (work in progress), July 2015.

Authors' Addresses

   Nik Tomkinson
   Mimecast Ltd
   CityPoint, One Ropemaker Street
   London  EC2Y 9AW
   United Kingdom

   Email: rfc.nik.tomkinson@gmail.com





Tomkinson & Borenstein   Expires January 7, 2016               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft       Multiple Language Content Type            July 2015


   Nathaniel Borenstein
   Mimecast Ltd
   480 Pleasant Street
   Watertown  MA 02472
   North America

   Email: nsb@mimecast.com












































Tomkinson & Borenstein   Expires January 7, 2016               [Page 11]
