

SIPPING                                                      C. Jennings
Internet-Draft                                             Cisco Systems
Expires: January 9, 2005                                   July 11, 2004


                       SIP Computational Puzzles
                     draft-jennings-sip-hashcash-00

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, I certify that any applicable
   patent or other IPR claims of which I am aware have been disclosed,
   and any of which I become aware will be disclosed, in accordance with
   RFC 3668.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 9, 2005.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).  All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   SPAM has been a frustrating problem in communications and also in
   SIP.  Forcing the client requesting the service to perform a
   calculation that limits the rate and increases the cost of requests
   is one of the techniques that may help manage this problem.  This
   draft defines a way to allow a UAS to ask the UAC to compute a
   computationally expensive hash based function and present the result
   to the UAS.

   This draft is a very incomplete and more of a sketch of a solution
   than a final draft.



Jennings                Expires January 9, 2005                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                SIP Puzzles                      July 2004


1.  Introduction

   This draft defines a mechanism for a proxy or UAS to request that a
   UAC compute the solution to a puzzle.  The puzzle is based on finding
   a value called the pre-image that when hashed with SHA 1 results in a
   specific value referred to as the image.  The puzzle provides a
   number, k, that indicates how how many bit of the pre-image have not
   been provided, the pre-image with some of the bits replaced with 0,
   and the image.  The proxy or UAS can send a 419 response to a SIP
   request and include a puzzle header that provides the puzzle to
   compute.  The UAC can compute a solution to this puzzle and resubmit
   the request with the solution in the puzzle header.

2.  Requirements

   Allow a UAS to request a variable amount of work from a UAC.

   Make sure this work cannot be used for attacking other systems.

3.  Puzzles

   The following is a non-normative way for a UAS or proxy to construct
   a puzzle.  The following strings are concatenated: 1) a secret that
   only this device knows and would typically be a crypto random string
   of bits; 2) the current time, rounded to the nearest minute; 3) the
   URI of the request, the Call-ID, the From tags, and the branch tag
   for a proxy or the To tag for a UAS.  The string is hashed with SHA1
   to form the pre-image.  The pre-image is appended to the string
   "z9hG4bK" and the SHA1 hash of this is computed to get the value of
   the image.  This concatenation is done so that this mechanism cannot
   be used as a distributed computation to reverse arbitrary hashed
   values.  A value k indicates how many bits of the pre-image are to be
   removed.  The value k could be a configurable parameter or could be
   dynamically discovered by the software based on how long a hash
   should take and the speed of the computer it was running on.  In the
   latter case, the resulting software would automatically choose larger
   values of k as the computer got faster.  The low order k bits of the
   pre-image are set to zero.  The puzzle consists of k, the pre-image
   (with the low order bits set to zero), and the image.

   The normative definition of a puzzle is as follows.  A puzzle is
   three values, k, pre-image, and image.  There MUST exist a value X
   such that all but the k low order bits of X match the pre-image, and
   the SHA 1 hash of the concatenation of "z9hG4bK" and X results in a
   value that MUST be equal to the image.  The value X is the solution
   to the puzzle.





Jennings                Expires January 9, 2005                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                SIP Puzzles                      July 2004


4.  Semantics

   A proxy or UAS MAY reject a request with a 419 status code and
   request that a particular computation be performed.  The puzzle is
   constructed as described in section X.

   A UAC that receives a 419 request must compute the result that
   satisfies the challenge and resubmit the request with the computed
   answer.  If the UAC knows that it is routing the request through a
   proxy that will compute the answer for the UAC, it MAY leave the
   answer blank.  A proxy that receives a request that contains a puzzle
   but does not have a solution to the puzzle MAY compute the solution
   and modify the header.

5.  Example

6.  Syntax

   A new header called Puzzle carries the puzzle and solution
   information.  It has a parameter k that has the number of bits as a
   text encoded number, a parameter p that carries the pre image base 64
   encoded, and a parameter i that carries the image value base 64
   encoded.  The solution is put in the same header but the value of k
   is 0 when it is a solution.

   Example puzzle


       Puzzle: k=10;p="XPokF1n0+NG6iwRcYzeXuETrtDo=";
                    i="XPokF1n0+NG6iwRcYzeXuETrtDo="


   Example solution


       Puzzle: k=0;p="XPokF1n0+NG6iwRcYzeXuETrtDo=";
                   i="XPokF1n0+NG6iwRcYzeXuETrtDo="



7.  Security Considerations

   TODO - many things left to do here.

   E wants to send spam to A.  Calls A, get challenge.  Encourages
   others to call E.  When B calls E, E passes on the puzzle to B.  B
   solves it and sends result to E who sends it to A.




Jennings                Expires January 9, 2005                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                SIP Puzzles                      July 2004


8.  IANA

   TODO - Define new header.

   TODO - Define 419 status code.

9.  Open Issues

   Put puzzle in header or body?

10.  References

10.1  Normative References

   [1]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
        Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [2]  Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston, A.,
        Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley, M. and E. Schooler, "SIP:
        Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261, June 2002.

   [3]  Eastlake, D. and P. Jones, "US Secure Hash Algorithm 1 (SHA1)",
        RFC 3174, September 2001.

10.2  Informational References

   [4]  Black, A., "http://www.hashcash.org/", June 2004.


Author's Address

   Cullen Jennings
   Cisco Systems
   170 West Tasman Drive
   MS: SJC-21/2
   San Jose, CA  95134
   USA

   Phone: +1 408 902-3341
   EMail: fluffy@cisco.com











Jennings                Expires January 9, 2005                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                SIP Puzzles                      July 2004


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Jennings                Expires January 9, 2005                 [Page 5]

