



Network Working Group                                           A. Begen
Internet-Draft                                                     Cisco
Intended status: Informational                               K. Streeter
Expires: April 30, 2015                       Adobe Systems Incorporated
                                                             I. Bouazizi
                                                        Samsung Research
                                                              F. Denoual
                                            Canon Research Centre France
                                                        October 27, 2014


             MPEG DASH Requirements for a webpush Protocol
                    draft-begen-webpush-dash-reqs-00

Abstract

   This draft presents two of the ongoing core experiments for the
   amendment of the MPEG Dynamic Adaptive Streaming over HTTP (DASH)
   specification and discusses some requirements for a webpush protocol
   in the context of these core experiments.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 30, 2015.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2014 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect



Begen, et al.            Expires April 30, 2015                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft           MPEG DASH Requirements             October 2014


   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  DASH Requirements in the Core Experiments . . . . . . . . . .   3
     2.1.  Requirements from the FDH CE  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     2.2.  Requirements from the SAND CE . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  Guidance from the IETF  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   4.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   5.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   6.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5

1.  Introduction

   HTTP adaptive streaming (HAS) has become the technology of choice for
   delivering video content over the Internet.  HAS will play an
   increasingly important role in delivering video to the primary and
   secondary screens.

   In HAS, streaming clients are offered multiple representations of the
   same content.  Clients independently choose a segment (i.e., a piece
   of the content) belonging to a representation to fetch from the
   content delivery network, a choice that is made at every switching
   boundary (usually every 2-10 seconds).  The choice is based on a
   number of parameters, including the network throughput observed by
   the client.

   To date they have been several different HAS implementations from
   different vendors.  To achieve interoperability, MPEG has started
   working on a specification in 2010 and published the first edition of
   the Dynamic Adaptive Streaming over HTTP specification in 2012.
   Earlier this year, the second edition has been published
   [DASH-Part1].

   To add new features and capabilities to the DASH applications, the
   DASH subgroup is currently running a number of core experiments (CE)
   [DASH-CE].  Two of these CEs are (i) DASH over Full Duplex HTTP-based
   Protocols (FDH) and (ii) Server and Network Assisted DASH (SAND).  In
   these CEs, there is a need for a webpush protocol.  This draft
   discusses some requirements for a such protocol to be used in DASH
   applications.





Begen, et al.            Expires April 30, 2015                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft           MPEG DASH Requirements             October 2014


2.  DASH Requirements in the Core Experiments

2.1.  Requirements from the FDH CE

   The FDH CE is investigating the problem of delivering media segments
   with shorter delay and/or reducing the request processing on the HTTP
   server.  The technologies considered are HTTP/2 and WebSockets.

   The main idea is that once a client is interested in streaming a
   particular content (e.g., a live channel), it may be beneficial not
   to send an individual GET request for each segment to the network.
   The network may keep sending segments once they become available to
   the client for a predetermined amount of time or until the client
   tells the server to stop.

   We realize that a content delivery network or an operator network can
   consist of both HTTP/2 enabled servers and HTTP 1.1 servers as well
   as proxy servers, some of which could have been implemented
   improperly.  An important requirement for us is that the push feature
   should not cause any caching inconsistency or reduce caching
   efficiency.  Note that not all clients streaming the same content
   will necessarily use the push feature.  Some may continue fetching
   each segment separately (the conventional way), some may ask for the
   push of the next k segments from the server or some may ask for push
   till a further command.

   An important issue is to decide how the clients will be able to ask
   for not one but multiple segments in a single GET request, i.e.,
   specifying a list of segments or potentially a pattern that includes
   wildcards or any other agreeable formats.  At least two options are
   considered: a modified URL scheme and the use of an extension header.
   In both cases modifications are expected on the origin server and
   possibly the cache servers (We will likely need a special handler on
   the servers).  We would like to get advice on any of these
   technologies taking into account among others backward-compatibility,
   efficiency, caching issues, processing load, extensibility and
   likelihood of implementation.

   The DASH clients may run in browsers, mobile applications, on
   personal computers or other connected devices.  Typically it cannot
   be assumed that in all applications a DASH client will have access to
   the HTTP stack in a given platform.  Such constraints should be taken
   into account when looking for a broadly acceptable and highly-
   scalable solution.

2.2.  Requirements from the SAND CE





Begen, et al.            Expires April 30, 2015                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft           MPEG DASH Requirements             October 2014


   The SAND CE has the goal of establishing a bi-directional messaging
   plane between the clients and other so-called Dash-aware Network
   Elements (DANE).  The DANEs may also communicate with each other.
   Common DANEs include proxies and caches as well as analytics servers
   and other network devices.  On the direction from a DANE to a DASH
   client (or another DANE), the messages can carry any kind of
   operational information and/or assistance information so that the
   DASH client (or the DANE) can take a proper action.  On the direction
   from a DASH client to a DANE, the messages are expected to carry
   metrics and status information.

   A simple use case for sending an operational information to a DASH
   client is to ask the client to switch to a particular CDN provider.
   Another use case is to ask the DASH client to fetch a particular
   representation, simply because that representation's segments are
   already cached at the edge of the network.  Yet other use cases may
   include network status information such as bitrate guarantees,
   delays, etc.

   An obvious choice for the protocol to carry these SAND messages back
   and forth is HTTP.  The DASH clients can send their metrics and
   status messages upon demand or periodically to a pre-designated
   server.  However, sending messages in the other direction (from a
   DANE to a DASH client) may be more challenging since DASH clients may
   or may not be expecting such a message.  It is important to note that
   we do not want to put time-sensitive client-specific feedback
   messages on top of the HTTP responses containing non-time-critical
   and non-client-specific media segments.

   To enable bi-directional communication between a DASH client and a
   DANE, we can also use WebSockets or the HTTP/2 PUSH technologies.
   However, we consider a more lightweight protocol that will scale to
   large populations when sending a common message or individual
   messages.

3.  Guidance from the IETF

   We would like to ask the webpush WG to consider media delivery use
   cases as part of the webpush activity, including the delivery of MPEG
   DASH content.  We also would like to ask the webpush WG to advise us
   on best practices on using header and URL based signaling for push
   behavior, and get feedback on proper message channels for SAND.









Begen, et al.            Expires April 30, 2015                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft           MPEG DASH Requirements             October 2014


4.  Security Considerations

   There are no security considerations.

5.  IANA Considerations

   There are no IANA considerations.

6.  Informative References

   [DASH-Part1]
              Available at: http://standards.iso.org/ittf/
              PubliclyAvailableStandards/index.html, , "ISO/IEC
              23009-1:2014: Dynamic adaptive streaming over HTTP (DASH)
              -- Part 1: Media presentation description and segment
              formats (2nd edition)", May 2014.

   [DASH-CE]  Available at: http://wg11.sc29.org/doc_end_user/
              current_meeting_intermediate.php?id_meeting=162, ,
              "Descriptions of core experiments on DASH amendment
              (w14858)", Oct. 2014.

Authors' Addresses

   Ali Begen
   Cisco
   181 Bay Street
   Toronto, ON  M5J 2T3
   Canada

   EMail: abegen@cisco.com


   Kevin Streeter
   Adobe Systems Incorporated
   345 Park Avenue
   San Jose, CA  95110
   USA

   EMail: kstreete@adobe.com











Begen, et al.            Expires April 30, 2015                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft           MPEG DASH Requirements             October 2014


   Imed Bouazizi
   Samsung Research
   1301 E. Lookout Dr.
   Richardson, TX  75082
   USA

   EMail: i.bouazizi@sta.samsung.com


   Franck Denoual
   Canon Research Centre France
   Rue de la Touche Lambert
   Cesson-Sevigne  35517
   France

   EMail: franck.denoual@crf.canon.fr


































Begen, et al.            Expires April 30, 2015                 [Page 6]
