



IETF                                                          P. Kyzivat
Internet-Draft                                   Sorenson Communications
Intended status: Informational                          January 13, 2015
Expires: July 17, 2015


Telecommunications Relay Service Purpose for the Call-Info Header Field
                in the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)
            draft-kyzivat-dispatch-trs-call-info-purpose-00

Abstract

   This document defines and registers a value of "original-identity"
   for the "purpose" header field parameter of the Call-Info header
   field in the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP).

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on July 17, 2015.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2015 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.




Kyzivat                   Expires July 17, 2015                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft            TRS Call-Info Purpose             January 2015


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Mechanism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   3.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   4.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   5.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4

1.  Introduction

   The United States Federal Communications Commission (FCC) sponsors
   specialized Telecommunications Relay Services (TRS) for US residents
   who are deaf, deaf-blind, and hard-of-hearing.  These "relay"
   services translate audio telephone calls into other modalities that
   can be used by these TRS users.  These services are being updated to
   employ SIP signaling.

   TRS services are provided by a number of private service providers.
   Individual users enroll with a provider, and the providers peer with
   one another and with public telecommunications providers to provide
   connectivity equivalent with basic telephone network.  Users enrolled
   with one provider may receive relay services from another provider.

   For providers to receive reimbursement for handling a call the FCC
   requires that the provider supply call detail including the URI of
   the device the hearing impaired user is using for the call.  When the
   service provider that is rendering the service is not the one
   enrolling the user this information is not necessarily available
   naturally in the SIP signaling.  To meet the requirement, this
   document defines a SIP extension to carry the URI of the user's
   device from the server enrolling the user to the server providing the
   service.

2.  Mechanism

   In some simple cases the URI of the hearing impaired user could be
   present in the signaling as the Contact URI of the caller or callee.
   However this is often not case due to the presence of intermediate
   devices acting as B2BUAs.  B2BUAs often modify the Contact URI,
   because they need the downstream entity to contact the B2BUA rather
   than the actual contact.  There are relay services that actually need
   the "real" contact URI, and TRS is one of them.

   To provide a mechanism that supplies the needed information in common
   deployments, this document calls for using the SIP Call-Info header
   field to carry the hearing impaired user's URI.  To distinguish this




Kyzivat                   Expires July 17, 2015                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft            TRS Call-Info Purpose             January 2015


   use of Call-Info from other uses, a new 'purpose' parameter value
   ("original-identity") is used.  For example:

      Call-Info: sip:10.1.1.1; purpose="original-identity"

   A Call-Info with this purpose can be inserted by a server in requests
   and responses in the following cases:

   o  in requests sent toward a peer TRS server when this server knows
      the the device originating the request is an enrolled TRS device;

   o  in responses sent toward a peer TRS server when this server knows
      that the target of the corresponding request is an enrolled TRS
      device.

3.  Security Considerations

   The security considerations for the extension defined herein are
   comparable to those for the Contact-URI.  The security considerations
   of [RFC3261] apply to this extension and deal with disclosure of this
   information to entities that are not in the signaling path for the
   call.

   In the case where the caller or callee wishes to withhold its
   identity from the other UA in the call, the considerations of
   [RFC3323] can be employed.  Because 'original-identity' is used to
   enable an intermediary to provide service, user-provided-privacy is
   not an option, and network-provided-privacy is the only option.  TRS
   service providers MUST act as a privacy service and remove or
   anonymize the URI in a Call-Info with purpose 'original-identity'
   when providing 'header' privacy.

   [NOTE: I would prefer to avoid having to define specific extensions
   to RFC3323 for this, and complex normative requirements.  But I'm not
   sure it is possible to avoid doing so.]

4.  IANA Considerations

   This document defines and registers a new predefined value "original-
   identity" for the "purpose" header field parameter of the Call-Info
   header field (defined in [RFC3261]), following the procedures
   specified in [RFC3968].

   IANA is requested to revise the existing entry for the Call-Info
   header Field in the "Header Field Parameters and Parameter Values"
   table of the "Session Initiation Protool (SIP) Parameters" registry,
   by adding a reference to this document.




Kyzivat                   Expires July 17, 2015                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft            TRS Call-Info Purpose             January 2015


5.  Informative References

   [RFC3261]  Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston,
              A., Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley, M., and E.
              Schooler, "SIP: Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261,
              June 2002.

   [RFC3323]  Peterson, J., "A Privacy Mechanism for the Session
              Initiation Protocol (SIP)", RFC 3323, November 2002.

   [RFC3968]  Camarillo, G., "The Internet Assigned Number Authority
              (IANA) Header Field Parameter Registry for the Session
              Initiation Protocol (SIP)", BCP 98, RFC 3968, December
              2004.

Author's Address

   Paul Kyzivat
   Sorenson Communications
   Hudson, MA
   US

   Email: pkyzivat@alum.mit.edu




























Kyzivat                   Expires July 17, 2015                 [Page 4]
