



Network Working Group                                         J. Klensin
Internet-Draft
Expires: December 26, 2006                                    S. Dawkins
                                                                  Huawei
                                                           June 24, 2006


  Terms of Appointments for NomCom-selected IETF Leadership Positions
                    draft-klensin-nomcom-term-01.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 26, 2006.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

Abstract

   A consensus is emerging in the IETF that very long tenure in
   leadership roles is not in the best interests of the community.
   While, in theory, that advice could simply be given to the NomCom,
   there is reason to believe that a different model for consideration
   of renewal or replacement for members of the leadership would be more
   efficient for the NomCom and would impose less hardship on incumbents
   and the community.  This document outlines that alternate method.



Klensin & Dawkins       Expires December 26, 2006               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft         NomCom and Terms of Office              June 2006


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.1.  Mailing List . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  The Review and Clean Nomination Model  . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     2.1.  Phase 1: Review of Incumbents  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     2.2.  Phase 2: Nomination and Selection of New Candidates  . . .  5
     2.3.  Revised schedule . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   3.  Previous Discussion Points . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     3.1.  IESG-only, or all NomCom appointments? . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.2.  "Doing an excellent job" as justification for third
           term?  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.3.  Guidance, or hard limit on service length? . . . . . . . .  7
   4.  Internationalization Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   5.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   6.  Security considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   7.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   8.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     8.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     8.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 10





























Klensin & Dawkins       Expires December 26, 2006               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft         NomCom and Terms of Office              June 2006


1.  Introduction

   A consensus is emerging in the IETF that very long tenure in
   leadership roles is not in the best interests of the community.
   While, in theory, that advice could simply be given to the NomCom,
   there is reason to believe that a different model for consideration
   of renewal or replacement for members of the leadership would be more
   efficient for the NomCom and would impose less hardship on incumbents
   and the community.  This document outlines that alternate method.

1.1.  Mailing List

   This proposal should be discussed on the main ietf list at ietf.org.


2.  The Review and Clean Nomination Model

   The current nomination process pits incumbents, incumbent
   performance, and questions of stability in the IESG against potential
   other candidates.  This is undesirable for a number of reasons.  It
   creates the notion of incumbents being "fired" rather than honorably
   retired to the citizenry after a brief period of contributing to the
   community by assuming a leadership role.  And, while there is
   significant value in treating stability as a goal, it can also create
   distortions about the degree of support various ideas have in the
   community.

   This specification changes the current model by reintroducing some
   principles that the author believes are widely held in the community
   and optimizing the selection process to support those principles.
   The principles include:
   o  Service in the IETF's leadership bodies is a short-term
      contribution to the community, not a career.  Indeed, assuming
      those positions may be considered a responsibility to the
      community.
   o  It takes long enough to learn the job of being an effective AD
      that, in general, having someone retire after a single two-year
      term is uneconomic for the community.
   o  Just as retirement of an AD after one term should be considered a
      major step because of the inefficiencies of the learning period,
      the six-month or more period in which an incumbent is uncertain
      about whether work should be planned that spans the "first meeting
      of the next year" introduces inefficiencies that should be
      minimized to the degree possible.
   o  A demonstrated shortage of people willing to do work in the IETF
      should be taken as an indication that there is insufficient real
      community interest in the work to reach a meaningful consensus
      about high-quality results.  While that position appears to be



Klensin & Dawkins       Expires December 26, 2006               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft         NomCom and Terms of Office              June 2006


      reasonably well-understood with regard to the number of active
      IETF participants interested in putting a working group together,
      and in finding leadership for working groups, the same principle
      probably should be applied to ADs and areas: if there are only one
      or two people willing and qualified to do the AD job, that may be
      an indication that the IETF should review the appropriateness of
      that area's existence or definition.

   To deal effectively with these problems, the NomCom consideration and
   evaluation process is divided into two phases.

2.1.  Phase 1: Review of Incumbents

   Incumbent performance should be evaluated, not compared to potential
   other candidates or replacements.  The incumbent will always have
   more experience.  An AD who has done his or her job well, will have
   accumulated strong proponents and probably strong detractors.  Other
   candidates are always risks, and direct comparison is inevitably
   difficult.

   In Phase 1, the NomCom will evaluate the performance of incumbents,
   collecting information from the community as needed to do that.  The
   NomCom is instructed that an incumbent should be returned once (i.e.,
   permitted/encouraged to serve two terms) unless there is strong
   evidence of problems (e.g., incompetence, inability to work with WGs,
   inability to work with other ADs, non-feasance, or malfeasance).
   Conversely, the NomCom should assume that it is better to return an
   incumbent who has served two terms to the community and active WG
   work unless some special circumstances apply.

   While this process allows flexibility, the NomCom is instructed that
   "special circumstances" should be a rare occurrence, based on what is
   best for the affected area, the IESG, and the IETF as a whole.
   Simply doing an outstanding job as an AD should not constitute
   "special circumstances" that would justify a third term.

   The level of special circumstances required for a fourth, or
   subsequent, term should be required to be much higher than that for a
   third: the intent is to make more than three terms a rare and nearly
   impossible event without formally prohibiting that through a term
   limit: it is important that the NomCom retain flexibility and the
   opportunity to judge special circumstances.

   Discussions between the NomCom and a candidate as to whether that
   candidate is willing to serve again should be covered by the NomCom's
   normal privacy rules except as mutually agreed.  If the NomCom
   chooses to not return a candidate who is willing to serve, the
   expectation is that this will be indistinguishable to the community



Klensin & Dawkins       Expires December 26, 2006               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft         NomCom and Terms of Office              June 2006


   from the candidate voluntarily stepping down.  Under normal
   circumstances, the NomCom is expected to conduct informational
   evaluations of even those candidates who have chosen to step down
   (the evaluations may inform later choices), but such candidates may
   negotiate with the NomCom as appropriate, perhaps supplying in-depth
   analysis of the relevant Area and its status and issues as an
   alternative.

   At the end of this phase, the NomCom submits the list of returning
   candidates to the IAB as usual.  The IAB makes its decision and the
   choices are announced to the community.  The list of (remaining) open
   slots is then announced to the community and nominations and
   recommendations sought.  Any incumbent who is not returned in this
   phase is not eligible for the relevant position in the second phase.

2.2.  Phase 2: Nomination and Selection of New Candidates

   This procedure works exactly as described in [RFC3777], with the
   understanding that no incumbent will ever be a candidate for the same
   position under this process.  As a side-effect, the process makes it
   more difficult than it has traditionally been to shift people around
   within the IESG: it is considered an explicit corollary to the
   principles above that an incumbent AD is one area should normally
   have working experience within one or more WGs in a new area before
   being considered as a candidate for AD in that area.

2.3.  Revised schedule

   [[to be supplied]]

   The authors are aware of other proposals that would also affect the
   NomCom timeline.  Rather than trying to develop a revised schedule on
   a per-proposal basis, we suggest that one NomCom schedule revision be
   considered, based on this and other proposals that would be
   accommodated.


3.  Previous Discussion Points

   In informal discussions before the initial version of this draft was
   completed and posted, there was considerable discussion on three
   points:
   o  Whether this proposal should apply only to IESG appointments, or
      to all NomCom appointments,
   o  Whether "doing an outstanding job" is justification for third
      terms, and





Klensin & Dawkins       Expires December 26, 2006               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft         NomCom and Terms of Office              June 2006


   o  Whether this proposal should contain a statement of guidance, or
      hard term limits.

   Reasonable people spoke in support of both sides on each of these
   points, but the proposal authors had to make choices.  The community
   will need to discuss, and decide upon, these issues.

3.1.  IESG-only, or all NomCom appointments?

   This specification has been written to apply to the IESG only, since
   the IESG's operational role and observed rates of AD burnout make it
   most obviously important there.

   It is possible that consideration should be given as to whether a
   similar or identical model should be applied to the IAB and/or other
   appointments made by the NomCom.

3.2.  "Doing an excellent job" as justification for third term?

   This specification is written to allow NomCom to return ADs for third
   terms, and beyond, due to "special circumstances".  One question
   we've been asked is whether "doing an outstanding job" should be
   included in "special circumstances".

   While our intention is to provide guidance to NomCom, rather than
   rules, this specification proposes that this guidance be "no".
   o  The community is better served by having former ADs returning to
      technical work.  A consistent criticism of the current working
      group process is that specifications often lack sufficient cross-
      area review when they are forwarded for publication.  ADs provide
      this type of review, but currently-serving ADs don't have time to
      provide reviews early in the development of a draft, where it is
      most useful and most likely to have a positive impact.
   o  Allowing "doing an outstanding job" to constitute "special
      circumstances" removes deterministic benefits of this model.  The
      intention is that ADs return to the community after two terms.  It
      is desired that all ADs "do an outstanding job" - this proposal
      would remove ADs who aren't headed for "outstanding", after their
      first term - but Only in Lake Woebegon are all the children above
      average, and Lake Wobegon is a fictitious place.
   o  We also note that former ADs are often asked to serve as working
      group chairs in difficult situations, to help with BOFs and WG
      charter discussions, and to carry out assignments that benefit
      from AD experience but do not require the assignee to be a serving
      AD.  It is unlikely that an outstanding AD who wants to continue
      to serve the community will be overlooked after leaving the IESG.





Klensin & Dawkins       Expires December 26, 2006               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft         NomCom and Terms of Office              June 2006


3.3.  Guidance, or hard limit on service length?

   There was considerable discussion about whether it was better to
   offer the NomCom the guidance above, discouraging terms beyond the
   second, or whether to flatly prohibit more than two terms.  One group
   believed that giving the NomCom a little extra flexibility was a good
   idea; the other believed that any additional flexibility would likely
   lead to very long terms since there would always be a reason to make
   an exception.

   The authors of this proposal prefer to offer NomCom guidance, rather
   than rules.  To take one example - if the NomCom believes that
   returning a third-term AD is appropriate (due, perhaps, to the other
   serving co-area director stepping down before the end of a second
   term), we prefer to allow NomCom this flexibility, rather than
   restrict them to a course of action that seems ill-advised.


4.  Internationalization Considerations

   This specification is about IETF Procedures.  It has no impact on
   internationalization issues.


5.  IANA Considerations

   This specification is about IETF Procedures.  It has no impact on
   IANA issues and does not contemplate any IANA actions.


6.  Security considerations

   This specification is about IETF Procedures for leadership selection.
   It has no impact on Internet security issues.


7.  Acknowledgements

   [[ to be supplied ]]


8.  References

8.1.  Normative References

   [RFC3777]  Galvin, J., "IAB and IESG Selection, Confirmation, and
              Recall Process: Operation of the Nominating and Recall
              Committees", BCP 10, RFC 3777, June 2004.



Klensin & Dawkins       Expires December 26, 2006               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft         NomCom and Terms of Office              June 2006


8.2.  Informative References


















































Klensin & Dawkins       Expires December 26, 2006               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft         NomCom and Terms of Office              June 2006


Authors' Addresses

   John C Klensin
   1770 Massachusetts Ave, #322
   Cambridge, MA  02140
   USA

   Phone: +1 617 491 5735
   Email: john-ietf@jck.com


   Spencer Dawkins
   Huawei Technologies (USA)
   1700 Alma Drive, Suite 100
   Plano, TX  75075
   US

   Phone: +1 469 229 5397
   Fax:   +1 972 509 0309
   Email: spencer@mcsr-labs.org































Klensin & Dawkins       Expires December 26, 2006               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft         NomCom and Terms of Office              June 2006


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Klensin & Dawkins       Expires December 26, 2006              [Page 10]


