

       SIPPING Workgroup                               A. van Wijk (editor) 
       Internet-Draft                                  Viataal 
       Category: Informational                          
       Expires: February 21 2006                       August 22 2005 
        
        
        
        Framework of requirements for real-time text conversation using SIP 
                                           
                           draft-ietf-sipping-toip-02.txt 
        
        
       Status of this Memo 
           
          By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any 
          applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware 
          have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes 
          aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79 
          [1]. 
           
          Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
          Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
          other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
          Drafts. 
           
          Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
          months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
          documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts 
          as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in 
          progress." 
           
          The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
          http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt. 
           
          The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
          http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
           
          This Internet-Draft will expire on February 21, 2006. 
           
       Copyright Notice 
           
          Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005). 
           
       Abstract  
                              
          This document provides the framework of requirements for real-time 
          character-by-character interactive text conversation over the IP 
          network using the Session Initiation Protocol and the Real-Time 
          Transport Protocol. It discusses requirements for real-time Text-
          over-IP as well as interworking between Text-over-IP and existing 
          text telephony on the PSTN and other networks. 
           
           

       A. van Wijk, et al.     Expires 21 February 2006      [Page 1 of 28] 
       Internet-Draft Requirements for real time text using SIP  August 2005 

       Table of Contents 
        
       1. Introduction.....................................................3 
       2. Scope............................................................4 
       3. Terminology......................................................4 
       4. Definitions......................................................4 
       5. Framework Description............................................6 
       5.1. General requirements for ToIP..................................6 
       5.1.1 General ToIP Summary..........................................8 
       5.2. General Requirements for ToIP Interworking.....................8 
       5.2.1 PSTN Interworking.............................................9 
       5.2.2 Cellular circuit switched Text-Telephony.....................10 
       5.2.2.1 Cellular "No-gain".........................................10 
       5.2.2.2 Cellular Text Telephone Modem (CTM)........................10 
       5.2.2.3 Cellular "Baudot mode".....................................11 
       5.2.3 Cellular data channel mode...................................11 
       5.2.4 Cellular Wireless ToIP.......................................11 
       5.2.5 Instant Messaging Support....................................11 
       6. Detailed requirements for ToIP..................................11 
       6.1. Pre-Session Requirements......................................12 
       6.2 Basic Point-to-Point Session Requirements......................12 
       6.2.1 Session control..............................................12 
       6.2.2 Text transport...............................................12 
       6.2.3 Session Setup................................................13 
       6.2.4 Addressing...................................................13 
       6.2.5 Alerting.....................................................14 
       6.2.6 Session information..........................................14 
       6.2.7 Session progress information.................................14 
       6.2.8 Session Negotiations.........................................15 
       6.2.9 Answering....................................................15 
       6.2.9.1 Answering Machine..........................................15 
       6.2.10 Actions During a Session....................................15 
       6.2.10.1 Text Transport............................................16 
       6.2.10.2 Handling Text and other Media.............................16 
       6.2.11 Additional session control..................................17 
       6.2.12 File storage................................................17 
       6.3 Conference Session Requirements................................17 
       6.4 Real-time Editing and User Alerting............................17 
       6.5 Emergency services.............................................17 
       6.6 User Mobility..................................................18 
       6.7 Firewalls and NATs.............................................18 
       7. Interworking Requirements for ToIP..............................18 
       7.1 ToIP Interworking Gateway Services.............................18 
       7.2 ToIP and PSTN/ISDN Text-Telephony Interworking.................18 
       7.3 ToIP and Cellular Wireless ToIP................................19 
       7.4 Instant Messaging Support......................................19 
       7.5 Common Text Gateway Functions..................................20 
       7.5.1 Protocol support.............................................20 
       7.5.2 Relay buffer storage.........................................20 
       7.5.3 Emergency calls through gateways.............................21 
       7.5.4 Text Gateway Invocation......................................21 
       7.6 Home Gateways or Analog Terminal Adapters......................21 
       7.7 Multi-functional Combination gateways..........................22 

       A. van Wijk, et al.     Expires 21 February 2006      [Page 2 of 28] 
       Internet-Draft Requirements for real time text using SIP  August 2005 

       7.8 Transcoding....................................................22 
       7.9 Relay Services.................................................23 
       7.9.1 Basic function of the relay service..........................23 
       7.9.2 Invocation of relay services.................................23 
       8. Security Considerations.........................................23 
       9. Authors Addresses...............................................24 
       10. References.....................................................25 
       10.1 Normative references..........................................25 
       10.2 Informative references........................................27 
           
        
        
       1. Introduction  
                              
          For many years, text has been in use as a medium for 
          conversational, interactive dialogue between users in a similar 
          way to how voice telephony is used. Such interactive text is 
          different from messaging and semi-interactive solutions like 
          Instant Messaging in that it offers an equivalent conversational 
          experience to users who cannot, or do not wish to, use voice. It 
          therefore meets a different set of requirements from other text-
          based solutions already available on IP networks. 
           
          Traditionally, deaf, hard of hearing and speech-impaired people 
          are amongst the most prolific users of conversational, interactive 
          text but, because of its interactivity, it is becoming popular 
          amongst mainstream users as well. 
           
          This document describes how existing IETF protocols can be used to 
          implement a Text-over-IP solution (ToIP). This ToIP framework is 
          specifically designed to be compatible with Voice-over-IP (VoIP) 
          environments, as well as meeting the userÆs requirements, 
          including those of deaf, hard of hearing and speech-impaired users 
          as described in RFC3351 [19]. 
           
          The Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) is the protocol of choice 
          for control of Multimedia communications and Voice-over-IP (VoIP) 
          in particular. It offers all the necessary control and signaling 
          required for the ToIP framework. 
           
          The Real-Time Transport Protocol (RTP) is the protocol of choice 
          for real-time data transmission, and its use for interactive text 
          payloads is described in RFC4103 [5].  
           
          This document defines a framework for ToIP to be used either by 
          itself or as part of integrated, multi-media services, including 
          Total Conversation. 
           






       A. van Wijk, et al.     Expires 21 February 2006      [Page 3 of 28] 
       Internet-Draft Requirements for real time text using SIP  August 2005 

       2. Scope  
                              
          This document defines a framework for the implementation of real-
          time ToIP, either stand-alone or as a part of multimedia services, 
          including Total Conversation. It defines the: 
            
             a. Requirements of Real-time, interactive text; 
             b. Requirements for ToIP interworking; 
             c. Description of ToIP using SIP and RTP; 
             d. Description of ToIP interworking with other text services. 
           
       3. Terminology  
                              
          In this document, the key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", 
          "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT 
          RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" are to be interpreted as 
          described in BCP 14, RFC 2119 [2] and indicate requirement levels 
          for compliant implementations. 
           
       4. Definitions  
           
          Audio bridging - a function of a gateway or relay service that 
          enables an audio path through the service between the users 
          involved in the call. 
           
          Cellular - Telephone systems based on radio transmission to become 
          wireless. Also called Wireless or Mobile systems.  
                            
          Full duplex - media is sent independently in both directions. 
           
          Half duplex - media can only be sent in one direction at a time 
          or, if an attempt to send information in both directions is made, 
          errors can be introduced into the presented media.  
           
          Interactive text - a term for real time transmission of text in a 
          character-by-character fashion for use in conversational services, 
          often as a text equivalent to voice based conversational services. 
                               
          Textphone û also "text telephone". A terminal device that allows 
          end-to-end real-time, interactive text communication using analog 
          transmission. A variety of PSTN textphone protocols exists world-
          wide. A textphone can often be combined with a voice telephone, or 
          include voice communication functions for simultaneous or 
          alternating use of text and voice in a call. 
           
          Text bridging - a function of a gateway service that enables the 
          flow of text through the service between the users involved in the 
          call. 
           
          Text gateway - a function that transcodes between different forms 
          of text transport methods, e.g., between ToIP in IP networks and 
          Baudot or ITU-T V.21 text telephony in the PSTN. 
           

       A. van Wijk, et al.     Expires 21 February 2006      [Page 4 of 28] 
       Internet-Draft Requirements for real time text using SIP  August 2005 

          Text Relay Service - a third-party or intermediary that enables 
          communications between deaf, hard of hearing and speech-impaired 
          people, and voice telephone users by translating between voice and 
          text in a call. 
           
          Text telephony û analog textphone service.  
           
          Total Conversation - a multimedia service offering real time 
          conversation in video, text and voice according to interoperable 
          standards. All media flow in real time. (See ITU-T F.703 
          "Multimedia conversational services".) 
           
          Transcoding Services - services of a third-party user agent that 
          transcodes one stream into another. Transcoding can be done by 
          human operators, in an automated manner or a combination of both 
          methods. Text Relay Services are examples of a transcoding service 
          between text and audio. 
           
          TTY û alternative designation for a text telephone or textphone, 
          often used in USA. Also called TDD, Telecommunication Device for 
          the Deaf. 
           
          Video Relay Service - A service that enables communications 
          between deaf and hard of hearing people, and hearing persons with 
          voice telephones by translating between sign language and spoken 
          language in a call. 
           
          Acronyms:  
           
          2G     Second generation cellular (mobile) 
          2.5G   Enhanced second generation cellular (mobile) 
          3G     Third generation cellular (mobile) 
          CDMA   Code Division Multiple Access 
          CLI    Calling Line Identification 
          CTM    Cellular Text Telephone Modem 
          ENUM   E.164 number storage in DNS (see RFC3761) 
          GSM    Global System of Mobile Communication 
          ISDN   Integrated Services Digital Network 
          ITU-T  International Telecommunications Union-Telecommunications 
                 Standardisation Sector 
          NAT    Network Address Translation 
          PSTN   Public Switched Telephone Network 
          RTP    Real Time Transport Protocol 
          SDP    Session Description Protocol 
          SIP    Session Initiation Protocol 
          SRTP   Secure Real Time Transport Protocol 
          TDD    Telecommunication Device for the Deaf 
          TDMA   Time Division Multiple Access 
          TTY    Analog textphone (Teletypewriter) 
          ToIP   Text over Internet Protocol 
          UTF-8  Universal Transfer Format-8 
          VCO/HCO Voice Carry Over/Hearing Carry Over 
          VoIP   Voice over Internet Protocol 

       A. van Wijk, et al.     Expires 21 February 2006      [Page 5 of 28] 
       Internet-Draft Requirements for real time text using SIP  August 2005 

       5. Framework Description 
           
          This framework defines the requirements of a text-based 
          conversational service that is the text equivalent of voice based 
          telephony. Real-time text conversation can be combined with other 
          conversational services like video or voice. 
           
          ToIP also offers an IP equivalent of analog text telephony 
          services as used by deaf, hard of hearing and speech-impaired 
          individuals. 
        
          It is important to understand that real-time text conversations 
          are significantly different from other text-based communications 
          like email or instant messaging. Real-time text conversations 
          deliver an equivalent mode to voice conversations by providing 
          transmission of text character by character as it is entered, so 
          that the conversation can be followed closely and immediate 
          interaction takes place. This provides the same mode of 
          interaction as voice telephony does for hearing people.  
           
          Store-and-forward systems like email or messaging on mobile 
          networks or non-streaming systems like instant messaging are 
          unable to provide that functionality. In particular, they do not 
          allow for smooth communication through a Text Relay Service. 
           
          This framework uses existing standards that are already commonly 
          used for voice based conversational services on IP networks. It 
          uses the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) to set up, control and 
          tear down the connections between users whilst the media is 
          transported using the Real-Time Transport Protocol (RTP) as 
          described in RFC4103 [5]. 
           
          This framework is designed to meet the requirements of RFC3351 
          [19]. As such, it offers a standardized way for offering text-
          based, conversational services that can be used as an equivalent 
          to voice telephony by deaf, hard of hearing and speech-impaired 
          individuals. 
           
          SIP allows participants to negotiate all media including real-time 
          text conversation [4,5]. This is a highly desirable function for 
          all IP telephony users but essential for deaf, hard of hearing, or 
          speech impaired people who have limited or no use of the audio 
          path of the call. 
           
       5.1. General requirements for ToIP 
           
          In order to make ToIP the text equivalent of voice services, it 
          needs to offer equivalent features in terms of conversationality 
          as voice telephony provides. To achieve that, ToIP needs to: 
           
             a. Offer real-time presentation of the conversation; 
             b. Provide simultaneous transmission in both directions; 
             c. Support both point-to-point and multipoint communication; 

       A. van Wijk, et al.     Expires 21 February 2006      [Page 6 of 28] 
       Internet-Draft Requirements for real time text using SIP  August 2005 

             d. Allow other media, like audio and video, to be used in       
               conjunction with ToIP; 
             e. Ensure that the text service is always available. 
           
          Real-time text is a useful subset of Total Conversation defined in 
          ITU-T F.703 [23]. Users could use multiple modes of communication 
          during the conversation, either at the same time or by switching 
          between modes, e.g., between text and audio.  
           
          Users may invoke ToIP services for many different reasons: 
           
          - Because they are in a noisy environment, e.g., in a machine room 
            of a factory where listening is difficult. 
          - Because they are busy with another call and want to participate 
            in two calls at the same time. 
          - For implementing text and/or speech recording services (e.g., 
            text documentation/ audio recording for 
            legal/clarity/flexibility purposes). 
          - To overcome language barriers through speech translation and/or 
            transcoding services. 
          - Because of hearing loss, deafness or tinnitus as a result of the 
            aging process or for any other reason, thus creating a need to 
            replace or complement voice with text in conversational 
            sessions. 
           
          NOTE: In many of the above examples, text may accompany speech. 
          The text could be displayed side by side, in a manner similar to 
          subtitling in broadcasting environments, or in any other suitable 
          manner.  This could occur for users who are hard of hearing and 
          also for mixed media calls with both hearing and deaf people 
          participating in the call. 
           
          User Agents providing ToIP functionality need to provide suitable 
          alerting indications, specifically offering visual and/or tactile 
          alerting for deaf and hard of hearing users. 
           
          The ability of SIP to set up conversation sessions from any 
          location, as well as its privacy and security provisions, MUST be 
          maintained by ToIP services. 
           
          Where ToIP is used in conjunction with other media, exposure of 
          SIP functions through the User Interface needs to be done in an 
          equivalent manner for all supported media. In other words, where 
          certain SIP call control functions are available for the audio 
          media part of the session, these functions MUST also be supported 
          for the text media part of the same session. For example, call 
          transfer must act on all media in the session.  
           
          T.140 real-time text conversation [4], in addition to audio and 
          video communications, is a valuable service for many users, 
          including those on non-IP networks. T.140 also provides for real-
          time editing of the text.   
           

       A. van Wijk, et al.     Expires 21 February 2006      [Page 7 of 28] 
       Internet-Draft Requirements for real time text using SIP  August 2005 

       5.1.1 General ToIP Summary 
           
          The general requirements for ToIP are: 
           
          a. Session setup, modification and teardown procedures for point-
             to-point and multimedia calls 
           
          b. Registration procedures and address resolutions 
           
          c. Registration of user preferences 
           
          d. Negotiation procedures for device capabilities 
           
          e. Support of text media transport using T.140 over RTP as 
             described in RFC 4103 [5] 
           
          f. Signaling of status information, call progress and the like in 
             a suitable manner, bearing in mind that the user may have a 
             hearing impairment 
           
          g. T.140 real-time text presentation mixing with voice and video  
           
          h. T.140 real-time text conversation sessions using SIP, allowing 
             users to move from one place to another 
           
          i. User privacy and security for sessions setup, modification, and 
             teardown as well as for media transfer 
           
          j. Routing of emergency calls according to national or regional 
             policy with the same level of functionality as a voice call. 
           
       5.2. General Requirements for ToIP Interworking  
           
          This section describes the general ToIP interworking requirements 
          and gives some background information to many of the issues.  
           
          There is a range of existing text services. There is also a range 
          of network technologies that could support text services (see 
          examples below). ToIP needs to provide interoperability with text 
          conversation features in other networks, for instance the PSTN, 
          and with some text messaging services. 
           
          Text gateways are used for converting between different media 
          types. They could be used between networks or within networks 
          where different transport technologies are used.  
           
          When communicating via a gateway to other networks and protocols, 
          the ToIP service SHOULD support the functionality for alternating 
          or simultaneous use of modalities as offered by the destination 
          network. 
           



       A. van Wijk, et al.     Expires 21 February 2006      [Page 8 of 28] 
       Internet-Draft Requirements for real time text using SIP  August 2005 

          Address information, both called and calling, SHOULD be 
          transferred, and possibly converted, when interworking between 
          different networks.  
           
          ToIP will often be used to access a relay service [I], allowing 
          text users to communicate with voice users. With relay services, 
          it is crucial that text characters are sent as soon as possible 
          after they are entered. While buffering may be done to improve 
          efficiency, the delays SHOULD be kept minimal. In particular, 
          buffering of whole lines of text will not meet character delay 
          requirements. 
           
          If the User Agents of different participants indicate that there 
          is an incompatibility between their capabilities to support 
          certain media types, e.g. one terminal only offering T.140 over IP 
          as described in RFC4103 [5] and the other one only supporting 
          audio, the user might want to invoke a transcoding service. 
           
          Examples of possible scenarios for including a relay service in 
          the conversation are: speech-to-text (STT), text-to-speech (TTS), 
          text bridging after conversion from speech, audio bridging after 
          conversion from text, etc. 
           
          The general requirements for ToIP Interworking are: 
           
          a. Interoperability between T.140 conversations [4] and analog 
             text telephones 
           
          b. Discovery and invocation of transcoding/translation services 
             between the media in the call 
           
          c. Different session establishment models for transcoding / 
             translation services invocation: Third party call control and 
             conference bridge model 
           
          d. Uniqueness in media mapping to be used in the session for 
             conversion from one media to another by the transcoding / 
             translation server for each communicating party 
           
          e. Media bridging services for T.140 real-time text, as described 
             in RFC4103 [5], audio and video for multipoint communications 
           
          f. Transparent session setup, modification, and teardown between 
             text conversation capable devices and voice/video capable 
             devices 
           
          g. Buffering of text when interworking with media that transport 
             text at different rates.  
           
       5.2.1 PSTN Interworking 
           
          Analog text telephony is cumbersome because of incompatible 
          national implementations where interworking was never considered. 

       A. van Wijk, et al.     Expires 21 February 2006      [Page 9 of 28] 
       Internet-Draft Requirements for real time text using SIP  August 2005 

          A large number of these implementations have been documented in 
          ITU-T V.18 [10], which also defines the modem detection sequences 
          for the different text protocols. The modem type identification 
          may in rare cases take considerable time depending on user 
          actions. 
           
          To resolve analog textphone incompatibilities, text telephone 
          gateways are needed to transcode incoming analog signals into 
          T.140 and vice versa. The modem capability exchange time can be 
          reduced by the text telephone gateways initially assuming the 
          analog text telephone protocol used in the region where the 
          gateway is located. For example, in the USA, Baudot [III] might be 
          tried as the initial protocol. If negotiation for Baudot fails, 
          the full V.18 modem capability exchange will take place. In the 
          UK, ITU-T V.21 [II] might be the first choice. 
           
       5.2.2 Cellular circuit switched Text-Telephony 
           
          Cellular wireless (or Mobile) circuit switched connections provide 
          a digital real-time transport service for voice or data. The 
          access technologies include GSM, CDMA, TDMA, iDen and various 3G 
          technologies. 
           
          Alternative means of transferring the Text telephony data have 
          been developed when TTY services over cellular was mandated by the 
          FCC in the USA. They are a) "No-gain" codec solution, b) the 
          Cellular Text Telephony Modem (CTM) solution and c) "Baudot mode" 
          solution. 
           
          The GSM and 3G standards from 3GPP make use of the CTM modem in 
          the voice channel for text telephony. However, implementations 
          also exist that use the data channel to provide such 
          functionality. Interworking with these solutions SHOULD be done 
          using text gateways that set up the data channel connection at the 
          GSM side and provide ToIP at the other side. 
           
       5.2.2.1 Cellular "No-gain" 
           
          The "No-gain" text telephone transporting technology uses 
          specially modified EFR [13] and EVR [14] speech vocoders in mobile 
          terminals used to provide a text telephony call. It provides full 
          duplex operation and supports alternating voice and text 
          ("VCO/HCO"). It is dedicated to CDMA and TDMA mobile technologies 
          and the US Baudot (i.e. 45 bit/s) type of text telephones. 
           
       5.2.2.2 Cellular Text Telephone Modem (CTM) 
           
          CTM [15] is a technology independent modem technology that 
          provides the transport of text telephone characters at up to 10 
          characters/sec using modem signals that can be carried by many 
          voice codecs and uses a highly redundant encoding technique to 
          overcome the fading and cell changing losses. 
           

       A. van Wijk, et al.     Expires 21 February 2006      [Page 10 of 28] 
       Internet-Draft Requirements for real time text using SIP  August 2005 

       5.2.2.3 Cellular "Baudot mode" 
           
          This term is often used by cellular terminal suppliers for a GSM 
          cellular phone mode that allows TTYs to operate into a cellular 
          phone and to communicate with a fixed line TTY. 
           
       5.2.3 Cellular data channel mode 
           
          Many mobile terminals allow the use of the data channel to 
          transfer data in real-time. Data rates of 9600 bit/s are usually 
          supported on the mobile network. Gateways provide interoperability 
          with PSTN textphones.  
           
       5.2.4 Cellular Wireless ToIP 
           
          ToIP could be supported over cellular wireless packet switched 
          services that interface to the Internet. For 3GPP 3G services, the 
          support is described to use ToIP in 3G TS 26.235 [18]. Low data 
          rates and additional delays can affect performance.  
           
       5.2.5 Instant Messaging Support 
           
          Many people use Instant Messaging to communicate via the Internet 
          using text. Instant Messaging transfers blocks of text rather than 
          streaming as is used by ToIP. As such, it is not a replacement for 
          ToIP and in particular does not meet the needs for real time 
          conversations including those of deaf, hard of hearing and speech-
          impaired users as defined in RFC 3351 [19]. It is unsuitable for 
          communications through a relay service [I]. The streaming nature 
          of ToIP provides a more direct conversational user experience and, 
          when given the choice, users may prefer ToIP. 
           
          Text gateways could be developed to allow interworking between 
          Instant Messaging systems and ToIP solutions. 
           
       6. Detailed requirements for ToIP 
           
          A ToIP user may wish to call another ToIP user, or join a 
          conference session involving several users or initiate or join a 
          multimedia session, such as a Total Conversation session.  
           
          There may be some need for pre-session setup e.g. storing of 
          registration information in the SIP registrar, to provide 
          information about how a user can be contacted. This will allow 
          sessions to be set up rapidly and with proper routing and 
          addressing. 
           
          Similarly, there are requirements that need to be satisfied during 
          session set up when other media are preferred by a user. For 
          instance, some users may indicate their preferred modality to be 
          audio while others may indicate text. In this case, transcoding 
          services might be needed for text-to-speech (TTS) and speech-to-


       A. van Wijk, et al.     Expires 21 February 2006      [Page 11 of 28] 
       Internet-Draft Requirements for real time text using SIP  August 2005 

          text (STT). The requirements for transcoding services need to be 
          negotiated in real-time to set up the session. 
           
          The subsequent subsections describe some of these requirements in 
          detail. 
           
       6.1. Pre-Session Requirements 
           
          The need to use text as a medium of communications can be 
          expressed by users during registration time. Two situations need 
          to be considered in the pre-session setup environment: 
           
          a. User Preferences: It MUST be possible for a user to indicate a 
             preference for text by registering that preference with a SIP 
             server that is part of the ToIP service. 
           
          b. Server to support User Preferences: SIP servers that support 
             ToIP services MUST have the capability to act on calling user 
             preferences for text in order to accept or reject the session-, 
             based on the called userÆs preferences defined as part of the 
             pre-session setup registration. For example, if the user is 
             called by another party, and it is determined that a 
             transcoding server is needed, the session MUST be re-directed 
             or otherwise handled accordingly. 
           
       6.2 Basic Point-to-Point Session Requirements 
           
          A point-to-point session takes place between two parties. The 
          requirements are described in subsequent sub-sections. They assume 
          that one or both of the communicating parties will indicate text 
          as a possible or preferred medium for conversation using SIP in 
          the session setup. 
           
       6.2.1 Session control 
           
          ToIP services MUST use the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) [3] 
          for setting up, controlling and terminating sessions for real-time 
          text conversation with one or more participants and possibly 
          including other media like video or audio. The session description 
          protocol (SDP) [6] used in SIP to describe the session is used to 
          express the attributes of the session and to negotiate a set of 
          compatible media types. 
            
       6.2.2 Text transport 
           
          A ToIP service MUST always support at least one Text media type. 
           
          ToIP services MUST support the Real-Time Transport Protocol (RTP) 
          [24] according to the specification of RFC4103 [5] for the 
          transport of text between participants.  
           
          RFC4103 describes the transmission of T.140 [4] on IP networks.  
           

       A. van Wijk, et al.     Expires 21 February 2006      [Page 12 of 28] 
       Internet-Draft Requirements for real time text using SIP  August 2005 

       6.2.3 Session Setup 
           
          Users will set up a session by identifying the remote party or the 
          service they want to connect to. However, conversations could be 
          started using a mode other than text. For instance, the 
          conversation might be established using audio and the user could 
          subsequently elect to switch to text, or add text as an additional 
          modality, during the conversation. Systems supporting ToIP MUST 
          allow users to select any of the supported conversation modes at 
          any time, including mid-conversation. 
           
          Systems SHOULD allow the user to specify a preferred mode of 
          communication, with the ability to fall back to alternatives that 
          the user has indicated are acceptable.  
           
          If the user requests simultaneous use of text and audio, and this 
          is not possible either because the system only supports alternate 
          modalities or because of constraints in the network, the system 
          MUST try to establish communication with best effort. If the user 
          has expressed a preference for text, establishment of a connection 
          including text MUST have priority over other outcomes of the 
          session setup. 
           
          The following features MAY be implemented to facilitate the 
          session establishment using ToIP: 
           
          a. Caller Preferences: SIP headers (e.g., Contact)[24] can be used 
             to show that ToIP is the medium of choice for communications. 
           
          b. Called Party Preferences: The called party being passive can 
             formulate a clear rule indicating how a session should be 
             handled either using text as a preferred medium or not, and 
             whether a designated SIP proxy needs to handle this session or 
             it will be handled in the SIP user agent. 
           
          c. SIP Server support for User Preferences: SIP servers can also 
             handle the incoming sessions in accordance with preferences 
             expressed for ToIP. The SIP Server can also enforce ToIP policy 
             rules for communications (e.g. use of the transcoding server 
             for ToIP). 
           
       6.2.4 Addressing 
           
          The SIP [3] addressing schemes MUST be used for all entities in a 
          ToIP session. For example, SIP URLÆs or Tel URLÆs are used for 
          caller, called party, user devices, and servers (e.g., SIP server, 
          Transcoding server). 
           
          The right to include a transcoding service MUST NOT require user 
          registration in any specific SIP registrar, but MAY require 
          authorisation of the SIP registrar to invoke the service. 
           
           

       A. van Wijk, et al.     Expires 21 February 2006      [Page 13 of 28] 
       Internet-Draft Requirements for real time text using SIP  August 2005 

       6.2.5 Alerting 
           
          User Agents supporting ToIP MUST have an alerting method (e.g., 
          for incoming sessions) that can be used by deaf and hard of 
          hearing people or provide a range of alternative, but equivalent, 
          alerting methods that can be selected by all users, regardless of 
          their abilities. 
           
          It should be noted that external alerting systems exist and one 
          common interface for triggering the alerting action is a contact 
          closure between two conductors. 
           
          Among the alerting options are alerting by the User AgentÆs User 
          Interface and specific alerting user agents registered to the same 
          registrar as the main user agent. 
           
       6.2.6 Session information 
           
          If present, identification of the originating party (for example 
          in the form of a URL or a CLI) MUST be clearly presented to the 
          user in a form suitable for the user BEFORE the session invitation 
          is answered. When a session invitation involving ToIP originates 
          from a gateway, this MAY be signaled to the user. 
           
          The user MUST be informed of any change in modalities. 
           
       6.2.7 Session progress information 
           
          During a conversation that includes ToIP, status and session 
          progress information MUST be provided in a textual form so users 
          can perform all session control functions. That information MUST 
          be equivalent to session progress information delivered in any 
          other format, for example audio.  
           
          Session progress information SHOULD use simple language so that as 
          many users as possible can understand it. The use of jargon or 
          ambiguous terminology SHOULD be avoided. It is RECOMMENDED that 
          text information be used together with icons to symbolise the 
          session progress information. 
           
          There MUST be a clear indication, in a modality useful to the 
          user, whenever a session is connected or disconnected. A user 
          SHOULD never be in doubt about the status of the session, even if 
          the user is unable to make use of the audio or visual indication. 
          For example, tactile indications could be used by deafblind 
          individuals. 
           
          In summary, it SHOULD be possible to observe indicators about: 
          - Incoming session 
          - Availability of text, voice and video channels 
          - Session progress 
          - Incoming text 
          - Any loss in incoming text 

       A. van Wijk, et al.     Expires 21 February 2006      [Page 14 of 28] 
       Internet-Draft Requirements for real time text using SIP  August 2005 

          - Typed and transmitted text. 
           
          For users who cannot use the audible alerter for incoming 
          sessions, it is RECOMMENDED to include a tactile as well as a 
          visual indicator.  
           
       6.2.8 Session Negotiations 
           
          The Session Description Protocol (SDP) used in SIP [3] provides 
          the capabilities to indicate text as a medium in the session 
          setup. RFC 4103 [5] uses the RTP payload type "text/t140" for 
          support of ToIP which can be indicated in the SDP as a part of the 
          SIP INVITE, OK and SIP/200/ACK media negotiations. In addition, 
          SIPÆs offer/answer model [20] can also be used in conjunction with 
          other capabilities including the use of a transcoding server for 
          enhanced session negotiations [7,8,9]. 
           
       6.2.9 Answering 
           
          Systems SHOULD provide a best-effort approach to answering 
          invitations for session set-up and users SHOULD be informed when 
          the session is accepted by the other party. On all systems that 
          both inform users of session status and support ToIP, this 
          information MUST be available in textual form and MAY also be 
          provided in other media. 
           
       6.2.9.1 Answering Machine 
           
          Systems for ToIP MAY support an auto-answer function, equivalent 
          to answering machines on telephony networks. If an answering 
          machine function is supported, it MUST support at least 160 
          characters for the greeting message. It MUST support incoming text 
          message storage of a minimum of 4096 characters, although systems 
          MAY support much larger storage. It is RECOMMENDED that systems 
          support storage of at least 20 incoming messages of up to 16000 
          characters per message. 
           
          When the answering machine is activated, user alerting SHOULD 
          still take place. The user SHOULD be allowed to monitor the auto-
          answer progress and where this is provided the user SHOULD be 
          allowed to intervene during any stage of the answering machine 
          procedure and take control of the session. 
           
       6.2.10 Actions During a Session 
           
          Certain actions need to be performed during ToIP conversation: 
           
          a. Text transmission from a terminal SHALL be performed character 
             by character as entered, or in small groups of characters, so 
             that no character is delayed from entry to transmission by more 
             than 300 milliseconds. 
           


       A. van Wijk, et al.     Expires 21 February 2006      [Page 15 of 28] 
       Internet-Draft Requirements for real time text using SIP  August 2005 

          b. The text transmission SHALL allow a rate of at least 30 
             characters per second so that human typing speed as well as 
             speech to text methods of generating conversation text can be 
             supported. 
           
          c. To enable the use of international character sets, the 
             transmission format for text conversation SHALL be UTF-8 [12], 
             in accordance with ITU-T T.140. 
           
          d. If text is detected to be missing after transmission, there 
             SHOULD be a "text loss" indication in the text as specified in 
             T.140 Addendum 1 [4]. 
           
          e. When the display of text conversation is included in the design 
             of the end user equipment, the display of the dialogue SHOULD 
             be made so that it is easy to differentiate the text belonging 
             to each party in the conversation. 
           
       6.2.10.1 Text Transport  
           
          ToIP uses RTP as the default transport protocol for the 
          transmission of real-time text via the medium "text/t140" as 
          specified in RFC 4103 [5]. 
           
          The redundancy method of RFC 4103 [5] SHOULD be used to 
          significantly increase the reliability of the text transmission. A 
          redundancy level using 2 generations gives very reliable results 
          and is therefore RECOMMENDED. 
           
          Text capability MUST be announced in SDP by a declaration similar 
          to this example: 
           
               m=text 11000 RTP/AVP 98 100 
               a=rtpmap:98 t140/1000 
               a=rtpmap:100 red/1000 
               a=fmtp:100 98/98/98 
           
          By having this single coding and transmission scheme for real time 
          text defined in the SIP session control environment, the 
          opportunity for interoperability is optimized. However, if good 
          reasons exist, other transport mechanisms MAY be offered and used 
          for the T.140 coded text provided that proper negotiation is 
          introduced, but RFC 4103 [5] transport MUST be used as both the 
          default and the fallback transport. 
           
       6.2.10.2 Handling Text and other Media.  
           
          A call is one or more related sessions. The following requirements 
          apply to media handling during a call: 
           
          a. When used between User Agents designed for ToIP, it SHALL be 
             possible to send and receive text simultaneously. 
           

       A. van Wijk, et al.     Expires 21 February 2006      [Page 16 of 28] 
       Internet-Draft Requirements for real time text using SIP  August 2005 

          b. When used between User Agents that support ToIP, it SHALL be 
             possible to send and receive text simultaneously with the other 
             media (text, audio and/or video) supported by the same 
             terminals.  
           
          c. It SHOULD be possible to know during a call that ToIP is 
             available, even if it is not invoked at call setup (e.g. when 
             only voice and/or video is used initially). To disable this, 
             the user MUST disable the use of ToIP. This is possible during 
             registration at the SIP registrar. 
           
       6.2.11 Additional session control 
           
          Systems that support additional session control features, for 
          example call waiting, forwarding, hold etc on voice sessions, MUST 
          offer this functionality for text sessions. 
           
       6.2.12 File storage 
           
          Systems that support ToIP MAY save the text conversation to a 
          file. This SHOULD be done using a standard file format. For 
          example: a UTF8 text file in XML format [11] including timestamps, 
          party names (or addresses) and the text conversation. 
           
       6.3 Conference Session Requirements 
           
          The conference session requirements deal with multipoint 
          conferencing sessions where there will be one or more ToIP capable 
          devices and/or other end user devices where the total number of 
          end user devices will be at least three. 
           
          It SHOULD be possible to use the text medium in conference 
          sessions in a similar way to how audio is handled and video is 
          displayed. Text in conferences can be used both for letting 
          individual participants use the text medium (for example, for 
          sidebar discussions in text while listening to the main conference 
          audio), as well as for central support of the conference with real 
          time text interpretation of speech.  
           
       6.4 Real-time Editing and User Alerting 
           
          ToIP SHOULD handle characters such as new line, erasure and 
          alerting during a session as specified in ITU-T T.140. 
           
       6.5 Emergency services 
           
          It MUST be possible to place an emergency call using ToIP and it 
          MUST be possible to use a relay service in such call. The 
          emergency service provided to users utilising the text medium MUST 
          be equivalent to the emergency service provided to users utilising 
          speech or other media.  
           


       A. van Wijk, et al.     Expires 21 February 2006      [Page 17 of 28] 
       Internet-Draft Requirements for real time text using SIP  August 2005 

       6.6 User Mobility 
           
          ToIP User Agents SHOULD use the same mechanisms as other SIP User 
          Agents to resolve mobility issues. It is RECOMMENDED that users 
          use a SIP-address, resolved by a SIP registrar, to enable basic 
          user mobility. Further mechanisms are defined for all session 
          types for 3G IP multimedia systems. 
           
       6.7 Firewalls and NATs 
           
          ToIP uses the same signaling and transport protocols as VoIP 
          hence, the same firewall and NAT solutions and network 
          functionality that apply to VoIP MUST also apply to ToIP. 
           
       7. Interworking Requirements for ToIP 
           
          A number of systems for real time text conversation already exist 
          as well as a number of message oriented text communication 
          systems. Interoperability is of interest between ToIP and some of 
          these systems. This section describes the interoperability 
          requirements, especially for PSTN text telephony, to ensure full 
          backward interoperability with ToIP. 
           
       7.1 ToIP Interworking Gateway Services 
           
          Interactive texting facilities exist already in various forms and 
          on various networks. On the PSTN, it is commonly referred to as 
          text telephony. 
           
          Simultaneous or alternating use of voice and text is used by a 
          large number of users who can send voice but must receive text 
          (due to a hearing impairment), or who can hear but must send text 
          (due to a speech impairment). 
           
          Session setup through gateways to other networks MAY require the 
          use of specially formatted addresses or other mechanisms for 
          invoking those gateways. 
           
          Different data rates of different protocols MAY require text 
          buffering. 
           
          Transcoding of text to and from other coding formats MAY need to 
          take place in gateways between ToIP and other forms of text 
          conversation, for example to connect to a PSTN text telephone. 
           
       7.2 ToIP and PSTN/ISDN Text-Telephony Interworking 
           
          On PSTN networks, transmission of interactive text takes place 
          using a variety of codings and modulations, including ITU-T V.21 
          [II], Baudot [III], DTMF, V.23 [IV] and others. Many difficulties 
          have arisen as a result of this variety in text telephony 
          protocols and the ITU-T V.18 [10] standard was developed to 
          address some of these issues. 

       A. van Wijk, et al.     Expires 21 February 2006      [Page 18 of 28] 
       Internet-Draft Requirements for real time text using SIP  August 2005 

           
          ITU-T V.18 [10] offers a native text telephony method plus it 
          defines interworking with current protocols. In the interworking 
          mode, it will recognise one of the older protocols and fall back 
          to that transmission method when required.  
           
          V.18 MUST be supported on the PSTN side of a PSTN-ToIP gateway.  
           
          PSTN-ToIP gateways MUST allow alternating use of text and voice if 
          the PSTN textphone involved at the PSTN side of the session 
          supports this. (This mode is often called VCO/HCO). 
           
          Calling party identification information, such as CLI, MUST be 
          passed by gateways and converted to an approapriate form if 
          required. 
           
       7.3 ToIP and Cellular Wireless ToIP 
           
          ToIP MAY be supported over the cellular wireless packet switched 
          service. It interfaces to the Internet. 
           
          A text gateway with cellular wireless packet switched services 
          MUST be able to route text calls to emergency service providers 
          when any of the recognized emergency numbers that support text 
          communication for the country.  
           
       7.4 Instant Messaging Support 
           
          Text gateways MAY be developed to allow interworking between 
          Instant Messaging systems and ToIP solutions. Because Instant 
          Messaging is based on blocks of text, rather than on a continuous 
          stream of characters, gateways MUST transcode between the two 
          formats. Text gateways for interworking between Instant Messaging 
          and ToIP MUST concatenate individual characters originating at the 
          ToIP side into blocks of text and: 
           
          a. When the length of the concatenated message becomes longer than 
             50 characters, the buffered text SHOULD be transmitted to the 
             Instant Messaging side as soon as any non-alphanumerical 
             character is received from the ToIP side. 
           
          b. When a new line indicator is received from the ToIP side, the 
             buffered characters up to that point, including the carriage 
             return and/or line feed characters, SHOULD be transmitted to 
             the Instant Messaging side. 
           
          c. When the ToIP side has been idle for at least 5 seconds, all 
             buffered text up to that point SHOULD be transmitted to the 
             Instant Messaging side. 
           
          It is RECOMMENDED that during the session, both users are 
          constantly updated on the progress of the text input. 


       A. van Wijk, et al.     Expires 21 February 2006      [Page 19 of 28] 
       Internet-Draft Requirements for real time text using SIP  August 2005 

          Many Instant Messaging protocols signal that a user is typing to 
          the other party in the conversation. Text gateways between such 
          Instant Messaging protocols and ToIP MUST provide this signaling 
          to the Instant Messaging side when characters start being 
          received, or at the beginning of the conversation.  
           
          At the ToIP side, an indicator of writing the Instant Message MUST 
          be present where the Instant Messaging protocol provides one. For 
          example, the real-time text user MAY see ". . . waiting for 
          replying IM. . . " and when 5 seconds have passed another . (dot) 
          can be shown. 
           
          Those solutions will reduce the difficulties between streaming and 
          blocked text services. 
           
          Even though the text gateway can connect Instant Messaging and 
          ToIP, the best solution is to take advantage of the fact that the 
          user interfaces and the user communities for instant messaging and 
          ToIP telephony are very similar. After all, the character input, 
          the character display, Internet connectivity and SIP stack are the 
          same for Instant Messaging (SIMPLE) and ToIP.  
           
          Devices that implement Instant Messaging SHOULD implement ToIP as 
          described in this document so that a more complete text 
          communication service can be provided. 
           
       7.5 Common Text Gateway Functions 
           
          Text gateways MUST allow for the differences that result from 
          different text protocols. The protocols to be supported will 
          depend on the service requirements of the Gateway. 
           
       7.5.1 Protocol support 
           
          Text gateways MUST use the ITU-T V.18 [10] standard at the PSTN 
          side. A text gateway MUST act as a SIP User Agent on the IP side 
          and support RFC4103 text transport. 
           
       7.5.2 Relay buffer storage 
           
          When text gateway functions are invoked, there will be a need for 
          intermediate storage of characters before transmission to a device 
          receiving text slower than the transmitting speed of the sender. 
          Such temporary storage SHALL be dimensioned to adjust for 
          receiving at 30 characters per second and transmitting at 6 
          characters per second for up to 4 minutes (i.e. less than 3k 
          characters). 
           
          Interoperation of half-duplex and full-duplex protocols MAY 
          require text buffering. Some intelligence will be needed to 
          determine when to change direction when operating in half-duplex 
          mode. Identification may be required of half-duplex operation 
          either at the "user" level (ie. users must inform each other) or 

       A. van Wijk, et al.     Expires 21 February 2006      [Page 20 of 28] 
       Internet-Draft Requirements for real time text using SIP  August 2005 

          at the "protocol" level (where an indication must be sent back to 
          the Gateway). 
           
       7.5.3 Emergency calls through gateways 
           
          A text gateway MUST be able to route text calls to emergency 
          service providers when any of the recognised emergency numbers 
          that support text communications for the country or region are 
          called e.g. "911" in USA and "112" in Europe. Routing text calls 
          to emergency services MAY require the use of a transcoding 
          service. 
        
       7.5.4 Text Gateway Invocation 
           
          ToIP interworking requires a method to invoke a text gateway. As 
          described previously in this draft, these text gateways MUST act 
          as User Agents at the IP side. The capabilities of the text 
          gateway during the call will be determined by the call 
          capabilities of the terminal that is using the gateway. For 
          example, a PSTN textphone is generally only able to receive voice 
          and streaming text, so the text gateway will only allow ToIP and 
          audio. 
           
          Examples of possible scenarios for invocation of the text gateway 
          are: 
           
          a. PSTN textphone users dial a prefix number before dialing out. 
          b. Separate text subscriptions, linked to the phone number or 
             terminal identifier/ IP address. 
          c. Text capability indicators. 
          d. Text preference indicator. 
          e. Listen for V.18 modem modulation text activity in all PSTN 
             calls and routing of the call to an appropriate gateway. 
          f. Call transfer request by the called user. 
          g. Placing a call via the web, and using one of the methods 
             described here 
          h. Text gateways with its own telephone number and/or SIP address. 
             (This requires user interaction with the text gateway to place 
             a call). 
          i. ENUM address analysis and number plan 
          j. Number or address analysis leads to a gateway for all PSTN 
             calls. 
           
       7.6 Home Gateways or Analog Terminal Adapters  
           
          Analog terminal adapters (ATAs) using SIP based IP communication 
          and RJ-11 connectors for connecting traditional PSTN devices 
          SHOULD enable connection of legacy PSTN text telephones [16].  
           
          These adapters SHOULD contain V.18 modem functionality, voice 
          handling functionality, and conversion functions to/from SIP based 
          ToIP with T.140 transported according to RFC 4103 [5], in a 
          similar way as it provides interoperability for voice sessions.  

       A. van Wijk, et al.     Expires 21 February 2006      [Page 21 of 28] 
       Internet-Draft Requirements for real time text using SIP  August 2005 

           
          If a session is set up and text/t140 capability is not declared by 
          the destination endpoint (by the end-point terminal or the text 
          gateway in the network at the end-point), a method for invoking a 
          transcoding server SHALL be used. If no such server is available, 
          the signals from the textphone MAY be transmitted in the voice 
          channel as audio with high quality of service. 
            
          NOTE: It is preferred that such analog terminal adaptors do use 
          RFC 4103 [5] on board and thus act as a text gateway. Sending 
          textphone signals over the voice channel is undesirable due to 
          possible filtering and compression and packet loss between the 
          end-points. This can result in character loss in the textphone 
          conversation or even not allowing the textphones to connect to 
          each other. 
           
       7.7 Multi-functional Combination gateways 
           
          In practice many interworking gateways will be implemented as 
          gateways that combine different functions. As such, a text gateway 
          could be built to have modems to interwork with the PSTN and 
          support both Instant Messaging as well as ToIP. Such interworking 
          functions are called Combination gateways. 
           
          Combination gateways MUST provide interworking between all of 
          their supported text based functions. For example, a text gateway 
          that has modems to interwork with the PSTN and that support both 
          Instant Messaging and real-time ToIP MUST support the following 
          interworking functions: 
           
          - PSTN text telephony to real-time ToIP. 
          - PSTN text telephony to Instant Messaging. 
          - Instant Messaging to real-time ToIP. 
           
       7.8 Transcoding 
        
          Gateways between the ToIP network and other networks MAY need to 
          transcode text streams. ToIP makes use of the ISO 10646 character 
          set. Most PSTN textphones use a 7-bit character set, or a 
          character set that is converted to a 7-bit character set by the 
          V.18 modem. 
           
          When transcoding between character sets and T.140 in gateways, 
          special consideration MUST be given to the national variants of 
          the 7 bit codes, with national characters mapping into different 
          codes in the ISO 10646 code space. The national variant to be used 
          could be selectable by the user on a per call basis, or be 
          configured as a national default for the gateway. 
           
          The indicator of missing text in T.140, specified in T.140 
          amendment 1, cannot be represented in the 7 bit character codes. 
          Therefore the indicator of missing text SHOULD be transcoded to 
          the ' (apostrophe) character in legacy text telephone systems, 

       A. van Wijk, et al.     Expires 21 February 2006      [Page 22 of 28] 
       Internet-Draft Requirements for real time text using SIP  August 2005 

          where this character exists. For legacy systems where the 
          character ' does not exist, the . ( full stop ) character SHOULD 
          be used instead. 
        
       7.9 Relay Services 
           
          The relay service acts as an intermediary between two or more 
          callers using different media or different media encoding schemes.  
           
       7.9.1 Basic function of the relay service 
           
          The basic text relay service allows a translation of speech to 
          text and text to speech, which enables hearing and speech impaired 
          callers to communicate with hearing callers. Even though this 
          document focuses on ToIP, we want to remind readers that other 
          relay services exist, like video relay services transcoding speech 
          to sign language and vice versa where the signing is communicated 
          using video. 
           
       7.9.2 Invocation of relay services 
           
          It is RECOMMENDED that ToIP implementations make the invocation 
          and use of relay services as easy as possible. It MAY happen 
          automatically when the session is being set up based on any valid 
          indication or negotiation of supported or preferred media types. A 
          transcoding framework document using SIP [7] describes invoking 
          relay services, where the relay acts as a conference bridge or 
          uses the third party control mechanism. ToIP implementations 
          SHOULD support this transcoding framework. 
           
          Adding or removing a relay service MUST be possible without 
          disrupting the current session. 
           
          When setting up a session, the relay service MUST be able to 
          determine the type of service requested (e.g., speech to text or 
          text to speech), to indicate if the caller wants voice carry over, 
          the language of the text, the sign language being used (in the 
          video stream), etc. 
           
          It SHOULD be possible to route the session to a preferred relay 
          service even if the user invokes the session from another region 
          or network than that usually used. 
           
          A number of requirements, motivations and implementation 
          guidelines for relay service invocation can be found in RFC 3351 
          [19]. 
        
       8. Security Considerations 
           
          User confidentiality and privacy need to be met as described in 
          SIP [3]. For example, nothing should reveal the fact that the user 
          of ToIP is a person with a disability unless the user prefers to 
          make this information public. If a transcoding server is being 

       A. van Wijk, et al.     Expires 21 February 2006      [Page 23 of 28] 
       Internet-Draft Requirements for real time text using SIP  August 2005 

          used, this SHOULD be transparent. Encryption SHOULD be used on 
          end-to-end or hop-by-hop basis as described in SIP [3] and SRTP 
          [17]. 
           
          Authentication needs to be provided for users in addition to the 
          message integrity and access control. 
           
          Protection against Denial-of-service (DoS) attacks needs to be 
          provided considering the case that the ToIP users might need 
          transcoding servers. 
           
       9. Authors Addresses 
        
          The following people provided substantial technical and writing 
          contributions to this document, listed alphabetically: 
           
          Willem P. Dijkstra 
          TNO Informatie- en Communicatietechnologie 
          Postbus 15000 
          9700 CD Groningen 
          The Netherlands 
          Tel: +31 50 585 77 24 
          Fax: +31 50 585 77 57 
          Email: willem.dijkstra@tno.nl 
           
           
          Barry Dingle 
          ACIF, 32 Walker Street 
          North Sydney, NSW 2060 Australia 
          Tel +61 (0)2 9959 9111 
          Mob +61 (0)41 911 7578 
          Email barry.dingle@bigfoot.com.au 
           
           
          Guido Gybels 
          Department of New Technologies 
          RNID, 19-23 Featherstone Street 
          London EC1Y 8SL, UK 
          Tel +44(0)20 7294 3713 
          Txt +44(0)20 7296 8019 
          Fax +44(0)20 7296 8069 
          Email: guido.gybels@rnid.org.uk 
           
           
          Gunnar Hellstrom 
          Omnitor AB 
          Renathvagen 2 
          SE 121 37 Johanneshov 
          Sweden 
          Phone: +46 708 204 288 / +46 8 556 002 03 
          Fax:   +46 8 556 002 06 
          Email: gunnar.hellstrom@omnitor.se 
           

       A. van Wijk, et al.     Expires 21 February 2006      [Page 24 of 28] 
       Internet-Draft Requirements for real time text using SIP  August 2005 

          Henry Sinnreich 
          pulver.com 
          115 Broadhollow Rd 
          Suite 225 
          Melville, NY 11747 
          USA 
          Tel: +1.631.961.8950 
           
           
          Gregg C Vanderheiden 
          University of Wisconsin-Madison 
          Trace R & D Center 
          1550 Engineering Dr (Rm 2107) 
          Madison, Wi  53706 
          USA 
          Phone +1 608 262-6966 
          FAX +1 608 262-8848 
          Email: gv@trace.wisc.edu 
           
           
          Arnoud A. T. van Wijk 
          Viataal 
          Centre for R & D on sensory and communication disabilities. 
          Theerestraat 42 
          5271 GD Sint-Michielsgestel 
          The Netherlands.   
          Email: a.vwijk@viataal.nl 
        
       10. References 
           
       10.1 Normative references  
                              
          1. S. Bradner, "Intellectual Property Rights in IETF Technology 
          ", BCP 79, RFC 3979, IETF, March 2005. 
           
          2. S. Bradner, "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement 
          Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, IETF, March 1997 
           
          3. J. Rosenberg, H. Schulzrinne, G. Camarillo, A. R. Johnston, J. 
          Peterson, R. Sparks, M. Handley, and E. Schooler, "SIP: Session 
          Initiation Protocol", RFC 3621, IETF, June 2002. 
           
          4. ITU-T Recommendation T.140, "Protocol for Multimedia 
          Application Text Conversation" (February 1998) and Addendum 1 
          (February 2000). 
           
          5. G. Hellstrom, "RTP Payload for Text Conversation", RFC 4103, 
          IETF, June 2005. 
           
          6. G. Camarillo, H. Schulzrinne, and E. Burger, "The Source and 
          Sink Attributes for the Session Description Protocol," IETF, 
          August 2003 - Work in Progress. 
           

       A. van Wijk, et al.     Expires 21 February 2006      [Page 25 of 28] 
       Internet-Draft Requirements for real time text using SIP  August 2005 

          7. G.Camarillo, "Framework for Transcoding with the Session 
          Initiation Protocol" IETF June 2005 -  Work in progress. 
           
          8. G. Camarillo, H. Schulzrinne, E. Burger, and A. van Wijk, 
          "Transcoding Services Invocation in the Session Initiation 
          Protocol (SIP) Using Third Party Call Control (3pcc)" RFC 4117, 
          IETF, June 2005. 
           
          9. G. Camarillo, "The SIP Conference Bridge Transcoding Model," 
          IETF, August 2003 - Work in Progress. 
           
          10. ITU-T Recommendation V.18,"Operational and Interworking 
          Requirements for DCEs operating in Text Telephone Mode," November 
          2000. 
           
          11. "XHTML 1.0: The Extensible HyperText Markup Language: A 
          Reformulation of HTML 4 in XML 1.0", W3C Recommendation. Available 
          at http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1. 
           
          12. Yergeau, F., "UTF-8, a transformation format of ISO 10646", 
          RFC 2279, IETF, January 1998. 
           
          13. TIA/EIA/IS-823-A  "TTY/TDD Extension to TIA/EIA-136-410 
          Enhanced Full Rate Speech Codec (must used in conjunction with 
          TIA/EIA/IS-840)" 
           
          14. TIA/EIA/IS-127-2 "Enhanced Variable Rate Codec, Speech Service 
          Option 3 for Wideband Spread Spectrum Digital Systems. Addendum 
          2." 
           
          15. 3GPP TS26.226  "Cellular Text Telephone Modem Description" 
          (CTM). 
           
          16. H. Sinnreich, S. Lass,  and C. Stredicke, "SIP Telephony 
          Device Requirements and Configuration," IETF, June 2005 - Work in 
          Progress. 
           
          17.  Baugher, McGrew, Carrara, Naslund, Norrman, "The Secure Real 
          Time Transport Protocol (SRTP)", RFC 3711, IETF, March 2004. 
           
          18. "IP Multimedia default codecs". 3GPP TS 26.235  
           
          19. Charlton, Gasson, Gybels, Spanner, van Wijk, "User 
          Requirements for the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) in Support 
          of Deaf, Hard of Hearing and Speech-impaired Individuals", RFC 
          3351, IETF, August 2002. 
           
          20. J. Rosenberg, H. Schulzrinne, "An Offer/Answer Model with the 
          Session Description Protocol (SDP)", RFC 3624, IETF, June 2002. 
           
          21. ITU-T Recommendation F.700,"Framework Recommendation for 
          Multimedia Services", November 2000. 
           

       A. van Wijk, et al.     Expires 21 February 2006      [Page 26 of 28] 
       Internet-Draft Requirements for real time text using SIP  August 2005 

          22. H. Schulzrinne, S.Casner, R. Frederick, V. Jacobsone, "RTP: A 
          Transport Protocol for Real-Time Applications", RFC 3550, IETF, 
          July 2003.  
           
          23. ITU-T Recommendation F.703,"Multimedia Conversational 
          Services", November 2000. 
           
          24. J. Rosenberg, H. Schulzrinne, P. Kyzivat, "Indicating User 
          Agent Capabilities in the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)", RFC 
          3840, IETF, August 2004 
           
       10.2 Informative references 
           
          I. A relay service allows the users to transcode between different 
          modalities or languages. In the context of this document, relay 
          services will often refer to text relays that transcode text into 
          voice and vice-versa. See for example http://www.typetalk.org. 
           
          II. International Telecommunication Union (ITU), "300 bits per 
          second duplex modem standardized for use in the general switched 
          telephone network". ITU-T Recommendation V.21, November 1988. 
           
          III. TIA/EIA/825 "A Frequency Shift Keyed Modem for Use on the 
          Public Switched Telephone Network." (The specification for 45.45 
          and 50 bit/s TTY modems.) 
           
          IV. International Telecommunication Union (ITU), "600/1200-baud 
          modem standardized for use in the general switched telephone 
          network. ITU-T Recommendation V.23, November 1988. 
        
       Intellectual Property Statement 
           
          The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
          Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed 
          to pertain to the implementation or use of the technology 
          described in this document or the extent to which any license 
          under such rights might or might not be available; nor does it 
          represent that it has made any independent effort to identify any 
          such rights.  Information on the procedures with respect to rights 
          in RFC documents can be found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 
           
          Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
          assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
          attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use 
          of such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
          specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository 
          at http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 
           
          The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention 
          any copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other 
          proprietary rights that may cover technology that may be required 
          to implement this standard.  Please address the information to the 
          IETF at ietf-ipr@ietf.org. 

       A. van Wijk, et al.     Expires 21 February 2006      [Page 27 of 28] 
       Internet-Draft Requirements for real time text using SIP  August 2005 

       Disclaimer of Validity 
           
          This document and the information contained herein are provided on 
          an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE 
          REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND 
          THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, 
          EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT 
          THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR 
          ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A 
          PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
           
       Copyright Statement 
           
          Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).  This document is 
          subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 
          78, and except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their 
          rights. 
           
       Acknowledgment 
           
          Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the 
          Internet Society. 
































       A. van Wijk, et al.     Expires 21 February 2006      [Page 28 of 28] 
