Internet Draft   draft-bhatia-manral-crypto-req-isis-01.txt  March 2007 
 
 
   Network Working Group                                   Manav Bhatia 
   Internet Draft                                        Alcatel-Lucent 
   Expires: September 2007                               Vishwas Manral 
                                                            IP Infusion 
    
       Cryptographic Algorithm Implementation Requirements for IS-IS 
                                      
                draft-bhatia-manral-crypto-req-isis-01.txt 
                                      
Status of this Memo 
    
   Distribution of this memo is unlimited. 
    
   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any 
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware 
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes 
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other 
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html 
    
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
Abstract 
    
   IS-IS currently defines two different kinds of authentication 
   schemes: Clear Text password and HMAC-MD5. There has been recently a 
   new draft submitted that adds support for a generic cryptographic 
   authentication scheme, which can make use of different cryptographic 
   algorithms in order to authenticate the IS-IS PDUs.  
    
   To ensure interoperability between disparate implementations, it is 
   imperative that we specify a set of mandatory-to-implement algorithms 
   to ensure that there is at least one algorithm that all 
   implementations will have available.   
    
   This document defines the current set of mandatory-to-implement 
   algorithms to be used for the cryptographic authentication for IS-IS 

 
 
Bhatia and Manral                                              [Page 1] 
Internet Draft   draft-bhatia-manral-crypto-req-isis-01.txt  March 2007 
 
 
   as well as specifying the algorithms that should be implemented 
   because they may be promoted to mandatory at some future time. 
    
Conventions used in this document 
    
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this  
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [KEYWORDS] 
    
1. Introduction 
    
   IS-IS [ISO] [RFC1195] specification allows for authentication of its 
   PDUs via the authentication TLV 10 that is carried as the part of the 
   PDU. The base spec has provision for only clear text passwords and 
   RFC 3567 [RFC3567] augments this to provide the capability to use 
   HMAC-MD5 authentication for its PDUs.  
    
   In the clear text password scheme of authentication, the passwords 
   are exchanged in the clear text on the network and anyone with 
   physical access to the network can learn the password and compromise 
   the security of the IS-IS domain. 
    
   The HMAC-MD5 scheme is also not good enough as there have recently 
   been reports about attacks on the collision resistance properties of 
   MD5 [MD5-attack]. MD5CRK, was a distributed computing project to 
   break the MD5 hash algorithm in a short period of time. The project 
   closed down with the publication of the paper [MD5-attack]. 
    
   It was discovered that collisions can be found in MD5 algorithm in 
   less than 24 hours, making MD5 very insecure. Further research has 
   verified this result and shown other ways to find collisions in MD5 
   hashes. We thus need to move away from MD5 towards more complex and 
   difficult to break hash algorithms.  
    
   The [ISIS-HMAC] document recently submitted in the IETF addresses 
   this. It is imperative that we move away from using MD5 to something 
   that’s cryptographically more stronger (like HMAC-SHA-1).  
    
   However, the nature of cryptography is that new algorithms surface   
   continuously and existing algorithms are continuously attacked. An   
   algorithm believed to be strong today may be demonstrated to be weak   
   tomorrow.  Given this, the choice of mandatory-to-implement algorithm   
   should be conservative so as to minimize the likelihood of it being   
   compromised quickly. 
    
   Also, we need to recognize that the mandatory-to-implement 
   algorithm(s) may need to change over time to adapt to the changing 
   world. For this reason, the selection of mandatory-to-implement 
   algorithms should not be included in the base IS-IS specification. 
 
 
Bhatia and Manral                                              [Page 2] 
Internet Draft   draft-bhatia-manral-crypto-req-isis-01.txt  March 2007 
 
 
   This way it is only this document that needs to get updated, whenever 
   there is a need to update the status of mandatory-to-implement 
   authentication algorithms. 
    
2. Requirements Terminology 
 
   Keywords "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT" and   
   "MAY" that appear in this document are to be interpreted as described   
   in [RFC2119]. 
    
   We define some additional terms here: 
    
   SHOULD+     This term means the same as SHOULD.  However, it is 
               likely that an algorithm marked as SHOULD+ will be 
               promoted at some future time to be a MUST. 
   SHOULD-     This term means the same as SHOULD.  However, it is 
               likely that an algorithm marked as SHOULD- will be 
               deprecated to a MAY or worse in a future version of   
               this document. 
   MUST-       This term means the same as MUST.  However, we expect 
               that at some point in the future this algorithm will no 
               longer be a MUST. 
    
3. Authentication Scheme Selection 
 
   For IS-IS implementations to interoperate, they must support one or 
   more authentication schemes in common. This section specifies the 
   requirements for standards conformant IS-IS implementations, which 
   desire to utilize the security feature. 
    
   Old   Old         New 
   Req.  RFC         Requirement  Authentication Scheme 
   ---   ------      -----------  ------------------------ 
   MUST  ISO-10589/  SHOULD NOT   Clear Text Password (1) 
         RFC 1195 
   MUST  3567        MUST-        HMAC-MD5 
   -     -           SHOULD+      Cryptographic Auth [ISIS-HMAC] 
    
   The above is only true in case security is required, if there is no 
   requirement of security from an implementation, the above 
   requirements need not be followed 
    
   Notes: 
    
   (1)This is used when all the routers can "trust" one another but the  
      operator does not want an accidental introduction of a router in  
      the domain. This scheme of authentication is useful, but not when  
      the operator wants to "cryptographically" authenticate the OSPF  
      packets. 
 
 
Bhatia and Manral                                              [Page 3] 
Internet Draft   draft-bhatia-manral-crypto-req-isis-01.txt  March 2007 
 
 
    
4. Authentication Algorithm Selection 
 
   For IS-IS implementations to interoperate, they must support one or 
   more authentication algorithms in common that can be used in the 
   cryptographic scheme of authentication. 
    
   This section details the authentication algorithm requirements for 
   standards conformant IS-IS implementations. 
    
   Old   Old         New 
   Req.  RFC         Requirement  Authentication Algorithm 
   ---   ------      -----------  ------------------------ 
   MUST  3567        MUST-        HMAC-MD5 
    -     -          SHOULD+      HMAC-SHA-1 [ISIS-HMAC] 
    -     -          MAY+         HMAC-SHA-256/HMAC-SHA-384/HMAC-SHA-512 
    
    
5. Security Considerations  
    
   The cryptographic mechanisms defined in this document define only 
   authentication algorithms, and do not provide any confidentiality. 
   However encrypting the content of the packet (providing 
   confidentiality) is not of as great a value to routing protocols as 
   authenticating the source of the packet. 
    
   It should be noted that the cryptographic strength of the HMAC 
   depends upon the cryptographic strength of the underlying hash 
   function and on the size and quality of the key.   
        
   To ensure greater security, the keys used must be changed 
   periodically and implementations MUST be able to store and use more 
   than one key at the same time.   
    
   This document concerns itself with the selection of cryptographic 
   algorithms for the use of IS-IS, specifically with the selection of 
   "mandatory-to-implement" algorithms.  The algorithms identified in 
   this document as "MUST implement" or "SHOULD implement" are not known 
   to be broken at the current time, and cryptographic research so far 
   leads us to believe that they will likely remain secure into the 
   foreseeable future.  However, this isn't necessarily forever.  We 
   would therefore expect that new revisions of this document will be 
   issued from time to time that reflect the current best practice in 
   this area.  
        
6. Acknowledgements  
     


 
 
Bhatia and Manral                                              [Page 4] 
Internet Draft   draft-bhatia-manral-crypto-req-isis-01.txt  March 2007 
 
 
   Much of the wording herein was adapted from RFC 4307, "Cryptographic   
   Algorithms for Use in the Internet Key Exchange Version 2", by 
   Jeffrey I. Schiller. 
    
7. IANA Considerations  
 
   This document places no requests to IANA. 
    
8. References 
 
8.1 Normative References 
    
   [KEYWORDS]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate  
               Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119 
    
   [ISO]       "Intermediate system to Intermediate system routeing  
               information exchange protocol for use in conjunction with 
               the Protocol for providing the Connectionless-mode  
               Network Service (ISO 8473)", ISO/IEC 10589:1992  
        
   [RFC1195]   Callon, R., "Use of OSI IS-IS for routing in TCP/IP and  
               dual environments", RFC 1195, December 1990.  
    
   [RFC3567]   Li, T. and R. Atkinson, "Intermediate System to  
               Intermediate System (IS-IS) Cryptographic  
               Authentication", RFC 3567, July 2003  
    
   [ISIS-HMAC] Bhatia, M., Manral, V. and White, R.,"ISIS HMAC  
               Cryptographic Authentication", Work in Progress 
    
8.2 Informative References 
    
   [MD5-attack]   Wang, X. et al., "Collisions for Hash Functions MD4,   
                  MD5, HAVAL-128 and RIPEMD", August 2004,  
                  http://eprint.iacr.org/2004/199  
        
9. Author's Addresses 
 
   Manav Bhatia 
   Alcatel-Lucent 
   Bangalore, India 
   Email: manav@alcatel-lucent.com 
    
   Vishwas Manral 
   IP Infusion 
   Almora, Uttarakhand 
   India 
   Email: vishwas@ipinfusion.com 
 
 
 
Bhatia and Manral                                              [Page 5] 
Internet Draft   draft-bhatia-manral-crypto-req-isis-01.txt  March 2007 
 
 
Full Copyright Statement 
    
   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007). 
    
   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions 
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors 
   retain all their rights. 
    
   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an 
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS 
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND 
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS 
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF 
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED 
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
    
Intellectual Property 
    
   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed 
   to pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described 
   in this document or the extent to which any license under such rights 
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has 
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information 
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be 
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 
    
   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any   
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an   
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use   
   of such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this   
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository   
   at http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 
    
   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at ietf-
   ipr@ietf.org. 
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
 
 
Bhatia and Manral                                              [Page 6] 
Internet Draft   draft-bhatia-manral-crypto-req-isis-01.txt  March 2007 
 
 
    
    
    
    













































 
 
Bhatia and Manral                                              [Page 7] 
