


IPR Working Group                                              M. Riegel
Internet-Draft                                             March 3, 2003
Expires: September 1, 2003


   Considerations for Intellectual Property Rights in IETF Standards
                   draft-riegel-ipr-practices-02.txt

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at http://
   www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 1, 2003.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   Intellectual Property Rights (IPR), in particular patents are an
   important topic for standards development organizations (SDOs). A
   patent grants a monopoly to the owner to control the usage of the
   covered technology. If such a technology is becoming part of a
   standard the patent owner can arbitrarily restrict the usage of the
   standard. Therefore all SDOs are concerned about patents in their
   standards.

   This memo focuses on practices the IETF may apply to cope with patent
   rights in its standards. The proposal is based on the idea of open
   standards and is fully aligned to the current IPR rules of the IETF.
   The intention is to retain the mind of the IETF while enabling the
   consideration of IPR covered proposals in a defined way.



Riegel                 Expires September 1, 2003                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft           IPR in IETF standards                March 2003


Table of Contents

   1.  Prologue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   1.1 Personal Disclaimer  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   1.2 Revision History . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3.  Intellectual Property Rights . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.1 Copyright  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.2 Patent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   4.  Implications of IPR on standardization . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   5.  Value of Patents in Standards  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   5.1 Compulsory Standards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   5.2 Voluntary Standards  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   6.  Current IPR practices in the IETF  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   7.  Refined IPR procedures for the IETF  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
       References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
       Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
       Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . 10

































Riegel                 Expires September 1, 2003                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft           IPR in IETF standards                March 2003


1. Prologue

1.1 Personal Disclaimer

   This memo purely expresses the personal opinion of the author and
   does not describe in any part a company's position concerning IPR in
   standards. Furthermore, being an engineer and not a patent attorney
   the statements concerning legal details shouldn't be taken as proved.

   The ideas expressed in this memo are stemming from many years'
   involvement in standardization and in particular from experiences
   with IPR discussions in the IETF ROHC working group.

1.2 Revision History

   -00 (2002-06-24)
      Initial release.

   -01 (2002-07-22)
      Editorial corrections, refined abstract, enclosing revision
      history.

   -02 (2003-03-03)
      Refined chapter 6 to show more clearly the underlying principles
      of the current practices in the IETF.
      Refined chapter 7 to reflect the written rules of the IETF more
      precisely.


2. Introduction

   Dealing with Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) in standards have
   been in discussion for many years. There are many publications
   covering the legal aspects of patents and benefits and drawbacks for
   standards development organizations. Several special issues have been
   published by the IEEE recently [1][2].

   Most standards development organizations (SDOs) dealing with
   communication standards are following the concept of Open Standards.
   A good explanation about the principles of Open Standards is given by
   [3]. Among the principles are the issues of 'Open IPR' and 'Open
   Use'.

   The issue 'Open IPR' is requesting the declaration of any known IPR
   during the standardization process by the participants. To fulfill
   this issue all SDOs dealing with Open Standards have according rules
   in their charters.




Riegel                 Expires September 1, 2003                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft           IPR in IETF standards                March 2003


   'Open Use' means that Open Standards should be implementable and
   useable without the need to strive for licenses from patent holders.
   Because there is no way to prove that a particular technology is not
   covered by IPR this principle is barely to achieve. Nevertheless some
   standardization organizations are staying with this principle, with
   remarkable success.

   This memo focuses on the methods by which the IETF is achieving 'Open
   IPR' and 'Open Use' and it expresses some potential extensions to the
   procedures of the IETF to allow the consideration of IPR covered
   proposals for restricted areas in a well defined way.

3. Intellectual Property Rights

   The Intellectual Property Law knows about several different kinds of
   IPR. While trade secrets, trademarks or semiconductor chip protection
   act normally do not have relevance in standardization, the copyright
   and the patent are quite important.

3.1 Copyright

   The US Code defines, that "copyright protection subsists in original
   works of authorship fixed in any tangible medium of expression from
   which they can be perceived, reproduced, or otherwise communicated,
   either directly or with the aid of a machine or device".

   Copyright protects the expression of an idea, not the idea itself. In
   standardization copyright protects the expression of the standard
   means the text, the drawings, the perceivable form. Copyright grants
   the owner exclusive rights for reproducing, preparing derivative work
   and distributing copies of the work. As standards are normally a
   derivative work put together out of many particular contributions,
   SDOs require from all contributors to a standard, that the copyright
   for standards contributions is handed over to the SDO.

3.2 Patent

   Patents were originally introduced to promote the progress of science
   and technology by granting to inventors exclusive rights for a
   limited time, when the inventions are made known to the public.

   In extension of the rights provided by copyright, patents are
   covering the idea itself, which must be a new and useful process,
   machine, manufacture of matters or new and useful improvement of
   these.

   Patents provide the patent owner a complete monopoly on the invention
   and the use of it. Even if the same invention is made fully



Riegel                 Expires September 1, 2003                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft           IPR in IETF standards                March 2003


   independently by somebody else, the patent owner can prevent the use
   of the invention, that means, prohibit that the (re)inventor is
   taking use of the idea.

4. Implications of IPR on standardization

   While copyright does not cause major concerns in standardization -
   appropriate rules have been set up by all SDOs and are well
   understood and accepted by the contributors to standardization - the
   monopoly, a patent grant to the owner, might cause serious trouble in
   standardization.

   It might happen that a SDO develops with considerable effort a new
   standard and this standard couldn't be used by anybody due to a
   patent, which covers part of such standard and is not allowed to be
   used.

   More seriously, it is nearly impossible to make sure, that a standard
   is not covered by any patent, as invention filings are not accessible
   by the public for some time.

   To cope with these matters SDOs are trying to get knowledge about
   related invention filings and patents as early as possible. It is
   common in Open Standardization that all participants in a particular
   standardization process have to declare the existence of all their
   related patents.

   If anything gets known, the SDO is trying to get a disclaimer of the
   patent owner that the patent can be used in such standard and all the
   implementers of such standard get licenses under fair and reasonable
   terms.

   What is meant by 'fair and reasonable' is normally left open by the
   disclaimer, and might be subject of business contracts between the
   patent owner and the manufacturer later.

5. Value of Patents in Standards

   The conditions of a license for a patent covered in a standard will
   be closely related to the importance of the standard for a business.
   Main differentiation might be compulsory standards, which are
   unconditionally necessary for a particular application, and voluntary
   standards, which are open to acceptance by the market and can be
   replaced by something equivalent, if the conditions are too
   expensive.

5.1 Compulsory Standards




Riegel                 Expires September 1, 2003                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft           IPR in IETF standards                March 2003


   With the deregulation of telecommunication worldwide the number of
   compulsory standards for telecommunication diminishes steadily, but
   especially for telephony and public mobile communication systems like
   2G and 3G there still exist many standards a operator has to
   implement when getting a license for telecommunication or spectrum
   usage.

   Patents being covered by compulsory standards have to be licensed in
   any case, and this might contribute to the conditions of the license.

5.2 Voluntary Standards

   Open standards are aimed to be voluntary standards. They often
   provide particular functions, not a complete network architecture,
   but building blocks, which can be used to set up a network
   architecture.

   It is quite feasible with voluntary standards, that the same function
   can be realized by another voluntary standard, based on different
   procedures, potentially avoiding known patents.

   Furthermore acceptance of a particular standard by the market might
   closely depend on the conditions to get all the licenses necessary
   for implementing the standard. The market will go most likely for the
   standard not needing a license at all, and the organizational effort
   to set up licensing agreements is an important issue especially for
   smaller companies.

   The fast success of the Internet and the World-Wide-Web may have been
   highly driven by the fact, that the relevant standards are license
   free.

   Getting profits out of a patent used in a voluntary standard might be
   a difficult task. If alternatives to an encumbered procedure are
   available, the implementers will most likely go with solutions not
   covered by patents to avoid expensive business negotiations as well
   as license fees. And if an alternative is established in the market,
   nobody will have any interest in the patent and all the effort put
   into the patent will be lost.

   Being in such an open and competitive environment, patents can be
   treated like selling goods in an open market. The market will decide
   whether it is worth to go with an encumbered proposal.

6. Current IPR practices in the IETF

   The IETF is developing voluntary standards for the Internet and has
   established well thought procedures to deal with IPR in standards



Riegel                 Expires September 1, 2003                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft           IPR in IETF standards                March 2003


   discussions.

   Chapter 10 of RFC2026 [4] specifies the rules of the IETF on
   Intellectual Property Rights in standards discussion. It defines the
   provisions related to copyrights, authors of submissions to the
   standards process have to grant to the IETF, as well as the procedure
   to declare knowledge of encumbered proposals as far as known to the
   author.

   The IETF has no written policy to allow only unencumbered solutions
   but has established rules which are potentially leading to standards
   attracting implementors by not causing troubles with acquiring
   licenses.

   Most important component of the IETF IPR policy is the requirement
   that IPR issues have to be declared to the Working Group as early as
   possible. The IETF has the intention to get known of encumbered
   proposals as early as possible in the standardization process to be
   able to look for alternative, not encumbered solutions.

   The IETF requires that contributors have to disclaim their knowledge
   about IPR in their proposals together with submission of the
   proposal. It is likely in an experts' world that the authors of
   contributions have good knowledge about the eventual IPR of their own
   proposals in general. With many experts contributing their IPR
   knowledge into the standards discussion it becomes quite likely, that
   all IPR related to the result of the standards discussion gets known.

   Taking into account that most IPR are normally generated during the
   development of a standard by the individuals personally being
   involved in the standards discussion, the rules of the IETF
   efficiently prevent the hidden generation of IPR on technology being
   developed during the standardization process.

   With such an open policy it is quite natural that the working group
   is preferring unencumbered solutions whenever possible. Therefore the
   IETF does not need any written guidance to prefer unencumbered
   solutions, the same result will grow quite 'naturally' out of the
   established rules.

   In this sense the visible involvement of many working group members
   in the standards discussions is very supportive for developing
   unencumbered standards. The best way to show the involvement of
   individuals in a standards developing effort may be listing the names
   as coauthors in the specifications.

   Understanding the underlying principles of the IPR practices in the
   IETF explains the common concerns of contributors that their costly



Riegel                 Expires September 1, 2003                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft           IPR in IETF standards                March 2003


   established rights on inventions will loose the value when their
   encumbered solution will become known to the IETF. An IETF working
   group will likely develop a standard not comprising the encumbered
   solutions contributed to the IETF.

   Unfortunately this leaves not much space for encumbered functions in
   standards providing superior performance.

7. Refined IPR procedures for the IETF

   Open, license-free standards have shown incredible benefits for the
   global economy.

   A huge community inside and outside the IETF is supporting the idea
   of open source systems and open source software. Royalty-free
   standards are needed for implementations in the open source
   environment.

   IETF standards specifying protocols aimed for general use in the
   Internet should be implementable as open source to support the fast
   and broad adoption in the market.

   The IETF should stay with its current IPR policies leading to
   solutions with a high acceptance in the market. It might be helpful
   to provide a more accessible database of IPR declarations than the
   current list on the IETF web-site to support implementers as well as
   working groups.

   In cases where an encumbered solution might provide additional
   benefits for particular applications, the standard should be split up
   in the license-free mandatory part and optional enhancements probably
   covered by IPR.

   o  Keeping license-free parts and encumbered parts separate would
      provide a well defined way for the IETF to include encumbered
      solutions as optional enhancements.

   o  Encumbered solutions should never become part of the base
      specification or mandatory part of the standard to enable at least
      interoperability of basic functions between all implementations.
      The IETF has long experience with protocols allowing optional
      enhancements. PPP [5] might be one of the best examples.

   o  Optional enhancements might be, but do not have to be covered by
      IPR providing additional functionality to the standard. This
      allows the use of the best technology available for enhancements
      of IP protocols.




Riegel                 Expires September 1, 2003                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft           IPR in IETF standards                March 2003


   o  Optional enhancements should always allow several different
      solutions for the same requirement enabling a competitive
      environment not only for the best technical solution but also for
      the most appropriate license condition.

References

   [1]  Kipnis, J., "Beating the System: Abuses of the Standards
        Adoption Process", IEEE Communications Magazine, Vol. 38, No. 7,
        pp. 102 - 105, July 2000.

   [2]  Egyedi, T., "IPR paralysis in standardization: Is regulatory
        symmetry desirable?", IEEE Communications Magazine, Vol. 39, No.
        4, pp. 108 - 114, April 2001.

   [3]  Krechmer, K., "The Principles of Open Standards", Standards
        Engineering Society, World Standards Day http://www.csrstds.com/
        openstds.html, 1998.

   [4]  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3", BCP
        9, RFC 2026, October 1996.

   [5]  Simpson, W., "The Point-to-Point Protocol (PPP)", STD 51, RFC
        1661, July 1994.


Author's Address

   Max Riegel
   Maxfeldstr. 24a
   Nuremberg  90409
   Germany

   Phone: +49-911-538747
   EMail: riegel@max.franken.de
















Riegel                 Expires September 1, 2003                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft           IPR in IETF standards                March 2003


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it
   has made any effort to identify any such rights. Information on the
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11. Copies of
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of
   licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to
   obtain a general license or permission for the use of such
   proprietary rights by implementors or users of this specification can
   be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice
   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF Executive
   Director.


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assignees.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION



Riegel                 Expires September 1, 2003               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft           IPR in IETF standards                March 2003


   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Acknowledgement

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.











































Riegel                 Expires September 1, 2003               [Page 11]


