


SIPPING Working Group                                       S. Niccolini
Internet-Draft                                             S. Tartarelli
Expires: August 5, 2006                                   M. Stiemerling
                                                                     NEC
                                                           February 2006


Requirements and methods for SPIT identification using feedbacks in SIP
                draft-niccolini-sipping-feedback-spit-00

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 5, 2006.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

Abstract

   This memo describes requirements and gives an overview of possible
   solutions to send feedbacks using the SIP protocol for the scope of
   SPIT (SPam over Internet Telephony) identification.  Feedback
   information from the users to the SPIT identification system (e.g.,
   working closely with the callee's SIP proxy server) are important for
   SPIT detection and prevention and the overall system could benefit
   from such information and increase its effectiveness.  The basic idea



Niccolini, et al.        Expires August 5, 2006                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft            SIP Feedback for SPIT            February 2006


   is that each user who receives a SPIT call reports it to the SPIT
   identification system (for example, using a button on the user
   interface of the client).  This memo identifies the parameters that
   the SPIT identification system may need in order to detect abusive
   behaviors; moreover it proposes an overview of technical solutions
   how such information can be sent back to the SPIT identification
   system by means of the SIP protocol.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3

   2.  Requirements for SPIT Identification using Feedbacks . . . . .  4
     2.1.  Parameters for SPIT Detection and Prevention . . . . . . .  4

   3.  Methods for sending SPIT Feedback using the SIP Protocol . . .  6
     3.1.  SIP Event Package  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.2.  Additional Header for SPIT Feedback  . . . . . . . . . . .  6

   4.  Conclusions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8

   5.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9

   6.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     6.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     6.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10

   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 12





















Niccolini, et al.        Expires August 5, 2006                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft            SIP Feedback for SPIT            February 2006


1.  Introduction

   The spam problem is well known in the email world.  Voice
   communications carried over the traditional PSTN are not largely
   suffering from unsolicited telemarketing calls because of the big
   costs an originator has to encounter to send voice spam over circuit
   switched networks.  Recent studies [2] have calculated that these
   costs will significantly reduce for voice call carried over the
   Internet Protocol (IP).  When referring to voice communications the
   spam is commonly referred to as SPIT (SPam over Internet Telephony).
   Given that the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) is used to initiate,
   among others, voice communications, it will be vulnerable to SPIT as
   the email is to spam.  The SPIT threat is currently gaining attention
   in the community and several solutions to counter this threat are
   currently being analyzed [2] and proposed [3].  This memo analyzes
   the requirements for SPIT identification using feedbacks, moreover it
   presents a list of parameters that a SPIT identification system may
   need to know in order to detect and prevent SPIT calls.  The SPIT
   identification system (referred to as "the system" in the rest of
   this document) is supposed to work closely with the SIP
   infrastructure (e.g., with the callee's SIP proxy server or with
   other SIP entities) and to make use of SIP signaling.  The basic idea
   is that when some calls are not detected as SPIT by the system, the
   callee picks up the call and realizes that he received an unsolicited
   telemarketing call.  After having realized that the call was a SPIT
   one, the callee decides to hung up the call with a special button
   that informs the system that a SPIT call was just delivered.  This
   feedback could be as well sent by an answering machine which answers
   the call instead of the callee and decides whether the call was a
   SPIT one or not sending afterwards the feedback to the system.  In
   addition to presenting the requirements and the parameters for SPIT
   prevention, we propose two methods on how this feedback could be sent
   back to the system using the SIP.


















Niccolini, et al.        Expires August 5, 2006                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft            SIP Feedback for SPIT            February 2006


2.  Requirements for SPIT Identification using Feedbacks

   There are some important requirements for the feedback mechanism to
   be taken into account when used for SPIT identification.  The
   identification of requirements is necessary to understand:

   o  how SIP messages carrying the feedback itself should look like;

   o  which are the methods best suited to carry such feedback;

   o  how the SIP entities should behave when dealing with such
      feedbacks messages.

   We report here a first non-exhaustive list of requirements that we
   identified in the context of SPIT identification using feedbacks:

   o  SIP user agents do not know if the handling SPIT identification
      system is working either in stateless or in stateful mode and
      therefore the feedback must contain all necessary parameters both
      to non-ambiguous identify the call and to serve as input for SPIT
      identification methods;

   o  the feedback should not notify the caller that the call was
      recognized to be SPIT by the terminating user agent, either the
      message containing the feedback should have only a scope valid for
      the SPIT identification system or the information related to the
      feedback should be stripped from the SIP message before forwarding
      it to the originating party.

2.1.  Parameters for SPIT Detection and Prevention

   The parameters described here are intended to be a list of parameters
   the system could need to know in order to detect and prevent the
   delivery of next SPIT calls.

   In addition to the methods detailed in [2] there are other methods
   that may be aided by the knowledge of parameters associated with SPIT
   calls (e.g., methods identifying SPIT calls based on caller's call
   rate, methods identifying SPIT calls based on caller's number of
   simultaneous calls, pattern-based systems, etc.) in order to identify
   and block next SPIT calls.

   We report here a non-exhaustive list of parameters associated to a
   call we envision to be important in SPIT detection:

   o  caller SIP URI;





Niccolini, et al.        Expires August 5, 2006                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft            SIP Feedback for SPIT            February 2006


   o  callee SIP URI;

   o  call-id;

   o  call start time (exact definition of call start time has to be
      included);

   o  call end time (exact definition of call start time has to be
      included);

   o  caller signaling contact address (IP address and port);

   o  callee signaling contact address (IP address and port);

   o  caller media address (IP address and port);

   o  callee media address (IP address and port).

   The scope and the usefulness of the above cited parameters depends on
   the actual methods implemented in the system to detect and prevent
   SPIT calls.






























Niccolini, et al.        Expires August 5, 2006                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft            SIP Feedback for SPIT            February 2006


3.  Methods for sending SPIT Feedback using the SIP Protocol

   We describe here two methods we identified for sending feedbacks for
   SPIT identification purposes.  We identified an already standardized
   method for the SIP protocol (SIP event package) and a second one
   based on an additional SIP header for sending feedbacks for SPIT
   purposes.  We present here both solutions and discuss pros and cons
   of each approach.

3.1.  SIP Event Package

   The idea is that when a client registers with the server, the server
   subscribes to the feedback of the user using the SIP event
   notification mechanism [1].  After each call the user decides whether
   the call was SPIT or not and provides the feedback using an
   appropriate GUI input method at the user agent.  The client then
   sends a NOTIFY to the server with the feedback given by the user.
   The drawback with this approach is that it is rather heavy-weight and
   [1] states that the SIP event package should not be used for general-
   purpose notifications.  How this additional NOTIFY should look like
   and which parameters should be sent with it is dependent on the SPIT
   detection and prevention methods actually implemented in the system.
   A possible option is to include all necessary parameters listed in
   Section 2.1 in the NOTIFY message and then leave the system using the
   only ones suitable for the SPIT detection methods actually
   implemented.  This issue is anyway left open for further discussion.

3.2.  Additional Header for SPIT Feedback

   A light-weight solution to passing feedback between a user agent and
   a SIP server is to add an additional header in the BYE message which
   indicates whether the call was SPIT or not.  This has as a
   consequence that only the user who actively terminates the call can
   give a feedback.  We believe this not to be a limitation since
   whenever a user receives a call that he considers SPIT, he will most
   probably hang up before the call itself has ended; therefore, it is
   very likely that the callee terminates a SPIT call that has been
   answered.  At the user agent such a method could be implemented as
   two different buttons to hang-up a call, one for a normal hang-up and
   the second one for hanging-up a SPIT call.  If the second button is
   used, a header is added to the BYE message to indicate that the call
   was SPIT.  This header is then interpreted by the system.  It is
   advisable that a SIP server strips any SPIT-related header to keep
   them from leaking out of the local domain as they will only be used
   by the local server anyway.  How this additional header should look
   like and which parameters should be sent with it is dependent on the
   SPIT detection and prevention methods actually implemented in the
   system.  Since the BYE message contains already some of the



Niccolini, et al.        Expires August 5, 2006                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft            SIP Feedback for SPIT            February 2006


   parameters listed in Section 2.1, a possible option is to include all
   remaining parameters in the additional header included in the BYE
   message and then leave the system using the only ones suitable for
   the SPIT detection methods actually implemented.  This issue is
   anyway left open for further discussion.














































Niccolini, et al.        Expires August 5, 2006                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft            SIP Feedback for SPIT            February 2006


4.  Conclusions

   This draft attempts to identify the requirements for a standard way
   of sending user agent feedback using the Session Initiation Protocol
   (SIP) for the purpose of SPam over Internet Telephony (SPIT)
   identification.  The document starts by examining the requirements in
   terms of parameters that a system may need to know in order to detect
   and prevent SPIT calls.  Moreover the document presents two
   alternatives how this feedback could be implemented using SIP (namely
   using the SIP event package or using an additional header).  The
   detailed analysis of the all the parameters that need to be included
   either in the NOTIFY message or in the additional header and their
   syntax will be topic for future work.






































Niccolini, et al.        Expires August 5, 2006                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft            SIP Feedback for SPIT            February 2006


5.  Security Considerations

   Some calls may be SPIT for some users but not for others and sending
   feedback to tell the system that the callee received a SPIT call is
   depending on the callee concept of SPIT calls (unless there is an
   automated machine checking on behalf of the user).  Security
   considerations should be tailored to understand if the feedback
   should apply to all users served by the system or only to the callee
   who gave the feedback.  Moreover the system should process SPIT
   feedbacks preserving normal operations for all users and do not let
   some "mafia" users exploiting this mechanism to create DoS attacks
   denying users to call.  This risk is anyway lowered by the fact that
   the mechanisms proposed for sending the feedback to the system are
   specific to a single call and not general, i.e., only the callee can
   give a SPIT feedback to the caller.




































Niccolini, et al.        Expires August 5, 2006                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft            SIP Feedback for SPIT            February 2006


6.  References

6.1.  Normative References

   [1]  Roach, A., "Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)-Specific Event
        Notification", RFC 3265, June 2002.

6.2.  Informative References

   [2]  Rosenberg, J., Jennings, C., and J. Peterson, "The Session
        Initiation Protocol (SIP) and Spam",
        DRAFT draft-ietf-sipping-spam-01.txt, July 2005.

   [3]  Schwartz, D., Sterman, B., Katz, E., and H. Tschofenig, "SPAM
        for Internet Telephony (SPIT) Prevention using the Security
        Assertion Markup Language (SAML)",
        DRAFT draft-schwartz-sipping-spit-saml-00.txt, October 2005.


































Niccolini, et al.        Expires August 5, 2006                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft            SIP Feedback for SPIT            February 2006


Authors' Addresses

   Saverio Niccolini
   Network Laboratories, NEC Europe Ltd.
   Kurfuersten-Anlage 36
   Heidelberg  69115
   Germany

   Phone: +49 (0) 6221 905 11 18
   Email: saverio.niccolini@netlab.nec.de
   URI:   http://www.netlab.nec.de


   Sandra Tartarelli
   Network Laboratories, NEC Europe Ltd.
   Kurfuersten-Anlage 36
   Heidelberg  69115
   Germany

   Phone: +49 (0) 6221 905 11 32
   Email: sandra.tartarelli@netlab.nec.de
   URI:   http://www.netlab.nec.de


   Martin Stiemerling
   Network Laboratories, NEC Europe Ltd.
   Kurfuersten-Anlage 36
   Heidelberg  69115
   Germany

   Phone: +49 (0) 6221 905 11 13
   Email: stiemerling@netlab.nec.de
   URI:   http://www.netlab.nec.de


















Niccolini, et al.        Expires August 5, 2006                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft            SIP Feedback for SPIT            February 2006


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Niccolini, et al.        Expires August 5, 2006                [Page 12]


