

draft-leith-tcp-htcp-04                                         D. Leith
Internet-Draft                                                R. Shorten
Intended status: Experimental                         Hamilton Institute
Expires: February 1, 2008                                  July 31, 2007


   H-TCP: TCP Congestion Control for High Bandwidth-Delay Product Paths


Status of this Memo

    By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
    applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
    have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
    aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

    Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
    Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
    other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
    Drafts.

    Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six  
months
    and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
    time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
    material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

    The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
    http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

    The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
    http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

    This Internet-Draft will expire on February 1, 2008.

Copyright Notice

    Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).














Leith & Shorten         Expires February 1, 2008                [Page 1]
Internet-Draft                    H-TCP                        July 2007


Abstract

    Our objective in this document is to renew discussion on how the TCP
    congestion control algorithm might best be modified to improve
    performance in high bandwidth-delay product paths.  We focus on
    changes to the additive increase element of the TCP AIMD algorithm.


Table of Contents

    1.   
Conventions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
    2.   
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
    3.  Additive Increase for High Bandwidth-Delay Product  
Paths . . .  6
    4.  Choice of Increase  
Function  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
      4.1.  RTT  
unfairness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
      4.2.   
Friendliness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
      4.3.   
Responsiveness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
      4.4.   
Efficiency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
    5.  RTT  
Scaling  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
    6.  Security  
Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
    7.   
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
    8.  Informative  
References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
    Authors'  
Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
    Intellectual Property and Copyright  
Statements . . . . . . . . . . 15



























Leith & Shorten         Expires February 1, 2008                [Page 2]
Internet-Draft                    H-TCP                        July 2007


1.  Conventions

    The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
    "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
    document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119.














































Leith & Shorten         Expires February 1, 2008                [Page 3]
Internet-Draft                    H-TCP                        July 2007


2.  Introduction

    The current TCP congestion control algorithm is known to perform
    poorly on paths where the TCP congestion window becomes very large.
    [Kelly02, Flo03, FAST04].  Following congestion, the congestion
    window is halved and only increases at a rate of 1 packet per RTT.
    As a result flows can take an unacceptably long time to recover  
their
    window size after a congestion event.

    A direct solution is to make the time between congestion events
    smaller.  This can be achieved by, for example, adjusting the AIMD
    additive increase rate to be greater for flows with larger  
congestion
    window.  Backward compatibility with legacy TCP can be ensured
    through the inclusion of a separate mode of operation that  
behaves as
    legacy TCP in the appropriate circumstances.

    The logic that orchestrates switching between the legacy and more
    aggressive modes of operation can clearly be designed several ways.
    One approach is to make the AIMD increase parameter, which we denote
    here by alpha, a function of the flow congestion window.  That is,
    alpha is increased as congestion window increases thereby resulting
    in an additive increase algorithm that directly scales with
    congestion window.  This is precisely the approach adopted in the
    High-Speed TCP [Flo03] proposal.  In addition to adjusting the AIMD
    increase parameter alpha as a function of congestion window, this
    proposal also increases the multiplicative decrease factor beta to
    further increase the aggressiveness of a flow.  (Note.  On
    multiplicative decrease, the congestion window cwnd is updated to
    beta x cwnd.  We use this definition of the backoff factor beta
    throughout this document).

    While such modifications might appear straightforward, it has been
    shown [Sho04, Yi05] that they often negatively impact the behaviour
    of networks of TCP flows.  High-speed TCP[Flo03] and BIC-TCP [BIC04]
    can exhibit extremely slow convergence following network  
disturbances
    such as the start-up of new flows; Scalable-TCP [Kelly02] is a
    multiplicative-increase multiplicative-decrease strategy and as such
    it is known that it may fail to converge to fairness in drop-tail
    networks [Jain89].

    Our objective in this document is to therefore to renew  
discussion on
    how the TCP congestion control algorithm might best be modified to
    improve performance when the congestion window is large.  Large
    congestion windows are associated with high bandwidth-delay product
    (BDP) paths and with the ongoing increase in network speeds, high  
BDP
    paths are becoming increasingly prevalent.  In this document we  
focus
    on changes to the additive increase element of the TCP AIMD  
algorithm
    (we leave discussion of modifications to the backoff factor to a



Leith & Shorten         Expires February 1, 2008                [Page 4]
Internet-Draft                    H-TCP                        July 2007


    later date).  In particular, we present proposed changes to the
    additive increase algorithm that we argue are promising enough  
(based
    on the outcome of experimental tests carried out by a number of
    groups [Hegde04, Yi05, Cot05]) to warrant further discussion within
    the wider networking community.

    Scope
    -----

    Our focus in this document is on the behaviour of long-lived flows
    and so we do not consider changes to slow-start.  We also seek to
    make the smallest possible changes to the existing TCP congestion
    control algorithm, and so confine consideration to the AIMD packet-
    loss based paradigm.  Use of jumbo packets is viewed as  
complementary
    to the changes proposed here.  We confine consideration to drop-tail
    queues as this is the prevalent queueing discipline in the current
    Internet and leave discussion of active queueing to a later date.


































Leith & Shorten         Expires February 1, 2008                [Page 5]
Internet-Draft                    H-TCP                        July 2007


3.  Additive Increase for High Bandwidth-Delay Product Paths

    The AIMD algorithm used in TCP has two key features that underpin  
its
    convergence behaviour.  Firstly, flows with the same RTT increase
    their congestion windows at the same rate.  Secondly, the backoff
    mechanism is multiplicative.  Hence, following congestion, flows  
with
    a larger congestion window will reduce their congestion window by
    more, in absolute terms, than flows with a smaller congestion  
window.
    Thus larger flows yield more bandwidth than smaller flows.  Since
    flows increase congestion window at the same rate, flows with  
smaller
    congestion window thereby gain a certain advantage over flows with
    larger congestion window, and it is this that enables flows with
    small congestion window to seize bandwidth from flows with large
    congestion window until balance is reached in the network.

    It follows from this observation that modifying the AIMD backoff
    factor can have a very significant impact on network responsiveness,
    and this is discussed in more detail elsewhere [Sho04, Sho05].  In
    this document we do not consider changes to the backoff factor.
    Instead, we confine attention to modifications to the AIMD increase
    rate with the aim of improving performance in high bandwidth-delay
    product paths.  Provided we retain appropriate symmetry between the
    increase rates of competing flows, modifying the increase rate
    affects the interval between congestion events but otherwise does  
not
    affect the responsiveness of TCP.

    We therefore propose generalising the AIMD algorithm by allowing the
    increase parameter alpha to vary as a function of the elapsed time
    since the last congestion event.  Specifically, if we let Delta
    denote the time in seconds that has elapsed since the last  
congestion
    event experienced by a flow, we adjust the AIMD increase parameter
    according to some function which we denote f_alpha(Delta).  To
    provide backward compatibility with legacy TCP flows we consider
    adjusting the increase parameter as follows

    if Delta <= Delta_L
       alpha  = 1
    else
       alpha = f_alpha(Delta)

    where Delta_L is the threshold for switching from standard/legacy
    operation to the new increase function.  The choice of function
    f_alpha is governed by the rate at which bandwidth should be
    acquired.

    We can immediately make the observation that, because the adjustment
    is based on time since the last backoff, a degree of symmetry is
    maintained between competing network flows and in particular flows



Leith & Shorten         Expires February 1, 2008                [Page 6]
Internet-Draft                    H-TCP                        July 2007


    already in high speed mode are not awarded a long-term advantage  
over
    newer flows.  Specifically, when packet drops are synchronised Delta
    is necessarily the same for all flows.  Hence all flows share
    identical increase profiles and symmetry is maintained [Sho04].   
When
    drops are not synchronised, Delta is the same *on average* for all
    flows provided flows share the same probability of backing off on
    congestion.  Hence, symmetry is still maintained, albeit in an
    average sense.

    We select the increase function f_alpha such that the duration of  
the
    congestion epochs remains reasonably small as the bandwidth-delay
    product on a path increases.  Below, we discuss one choice of
    increase function that yields convergence times that seem  
reasonable.
    However, the precise responsiveness requirement in future  
networks is
    currently not well defined and so we leave this, and the associated
    specific choice of increase function, as a question for further
    debate.


































Leith & Shorten         Expires February 1, 2008                [Page 7]
Internet-Draft                    H-TCP                        July 2007


4.  Choice of Increase Function

    We consider, as an illustrative example, use of the increase  
function

    f_alpha(Delta) = 1 + 10(Delta-Delta_L)+0.5(Delta-Delta_L)^2   (1)

    and Delta_L=1 second.  This choice yields the congestion epoch
    duration for a single flow, as a function of congestion window size,
    shown in Table 1.

    -------------------------------------
    Congestion              Congestion
    window                  epoch
    (packets)               duration (s)
    -------------------------------------
    100                     1.1
    1000                    3.1
    2000                    4.3
    5000                    6.6
    10000                   9.2
    20000                   12.8
    50000                   19.4
    -------------------------------------
    Table 1 - Congestion epoch duration vs congestion window
    size for an RTT of 100ms

4.1.  RTT unfairness

    It follows from the introductory discussion that (when RTT  
scaling is
    not used) the level of unfairness between flows with different RTT's
    is similar to that with the current AIMD algorithm.  This behaviour
    is confirmed in experimental and simulation tests [HTCP04, Yi05].

4.2.  Friendliness

    The mean AIMD increase parameter is shown in Table 2 for a range of
    bandwidth-delay products.  This an indication of the number of
    standard TCP flows (neglecting statistical multiplexing of backoffs)
    whose aggregate would be equivalent to a flow using increase  
function
    (1).  That is, an indication of friendliness and also of the packet
    drop overhead associated with the AIMD probing action.










Leith & Shorten         Expires February 1, 2008                [Page 8]
Internet-Draft                    H-TCP                        July 2007


    ------------------------------------------------------------------
    Congestion              Effective number of standard TCP flows
      window
    (packets)               10ms RTT        100ms RTT       250ms RTT
    ------------------------------------------------------------------
    10                      1               1               1
    100                     1               2               5
    1000                    3               12              22
    2000                    4               19              32
    5000                    8               33              55
    10000                   12              49              82
    20000                   19              72              123
    50000                   32              122             208
    ------------------------------------------------------------------
    Table 2 - Mean increase parameter (packets/RTT) vs congestion window
    size

4.3.  Responsiveness

    Responsiveness is qualitatively similar to that of the current AIMD
    congestion control algorithm, i.e. the convergence time of TCP flows
    using an AIMD backoff factor of 0.5 is approximately 4 congestion
    epochs, although the congestion epoch duration is significantly
    shorter on high bandwidth-delay product paths (see Table 1).

4.4.  Efficiency

    Link utilisation depends on queue provisioning in a similar  
manner to
    the current TCP congestion control algorithm.  That is, for a single
    flow (or multiple synchronised flows) 100% link utilisation requires
    that the queue be sized as the bandwidth-delay product.  Simulation
    and experimental tests indicate that statistical multiplexing  
between
    unsynchronised flows yields similar efficiency gains to standard  
TCP.


















Leith & Shorten         Expires February 1, 2008                [Page 9]
Internet-Draft                    H-TCP                        July 2007


5.  RTT Scaling

    We note that the parameter alpha determines the AIMD increase  
rate in
    packets per RTT.  Hence, flows with the same RTT have the same
    increase rate in packets per second, but flows with different RTTs
    have different increase rate in packets per second.  It is this that
    primarily leads to unfairness between flows with different RTTs.
    Removing RTT unfairness is not one of our objectives here.  However,
    we note that an AIMD flow generates roughly alpha packet drops per
    RTT as a result of its probing action.  Hence, flows with short RTT
    are more aggressive than flows with long RTT in the sense that they
    generate more packet drops over intervals of time measured in
    seconds.  We can reduce the aggressiveness of short RTT flows by
    scaling the increase parameter alpha with RTT.  This need not
    compromise the responsiveness of TCP flows.  As noted in [Sh04,  
Sh05,
    HTCP04], the convergence time of TCP flows using an AIMD backoff
    factor of 0.5 is approximately 4 congestion epochs.  Scaling  
alpha by
    RTT leads to scaling of the congestion epoch duration to become
    effectively the same for both short and long RTT flows.  The
    convergence time is therefore also scaled to be effectively the same
    for both short and long RTT flows.

    Such RTT scaling can be readily implemented by modifying the  
increase
    rule to

    if Delta <= Delta_L
       alpha  = 1
    else
       alpha = K x f_alpha(Delta)

    where K = RTT/RTT_ref.  Note that RTT scaling is not applied in low-
    speed conditions in order to maintain backward compatibility with
    legacy TCP flows (ensuring adequate backward compatibility presented
    a major difficulty in previous studies on the use of RTT scaling).
    Note also that the scaling is proportional to RTT rather than RTT^2,
    as we do not seek to achieve throughput fairness here.  RTT_ref is
    the reference RTT for which f_alpha is designed to ensure acceptable
    congestion epoch durations.













Leith & Shorten         Expires February 1, 2008               [Page 10]
Internet-Draft                    H-TCP                        July 2007


6.  Security Considerations

    Security implications are not discussed in this document.
















































Leith & Shorten         Expires February 1, 2008               [Page 11]
Internet-Draft                    H-TCP                        July 2007


7.  Acknowledgements

    This work was supported by Science Foundation Ireland grants 00/ 
PI.1/
    C067 and 04/IN3/I460.















































Leith & Shorten         Expires February 1, 2008               [Page 12]
Internet-Draft                    H-TCP                        July 2007


8.  Informative References

    [Jain89] D.M. Chiu, R. Jain, Analysis of the increase and decrease
    algorithms for congestion avoidance in computer networks.  Computer
    Networks and ISDN Systems, 1989.

    [Flo03] S.Floyd, HighSpeed TCP for Large Congestion Windows .  Sally
    Floyd.  IETF RFC 3649, Experimental, Dec 2003.

    [FAST04] C. Jin, D.X. Wei, S,H. Low, FAST TCP: motivation,
    architecture, algorithms, performance.  Proc IEEE INFOCOM 2004.

    [Kelly02] T. Kelly, On engineering a stable and scalable TCP  
variant,
    Cambridge University Engineering Department Technical Report CUED/
    F-INFENG/TR.435, June 2002.

    [HTCP04] D.J.Leith, R.N.Shorten, H-TCP Protocol for High-Speed Long-
    Distance Networks.  Proc. 2nd Workshop on Protocols for Fast Long
    Distance Networks.  Argonne, USA, 2004.
    http://www.hamilton.ie/net/htcp3.pdf

    [BIC04] L. Xu, K. Harfoush, I. Rhee, Binary Increase Congestion
    Control for Fast Long-Distance Networks.  Proc.  INFOCOM 2004.

    [Sho04] R.N.Shorten, D.J.Leith,J.Foy, R.Kilduff, Analysis and design
    of congestion control in synchronised communication networks.
    Automatica, 2004. http://www.hamilton.ie/net/synchronised.pdf

    [Sho05] R.N.Shorten, F. Wirth,F., D.J. Leith, A positive systems
    model of TCP-like congestion control: Asymptotic results.
    http://www.hamilton.ie/net/unsynchronised_final.pdf

    [Yi05] Y.Li, D.J.Leith, R.N.Shorten, Experimental evaluation of TCP
    protocols of high-speed networks. http://www.hamilton.ie/net/eval/

    [Cot05] R.L. Cottrell, S. Ansari, P. Khandpur, R. Gupta, R. Hughes-
    Jones, M. Chen, L. MacIntosh, F. Leers, Characterization and
    Evaluation of TCP and UDP-Based Transport On Real Networks. .  Proc.
    3rd Workshop on Protocols for Fast Long-distance Networks, Lyon,
    France, 2005.

    [Hegde04] S. Hegde, D. Lapsley, B. Wydrowski, J. Lindheim, D.Wei, C.
    Jin, S. Low, H. Newman, FAST TCP in High Speed Networks: An
    Experimental Study.  Proc.  GridNets, San Jose, 2004.







Leith & Shorten         Expires February 1, 2008               [Page 13]
Internet-Draft                    H-TCP                        July 2007


Authors' Addresses

    Doug Leith
    Hamilton Institute
    NUI Maynooth
    Maynooth, Co. Kildare
    Ireland

    Email: doug.leith@nuim.ie


    Robert Shorten
    Hamilton Institute
    NUI Maynooth
    Maynooth, Co. KIldare
    Ireland

    Email: robert.shorten@nuim.ie

































Leith & Shorten         Expires February 1, 2008               [Page 14]
Internet-Draft                    H-TCP                        July 2007


Full Copyright Statement

    Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

    This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
    contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
    retain all their rights.

    This document and the information contained herein are provided  
on an
    "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE  
REPRESENTS
    OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST  
AND
    THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
    OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE  
USE OF
    THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
    WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

    The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
    Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be  
claimed to
    pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
    this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
    might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
    made any independent effort to identify any such rights.   
Information
    on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
    found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

    Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
    assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
    attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the  
use of
    such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
    specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR  
repository at
    http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

    The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
    copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
    rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
    this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
    ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

    Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
    Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Leith & Shorten         Expires February 1, 2008               [Page 15]



