OPSEC Working Group                                             Z. Ye 
Internet Draft                                               M. Fuyou 
Expires: November 2006                             Huawei Technologies 
                                                              R. Callon 
                                                       Juniper Networks 
                                                          May 30, 2006 
                                   
 
                                      
                Routing Control Plane Security Capabilities 
               draft-zhao-opsec-routing-capabilities-01.txt 


Status of this Memo 

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any 
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware 
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes 
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79. 

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other 
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts. 

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt. 

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 

   This Internet-Draft will expire on November 30, 2006. 

Copyright Notice 

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006). All Rights Reserved. 

Abstract 

   The document lists the security capabilities needed for the routing 
   control plane of an IP infrastructure to support the practices 
   defined in Operational Security Current Practices [OSCP]. In 
   particular this includes capabilities for route filtering and for 
   authentication of routing protocol packets. 


 
 
 
Zhao                  Expires November 30, 2006               [Page 1] 

Internet-Draft   Control Plane Security Capabilities          May 2006 
    

Conventions used in this document 

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119] 

Table of Contents 

    
   1. Introduction................................................2 
      1.1. Threat model...........................................3 
      1.2. Capabilities versus Requirements........................3 
      1.3. Packet Filtering versus Route Filtering.................3 
      1.4. RFC 2119 Keywords.......................................4 
   2. Route Filtering Capabilities.................................5 
      2.1. Route Filtering of External Routing Protocols...........5 
      2.2. Route Filtering Within an IGP Area......................7 
         2.2.1. Route Filtering Within an IGP Area.................7 
         2.2.2. Route Filtering Between IGP Areas..................7 
      2.3. Ability to Filter Routing Update by TTL.................8 
   3. Route Flap Dampening.........................................9 
   4. Authentication of Routing Protocols..........................9 
   5. Security Considerations.....................................10 
   6. Acknowledgements...........................................10 
   7. References.................................................12 
      7.1. Normative References...................................12 
      7.2. Informative References.................................13 
   Author's Addresses............................................14 
   Intellectual Property Statement................................14 
   Disclaimer of Validity........................................15 
   Copyright Statement...........................................15 
   Acknowledgment................................................15 
    
1. Introduction 

   This document is defined in the context of [FRAMEWORK] and [OSCP]. 

   The Framework for Operational Security Capabilities [FRAMEWORK] 
   outlines the effort of the IETF OPSEC working group. This includes 
   producing a series of drafts to codify knowledge gained through 
   operational experience about capabilities that are needed to securely 
   deploy and operate managed network elements providing transit 
   services at the data link and IP layers. 

   This document lists the security capabilities needed for the routing 
   control plane of IP infrastructure to support the practices defined 
   in Operational Security Current Practices [OSCP]. In particular this 
 
 
Zhao                  Expires November 30, 2006               [Page 2] 

Internet-Draft   Control Plane Security Capabilities          May 2006 
    

   includes capabilities for route filtering and for authentication of 
   routing protocol packets. 

   Note that this document lists capabilities that can reasonably be 
   expected to be currently deployed in the context of existing 
   standards. Extensions to existing protocol standards and development 
   of new protocol standards are outside of the scope of this effort. 
   The preferred capabilities needed for securing the routing 
   infrastructure may evolve over time. 

   There will be other capabilities which are needed to fully secure a 
   router infrastructure. For example, network management of devices 
   must be secured in order to prevent unauthorized access to or denial 
   of service to the device [NMASC]. The reader should refer to 
   [FRAMEWORK] for a more complete list of documents describing 
   operational capabilities for network and link layer devices 
   supporting IP Network Infrastructure. 

   Operational Security Current Practices [OSCP] defines the goals, 
   motivation, scope, definitions, intended audience, threat model, 
   potential attacks and give justifications for each of the practices. 

1.1. Threat model 

   The capabilities listed in this document are intended to aid in 
   preventing or mitigating the threats outlined in [FRAMEWORK] and 
   [OSCP]. 

1.2. Capabilities versus Requirements 

   Capabilities may or may not be requirements. That is a local 
   determination that must be made by each operator with reference to 
   the policies that they must support. It is hoped that this document, 
   together with [OSCP] will assist operators in identifying their 
   security capability requirements and communicating them clearly to 
   vendors. 

   The capabilities described in this document follow the format 
   outlined in section 1.7 of [FRAMEWORK]. 

1.3. Packet Filtering versus Route Filtering 

   It is useful to make a distinction between Packet Filtering versus 
   Route Filtering. 

   The term "packet filter" is used to refer to filters that routers 
   apply to network layer packets that they are forwarding. In general 
 
 
Zhao                  Expires November 30, 2006               [Page 3] 

Internet-Draft   Control Plane Security Capabilities          May 2006 
    

   packet filters are based on contents of the network (IP) and 
   transport (TCP,UDP) layers, and are mostly stateless, in the sense 
   that whether or not a filter applies to a particular packet is a 
   function of that packet (including the contents of IP and transport 
   layer headers, size of packet, incoming interface, and similar 
   characteristics), but does not depend upon the contents of other 
   packets which might be part of the same stream (and thus which may 
   also be forwarded by the same router). One commonly minor exception 
   to the "stateless" nature of packet filters is that packets that fit 
   a particular filter may be counted and/or rate limited (the act of 
   counting therefore represents a very simple "state" associated with 
   the filter). 

   Because of the simplicity and stateless nature of packet filters, 
   they can typically be implemented with very high performance. It is 
   not unusual for them to be implemented on line cards and to perform 
   at or near full line rate. For this reason they are very useful to 
   counter very high bandwidth attacks, such as large DDoS attacks. 

   Packet filtering capabilities are outside of the scope of this 
   document. A detailed description of packet filtering capabilities can 
   be found in "Filtering Capabilities for IP Network Infrastructure" 
   [FILTER]. 

   The Term "route filter" is used to refer to filters that routers 
   apply to the content of routing protocol packets that they are either 
   sending or receiving. Typically these therefore occur at the 
   application layer (although which route filters are applied to a 
   particular packet may be a function of network layer information, 
   such as what interface the packet is received on, or the source 
   address for the packet -- indicating the system that transmitted the 
   packet). 

   Route filters are typically implemented in some sort of processor. In 
   many cases the total bandwidth which can be received by the processor 
   is considerably less than the sum of the rate that packets may be 
   received on all interfaces to a router. Therefore in general route 
   filters cannot handle the same bandwidth as packet filters. Route 
   filters are however very useful in that they can be applied to the 
   contents of routing packets. 

1.4. RFC 2119 Keywords 

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119]. 

 
 
Zhao                  Expires November 30, 2006               [Page 4] 

Internet-Draft   Control Plane Security Capabilities          May 2006 
    

   The use of the RFC 2119 keywords is an attempt, by the authors, to 
   assign the correct requirement levels ("MUST", "SHOULD", "MAY"...). 
   It must be noted that different organizations, operational 
   environments, policies and legal environments will generate different 
   requirement levels. 

   NOTE: This document defines capabilities. This document does not 
   define requirements, and there is no requirement that any particular 
   capability be implemented or deployed. The use of the terms MUST, 
   SHOULD, and so on are in the context of each capability in the sense 
   that if you conform to any particular capability then you MUST or 
   SHOULD do what is specified for that capability, but there is no 
   requirement that you actually do conform to any particular capability. 

2. Route Filtering Capabilities 

2.1. Route Filtering of External Routing Protocols 

   Capability. 
   The device MUST provide a means to filter routing updates for all 
   protocols used to exchange external routing information. Generally 
   this includes BGP [RFC4271], as well as static routes. 

   Supported Practices. 
   See [RFC3013] and section 3.2 of [RFC2196] and section 2.5 of [OSCP]. 

   Current Implementations. 
   Typically BGP implementations allow operators to apply a variety of 
   filters to restrict which incoming updates are accepted from BGP 
   peers, as well as to limit which updates are sent out to BGP peers. 
   In general packet filters may be used in the following ways: 

   - Routers MUST allow operators to configure route filters which 
   restrict which routes are accepted from other peer routers. Route 
   filters MUST be capable of being individually configured on a per-
   neighbor basis. 

   - Routers MUST allow operators to configure route filters which 
   restrict which routes are sent to other peer routers. Route filters 
   MUST be capable of being individually configured on a per-neighbor 
   basis. 

   - Routers SHOULD allow operators to configure whether Outbound Route 
   Filters [ORF] are accepted from other peer routers. This SHOULD be 
   configurable on a per-neighbor basis. 


 
 
Zhao                  Expires November 30, 2006               [Page 5] 

Internet-Draft   Control Plane Security Capabilities          May 2006 
    

   - Routers SHOULD allow operators to configure which (if any) Outbound 
   Route Filters [ORF] are sent to other peer routers. This SHOULD be 
   configurable on a per-neighbor basis. 

   In general route filters determine whether a route is accepted from 
   or sent to a neighboring router. Filters MAY be based upon any 
   combination of route attributes, such as: 

      - Specific route prefixes 

      This may include a list of specific prefixes to be accepted or 
      rejected. This may alternately include a list of prefixes, such 
      that more specific (longer) prefixes which are included in the 
      more inclusive (shorter) prefix are accepted, rejected, or 
      summarized into the shorter prefix. 

      - Maximum length of route prefix 

      - Maximum number of routes to be accepted from a particular peer 
      router 

      If too many routes are received, then the router may reset the 
      BGP session, or may reject excess routes. In either case the 
      failure event should be logged. 

      - Restrictions on the AS_PATH 

      Restrictions on the contents of the AS PATH are frequently used: 
      for example if you get a prefix from AS X, then you might want to 
      make sure that X is in the AS PATH.  

 
      - Restrictions on BGP Community and Extended Community 

       

   Route redistribution is used to exchange routing information between 
   different protocols. Although route redistribution bridges between 
   different route domains and improves the flexibility of routing 
   system, it may lead to looping or black hole as well. 

   - Routers SHOULD provide method to limit the scope of route 
   redistribution between different route protocols. Unfiltered 
   redistribution SHOULD be forbidden. 



 
 
Zhao                  Expires November 30, 2006               [Page 6] 

Internet-Draft   Control Plane Security Capabilities          May 2006 
    

   Considerations. 
   Operators may wish to ignore advertisements for routes to specially 
   used addresses, such as private addresses, reserved addresses and 
   multicast addresses, etc. The up-to-date allocation of IPv4 address 
   space can be found in [IANA]. 

2.2. Route Filtering Within an IGP Area 

   This section describes route filtering as it may be applied to OSPF 
   [RFC 2328] and IS-IS [RFC1195] when used as the interior routing 
   protocol (Internal Gateway Protocol or "IGP") used within a routing 
   domain. Route filtering with RIP [RFC2453] is TBD. 

   2.2.1. Route Filtering Within an IGP Area 

   A critical design principle of OSPF and IS-IS is that each router 
   within an area has the same view of the topology, thereby allowing 
   consistent routes to be computed by all routers within the area. For 
   this reason, all properly authentication (if applicable) routing 
   topology advertisements (Link State Advertisements or LSAs in OSPF, 
   or Link State Packets or LSPs in IS-IS) are flooded unchanged 
   throughout the area. Route filtering within an OSPF or IS-IS area is 
   therefore not appropriate. 

   2.2.2. Route Filtering Between IGP Areas 

   Capability 
   It is normal when passing routes into the backbone area (area O.0.0.0 
   in OSPF, or the level 2 backbone in IS-IS) for routes to be 
   summarized, in the sense that multiple more specific (longer) address 
   prefixes that are reachable in an area may be summarized into a 
   smaller number of less specific (shorter) address prefixes. This 
   provides important scaling improvements, but is generally not 
   primarily intended to aid in security and is therefore outside of the 
   scope of this document. 

   Routers MAY implement the capability to allow the network operator 
   the option of configuring route filters which restrict which routes 
   (i.e. address prefixes) are advertised into areas from outside of the 
   area (i.e. from other OSPF or IS-IS areas). 

   Supported Practices 
   TBD. 

   Current Implementations 
   TBD. 

 
 
Zhao                  Expires November 30, 2006               [Page 7] 

Internet-Draft   Control Plane Security Capabilities          May 2006 
    

   Considerations 
   If filters are used which restrict the passing of routes between IGP 
   areas, then this may result in some addresses being unreachable from 
   some other areas within the same routing domain. 

2.3. Ability to Filter Routing Update by TTL 

   Capability 
   The device should provide a means to filter route packets based on 
   the value of the TTL field in the IPv4 header or the Hop-Limit field 
   in the IPv6 header. 

   For example, in many cases routing protocol packets should only be 
   arriving from immediate neighboring routers. In these cases, packets 
   SHOULD be dropped if the TTL is not equal to 255. In these cases 
   filtering on TTL prevents any system which is not immediately 
   physically adjacent to a router from sending that router spoofed 
   routing packets. 

   Note that "Filtering Capabilities for IP Network Infrastructure" 
   [FILTER] specifies: 

       Capability. 

       The filtering mechanism supports filtering based on the value(s) 
       of any portion of the protocol headers for IP, ICMP, UDP and TCP. 

   The ability to filter based on TTL is therefore a packet filtering 
   capability which is already implicitly covered by the capabilities 
   listed in [FILTER]. Since this capability is particularly important 
   for routing protocols, we felt that it is worth mentioning here. 

   Supported Practices. 
   See [OSCP] section 2.5.7 

   Current Implementations. 
   When a router forwards a packet, it will decrement the TTL value 
   (Hop-Limit for IPv6) of the packet by one. Thus, TTL spoofing is 
   considered nearly impossible. Furthermore, the vast majority of 
   routing peers are adjacent. This capability is therefore quite useful, 
   and is widely implemented in routers. 

   Considerations. 
   There will be situations in which the distance to the neighboring 
   router is more than one hop away. This for example is common for I-
   BGP. 

 
 
Zhao                  Expires November 30, 2006               [Page 8] 

Internet-Draft   Control Plane Security Capabilities          May 2006 
    

3. Route Flap Dampening 

   "Route flap" means that a route's state changes from up to down or 
   down to up. In some cases a route may come up and go down multiple 
   times in a short period of time (for example due to an unstable link 
   somewhere in the global Internet). When repeated route flapping 
   occurs, the route process has to insert or delete an item and the 
   advertised update. If large amounts of routes continue to go up and 
   down multiple times in a short time period this may result in 
   significant load on CPUs and could result in DoS (whether intentional 
   or not).  

   Capabilities. 
   The device MUST provide ability to dampen route flap.  

   Route Flap dampening MUST be configurable. For example, some 
   operators may want to change the timers, and others may want to turn 
   it off altogether. 

   Supported Practices. 
   The function to dampen route flap may enhance the stability of 
   routing system and minimize the influence of flapping. It is useful 
   to counter against some DoS attacks. 

   Current Implementations. 
   In BGP, route flapping dampening is the primary mechanism to mitigate 
   the influence caused by flapping. Most of current implements support 
   this capability. 

   Consideration. 

   None 

4. Authentication of Routing Protocols 

   As mentioned in [RFC4272], the authentication mechanism specified in 
   [TCPMD5] can counter several types of attacks on BGP, such as message 
   insertion, modification, deletion, man-in-the-middle, and some types 
   of DOS attack. Even though an assailant can guess TCP sequence 
   numbers of a BGP session, he will fail to launch the attack mentioned 
   above. Most other routing protocols adopt similar authentication 
   mechanism. 

   Capabilities. 
   - MUST provide a mechanism through which operators can manually 
   configure a sequence of keys on peer systems 

 
 
Zhao                  Expires November 30, 2006               [Page 9] 

Internet-Draft   Control Plane Security Capabilities          May 2006 
    

   - MUST provide a mechanism through which peer systems can transition 
   from one key to another based upon system time 

   - MUST provide a mechanism through which peer systems can transition 
   from one key to another without resetting the neighboring session 

   - MUST support authentication algorithms that are stronger than MD5 
   (e.g., CMAC-AES-128-96, HMAC-SHA-1-96). 

   - SHOULD support automatic generation and encrypted distribution of 
   key material.  

   Supported Practices. 
   See [OSCP] section 2.5.7. 

   Current Implementations. 
   [TCPMD5] is deployed widely in BGP. Other routing protocols, such as 
   OSPF, adopt similar technology.  

   In most of current implements, neither the authentication mechanism 
   nor key can be negotiated. An operator has to configure it manually.  

   Consideration.  
   OSPF supports plain text authentication which is not able to counter 
   attacks above. Most OSPF implementations also support MD5 
   authentication. In this section the authentication mechanism refers 
   to the technology using cryptographic hash functions. 

   In order to counter key-guessing attack, when manual key management 
   is used, a device SHOULD support a proper length of a key . 

    

5. Security Considerations 

   Security is the subject matter of this entire document. This document 
   lists device capabilities intended to improve the ability of the 
   network to withstand security threats. Operational Security Current 
   Practices [OSCP] defines the threat model and practices, and lists 
   justifications for each practice. 

6. Acknowledgements 

   The authors gratefully acknowledge the contributions of: 

   o tbd, xxx, yyy, ... 

 
 
Zhao                  Expires November 30, 2006              [Page 10] 

Internet-Draft   Control Plane Security Capabilities          May 2006 
    

   o We would like to thank Ron Bonica and Pat Cain for their helpful 
   comments and suggestions. 

   o This listing is intended to acknowledge contributions, not to imply 
   that the individual or organizations approve the content of this 
   document. 

   o Apologies to those who commented on/contributed to the document and 
   were not listed. 





































 
 
Zhao                  Expires November 30, 2006              [Page 11] 

Internet-Draft   Control Plane Security Capabilities          May 2006 
    

7. References 

7.1. Normative References 

   [RFC1208]  Jacobsen, O. and D. Lynch, "Glossary of networking terms", 
   RFC 1208, March 1991. 

   [RFC1812]  Baker, F., "Requirements for IP Version 4 Routers", RFC 
   1812, June 1995. 

   [RFC1918]  Rekhter, Y., Moskowitz, R., Karrenberg, D., Groot, G., and 
   E. Lear, "Address Allocation for Private Internets", BCP 5, RFC 1918, 
   February 1996. 

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate 
   equirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997. 

   [RFC2196]  Fraser, B., "Site Security Handbook", RFC 2196, September 
   1997. 

   [RFC2827]  Ferguson, P. and D. Senie, "Network Ingress Filtering: 
   Defeating Denial of Service Attacks which employ IP Source Address 
   Spoofing", BCP 38, RFC 2827, May 2000. 

   [RFC3013]  Killalea, T., "Recommended Internet Service Provider 
   Security Services and Procedures", BCP 46, RFC 3013, November 2000. 

   [RFC3309]  Stone, J., Stewart, R., and D. Otis, "Stream Control 
   Transmission Protocol (SCTP) Checksum Change", RFC 3309, September 
   2002. 

   [RFC3330]  IANA, "Special-Use IPv4 Addresses", RFC 3330, September 
   2002. 

   [RFC3704] Baker, F. and P. Savola, "Ingress Filtering for Multihomed 
   Networks", BCP 84, RFC 3704, March 2004. 

   [RFC4271] Rekhter, Y., Li, T., and S. Hares, "A Border Gateway 
   Protocol 4 (BGP-4)", RFC 4271, January 2006. 

   [RFC1195] R. Callon, "Use of OSI IS-IS for Routing in TCP/IP and Dual 
   Environments", RFC1195, December 1990. 

   [RFC2328] J. Moy, "OSPF Version 2", RFC2328, April 1998. 

   [RFC2453] G. Malkin, "RIP Version 2", RFC2453, November 1998. 

 
 
Zhao                  Expires November 30, 2006              [Page 12] 

Internet-Draft   Control Plane Security Capabilities          May 2006 
    

   [RFC3682] V. Gill, J. Heasley, D. Meyer, "The Generalized TTL 
   Security Mechanism (GTSM)", RFC3682, February 2004.  

   [TCPMD5]  Heffernan, A., "Protection of BGP Sessions via the TCP MD5 
   Signature Option", RFC 2385, August 1998. 

7.2. Informative References 

   [FRAMEWORK] Jones, G., "Framework for Operational Security 
   Capabilities for IP Network Infrastructure", draft-ietf-opsec-
   framework-01 (work in progress), October 2005. 

   [OSCP] Kaeo, M., "Operational Security Current Practices", draft-
   ietf-opsec-current-practices-02 (work in progress), October 2005. 

   [FILTER] Morrow, C., "Filtering Capabilities for IP Network 
   Infrastructure", draft-ietf-opsec-filter-caps-00 (work in progress), 
   October 2005. 

   [NMASC] Bonica, R. and S. Ahmed, "Network Management Access Security 
   Capabilities", draft-bonica-opsec-nmasc-00 (work in progress), 
   October 2005. 

   [IANA] IANA, "INTERNET PROTOCOL V4 ADDRESS" 
   SPACE,http://www.iana.org/assignments/ipv4-address-space 

   [RFC3631] Bellovin, S., Schiller, J., and C. Kaufman, "Security 
   Mechanisms for the Internet", RFC 3631, December 2003. 

   [RFC3871] Jones, G., "Operational Security Requirements for Large 
   Internet Service Provider (ISP) IP Network Infrastructure", RFC 3871, 
   September 2004. 

   [ORF] Enke Chen, Yakov Rekhter, "Cooperative Route Filtering 
   Capability for BGP-4", draft-ietf-idr-route-filter-13.txt, (work in 
   progress), March 2006.  

   [RFC4272] S. Murphy., "BGP Security Vulnerabilities Analysis", RFC 
   4272, January 2006 







 
 
Zhao                  Expires November 30, 2006              [Page 13] 

Internet-Draft   Control Plane Security Capabilities          May 2006 
    

Author's Addresses 

   Zhao Ye 
   Huawei Technologies 
   No.3, Xinxi Road, Shangdi Information Industry Base 
   Haidian District, Beijing City 100085 
   Email: yezhao@huawei.com 
    

   Miao Fuyou 
   Huawei Technologies 
   No.3, Xinxi Road, Shangdi Information Industry Base 
   Haidian District, Beijing City 100085 
   Email: miaofy@huawei.com 
    

   Ross W. Callon 
   Juniper Networks 
   10 Technology Park Drive 
   Westford, MA 01886 
   USA 
   Email: rcallon@juniper.net 
Intellectual Property Statement 

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to 
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in 
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights 
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has 
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights. Information 
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be 
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of 
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF at 
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org 


 
 
Zhao                  Expires November 30, 2006              [Page 14] 

Internet-Draft   Control Plane Security Capabilities          May 2006 
    

Disclaimer of Validity 

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an 
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS 
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET 
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, 
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE 
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED 
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 

Copyright Statement 

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006). 

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions 
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors 
   retain all their rights. 

Acknowledgment 

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the 
   Internet Society. 
























 
 
Zhao                  Expires November 30, 2006              [Page 15] 

