

  INTERNET DRAFT                                       Suresh Boddapati 
  Internet Engineering Task Force                           Venu Hemige 
  Document:                                                     Alcatel 
  draft-boddapati-mpls-pim-ldp-p2mp-00.txt      
  November 2005                                  
  Expires: May 2006 
                                                                        
                                                                        
   
   
                  P2MP LSP Setup using PIM-SSM and LDP 
   
Status of this memo 
   
  Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
  Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that  
  other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet- 
  Drafts.  
   
  Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
  and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
  time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
  material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."  
   
  The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
  http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.  
   
  The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
  http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.  
   
IPR Disclosure Acknowledgement 
   
  By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any 
  applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware 
  have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes 
  aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79. 
   
Abstract 
   
  There is emerging interest in the use of MPLS LSPs for the delivery of 
  multicast traffic. Efficient delivery of multicast traffic using MPLS 
  requires P2MP LSPs. This document describes a mechanism to setup P2MP 
  LSPs using PIM-SSM and LDP. PIM-SSM is a widely deployed multicast 
  routing protocol and has well defined procedures for signalling 
  multicast traffic. LDP is a well defined mechanism for distribution of 

                                                              [Page 1] 

Internet Draft draft-boddapati-mpls-pim-ssm-ldp-p2mp-00.txt  Nov, 2005 
 
 
  MPLS labels. Utilizing both PIM-SSM and LDP for setting up P2MP LSPs 
  keeps the clear separation between signalling and label distribution,  
and minimizes changes to both protocols. PIM-SSM signals when to receive 
multicast traffic and LDP distributes label information regarding how to 
receive multicast traffic. 
   
  Conventions used in this document 
   
  The key words MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
  "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
  document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119. 
   
Table of Contents 
 
   1. Overview........................................................2 
   2. Label allocation and distribution mechanisms for P2MP LSPs......3 
   2.1. Downstream and upstream label distribution....................3 
   2.2. Label Distribution Control....................................4 
   2.3. Liberal Label Retention.......................................4 
   3. Procedures for setting up P2MP LSPs.............................4 
   3.1. Egress LSR Procedures.........................................4 
   3.2. Branch LSR procedures.........................................5 
   3.3. Ingress LSR procedures........................................6 
   3.4. Receiving P2MP FEC Advertisements.............................6 
   4. PIM-SSM-LDP interaction.........................................7 
   5. Detecting and Stopping Duplicate Traffic on a LAN...............8 
   6. P2MP FEC Element................................................8 
   7. An example......................................................9 
   8. Security Considerations........................................10 
   9. IANA Considerations............................................10 
   10. Acknowledgements..............................................10 
   11. Normative References..........................................10 
   12. Informative References........................................11 
   13. Authors' Addresses............................................11 
   14. Intellectual Property Statement...............................11 
   15. Full copyright statement......................................12 
    
1. Overview 
   
  Efficient delivery of multicast traffic using MPLS requires P2MP 
  LSPs. A P2MP LSP has one Ingress LSR and one or more Egress LSRs. 
  This document focuses on the setup of leaf-initiated P2MP LSPs. For 
  creating such LSPs, the following options can be considered. 
   
       - An existing multicast routing protocol such as PIM-SSM can be 
          extended to also distribute labels required to set up P2MP 
          LSPs. 

 
 
                                                              [Page 2] 

Internet Draft draft-boddapati-mpls-pim-ssm-ldp-p2mp-00.txt  Nov, 2005 
 
 
       - An existing label distribution protocol such as LDP can be 
          extended to also build multicast trees. [LDP-P2MP1] and[LDP-
          P2MP2] are proposals based on this option. 
       - Without significant modifications to PIM-SSM and LDP, 
          procedures can be defined for both PIM-SSM and LDP to 
          interact with each other such that PIM-SSM builds multicast 
          trees and LDP distributes labels to be used for forwarding 
          labeled traffic on those multicast trees. 
   
  This document proposes the use of the third option described above.  
  The advantages of such a mechanism are: 
   
       - There is considerable experience built in the development and 
          use of PIM-SSM as a multicast routing protocol. This can be 
          leveraged for building multicast trees for P2MP LSPs as well. 
          This way, the changes to LDP are minimal. 
       - The changes to PIM-SSM are also minimal. Modifying PIM-SSM to 
          distribute labels would mean that if any other routing 
          protocol replaces PIM-SSM, then that protocol would also have 
          to have procedures defined for label distribution. Besides, 
          PIM-SSM does not lend itself very well for label 
          distribution. Specifically, upstream label allocation is not 
          possible with PIM-SSM as it exists today, since there is no 
          message that goes from an upstream router to a downstream 
          router in response to a Join received from the downstream 
          router. 
       - PIM-SSM is equipped to deal with duplicate traffic on LANs, 
          for scenarios where multiple upstream routers are forwarding 
          the same traffic to the LAN. Using PIM Assert messages, PIM 
          ensures that only one router forwards traffic to the LAN. 
   
2. Label allocation and distribution mechanisms for P2MP LSPs 
   
 2.1. Downstream and upstream label distribution 
   
  Downstream unsolicited label distribution suits well for leaf-
  initiated P2MP LSPs. However, in the case of LAN interfaces, where it 
  is efficient to send only one copy of the multicast traffic, instead 
  of ingress replicating it multiple times, an upstream label 
  allocation scheme is more suitable. [UPSTREAM] discusses one way of 
  assigning upstream labels, where labels come from a context specific 
  label space. Downstream assigned labels can be allocated from the 
  platform wide label space. 
   
  This document proposes that downstream unsolicited label distribution 
  MUST be used for point-to-point interfaces and upstream unsolicited 
  label distribution SHOULD be used for LAN interfaces.  

 
 
                                                              [Page 3] 

Internet Draft draft-boddapati-mpls-pim-ssm-ldp-p2mp-00.txt  Nov, 2005 
 
 
 2.2. Label Distribution Control 
   
  This document also proposes the use of Independent Control for label 
  distribution. If a network has only LAN interfaces and if Ordered 
  Control is used, the P2MP LSP will always end up being constructed 
  from the root. Moreover, traffic could start flowing on the P2MP LSP 
  before the tree is completely set up, and get dropped downstream. On 
  the other hand, if Independent Control is used, the label 
  distribution occurs as soon as the multicast state is available.  
   
 2.3. Liberal Label Retention 
   
  This document also proposes that Liberal Label Retention be used for 
  P2MP LSPs. Liberal label retention enables faster convergence in the 
  following cases: 
       - When a P2MP LSP is already setup, and new branches are added 
          to it. 
       - When topology changes occur in the network and the path to 
          the root of the P2MP LSP changes. 
        
3. Procedures for setting up P2MP LSPs 
   
  In order to setup P2MP LSPs, all LSRs MUST run PIM-SSM as the 
  multicast routing protocol in the domain. All LSRs MUST also run LDP 
  as the label distribution protocol in the domain.  
   
  Each P2MP LSP is associated with an (S,G), where S is the IP address 
  of the source of the multicast traffic which will be mapped on to the 
  P2MP LSP. S can be the address of the Ingress LSR, a host directly 
  connected to the Ingress LSR, or a remote host whose traffic is being 
  mapped to a P2MP LSP at the Ingress LSR. G is the multicast group 
  address representing the P2MP LSP. Both S and G can belong to any 
  address family, such as Ipv4, Ipv6 etc. Note that for the purposes of 
  this document, the PIM-SSM requirement does not mean the SSM range of 
  multicast addresses has to be used. It simply means that there is no 
  Rendezvous Point (RP) in the network and no (*,G) state is built. 
  There is no restriction on the group address that can be used. 
   
  The creation of a P2MP LSP is triggered at an Egress LSR when an 
  (S,G) is added to the multicast routing table by PIM-SSM. The router 
  can create P2MP LSPs for all (S,G)s in its multicast routing table or 
  do it selectively based on a local policy.  
    
   
 3.1. Egress LSR Procedures 
   
  An Egress LSR is a leaf of a P2MP LSP. On an Egress LSR, a labeled 
  multicast packet is received and is forwarded natively (the label is 
  popped) on one or more interfaces.   
   

 
 
                                                              [Page 4] 

Internet Draft draft-boddapati-mpls-pim-ssm-ldp-p2mp-00.txt  Nov, 2005 
 
 
  When a new multicast routing table entry for an (S,G) is added (due 
  to receiving a PIM-SSM Join from a downstream router or due to having 
  local multicast receivers), an LSR does the following: 
       - It creates an (S,G) multicast forwarding entry which 
          typically consists of an incoming interface (also known as 
          the RPF interface, the interface on which traffic is expected 
          to arrive), and a set of outgoing interfaces. This is done 
          using regular PIM-SSM procedures as defined in [PIM-SM]. 
       - It allocates a P2MP FEC (see Section 6. ) for the (S,G), and 
          using LDP advertises a label corresponding to the FEC, to 
          each of its directly connected LDP peers. On a point-to-point 
          interface, the label is a downstream assigned label and 
          represents the label which the upstream router should use 
          while sending labeled traffic for the (S,G). On a LAN 
          interface, the label is an upstream assigned label and 
          represents the label which this router would encapsulate the 
          multicast packet in before sending it out on the interface. 
       - A PIM-SSM Join is sent toward the RPF neighbor corresponding 
          to the (S,G). The RPF neighbor is determined from the unicast 
          routing table. If the interface on which the PIM-SSM Join is 
          sent is a point-to-point interface, an ILM entry is also 
          created for the FEC representing the (S,G), with incoming 
          label set to the label that was advertised on the interface 
          for the (S,G). If the interface on which the PIM-SSM Join is 
          sent is a LAN interface, the ILM entry is created only if the 
          label mapping for the FEC representing the (S,G) is already 
          known (due to the upstream LSR having advertised it). 
       - The label action in the ILM entry is to pop the label. 
          Further action is determined by what the traffic sent on the 
          P2MP LSP represents. This is outside of the scope of this 
          document. 
        
 3.2. Branch LSR procedures 
   
  A Branch LSR is an LSR in the path between an Ingress LSR and an 
  Egress LSR. On a Branch LSR, a labeled multicast packet is received 
  and is forwarded as a labeled packet (the label undergoes a swap 
  operation) on one or more interfaces. The label encapsulation on one 
  outgoing interface has no relation to the label encapsulation on 
  another.  
   
  When a PIM-SSM Join is received by a Branch LSR, if the Join creates 
  a new multicast routing table entry, the procedures are the same as 
  in Section 3.1 except for the ILM entry. The label action for the ILM  




 
 
                                                              [Page 5] 

Internet Draft draft-boddapati-mpls-pim-ssm-ldp-p2mp-00.txt  Nov, 2005 
 
 
  entry is to swap the label on each of the outgoing interfaces. The 
  outgoing interface list is as determined by PIM-SSM and the label to 
  encapsulate on each interface is as determined by LDP. If the 
  outgoing interface is a point-to-point, the label encapsulated is  
  the label advertised by the downstream LSR for the FEC associated 
  with the (S,G). If the outgoing interface is a LAN interface, the 
  label encapsulated is the label advertised by this LSR to its 
  downstream LSRs on the LAN for the FEC associated with the (S,G). 
   
  If the PIM-SSM Join received by an LSR adds an outgoing interface to 
  an existing (S,G), the following actions are taken. 
       - The interface is added to the outgoing interface list of the 
          ILM entry. 
       - The label to be encapsulated for this outgoing interface is 
          also programmed. The label used is as described above, based 
          on whether the interface is a point-to-point interface or a 
          LAN interface. 
 
 3.3. Ingress LSR procedures 
   
  An ingress LSR is the root of the P2MP LSP. The ingress LSR has one or 
  more FTN entries which map incoming multicast traffic to P2MP LSPs. 
  How a traffic flow is mapped to a P2MP LSP is a policy decision and is 
  outside the scope of this document. The label operation at the ingress 
  LSR is to push a label onto the received multicast packet before 
  forwarding it on one or more interfaces. The label pushed for one 
  downstream interface has no relation to the label pushed for another 
  downstream interface.  
   
  When an Ingress LSR receives a PIM-SSM Join for an (S,G), if it does 
  not have an FTN entry associated with the (S,G), the following actions 
  are taken. 
       - An FTN entry is created corresponding the (S,G). 
       - The interface on which the Join was received is added to the 
          outgoing interface list. 
       - The label to be encapsulated for this outgoing interface is 
          also programmed. The label used is as described in Section 
          3.2, based on whether the interface is a point-to-point 
          interface or a LAN interface.  
        
  When an Ingress LSR receives a PIM-SSM Join for an (S,G), and it 
  already has an FTN entry associated with the (S,G), the first step is 
  bypassed and the rest of the actions as described above are taken. 
   
 3.4. Receiving P2MP FEC Advertisements 
  When an LSR receives a P2MP FEC advertisement in a Label Mapping 
  message from a peer, if the LSR has an (S,G) state corresponding to 
  the FEC, the following actions are taken. 


 
 
                                                              [Page 6] 

Internet Draft draft-boddapati-mpls-pim-ssm-ldp-p2mp-00.txt  Nov, 2005 
 
 
       - If the neighbor from which the FEC was received is an RPF 
          neighbor on a LAN interface, an ILM entry for the FEC 
          corresponding to the (S,G) is programmed with incoming label 
          set to the label from the received FEC. 
       - If the neighbor from which the FEC was received is a 
          downstream LSR that also sent a PIM-SSM Join for the (S,G) 
          corresponding to the FEC, and the interface is a point-to-
          point interface, the label encapsulation for that interface in 
          the outgoing interface list of the ILM entry is updated with 
          the label from the FEC.   
   
4. PIM-SSM-LDP interaction 
   
  As can be seen from Section 3, the setting up of P2MP LSPs requires 
  interaction between PIM-SSM and LDP. The interactions are as described 
  below. 
   
   
   
       - When PIM-SSM creates new (S,G), it notifies LDP of the (S,G). 
          This causes LDP to create a FEC for the (S,G) and advertise 
          labels to all its neighbors using Label Mapping messages. PIM-
          SSM also notifies LDP of the RPF neighbor for the (S,G). LDP 
          programs the ILM entry using the incoming label for the FEC 
          advertised to the RPF neighbor (on point-to-point interfaces) 
          or by the RPF neighbor (on LAN interfaces). Note that on 
          point-to-point interfaces, the label is downstream advertised 
          while on LAN interfaces, the label is upstream advertised. 
       - When PIM-SSM receives a Join on an interface to an (S,G), it 
          notifies LDP of the outgoing interface. This causes LDP to 
          program the interface in the outgoing interface list for the 
          FEC corresponding to the (S,G) in either the FTN entry or the 
          ILM entry (based on whether the LSR is an Ingress LSR or an 
          Egress or Branch LSR). The label on the outgoing interface for 
          the FEC is also programmed if available. 
       - When PIM-SSM prunes an interface for an (S,G), it notifies LDP 
          of the prune. This causes LDP to remove the interface from the 
          outgoing interface list for the FEC corresponding to the (S,G) 
          in either the FTN entry or the ILM entry. 
       - When PIM-SSM removes an (S,G) from its database, it notifies 
          LDP of the removal. This causes LDP to withdraw labels for the 
          FEC associated with the (S,G) from all its neighbors using 
          Label Withdraw messages. 
       - When PIM-SSM detects an RPF neighbor change either due to 
          change in the unicast routing topology or due to Assert 
          election, PIM-SSM notifies LDP of the change in RPF neighbor.  

 
 
                                                              [Page 7] 

Internet Draft draft-boddapati-mpls-pim-ssm-ldp-p2mp-00.txt  Nov, 2005 
 
 
       - This causes LDP to reprogram the ILM entry with the old 
          incoming label getting replaced with a new incoming label 
          associated with the new RPF neighbor.  
   
5. Detecting and Stopping Duplicate Traffic on a LAN 
   
  Due to ECMP, it is possible that two downstream routers on a LAN could 
  solicit traffic for the same multicast flow from two different 
  routers. In other words, two downstream routers could use two 
  different RPF neighbors on the same LAN. If not detected and stopped, 
  the LAN will always receive two copies of the traffic.  
   
  PIM-SSM has well defined procedures to detect and stop duplicate 
  traffic. In regular PIM-SSM, the detection of duplicate traffic for an 
  (S,G) is triggered by data arrival for the (S,G) on an interface which 
  is in the outgoing interface list. Once duplicate traffic is detected, 
  using PIM-SSM Assert messages, PIM-SSM routers elect an Assert Winner 
  which takes over the responsibility of being the sole forwarder of the 
  (S,G) traffic on the LAN, thus stopping the duplicate traffic flow on 
  the LAN. While this works fine for IP traffic, in the case of P2MP 
  LSPs, it is not necessary that the labeled packet carry an IP packet 
  for the same (S,G) using which the P2MP LSP was created. The P2MP LSP 
  could be used simply as a transport and can carry any type of 
  multicast traffic. Therefore a data driven approach cannot be used to 
  detect duplicate traffic. 
   
  [VENU-ASSERT] defines a mechanism which enables PIM-SSM routers to 
  detect the possibility of duplicate traffic purely based on PIM-SSM 
  Join messages. This mechanism is based on detecting PIM-SSM Joins sent 
  for the same (S,G) to multiple upstream neighbors. As soon as this is 
  detected, PIM Assert procedures trigger and duplicate traffic is 
  detected and stopped even before it arrives.  
   
  In order to prevent duplicate traffic from flowing to the LAN, P2MP 
  LSPs setup using PIM-SSM MUST implement the improved Assert procedures 
  defined in [VENU-ASSERT].  
   
  Using PIM-SSM to prevent duplicate traffic flow has the advantage of 
  using ECMP paths efficiently. 
   
6. P2MP FEC Element 
  The P2MP FEC element consists of the (S,G) that is associated with the 
  P2MP LSP. The format of the FEC is as follows: 
   
   0                   1                   2                   3 
     0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+ 
    |  Type (TBD)   |                Reserved                       | 
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+ 
    |             Source Address (Encoded Source Format)            | 
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+ 
 
 
                                                              [Page 8] 

Internet Draft draft-boddapati-mpls-pim-ssm-ldp-p2mp-00.txt  Nov, 2005 
 
 
    |              Group Address (Encoded Group Format)             | 
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+ 
   
  Type: To be assigned by IANA 
   
  Reserved: SHOULD be set to zero on transmission and MUST be ignored 
  on receipt. 
   
  Source Address: The source address (S) in (S,G) associated with this 
  P2MP FEC Element. The source address MUST be encoded using the 
  Encoded Source Format defined in [PIM-SM]. 
   
  Group Address: The multicast group address (G) in (S,G) associated 
  with this P2MP FEC Element. The group address MUST be encoded using 
  the Encoded Group Format defined in [PIM-SM].  
   
  The P2MP FEC element MUST be advertised in a FEC TLV without any other 
  elements in it. The P2MP FEC element MUST be present only once in a 
  FEC TLV. If present more than once, the FEC TLV MUST NOT be processed 
  and an "Unknown FEC" Notification MUST be sent to the peer that 
  advertised it.  
 
  A P2MP FEC element received with an unknown address family or unknown 
  encoding format MUST NOT be processed and an "Unknown FEC" 
  Notification MUST be sent to the peer that advertised it. 
  
7. An example 
  Consider the following network. 
   
   
                                S 
                                | 
                                |if1 
                                | 
                                I 
                                | 
                                | if2 
                                |  
                                B 
                               / \ 
                           if3/   \if4 
                             /     \ 
                            E1     E2                                
   
  I is an Ingress LSR connected to a source S on interface if1. 
  B is a Branch LSR connected to I on interface if2. if2 is a point-to-
  point interface. 
  E1 and E2 are Egress LSRs connected to B on interfaces if3 and if4 
  respectively. if3 is a point-to-point interface and if4 is a LAN 
  interface.  
  Receivers for a group G are connected to E1 and E2. 

 
 
                                                              [Page 9] 

Internet Draft draft-boddapati-mpls-pim-ssm-ldp-p2mp-00.txt  Nov, 2005 
 
 
  Assuming that a P2MP LSP is desired from I to E1 and E2 for the flow 
  (S,G), the LSP is setup by the following steps. 
   
       - Since E1 has receivers for group G and assuming it is known 
          that the source is S, E1 initiates a PIM-SSM Join for (S,G) 
          towards B. 
       - E1 also advertises a label mapping LE1 for the FEC associated 
          with (S,G) to B, since if3 is a point-to-point interface. LE1 
          is a downstream allocated label which comes from platform wide 
          label space. 
       - B forwards the PIM-SSM Join towards I. 
       - B advertises a downstream assigned platform wide label mapping 
          LB for (S,G) to its upstream neighbor I and its downstream 
          neighbor E1 since both are point to point interfaces. B also 
          advertises a context specific upstream label mapping LBif4 to 
          E2 on interface if4.  
       - When I receives the (S,G) Join from B, since it is directly 
          connected to S, it creates an FTN entry that maps (S,G) 
          traffic to a set of P2MP NHLFEs. In this case, the set 
          consists of outgoing interface if1 and label LB. 
       - The P2MP LSP setup is now complete.  
       - Now if E2 wants to join the P2MP  LSP, it simply sends a PIM-
          SSM Join towards B. E2 will also advertise an upstream 
          assigned label to B. Since it already has the upstream label 
          mapping from B, it programs an ILM entry with incoming label 
          LBif4, that was advertised by B. 
       - When B receives the PIM-SSM Join from E2, it adds if4 to the 
          outgoing interface list for the ILM entry corresponding to the 
          (S,G), and the outgoing label on if4 is set to LBif4. Thus the 
          branch of the P2MP LSP is added. 
 
8. Security Considerations 
  This document does not introduce any new security considerations that 
  are not inherent to PIM and LDP.  
 
9. IANA Considerations 
  This document defines a new FEC Element for which the type has to be 
  assigned by the IANA. 
   
10. Acknowledgements 
  The authors would like to acknowledge in no particular order, Alex 
  Zinin, Joe Regan, Ray Qiu, Vach Kompella, Ron Haberman, Sunil 
  Khandekar, Devendra Raut and Jayant Kotalwar for their input and 
  valuable feedback. 
   
11. Normative References 
   
    [LDP]           Andersson, L, et al. "LDP Specification", RFC 3036 
 
 
                                                             [Page 10] 

Internet Draft draft-boddapati-mpls-pim-ssm-ldp-p2mp-00.txt  Nov, 2005 
 
 
    
12. Informative References 
 
   [PIM-SM]         Fenner, B, et al. "Protocol Independent Multicast - 
                    - Sparse Mode (PIM-SM): Protocol Specification",  
                    draft-ietf-pim-sm-v2-new-11.txt 
   [P2MP-REQ]       Le Roux, J-L et al. "Requirements for point-to-
                    multipoint extensions to the Label Distribution 
                    Protocol", draft-leroux-mpls-mp-ldp-reqs-01.txt 
   [UPSTREAM]       Aggarwal, R, et al. "MPLS Upstream Label Assignment 
                    and Context Specific Label Space",  
                    draft-raggarwa-mpls-upstream-label-00.txt 
   [LDP-P2MP1]      Minei, I, et al. "Label Distribution Protocol 
                    Extensions for Point-to-Multipoint Label Switched 
                    Paths", draft-minei-mpls-ldp-p2mp-01.txt 
   [LDP-P2MP2]      Wijnands, I, et al. "Multicast Extensions for LDP",  
                    draft-wijnands-mpls-ldp-mcast-ext-00.txt 
   [VENU-ASSERT]    Hemige, V, et al. "Improved Assert in PIM", draft-
                    hemige-pim-improved-assert-00.txt 
    
           
13. Authors' Addresses 
   
  Suresh Boddapati 
  Alcatel North America 
  701 East Middlefield Rd. 
  Mountain View, CA 94043 
  Suresh.boddapati@alcatel.com 
   
  Venu Hemige 
  Alcatel North America 
  701 East Middlefield Rd. 
  Mountain View, CA 94043 
  Venu.hemige@alcatel.com 
   
14. Intellectual Property Statement  
   
  The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
  Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to 
  pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in 
  this document or the extent to which any license under such rights 
  might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has 
  made any independent effort to identify any such rights. Information 
  on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be 
  found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.  
   
  Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
  assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
  attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of 
  such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
  specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at 
  http://www.ietf.org/ipr.  
 
 
                                                             [Page 11] 

Internet Draft draft-boddapati-mpls-pim-ssm-ldp-p2mp-00.txt  Nov, 2005 
 
 
   
  The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
  copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
  rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
  this standard. Please address the information to the IETF at ietf- 
  ipr@ietf.org.  
   
15. Full copyright statement 
   
Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005). 
 
This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions 
contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors 
retain all their rights.  
   
This document and the information contained herein are provided on an 
"AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS 
OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET 
ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, 
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE 
INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED 
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  
   
  




























 
 
                                                             [Page 12] 
