
Internet Engineering Task Force                                M. Allman
INTERNET-DRAFT                                                      ICSI
File: draft-allman-tcpm-no-initwin-00.txt              November 24, 2015
Intended Status: Best Current Practice
Expires: May 24, 2016

    
                Removing TCP's Initial Congestion Window

Status of this Memo

    This document may not be modified, and derivative works of it may
    not be created, except to format it for publication as an RFC or to
    translate it into languages other than English.
    
    This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
    provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.  Internet-Drafts are working
    documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas,
    and its working groups. Note that other groups may also distribute
    working documents as Internet-Drafts.

    Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
    months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents
    at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as
    reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

    The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
    http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html 

    The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
    http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html
    
    This Internet-Draft will expire on May 24, 2016.

Copyright Notice
    
    Copyright (c) 2015 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
    document authors. All rights reserved. 

    This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
    Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
    (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
    publication of this document. Please review these documents
    carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with
    respect to this document. Code Components extracted from this
    document must include Simplified BSD License text as described in
    Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without
    warranty as described in the Simplified BSD License."

Abstract

    This specification removes the specification of TCP's initial
    congestion window.

Terminology

Expires: May 23, 2016                                           [Page 1]

draft-allman-tcpm-no-initwin-00.txt                        November 2015


    The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
    "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
    document are to be interpreted as described in BCP 14, RFC 2119
    [RFC2119].

1   Introduction

    TCP connections may choose the initial value of the congestion
    window (cwnd) and are not beholden to [RFC6928] or previous
    specifications of the initial cwnd, provided that:

    (1) The 3WHS MUST complete without a retransmission.

    (2) For initial windows of more than 10 segments, the initial
        window of segments MUST be paced evenly across the first
        round-trip time (as measured during the 3WHS).

    (3) Since the initial cwnd has no relationship to the available
        capacity of the network path, in the case of loss within the
        initial window of segments sent, the cwnd MUST be set to
        SMSS * ((IW - R) / 2) instead of simply halving the cwnd.  Here,
        the IW is the size of the initial cwnd (in segments) and R is
        the number of retransmitted segments within the initial
        transmission window.

    (4) The initial cwnd MUST be bounded by the receiver's advertised
        window.  

2   Reasoning    

    The reasoning behind this proposal is mostly taken from [LAJW07].

    (a) The author thinks that talking about the initial window for the
        better part of two decades is probably enough.  And, definitely 
        boring. 

    (b) Traffic is heavy tailed and most TCP connections cannot use an
        overly large IW as they are short. 

    (c) An overly aggressive IW is likely to congestion local networks
        before burdening remote portions of the path.

    (d) Routers should be using Active Queue Management [RFC2309] to
        protect from overly aggressive flows.

    (e) Receivers cannot be overrun as they can exercise control via the
        advertised window.

    (f) TCP's congestion control algorithms remain in force and
        therefore even if a sender transmits too aggressively, this
        aggression will not be a prolonged event.

    (g) Ultimately, being egregiously overly aggressive will not be in 

Expires: May 23, 2016                                           [Page 2]

draft-allman-tcpm-no-initwin-00.txt                        November 2015

        the sender's best interest---e.g., there will be a fight for
        local resources among the sender's own connections---and
        therefore there is an incentive to be reasonable.

3   Security Considerations

    A large IW allows TCP to send a large burst of traffic, but an
    attacker that can tune a TCP to do this can also simply send a large
    amount of traffic.

Normative References
    
    [RFC2119] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
        Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

    [RFC6928] J. Chu, N. Dukkipati, Y. Cheng, M. Mathis.  Increasing
        TCP's Initial Window, RFC 6928, April 2013.
    
Informative References

    [LAJW07] Dan Liu, Mark Allman, Shudong Jin, Limin Wang.  Congestion
        Control Without a Startup Phase.  Workshop on Protocols for Fast
        Long-Distance Networks (PFLDnet), February 2007.
    
    [RFC2309] B. Braden, D. Clark, J. Crowcroft, B. Davie, S. Deering,
        D. Estrin, S. Floyd, V. Jacobson, G. Minshall, C. Partridge,
        L. Peterson, K. Ramakrishnan, S. Shenker, J. Wroclawski,
        L. Zhang.  Recommendations on Queue Management and Congestion
        Avoidance in the Internet, RFC 2309, April 1998.

Authors' Addresses

   Mark Allman
   International Computer Science Institute
   1947 Center St.  Suite 600
   Berkeley, CA  94704

   EMail: mallman@icir.org
   http://www.icir.org/mallman
















Expires: May 23, 2016                                           [Page 3]
