Internet Engineering Task Force                             Charles Lynn
Internet Draft                                          BBN Technologies
draft-clynn-bgp-x509-auth-00.txt                               June 1999

          X.509 Extensions for Authorization of IP Addresses,
                  AS Numbers, and Routers within an AS

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress".

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   Please send comments on this draft to CLynn@BBN.Com.

Abstract

   This document defines three X.509 v3 Certificate Extensions.  The
   first binds a list of IP Address blocks to the public key of the
   subject of a certificate.  The second binds a list of Autonomous
   System Numbers to the public key of the subject of a certificate.
   The third binds a BGP Router Identifier and an Autonomous System
   Number to the public key of the subject of a certificate.  Third
   parties, e.g., BGP routers, may use these certificates to verify that
   the holder of the private key corresponding to the public key in the
   certificate has been properly authorized to use resources specified
   in the certificate extension.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society 1999.  All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published

Expires December 1999            CLynn                          [Page 1]

Internet Draft     X.509 Extensions for Authorization          June 1999

   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Table of Contents

   Status of this Memo  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  1
   Abstract   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  1
   Copyright Notice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  1
   Table of Contents  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  2
   1.  Introduction   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   1.1.  X.509 Certificate Extensions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.  PKI for IP Address Allocation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.1.  IP Address Block Certificate Extension . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   2.2.  Examples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   2.3.  Certification Path Verification  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   3.  PKI for Assignment of ASes and Router Associations . . . . . .  8
   3.1.  Autonomous System Number Extension . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   3.1.1.  Example  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   3.1.2.  Certification Path Verification  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   3.2.  Router Authorization Certificate Extension . . . . . . . . . 10
   3.2.1.  Example  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   3.2.2.  Certification Path Verification  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   4.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   5.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   6.  Intellectual Property Rights . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   7.  References   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   8.  Author's Addresse  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13

Expires December 1999            CLynn                          [Page 2]

Internet Draft     X.509 Extensions for Authorization          June 1999

1.  Introduction

   Internet routing is based on a distributed system composed of many
   routers, grouped into management domains called Autonomous Systems
   (ASes).  Routing information is exchanged between ASes in Border
   Gateway Protocol (BGP) [1,2] UPDATE messages.  BGP has proven to be
   highly vulnerable to a variety of attacks [3], due to the lack of a
   scalable means of verifying the authenticity and legitimacy of BGP
   control traffic.

   Verification of the legitimacy of the control traffic requires that
   several conditions be met.  Some of the conditions are:

   *  The AS number of each peer in a BGP peering session has been
      authorized for use and to be a neighboring AS.

   *  The peer that sends an UPDATE was authorized to act on behalf of
      its AS to advertise the routing information contained within the
      UPDATE to BGP peers in the recipient AS.

   *  The AS that originates an UPDATE was authorized, by the owners of
      the address space corresponding to the set of reachable
      destinations, to advertise those destinations.

   *  The owner of an address space corresponding to a reachable
      destination advertised in an UPDATE was authorized by its parent
      organization to own that address space.

   Checking these conditions requires a mechanism that can be used to
   verify: the ownership of IP Address Prefixes, the ownership of AS
   Numbers, and the authorization of a router to represent an AS.  The
   mechanism must scale to the projected number of address prefixes, AS
   numbers, and inter-AS routers in the Internet.  Due to the
   distributed nature of Internet routing, the entities that are
   checking the conditions will generally be unknown to the entities
   that own these resources, and thus any mechanism that requires a peer
   to peer security relationship between the entities will not meet the
   scaling requirements.

   Public Key Infrastructures (PKIs) have been designed to solve such
   problems.  PKIs can be created, rooted at ICANN (formerly IANA), that
   corresponds to the assignment delegation system for IP address
   prefixes and AS numbers that is currently used in the Internet.

   This document describes these PKIs and defines the X.509 Certificate
   Extensions that they use to convey the necessary authorizations.

Expires December 1999            CLynn                          [Page 3]

Internet Draft     X.509 Extensions for Authorization          June 1999

1.1.  X.509 Certificate Extensions

   Version 3 of X.509 [X.509] provides an extensible mechanism to
   include application specific information in certificates.  Each
   extension contains three elements: an OBJECT IDENTIFIER that is
   associated with the syntax of the application specific data, a
   BOOLEAN that indicates if the certificate user must reject the
   certificate if it does not properly process the extension, and the
   application specific data encoded in an OCTET STRING.

   The ASN.1 specification for an X.509 v3 Certificate Extension is:

   Extension ::= SEQUENCE {
      extnID     OBJECT IDENTIFIER ,     -- identifies extnValue syntax
      critical   BOOLEAN DEFAULT FALSE , -- must reject if unknown
      extnValue  OCTET STRING }          -- application specific data

2.  PKI for IP Address Allocation

   A certificate will be issued to each organization that is given
   ownership of a portion of the IP address space.  This certificate is
   issued through a hierarchy of entities that, in the physical
   environment, is responsible for address allocation.  The root of this
   hierarchy is ICANN, and includes at lower layers regional address
   space allocation authorities (e.g., ARIN, Internic, RIPE), Internet
   Service Providers (ISPs), Down Stream Providers (DSPs), and
   subscribers owning IP address prefixes.  Note, however, that address
   assignments do not have to be certified all the way to every
   subscriber.  If a subscriber's address is allocated from that of a
   DSP or an ISP with which it is currently affiliated, then the
   certification process need only be effected as far as the DSP/ISP.
   The same applies to DSPs that receive their address space assignments
   from ISPs.

   This PKI reflects the assignment of address blocks to organizations
   by binding address blocks to a public key belonging to the
   organization to whom the addresses are being assigned.  It has the
   possible drawback that this violates the "assumption" that for a
   typical X.509 certificate, the issuer is vouching for the identity of
   the subject.  Instead, these certificates will be used for proving
   ownership of a block of addresses.

   In Figure 1 below,

   (a) ICANN is the root and issues certificates to the first tier of
       organizations (Org1_x).  At present, Org1_x could be an Internet
       Registry, an ISP, an organization, etc.  ICANN signs the tier 1
       certificates using its private key.  A certificate extension is
       used to specify a list of address families and address blocks.
       The alternate name in the certificate is the DNS name of the

Expires December 1999            CLynn                          [Page 4]

Internet Draft     X.509 Extensions for Authorization          June 1999

       organization.

   (b) Org1_x then assigns sub-blocks of its address space to ISPs,
       DSPs, etc.  In the diagram, for example, Org1_1 issues a
       certificate to each of Org2_1 through Org2_7 while Org1_N issues
       a certificate to Org2_8.  Org1_x signs the certificate using the
       private key corresponding to the public key in the certificate it
       received in (a).  The same certificate extension as in (a) is
       used to specify a list of address families and address blocks to
       be delegated to ISPs, DSP, etc.  The alternate name in the
       certificate is the DNS name of the organization.

   (c) Org2_x then assigns sub-blocks of its address space to DSPs,
       customers, etc.  In the diagram, Org2_1 issues a certificate to
       each of Org3_1 through Org3_4.  Org2_x signs the certificate
       using the private key corresponding to the public key in the
       certificate it received in (b).  The same certificate extension
       is used to specify a list of address families and address blocks
       to be delegated to organizations.  The alternate name in the
       certificate is the DNS name of the organization.

   (d) And so on....

                              ICANN
                          Addr block(s)
                                |
               +----------------+---------+++---------+
               |                |         |||         |
            Org1_1           Org1_2       ...      Org1_N
         Addr block(s)    Addr block(s)         Addr block(s)
               |                                      |
               +--------+++--------+                  |
               |        |||        |                  |
            Org2_1      ...     Org2_7             Org2_8
         Addr block(s)       Addr block(s)      Addr block(s)
               |
               +--------+++--------+
               |        |||        |
            Org3_1      ...     Org3_4
         Addr block(s)       Addr block(s)

      Org1_x =  a 1st tier organization, e.g., an Internet Registry
      Org2_x =  a 2nd tier organization, e.g., an ISP or organization
      Org3_x =  a 3rd tier organization, e.g., an organization or DSP

         Figure 1.  IP Address Assignment PKI Hierarchy

Expires December 1999            CLynn                          [Page 5]

Internet Draft     X.509 Extensions for Authorization          June 1999

2.1.  IP Address Block Certificate Extension

   X.509 v3 Certificate Extension with OID XXX is used to bind the
   subject organization and its public key to one or more address
   prefixes.  This extension is CRITICAL since, for a given certificate,
   the certificate user must verify that all prefixes and address ranges
   present in the extension are subsets of those present in the
   certificate of the certificate authority that signed the given
   certificate.

   The type of address is specified by the addressFamily OCTET STRING.
   The values of the Address Family Identifier (AFI) and Subsequent
   Address Family Identifier (SAFI) are specified on the IANA web page
   http://www.iana.org under the "Address Family Numbers" item, or in
   RFC 1700 [RFC 1700].  The 16-bit AFI and 8-bit SAFI are encoded as
   three octets: two octets of AFI followed by a single octet of SAFI
   (see [RFC 2283]).

   When the maxIPAddress element is not present, the minIPPrefix OCTET
   STRING contains a list of address prefixes, encoded as specified in
   the "NLRI encoding" section of the BGP Multiprotocol RFC (RFC 1771).
   Each prefix is encoded as a one-octet count of significant (left-
   most) bits (0 to 255) in the prefix, followed by as many address
   prefix octets as are required to hold that many bits.  The value of
   any bits beyond those specified in the count octet should be zero.

   When the maxIPAddress element is present, an address range that is
   not a power of two can be expressed.  The minIPPrefix OCTET STRING
   contains a list of the low end address items in a range of addresses,
   and the corresponding items in the maxIPAddress OCTET STRING contains
   the high end addresses.  If the number of significant bits is less
   than the number of bits in an address of the specified family, then
   any unspecified bits default to zero bits in minIPPrefix and one bits
   in maxIPAddress.

      IPAddressRanges ::= SEQUENCE OF IPAddressRange
      IPAddressRange ::= SEQUENCE {
         addressFamily     OCTET STRING,
         minIPPrefix       OCTET STRING,
         maxIPAddress      OCTET STRING OPTIONAL }
      -- when only a minIPPrefix is present, it represents a list
      -- of address prefixes
      -- when both minIPPrefix and maxIPAddress are present, they
      -- are minimum and maximum values in an address range

2.2.  Examples

      An extension that specifies net 10, i.e., 10/8 or addresses
      10.0.0.0 through 10.255.255.255 would be (in hexadecimal):

Expires December 1999            CLynn                          [Page 6]

Internet Draft     X.509 Extensions for Authorization          June 1999

      20 len                       Extension
         06 len  XXX                 extnID     OBJECT IDENTIFIER ,
         01 01  FF                   critical   BOOLEAN TRUE ,
         04 0D                       extnValue  OCTET STRING }
            20 0B                      IPAddressRanges
               20 09                     IPAddressRange
                  04 03  00 01 01          addressFamily -- IPv4 Unicast
                  04 02  08 0A             minIPPrefix   -- 10/8

      An extension specifying 10/8, 172.16/12, 192.168/16 and 5800::/8
      would be:

      20 len                       Extension
         06 len  XXX                 extnID     OBJECT IDENTIFIER ,
         01 01  FF                   critical   BOOLEAN  -- TRUE
         04 20                       extnValue  OCTET STRING }
            20 1E                      IPAddressRanges
               20 1C                     IPAddressRange
                  04 03  00 01 01          addressFamily -- IPv4 Unicast
                  04 08  08 0A             minIPPrefix   -- 10/8
                         0C AC 10                        -- 172.16/12
                         10 C0 A8                        -- 192.168/16
               20 09                     IPAddressRange
                  04 03  00 02 01          addressFamily -- IPv6 Unicast
                  04 02  08 58             minIPPrefix   -- 5800::/8

      An extension specifying 10.16.0.0 to 10.48.255.255 would be:

      20 len                       Extension
         06 len  XXX                 extnID     OBJECT IDENTIFIER ,
         01 01  FF                   critical   BOOLEAN TRUE ,
         04 13                       extnValue  OCTET STRING }
            20 11                      IPAddressRanges
               20 0F                     IPAddressRange
                  04 03  00 01 01          addressFamily -- IPv4 Unicast
                  04 03  0C 0A 10          minIPPrefix   -- 10.16.0.0
                  04 03  0C 0A 3F          maxIPAddress  -- 10.48.255.255

2.3.  Certification Path Verification

      During certification path verification of a certificate containing
      the IP Address Block Extension, additional processing is required.
      Each preceding certificate in the certification path must contain
      an IP Address Block Extension that contains all of the IP Address
      Block(s) in the certificate being verified, recursively, until a
      trusted certificate has been verified.

Expires December 1999            CLynn                          [Page 7]

Internet Draft     X.509 Extensions for Authorization          June 1999

3.  PKI for Assignment of ASes and Router Associations

   Two types of certificates will be used to support the authentication
   of ASes, BGP speakers and the relationship between speakers and ASes.
   As shown in Figure 2 below, these certificates bind together:

   (a) one or more a blocks of AS numbers and an organization's public
       key -- a registry issues these to organizations and signs them
       using its private key.  The alternate name in the certificate is
       the DNS name of the organization.  An extension contains the
       (list of) AS number(s).

   (b) an AS number and its public key -- An organization owning an AS
       number issues these and signs them using the private key
       corresponding to the public key in the certificate described in
       (a).  The certificate extension containing the AS nubmer is the
       same as is used in (a).  The alternate name in the certificate is
       the DNS name of the organization.

   (c) a router (DNS) name, a router id, an AS number, and the router's
       public key -- An organization owning the AS number of the AS of
       the router issues these and signs them using the private key
       corresponding to the public key in the certificate described in
       (a).  Note that both the router id (an IP address) and the AS
       number are extensions in this certificate, and the binding of
       three items is a critical aspect of this certificate.  The
       alternate name in the certificate is the DNS name of the router
       corresponding to the router id.

Expires December 1999            CLynn                          [Page 8]

Internet Draft     X.509 Extensions for Authorization          June 1999

                          ICANN
                      list of AS#s
                            |
                +++---------+---------+++
                |||         |         |||
                ...      Registry     ...
                      list of AS#s
                            |
            +---------------+-------+++--------+
            |               |       |||        |
          Org-1           Org-2     ...      Org-N
      list of AS#s    list of AS#s       list of AS#s
            |
            +------------------+
            |                  |
            +----+++---+       +-----+++-----+
            |    |||   |       |     |||     |
           AS-1  ...  AS-N   Rtr-1   ...   Rtr-N
           AS#        AS#     AS-1          AS-N
                            RtrId-1       RtrId-N

      Org-N    =  DNS Name of ISP/DSP/Organization N
      AS-N     =  DNS Name of Autonomous System N
      Rtr-N    =  DNS Name of router N
      RtrId-N  =  Router identifier (IP address) of router N

     Figure 2.  AS Number Assignment and Router PKI Hierarchy

3.1.  Autonomous System Number Extension

   X.509 v3 Certificate Extension with OID YYY is used to bind the
   subject organization and its public key to one or more Autonomous
   System Number ranges.  An Autonomous System Number is currently an
   unsigned 16-bit unsigned quantity, but may be enlarged in the future.
   This extension is CRITICAL since, for a given certificate, all
   Autonomous System number ranges present in the extension must be
   subsets of those present in the certificate of the certificate
   authority that signed the given certificate.

   Each range of Autonomous System Numbers is encoded in an
   ASNumberRange sequence by placing the low end of the range in the
   minASNumber OCTET STRING and the high end of the range in the
   maxASNumber OCTET STRING.  If a single Autonomous System Number is
   being specified, the maxASNumber element is omitted.

      ASNumberRanges ::= SEQUENCE OF ASNumberRange
      ASNumberRange ::= SEQUENCE {
         minASNumber    OCTET STRING,
         maxASNumber    OCTET STRING OPTIONAL }
      -- OCTET STRING length is currently 2k Autonomous System Numbers

Expires December 1999            CLynn                          [Page 9]

Internet Draft     X.509 Extensions for Authorization          June 1999

3.1.1.  Example

      An extension that specifies Autonomous System Numbers 3000 to 3999
      would be (in hexadecimal):

      20 len                       Extension
         06 len  yyy                 extnID     OBJECT IDENTIFIER ,
         01 01  FF                   critical   BOOLEAN TRUE ,
         04 0C                       extnValue  OCTET STRING }
            20 0A                      ASNumberRanges
               20 08                     ASNumberRange
                  04 02  0b b8             minASNumber   -- 3000
                  04 02  0f 9f             maxASNumber   -- 3999

3.1.2.  Certification Path Verification

      During certification path verification of a certificate containing
      the Autonomous System Number Extension, additional processing is
      required.  Each preceding certificate in the certification path
      must contain an Autonomous System Number Extension that contains
      all of the Autonomous System Number(s) in the certificate being
      verified, recursively, until a trusted certificate has been
      verified.

3.2.  Router Authorization Certificate Extension

   X.509 v3 Certificate Extension with OID ZZZ is used to bind the
   subject router (specified, e.g., by a DNS name), its public key, its
   BGP Router Identifier (currently a 32-bit IPv4 address), and the
   number of the Autonomous System of which the router is an authorized
   BGP speaker.  This extension is not CRITICAL.

   Currently, the owningASNumber OCTET STRING would have a length of two
   and the routerId OCTET STRING a length of four.

      RouterIdentifiers ::= SEQUENCE {
         owningASNumber OCTET STRING,
         routerId       OCTET STRING }

3.2.1.  Example

      An extension in the certificate for a router with BGP Router
      Identifier 10.0.0.1 in Autonomous System 3456 would be (in
      hexadecimal):

Expires December 1999            CLynn                         [Page 10]

Internet Draft     X.509 Extensions for Authorization          June 1999

      20 len                       Extension
         06 len  zzz                 extnID     OBJECT IDENTIFIER ,
                                     critical   BOOLEAN DEFAULT FALSE ,
         04 0C                       extnValue  OCTET STRING }
            20 0A                      RouterIdentifiers
               04 02  0d 80              owningASNumber
               04 04  0A 00 00 01        routerId

3.2.2.  Certification Path Verification

      During certification path verification of a certificate containing
      the Router Authorization Extension, additional processing is
      required.  The issuer's certificate must contain an Autonomous
      System Number Extension that contains the owningASNumber in one of
      its ASNumberRange elements.

4.  Security Considerations

   This specification is devoted to the format and encoding of three
   extensions for X.509 certificates.  Since certificates are digitally
   signed, no additional integrity service is necessary.  Certificates
   need not be kept secret, and unrestricted and anonymous access to
   certificates and CRLs has no security implications.

   However, security factors outside the scope of this specification
   will affect the assurance provided to certificate users.  This
   section highlights critical issues that should be considered by
   implementors, administrators, and users.

   The procedures performed by CAs and RAs to validate the binding of
   the subject's identity and their public key greatly affects the
   assurance that should be placed in the certificate.  Certificate
   users may wish to review the CA's certificate practice statement to
   determine what level of assurance, if any, may be associated with the
   identity of the subject of the certificate.

   The protection afforded private keys is a critical factor in
   maintaining security.  Failure of organizations or routers to protect
   their private keys will permit an attacker to masquerade as them.

   The availability and freshness of revocation information will affect
   the degree of assurance that should be placed in a certificate.

   While certificates expire naturally, events may occur during its
   natural lifetime which negate the binding between the subject and
   either public key or the information in the extension.  If revocation
   information is untimely or unavailable, the assurance associated with
   the bindings is clearly reduced.  Similarly, implementations of the
   additional Certification Path Verification mechanisms described in

Expires December 1999            CLynn                         [Page 11]

Internet Draft     X.509 Extensions for Authorization          June 1999

   sections 2.3, 3.1.2, and 3.3.2 that omit revocation checking provide
   less assurance than those that support it.

   Certification Path Verification depends on the certain knowledge of
   the public keys (and other information) about one or more trusted
   CAs.  The decision to trust a CA is an important decision as it
   ultimately determines the trust afforded a certificate.  The
   authenticated distribution of trusted CA public keys (usually in the
   form of a "self-signed" certificate) is a security critical out of
   band process that is beyond the scope of this specification.

   In addition, where a key compromise or CA failure occurs for a
   trusted CA, the user will need to modify the information provided to
   the Certification Path Verification routine.

   The quality of implementations that process certificates may also
   affect the degree of assurance provided.  Certification Path
   Verification relies upon the integrity of the trusted CA information,
   and especially the integrity of the public keys associated with the
   trusted CAs.  By substituting public keys for which an attacker has
   the private key, an attacker could trick the user into accepting
   false certificates.

   The binding between a key and resources specified in the certificate
   extension cannot be stronger than the cryptographic module
   implementation and algorithms used to generate the signature.

5.  Acknowledgements

   PKIX doc for security concerns section ...

6.  Intellectual Property Rights

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it
   has made any effort to identify any such rights.  Information on the
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11.  Copies of
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of
   licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to
   obtain a general license or permission for the use of such
   proprietary rights by implementors or users of this specification can
   be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary

Expires December 1999            CLynn                         [Page 12]

Internet Draft     X.509 Extensions for Authorization          June 1999

   rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF Executive
   Director.

7.  References

   [1]        Y. Rekhter, T. Li, "A Border Gateway Protocol 4 (BGP-4)",
              RFC 1771, March 1995.

   [2]        Y. Rekhter, T. Li, "A Border Gateway Protocol 4 (BGP-4)",
              <draft-ietf-idr-bgp4-08.txt>, August 1998.

   [3]        S. Murphy, "BGP Security Analysis", draft-murphy-bgp-
              secr-02.txt, NOV 1998.

   [RFC 1700] Reynolds, J., and J. Postel, "Assigned Numbers", STD 2,
              RFC 1700, October 1994. (see also
              http://www.iana.org/iana/assignments.html)

   [RFC 2283] T. Bates, R. Chandra, D. Katz, Y. Rekhter, "Multiprotocol
              Extensions for BGP-4", February 1998

   [X.509]    ITU-T Recommendation X.509 (1997 E): "Information
              Technology - Open Systems Interconnection - The Directory:
              Authentication Framework", June 1997.

8.  Author's Addresses

   Charles Lynn
   BBN Technologies
   10 Moulton St.
   Cambridge, MA 02138
   CLynn@BBN.Com

Expires December 1999            CLynn                         [Page 13]
