

Network Working Group                                    R. Austein, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                                       ISC
Expires: June 7, 2005                                     B. Wijnen, Ed.
                                                     Lucent Technologies
                                                        December 7, 2004


      Structure of the IETF Administrative Support Activity (IASA)
                         draft-ietf-iasa-bcp-02

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is subject to all provisions
   of section 3 of RFC 3667.  By submitting this Internet-Draft, each
   author represents that any applicable patent or other IPR claims of
   which he or she is aware have been or will be disclosed, and any of
   which he or she become aware will be disclosed, in accordance with
   RFC 3668.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on June 7, 2005.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).

Abstract

   This document describes the structure of the IETF Administrative
   Support Activity (IASA) as an IETF-controlled activity housed within
   the Internet Society (ISOC) legal umbrella.  It defines the roles and
   responsibilities of the IETF Administrative Oversight Committee
   (IAOC), the IETF Administrative Director (IAD), and ISOC in the
   fiscal and administrative support of the IETF standards process.  It



Austein & Wijnen          Expires June 7, 2005                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft             Structure of IASA               December 2004


   also defines the membership and selection rules for the IAOC.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.1   Editors' Notes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     1.2   Closed Issues  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     1.3   Open Issues  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   2.  Definitions and Principles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     2.1   Alphabet Soup  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     2.2   Principles of the IASA, IETF and ISOC relationship . . . .  7
     2.3   Community Consensus and Grant of Authority . . . . . . . .  8
     2.4   Termination and Change . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     2.5   Effective Date for Commencement of IASA  . . . . . . . . .  8
   3.  Structure of the IASA  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     3.1   IAD Responsibilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     3.2   IAOC Responsibilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     3.3   Relationship of the IAOC to Existing IETF Leadership . . . 11
     3.4   IAOC Decision Making . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   4.  IAOC Membership, Selection and Accountability  . . . . . . . . 12
     4.1   Initial IAOC Selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   5.  IASA Funding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
     5.1   Divisional Accounting  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
     5.2   IETF Meeting Revenues  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
     5.3   Designated Donations, Monetary and In-Kind . . . . . . . . 15
     5.4   Other ISOC Support . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
     5.5   IASA Expenses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
     5.6   Operating Reserve  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   6.  IASA Budget Process  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   7.  ISOC Responsibilities for IASA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
   8.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
   9.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
   10.   Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
   11.   References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
   11.1  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
   11.2  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
       Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
   A.  Change Log . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
     A.1   Changes in draft-ietf-iasa-bcp-02.txt  . . . . . . . . . . 20
     A.2   Changes in draft-ietf-iasa-bcp-01.txt  . . . . . . . . . . 21
     A.3   Changes in draft-ietf-iasa-bcp-00.txt  . . . . . . . . . . 22
     A.4   Changes in draft-wasserman-iasa-bcp-01.txt . . . . . . . . 22
     A.5   Origin of draft-wasserman-iasa-bcp-00.txt  . . . . . . . . 23
       Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . 24







Austein & Wijnen          Expires June 7, 2005                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft             Structure of IASA               December 2004


1.  Introduction

   This document describes the structure of the IETF Administrative
   Support Activity (IASA) as an IETF-controlled activity housed within
   the Internet Society (ISOC) legal umbrella.  It defines the roles and
   responsibilities of the IETF Administrative Oversight Committee
   (IAOC), the IETF Administrative Director (IAD), and ISOC in the
   fiscal and administrative support of the IETF standards process.  It
   also defines the membership and selection rules for the IAOC.

   The IETF undertakes its technical activities as an ongoing, open,
   consensus-based process.  This document defines an administrative
   support structure intended to be responsive to the administrative
   needs of the IETF technical community, and describes how that support
   structure fits under ISOC's organizational umbrella.  This document
   does not affect the ISOC-IETF working relationship as it relates to
   standards development or the communication of technical advice
   relevant to the policy and educational goals of ISOC.

   The IETF Administrative Support Activity (IASA) provides the
   administrative structure required to support the IETF standards
   process and to support the IETF's technical activities.  As of the
   time at which this document was written, this included the work of
   IETF working groups, the IESG, the IAB, and the IRTF.  Should the
   IETF standards process at some future date come to include other
   technical activities, the IASA shall provide administrative support
   for those activities as well.  Such support includes, as appropriate,
   undertaking or contracting for the work described in
   [RFC3716],including IETF document and data management, IETF meetings,
   and any operational agreements or contracts with the RFC Editor and
   IANA.  The IASA is also ultimately responsible for the financial
   activities associated with IETF administrative support such as
   collecting IETF meeting fees, paying invoices, managing budgets and
   financial accounts, and so forth.

   The IASA is responsible for ensuring that the IETF's administrative
   needs are met, and met well.  The IETF does not expect the IASA to
   undertake the bulk of this work directly; rather, the IETF expects
   the IASA to contract this work from others, and manage these
   contractual relationships to achieve efficiency, transparency and
   cost effectiveness.

   The IASA is distinct from IETF-related technical functions, such as
   the RFC Editor, the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA), and
   the IETF standards process itself.  The IASA has no influence on the
   technical decisions of the IETF or on the technical contents of IETF
   work.  Note, however, that this in no way prevents people who form
   part of the IASA from participating as individuals in IETF technical



Austein & Wijnen          Expires June 7, 2005                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft             Structure of IASA               December 2004


   activities.

1.1  Editors' Notes

      Note to RFC Editor: Please remove this section prior to
      publication.

   This document is still a work in progress, primarily due to time
   pressure and lack of a clear consensus on some issues.

   In some cases the best way to handle a particular suggestion (in the
   editors' opinion, at any rate) has been to incorporate new text with
   an "Editors' note" which attempts to explain the change.

   The editors request that substantive comments and requested changes
   be sent, one per message, with a clear and meaningful subject line on
   each message, as this will make it easier for the editors to keep
   track of change requests.

1.2  Closed Issues

      Note to RFC Editor: Please remove this section prior to
      publication.

   Summary of issues that the editors believe have been resolved and
   been agreed to.  Please do check to make sure that the editors are
   correct in their assessment of these issues.

   o  Do we need "pre-nuptial" agreement text as part of the BCP?
      Currently, the document does have some explicit text for it, which
      appears to be enough to guide us all if a separation turns out
      necessary in the future.  Also, it seems IETF consensus on
      choosing Scenario O means that we (the IETF) trust ISOC.

   o  Do we need separate bank accounts?  Consensus seems to be not to
      ask for that.  So this document does not claim so now.  Instead we
      specify "Divisional Accounting" (Section 5.1).

   o  Do we need to be more specific as to how reserves are built for
      emergency situations, or can we leave that at ISOC's discretion?
      It seems we are OK with current text.

   o  We have added a set of principles (Section 2.2).  Some of them
      have been edited a little bit.  The remainder of the document
      still contains a fair amount of detail (based on the principles)
      but potentially some of those details can be removed.  Some
      details have been removed or reworded.  In any event, the editors
      believe the level of detail is now OK, and that the details



Austein & Wijnen          Expires June 7, 2005                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft             Structure of IASA               December 2004


      themselves are in sync with the principles.  Section 5.6 may be
      longer and more detailed than strictly necessary, but since we
      believe it to be in sync with the principle we have defined, we
      think it's harmless.

   o  There has been a suggestion that we may need some more wording on
      startup phase.  Not clear exactly what might be needed.  Send text
      if you feel additions are needed.  Revision (02) added a variance
      clause (see Section 3), and startup variances can be handled by
      that.

   o  Do we need wording about the ownership of IETF tools and data?  We
      have some text (in Section 2.2) about IPR, which has been checked
      by Jorge Contreras.  We believe that this text covers copyright.
      We also have text about software tools under IAD responsibilities.
      So the editors consider this issue closed.

   o  Do we need to add text to protect IETF from the hypothetical case
      of an IAD or an IAOC going amok?  The IAD can be suspended or
      fired, and the IAOC can be recalled, and so maybe that is
      sufficient.  This issue has not been discussed much yet; does that
      mean that this is not an issue and that the document is OK with
      respect to this topic?  The editors believe it is not an issue
      anymore unless someone asks us to open it again.  If you think we
      should reopen it, please send text.

   o  We believe that the current text on the IETF Executive Director
      has consensus.

   o  With regard to voting by the IAOC, we believe we have rough
      consensus that the current text is OK.  We do not have unanimity
      though.

   o  We believe there is consensus that the IAB chair should be a
      voting member of the IAOC.  The text does say so.


1.3  Open Issues

      Note to RFC Editor: Please remove this section prior to
      publication.

   Summary of open issues for which we need to find specific IETF
   consensus so that editors can put in correct and agreed-upon text.

   o  Are designated donations specified appropriately?  In particular,
      does requiring that donations not be "unduly restricted" address
      previously stated concerns?  This is what the current text says.



Austein & Wijnen          Expires June 7, 2005                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft             Structure of IASA               December 2004


      It is not yet clear whether the current text is acceptable to
      ISOC.  We may need to check this with ISOC's accountants first.

   o  It's not yet clear whether we have too much about the IAD task.
      Should that task be specified elsewhere, initially by the
      Transition Team, later by IAOC or some committee?  We need people
      to speak up on this.  Is the current text OK?

   o  Would we want the IAOC to sign off on the yearly (or more
      frequent) reports in some formal sense within a reasonable amount
      of time?  This might protect the IAD from some form of open-ended
      lingering responsibility for previous years.  It might also
      protect against having somebody, five years from now, state "this
      is wrong and oh by the way this was already wrong N years ago."

   o  How should we deal with conflicts between the IAD, the IAOC and
      ISOC?  This is complicated by the fact that ISOC officially
      employs the IAD while a small committee hires and fires and
      evaluates the IAD.  No new discussion or text has come up since
      draft version 01.

   o  How should we deal with disagreements between the ISOC Board of
      Trustees and the IAOC regarding business decisions, spending,
      hiring, etc?

   o  When do we do a check with accountants and legal advisors?  Can
      that be done during IETF Last Call, or must that happen first?

   o  The text on an appeal against the IAOC (Section 3.4 is pretty
      fresh, and some seem to want to narrow down what can be appealed.
      Not clear that we have consensus yet.


2.  Definitions and Principles

   This section describes terminology and underlying principles used in
   the rest of this document.

2.1  Alphabet Soup

   Although most of the terms, abbreviations, and acronyms used in this
   document are reasonably well-known, first-time readers may find this
   alphabet soup confusing.  This section therefore attempts to provide
   a quick summary.

   IAB: Internet Architecture Board (see [RFC2026], [RFC2850]).





Austein & Wijnen          Expires June 7, 2005                  [Page 6]

Internet-Draft             Structure of IASA               December 2004


   IAD: Internet Administrative Director, defined by this document.

   IAOC: Internet Administrative Oversight Committee, defined by this
      document.

   IASA: IETF Administrative Support Activity, defined by this document.

   IESG: Internet Engineering Steering Group (see [RFC2026], [RFC3710]).

   ISOC: Internet Society (see [RFC2031] and [ISOC]).


2.2  Principles of the IASA, IETF and ISOC relationship

   This section attempts to describe principles underlying the
   mechanisms described in this document.

   1.  The IETF intends to establish a structure (the IASA) in order to
       get IETF administrative functions managed appropriately,
       according to good administrative, fiscal, and management
       principles.  The IASA includes the IAD and the IAOC, and shall be
       housed within ISOC.

   2.  The IAD, IAOC and ISOC shall not have any authority over the IETF
       standards development activities.

   3.  The IAD and IAOC, with advice from the ISOC President/CEO and
       staff, shall develop an annual budget for the IASA.  The budget
       must clearly identify all expected direct and indirect
       expenditures related to the IASA.  ISOC, through its normal
       procedures, shall evaluate and adopt the IASA budget as part of
       ISOC's own budget process and commit to ensuring funds to support
       the approved budget.

   4.  Responsibility for the evaluation, review and negotiation of
       contracts and other IETF administrative and support agreements
       and other expenditures of funds under the IASA shall rest with
       the IAD, operating in accordance with policies and procedures set
       by the IAOC and consistent with ISOC operating policies.

   5.  There shall be a detailed public accounting to separately
       identify all funds available to and all expenditures relating to
       the IETF and to the IASA, including any donations, of funds or
       in-kind, received by ISOC for IETF-related activities.  In-kind
       donations shall only be accepted at the direction of the IAD and
       IAOC.

   6.  The IETF, through the IASA, shall have a perpetual right to use,



Austein & Wijnen          Expires June 7, 2005                  [Page 7]

Internet-Draft             Structure of IASA               December 2004


       display, distribute, reproduce, modify and create derivatives of
       all data created in support of IETF activities.

   7.  The IASA shall establish a target for a reserve fund to cover
       normal operating expenses and meeting expenses in accordance with
       prudent planning, and ISOC shall work with the IASA to build up
       and maintain the reserve.

   The remainder of this document contains details based on the above
   principles.

2.3  Community Consensus and Grant of Authority

   The IETF is a consensus-based group, and authority to act on behalf
   of the community requires a high degree of consensus and the
   continued consent of the community.  After a careful process of
   deliberation, a broad-based community consensus emerged to house the
   IETF Administrative Support Activity (IASA) within the Internet
   Society.  This document reflects that consensus.

2.4  Termination and Change

   Any change to this agreement shall require a similar level of
   community consensus and deliberation and shall be reflected by a
   subsequent Best Current Practice (BCP) document.

2.5  Effective Date for Commencement of IASA

   The procedures in this document shall become operational immediately
   after this document has been approved by the process defined in BCP 9
   [RFC2026] and has been affirmed by a Resolution of agreement by the
   ISOC Board of Trustees.

3.  Structure of the IASA

   The IASA structure is designed to ensure accountability and
   transparency of the IETF administrative and fiscal activities to the
   IETF community.  The IETF Administrative Oversight Committee (IAOC)
   directs and oversees the IASA.  The IAOC consists of volunteers, all
   chosen directly or indirectly by the IETF community, as well as
   appropriate ex officio members from ISOC and IETF leadership.  The
   IAOC shall be accountable to the IETF community for the
   effectiveness, efficiency and transparency of the IASA.

   The IASA consists initially of a single full-time ISOC employee, the
   IETF Administrative Director (IAD), an officer entitled to act on
   behalf of the IASA at the direction of the IAOC.  The IAD is likely
   to draw on financial, legal and administrative support furnished by



Austein & Wijnen          Expires June 7, 2005                  [Page 8]

Internet-Draft             Structure of IASA               December 2004


   ISOC support staff or consultants.  Costs for ISOC support staff and
   consultants are allocated based on actual expenses or on some other
   allocation model determined by consultation between the IAOC and
   ISOC.

   Although the IAD is an ISOC employee, he or she works under the
   direction of the IAOC.  The IAD is selected and hired by a committee
   of the IAOC.  The members of this committee are appointed by the
   IAOC, and consist at minimum of the ISOC President and the IETF
   Chair.  This same committee is responsible for setting the IAD's
   initial compensation, reviewing the performance of the IAD
   periodically, and determining any changes to the IAD's employment and
   compensation.

   In principle, IETF administrative functions should be outsourced.
   The IAD is responsible for negotiating and maintaining such
   contracts, as well as providing any coordination necessary to make
   sure the IETF administrative support functions are covered properly.
   The IAOC is accountable for the structure of the IASA and thus
   decides which functions are to be outsourced.  All outsourcing must
   be via well-defined contracts or equivalent instruments.  If any
   functions are performed in-house, they must be clearly specified and
   documented with well-defined deliverables, service level agreements,
   and transparent accounting for the cost of such functions.

   If the IASA cannot comply with the procedures described in this
   document for legal, accounting or practical reasons, the IAOC shall
   report that fact to the community, along with the variant procedure
   the IAOC intends to follow.  If the problem is a long-term one, the
   IAOC shall ask the IETF to update this document to reflect the
   changed procedure.

3.1  IAD Responsibilities

   The IAD is responsible for working with the IAOC and others to
   understand the administrative requirements of the IETF, and for
   managing the IASA to meet those needs.  This includes determining the
   structure of the IASA effort, establishing an operating budget,
   negotiating contracts with service providers, managing the business
   relationship with those providers, and establishing mechanisms to
   track their performance.  The IAD may also manage other contractors
   or ISOC employees (such as support staff) as necessary, when such
   contractors or employees are engaged in IASA-related work.

   The IAD is responsible for running IASA in an open and transparent
   manner, and for producing regular monthly, quarterly, and annual
   financial and operational updates for IAOC and IETF community review.




Austein & Wijnen          Expires June 7, 2005                  [Page 9]

Internet-Draft             Structure of IASA               December 2004


   The IAD is responsible for administering the IETF finances, managing
   a separate financial account for the IASA, and establishing and
   administering the IASA budget.  While ISOC will need to put some
   financial controls in place to protect ISOC's fiscal stability, the
   IAD (with IAOC approval, as appropriate) should have signing
   authority consistent with carrying out IASA work effectively,
   efficiently and independently.  If there are any problems regarding
   the level of financial approval granted to the IAD, the IAOC and ISOC
   shall work out a policy that is mutually agreeable, and shall do so
   within a reasonable timeframe.

   The IAD negotiates service contracts, with input, as appropriate,
   from other bodies, and with review, as appropriate, by the IAOC.  The
   IAOC should establish guidelines for what level of review is expected
   based on contract type, size, cost, or duration.  ISOC executes
   contracts on behalf of the IASA, after whatever review ISOC requires
   to ensure that the contracts meet ISOC's legal and financial
   requirements.

   The IAD is responsible for ensuring that all contracts give the IASA
   and the IETF all rights in data needed to satisfy the principle of
   data access.  This is necessary to make sure the IETF has access to
   the data it needs at all times, and to ensure that the IASA can
   change contractors as needed without disrupting IETF work.

   Whenever reasonable, if software is developed under an IASA contract
   it should should remain usable by the IETF beyond the terms of the
   contract.  Some ways of achieving this are by IASA ownership or an
   open source license; an open source license is preferrable.  The IAD
   shall decide how best to serve the IETF's interests when making such
   contracts.

   The IAD and IAOC are responsible for making all business decisions
   regarding the IASA.  In particular, the ISOC Board of Trustees shall
   not have direct influence over the choice of IASA contractors or IETF
   meeting sponsors.  This restriction is meant to enforce the
   separation between fund raising and the actual operation of the
   standards process.

   The IAD prepares an annual budget, which is subject to review and
   approval by the IAOC.  The IAD is responsible for presenting this
   budget to the ISOC Board of Trustees, as part of ISOC's annual
   financial planning process.  The IAOC is responsible for ensuring the
   budget's suitability for meeting the IETF community's administrative
   needs, but the IAOC does not bear fiduciary responsibility for ISOC.
   The ISOC Board of Trustees therefore needs to review and understand
   the budget and planned activity in enough detail to carry out their
   fiduciary responsibility properly.  The IASA publishes its complete



Austein & Wijnen          Expires June 7, 2005                 [Page 10]

Internet-Draft             Structure of IASA               December 2004


   budget to the IETF community each year.

3.2  IAOC Responsibilities

   The IAOC's role is to provide appropriate direction to the IAD, to
   review the IAD's regular reports, and to oversee the IASA functions
   to ensure that the administrative needs of the IETF community are
   being properly met.  The IAOC's mission is not to be be engaged in
   the day-to-day administrative work of IASA, but rather to provide
   appropriate direction, oversight and approval.

   Therefore, the IAOC's responsibilities are:

   o  To select the IAD and provide high-level review and direction for
      his or her work.  This task should be handled by a sub-committee,
      as described in Section 3.

   o  To review the IAD's plans and contracts to ensure that they will
      meet the administrative needs of the IETF.

   o  To track whether the IASA functions are meeting the IETF
      community's administrative needs, and to work with the IAD to
      determine a plan for corrective action if they are not.

   o  To review the IAD's budget proposals to ensure that they will meet
      the IETF's needs, and review the IAD's regular financial reports.

   o  To ensure that the IASA is run in a transparent and accountable
      manner.  While the day-to-day work should be delegated to the IAD
      and others, the IAOC is responsible for ensuring that IASA
      finances and operational status are tracked appropriately, and
      that monthly, quarterly, and annual financial and operational
      reports are published to the IETF community.

   o  To designate, in consultation with the IAB and the IESG, the
      person or people who carry out the tasks which other IETF process
      documents say are carried out by the IETF Executive Director.

   The IAOC's role is to direct and review, not perform, the work of the
   IAD and IASA.  The IAOC holds periodic teleconferences and
   face-to-face meetings as needed to carry out the IAOC's duties
   efficiently and effectively.

3.3  Relationship of the IAOC to Existing IETF Leadership

   The IAOC is directly accountable to the IETF community for the
   performance of the IASA.  However, the nature of the IAOC's work
   involves treating the IESG and IAB as major internal customers of the



Austein & Wijnen          Expires June 7, 2005                 [Page 11]

Internet-Draft             Structure of IASA               December 2004


   administrative support services.  The IAOC and the IAD should not
   consider their work successful unless the IESG and IAB are also
   satisfied with the administrative support that the IETF is receiving.

3.4  IAOC Decision Making

   The IAOC attempts to reach all decisions unanimously.  If unanimity
   cannot be achieved, the IAOC chair may conduct informal polls to
   determine the consensus of the group.  In cases where it is
   necessary, some decisions may be made by voting.  For the purpose of
   judging consensus or voting, only the "voting members" (as defined in
   Section 4) shall be counted.  If voting results in a tie, then IAOC
   chair decides how to proceed with the decision process.

   If someone believes that the IAOC has violated the IAOC rules and
   procedures, he or she can ask the IETF leadership to investigate the
   matter, using the same procedure as is used for appeals of procedural
   issues in the IETF, starting with the IESG.

   If the IESG, IAB or the ISOC Board of Trustees find that procedures
   have been violated, they may advise the IAOC, but do not have
   authority to overturn or change a decision of the IAOC.

   The IAOC plays no role in appeals of WG Chair, IESG, or IAB
   decisions.

4.  IAOC Membership, Selection and Accountability

   The IAOC shall consist of eight voting members who shall be selected
   as follows:

   o  2 members appointed by the IETF Nominations Committee (NomCom);

   o  1 member appointed by the IESG;

   o  1 member appointed by the IAB;

   o  1 member appointed by the ISOC Board of Trustees;

   o  The IETF Chair (ex officio);

   o  The IAB Chair (ex officio);

   o  The ISOC President/CEO (ex officio).

   The IETF Administrative Director also serves, ex officio, as a
   non-voting member of the IAOC.




Austein & Wijnen          Expires June 7, 2005                 [Page 12]

Internet-Draft             Structure of IASA               December 2004


   The IAOC may also choose to invite liaisons from other groups, but is
   not required to do so; the IAOC decides whether or not to have a
   liaison to any particular group.  Any such liaisons are non-voting.
   Responsibility for selecting the individual filling a particular
   liaison role with the body from which the IAOC has requested the
   liaison.

   Appointed members of the IAOC serve two year terms.  IAOC terms
   normally end at the first IETF meeting of a year, just as as IAB and
   IESG terms do.

   The members of the IAOC shall select one of its appointed voting
   members to serve as the chair of the IAOC, with all of the duties and
   responsibilities normally associated with such a position.  The term
   of the IAOC chair shall be one year, with no restriction on renewal.
   The chair of the IAOC may be removed at any time by the affirmative
   vote of two-thirds of the voting members of the IAOC, or as a result
   of his or her departure from the IAOC.

   The chair of the IAOC shall have the authority to manage the
   activities and meetings of the IAOC.  The IAOC Chair has no formal
   duty to represent the IAOC, except as directed by IAOC consensus.

   The two NomCom-appointed IAOC members are chosen using the procedures
   described in RFC 3777 [RFC3777].  For the initial IAOC selection, the
   IESG will provide the list of desired qualifications for these
   positions; in later years, the IAOC will provide this qualification
   list.  The IESG will serve as the confirming body for IAOC
   appointments by the NomCom.

   While there are no hard rules regarding how the IAB and the IESG
   should select members of the IAOC, such appointees need not be
   current IAB or IESG members (and probably should not be, if only to
   avoid overloading the existing leadership).  The IAB and IESG should
   choose people with some knowledge of contracts and financial
   procedures, who are familiar with the administrative support needs of
   the IAB, the IESG, or the IETF standards process.  The IAB and IESG
   should follow a fairly open process for these selections, perhaps
   with an open call for nominations or a period of public comment on
   the candidates.  The procedure for IAB selection of ISOC Board of
   Trustees [RFC3677] might be a good model for how this could work.
   After the IETF gains some experience with IAOC selection, these
   selection mechanisms should be documented more formally.

   Although the IAB, the IESG and the ISOC Board of Trustees choose some
   members of the IAOC, those members do not directly represent the
   bodies that chose them.  All members of the IAOC are accountable
   directly to the IETF community.  To receive direct feedback from the



Austein & Wijnen          Expires June 7, 2005                 [Page 13]

Internet-Draft             Structure of IASA               December 2004


   community, the IAOC holds an open meeting at least once per year at
   an IETF meeting.  This may take the form of an open IAOC plenary or a
   working meeting held during an IETF meeting slot.  The form and
   contents of this meeting are left to the discretion of the IAOC
   Chair.  The IAOC should also consider open mailing lists or other
   means to establish open communication with the community.

   IAOC members are subject to recall in the event that an IAOC member
   abrogates his or her duties or acts against the best interests of the
   IETF community.  Any appointed IAOC member, including those appointed
   by the IAB, IESG or ISOC Board of Trustees, may be recalled using the
   recall procedure defined in RFC 3777 [RFC3777].  IAOC members are
   not, however, subject to recall by the bodies that appointed them.

4.1  Initial IAOC Selection

   The initial IAOC selection will start after this document is approved
   as a BCP by the IESG and accepted by the ISOC Board of Trustees.  The
   IESG, IAB, and ISOC Board of Trustees should make their selections
   within 45-days of BCP approval, and the NomCom should make their
   selections as quickly as possible while complying with the documented
   NomCom procedures.  The IAOC will become active as soon as a majority
   (three or more) of the appointed members have been selected.

   Initially, the IESG and the ISOC Board of Trustees will make one-year
   appointments, the IAB will make a two-year appointment, and the
   NomCom will make one one-year appointment and one two-year
   appointment.  This will establish a pattern in which approximately
   half of the IAOC is selected each year.

5.  IASA Funding

   The IASA manages money from three sources:

   1.  IETF meeting revenues;

   2.  Designated donations to ISOC (both monetary and in-kind);

   3.  Other ISOC support.

   Note that the goal is to achieve and maintain a viable IETF support
   function based on available funding sources.  The IETF community
   expects the IAOC and ISOC to work together to attain that goal, and
   recognizes that doing so will require striking some sort of balance.
   For example, dropping the meeting fees to $0 and expecting ISOC to
   pick up the slack would not be viable in the long term, and neither
   would be raising the meeting fees to prohibitive levels in order to
   fund all non-meeting-related activities.



Austein & Wijnen          Expires June 7, 2005                 [Page 14]

Internet-Draft             Structure of IASA               December 2004


5.1  Divisional Accounting

   For bookkeeping purposes, funds managed by IASA should be accounted
   for in a separate set of accounts which can be rolled-up periodically
   to the equivalent of a balance sheet and a profit and loss statement
   for IASA alone after taking into account the effect of common items
   paid for or received by ISOC as a whole.

5.2  IETF Meeting Revenues

   Meeting revenues are an important source of funds for IETF functions.
   The IAD, in consultation with the IAOC, sets the meeting fees as part
   of the budgeting process.  All meeting revenues shall be credited to
   the appropriate IASA account.

5.3  Designated Donations, Monetary and In-Kind

   Donations are an essential component of funding.  The IASA undertakes
   no direct fund-raising activities.  This establishes a practice of
   separating IETF administrative and standards activities from
   fund-raising activities, and helps ensure that no undue influence may
   be ascribed to those from whom funds are raised.

   ISOC shall create and maintain appropriate structures and programs to
   coordinate donations intended to support the work of the IETF, and
   these will include mechanisms for both in-kind and direct
   contributions to the work supported by IASA.  Since ISOC will be the
   sole entity through whom donations may be made to the work of the
   IETF, ISOC shall ensure that those programs are not unduly
   restrictive.  For the benefit of individuals, smaller organizations
   and countries with developing economies, ISOC shall maintain programs
   that allow for designated donations to the IETF.

      Editors' note: Some have suggested we need explicit IETF consensus
      on the above.  So if you do not agree, please speak up ASAP.

      Editors' note: Removed "either using an overhead model or other
      unrestricted donation program." because it is too detailed and
      prescriptive.  Send objections ASAP if you do not agree.

   ISOC shall create appropriate administrative structures to coordinate
   such donations with the IASA.  In-kind resources are owned by the
   ISOC on behalf of the IETF and shall be reported and accounted for in
   a manner that identifies them as such.  Designated monetary donations
   shall be credited to the appropriate IASA account.






Austein & Wijnen          Expires June 7, 2005                 [Page 15]

Internet-Draft             Structure of IASA               December 2004


5.4  Other ISOC Support

   Other ISOC support shall be based on the budget process as specified
   in Section 6.  ISOC shall credit the appropriate IASA accounts at
   least quarterly.

   If ISOC pays any other IETF expenses directly, without transferring
   funds to the IASA, this shall be documented as a footnote to the IASA
   accounts.

5.5  IASA Expenses

   The IASA exists to support the IETF.  Therefore, only expenses
   related to supporting the IETF may be debited from the IASA account.

5.6  Operating Reserve

   As an initial guideline and in normal operating circumstances, the
   IASA should have an operating reserve for its activities sufficient
   to cover 6-months of non-meeting operational expenses, plus twice the
   recent average for meeting contract guarantees.  However, the IASA
   shall establish a target for a reserve fund to cover normal operating
   expenses and meeting expenses in accordance with prudent planning.
   Rather than having the IASA attempt to build that reserve in its
   separate accounts, the IASA looks to ISOC to build and provide that
   operational reserve, through whatever mechanisms ISOC deems
   appropriate: line of credit, financial reserves, meeting cancellation
   insurance, and so forth.  Such reserves do not appear
   instantaneously; the goal is to reach this level of reserves within 3
   years after the creation of the IASA.  Such funds shall be held in
   reserve for use by IASA for use in the event of IETF meeting
   cancellation or other unexpected fiscal emergencies.  These reserves
   shall only be spent on IETF support functions.

6.  IASA Budget Process

   While the IASA sets a budget for the IETF's administrative needs, its
   budget process clearly needs to be closely coordinated with ISOC's.
   The specific timeline shall be established each year.  A general
   annual timeline for budgeting is:

   July 1: The IAD presents a budget proposal for the following fiscal
      year, with 3 year projections, to the IAOC.

   August 1: The IAOC approves the budget proposal for IETF purposes,
      after any appropriate revisions.  As the ISOC President is part of
      the IAOC, the IAOC should have a preliminary indication of how the
      budget will fit with ISOC's own budgetary expectations.  The



Austein & Wijnen          Expires June 7, 2005                 [Page 16]

Internet-Draft             Structure of IASA               December 2004


      budget proposal is passed to the ISOC Board of Trustees for review
      in accordance with their fiduciary duty.

   September 1: The ISOC Board of Trustees approves the budget proposal
      provisionally.  During the next 2 months, the budget may be
      revised to be integrated in ISOC's overall budgeting process.

   November 1: Final budget to the ISOC Board for approval.

   The dates described above are subject to change, and will most likely
   be modified each year based on the dates of the second and third IETF
   meetings of that year.

   The IAD shall provide monthly accountings of expenses, and shall
   update expenditures forecasts every quarter.  This may require
   adjustment of the IASA budget: if so, the revised budget will need to
   be approved by the IAOC, the ISOC President/CEO and, if necessary,
   the ISOC Board of Trustees.

7.  ISOC Responsibilities for IASA

   Within ISOC, support for the IASA shall meet the following goals:

   Transparency: The IETF community shall have complete visibility into
      the financial and legal structure of the ISOC standards activity.
      In particular, a detailed budget for the entire standards
      activity, quarterly financial reports, and audited annual
      financial reports shall all be available to the IETF community.
      In addition, key contract material and MOUs shall also be publicly
      available.  The IAD and IAOC are responsible for providing regular
      overviews of the state of the IASA to the IETF community.

   Unification: As part of this arrangement, ISOC's sponsorship of the
      RFC Editor, IAB and IESG shall be managed as part of the IASA
      under the IAOC.

   Independence: The IASA shall be distinct from other ISOC activities.
      ISOC will support the IASA through the mechanisms specified in
      this document and its successors.

   Support: ISOC shall work with the IAD and IAOC to ensure appropriate
      financial support for the IASA, following the mechanisms described
      in this document and its successors.

   Removability: While there is no current plan to transfer the legal
      and financial home of the IASA to another corporation, the IASA
      shall be structured to enable a clean transition in the event that
      the IETF community decides, through BCP publication, that such a



Austein & Wijnen          Expires June 7, 2005                 [Page 17]

Internet-Draft             Structure of IASA               December 2004


      transition is required.  In such a case, the IAOC shall give ISOC
      a minimum of six months notice before the transition formally
      occurs.  During that period, the IAOC and ISOC shall work together
      to create a smooth transition that does not result in any
      significant service outages or missed IETF meetings.  All
      contracts executed by ISOC on behalf of IASA shall either include
      a clause allowing termination or transfer by ISOC with six months
      notice, or shall be transferable to another corporation in the
      event that the IASA transitions away from ISOC.  Any accrued
      funds, any IETF-specific intellectual property rights, and any
      IETF-specific data and tools shall also transition to the new
      entity.

   Within the constraints outlined above, all other details of how to
   structure this activity within ISOC (whether as a cost center, a
   department, or a formal subsidiary) shall be determined by ISOC in
   consultation with the IAOC.

8.  Security Considerations

   This document describes the structure of the IETF's administrative
   support activity.  It introduces no security considerations for the
   Internet.

9.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no IANA considerations in the traditional sense.
   However, some of the information in this document may affect how the
   IETF standards process interfaces with IANA, so IANA may be
   interested in the contents.

10.  Acknowledgements

   The editors would like to thank everyone who provided feedback on
   this document or any of its predecessors back to the original
   "Scenario O" e-mail message.  In particular, the editors would like
   to thank: Bernard Aboba, Harald Alvestrand, Fred Baker, Scott
   Bradner, Brian Carpenter, Dave Crocker, Avri Doria, Tony Hain, Joel
   Halpern, Ted Hardie, Sam Hartman, Geoff Huston, John Klensin, Valdis
   Kletnieks, Eliot Lear, Henrik Levkowetz, Carl Malamud, Allison
   Mankin, Eric Rescorla, Glenn Ricart, and Lynn St Amour.

   Special thanks are due to Leslie Daigle and Margaret Wasserman, who
   wrote the original "Scenario O" message and edited the earliest
   versions of this document.

   No doubt the above list is incomplete.  We apologize to anyone whom
   we left out.



Austein & Wijnen          Expires June 7, 2005                 [Page 18]

Internet-Draft             Structure of IASA               December 2004


   This document was written using the xml2rfc tool described in RFC
   2629 [RFC2629].

11.  References

11.1  Normative References

   [RFC2026]  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision
              3", BCP 9, RFC 2026, October 1996.

   [RFC3716]  Advisory, IAB., "The IETF in the Large: Administration and
              Execution", RFC 3716, March 2004.

   [RFC3777]  Galvin, J., "IAB and IESG Selection, Confirmation, and
              Recall Process: Operation of the Nominating and Recall
              Committees", BCP 10, RFC 3777, June 2004.

11.2  Informative References

   [ISOC]     Internet Society, "Internet Society By-Laws", February
              2001,
              <http://www.isoc.org/isoc/general/trustees/bylaws.shtml>.

   [RFC2031]  Huizer, E., "IETF-ISOC relationship", RFC 2031, October
              1996.

   [RFC2629]  Rose, M., "Writing I-Ds and RFCs using XML", RFC 2629,
              June 1999.

   [RFC2850]  Internet Architecture Board and B. Carpenter, "Charter of
              the Internet Architecture Board (IAB)", BCP 39, RFC 2850,
              May 2000.

   [RFC3668]  Bradner, S., "Intellectual Property Rights in IETF
              Technology", BCP 79, RFC 3668, February 2004.

   [RFC3677]  Daigle, L. and Internet Architecture Board, "IETF ISOC
              Board of Trustee Appointment Procedures", BCP 77, RFC
              3677, December 2003.

   [RFC3710]  Alvestrand, H., "An IESG charter", RFC 3710, February
              2004.









Austein & Wijnen          Expires June 7, 2005                 [Page 19]

Internet-Draft             Structure of IASA               December 2004


Authors' Addresses

   Rob Austein (editor)
   Internet Systems Consortium
   950 Charter Street
   Redwood City, CA  94063
   USA

   EMail: sra@isc.org


   Bert Wijnen (editor)
   Lucent Technologies
   Schagen 33
   3461 GL Linschoten
   NL

   EMail: bwijnen@lucent.com

Appendix A.  Change Log

      Note to RFC Editor: Please remove this appendix (including all of
      its subsections) prior to publication.

   This document was produced as part of the overall IETF Administrative
   Restructuring (AdminRest) effort.  Information about the effort and
   related documents can be found at:

   http://www.alvestrand.no/ietf/adminrest

   We are using an issue tracker to track the editorial and substantive
   feedback on this document.  It can be found at:

   https://rt.psg.com (user: ietf, password: ietf, queue: iasa-bcp).

   We ended up not using the issue tracker so much.  Instead we have
   listed open issues (and now also closed issues) in this document
   itself.

   $Revision: 1.36 $

A.1  Changes in draft-ietf-iasa-bcp-02.txt

   o  Split issues list into separate lists of open issues and closed
      issues (as seen by the editors).  Everyone should check Section
      1.3 and Section 1.2 carefully to see whether they agree with the
      editors' characterization of these issues.  Removed some inline
      editors' comments when we believed that an issue has been



Austein & Wijnen          Expires June 7, 2005                 [Page 20]

Internet-Draft             Structure of IASA               December 2004


      resolved.

   o  Added Section 2.5 on when the procedures in this document become
      effective.

   o  Changed text in Section 5 to state that the goal is a viable IASA
      based on all funding as opposed to just meeting fees and
      designated donations.

   o  Added text to Section 2.2 stating that funds and donations shall
      be irrevocably assigned to IETF.

   o  Removed section on IAD Committees.

   o  Changed the text in Section 4 on IAOC Chair selection and
      responsibilities.  It is now very similar to IAB chair selection
      as in RFC2850.

   o  Various textual clarifications.  This also includes several
      changes of "will" and "should" into "shall".

   o  Moved disclaimer of variance procedure to Section 3 and
      generalized it.

   o  Improved wording on IPR in Section 2.2 and added specific text for
      IAD to ensure we have proper rights to any IPR.  Section 5.1

   o  Cleanup Section 7.


A.2  Changes in draft-ietf-iasa-bcp-01.txt

   o  Added a list of open issues (Section 1.3).

   o  Added that small committee determines initial compensation for
      IAD.

   o  Added a set of Principles (Section 2.2) on which any details are
      (should be) based.

   o  Added "Community Consensus and Grant of Authority" (Section 2.3).

   o  Added more acknowledgments (no doubt still incomplete).

   o  Clarified Section 5 and subsections.  Added Editors' note.

   o  Clarified what happens if IAOC voting results in a tie.




Austein & Wijnen          Expires June 7, 2005                 [Page 21]

Internet-Draft             Structure of IASA               December 2004


   o  Changed the selection of person(s) to act as IETF Executive
      Director.

   o  Added a disclaimer in Section 5, stating that IAOC can deal with
      changes because of legal, accounting or practical reasons.

   o  Removed "insurance" example in Section 5.4.

   o  Added a reference to ISOC bylaws.

   o  Stop using term "liaison" to mean "non-voting IAOC member";
      instead, spell out which members are voting and which are not.
      Add text allowing IAOC to request non-voting liaisons from other
      bodies.

   o  Various editorial cleanups.


A.3  Changes in draft-ietf-iasa-bcp-00.txt

   o  Modified the text of Section 5.

   o  Added text on Reserve funds.

   o  Made IAB chair a voting member of IAOC; added tie-breaker rule
      that if voting results in equal split, then IAOC chair decides.

   o  Changed 2nd paragraph in "Structure of IASA" section to replace
      the fuzzy term "executive-level" and to be clear about cost
      aspects.

   o  Made it explicit that the IESG's role as a confirming body only
      applies to IAOC appointments made by the NomCom.

   o  Editorial changes at various places in the document.


A.4  Changes in draft-wasserman-iasa-bcp-01.txt

   o  Adjusted the description of the IAD role and reporting structure
      to make it clear that the IAD is expected to serve as
      executive-level management for IASA, with only high-level
      direction (not day-to-day management) from the IAOC.

   o  Removed some troublesome wording regarding termination of the IAD
      by the ISOC President/CEO.

   o  Moved the initial IAOC selection into a separate section and added



Austein & Wijnen          Expires June 7, 2005                 [Page 22]

Internet-Draft             Structure of IASA               December 2004


      some text describing how and when the initial IAOC will be seated.

   o  Added the concept of IAD committees, largely taken from Leslie
      Daigle's original AdminRest proposal.

   o  Performed some general text editing and clean-up.


A.5  Origin of draft-wasserman-iasa-bcp-00.txt

   draft-wasserman-iasa-bcp-00.txt was derived from an e-mail message
   written by Leslie Daigle and Margaret Wasserman and posted to the
   IETF by Leslie Daigle.  The original message can be found at:

   http://www1.ietf.org/mail-archive/web/ietf/current/msg31326.html

   This document was derived from the "Draft BCP" portion of that
   message and has been updated based on comments received.

































Austein & Wijnen          Expires June 7, 2005                 [Page 23]

Internet-Draft             Structure of IASA               December 2004


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Austein & Wijnen          Expires June 7, 2005                 [Page 24]

e 

