
 
Internet Draft                                                 J. Morris 
                                                             A. Davidson 
                                       Center for Democracy & Technology 
                                                                          
draft-morris-policy-considerations-00.txt                      June 2003 
Expires: December 2003 
    
    
    
    
                       Public Policy Considerations 
                       for Internet Design Decisions 
    
    
    
    
    
Status of this Memo 
    
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of [RFC2026].  Internet-Drafts are 
   working documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its 
   areas, and its working groups.  Note that other groups may also 
   distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
    
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
    
Abstract 
    
   This document suggests public policy questions that the IETF should 
   consider and possibly address when developing new standards and 
   protocols, and modifying or enhancing old standards and protocols.  
   This document contains questions to be considered, as opposed to 
   guidelines or rules that should in all cases be followed.  This first 
   draft provides a framework for identifying and discussing questions 
   of public policy concern, and invites members of the IETF community 
   to contribute to the questions and discussions raised here. 
    
    
 
Morris & Davidson      Expires - December 2003                [Page 1] 
Internet-Draft       Public Policy Considerations            June 2003  
 
Conventions used in this document 
    
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119]. 
    
    
Table of Contents 
    
   1. Introduction and Rationale for this Document...................2 
   2. Scope of this Document.........................................4 
   3. A Few Basic Definitions........................................5 
   4. Questions about Technical Characteristics or Functionality.....6 
   5. Discussion of Potential Public Policy Concerns................10 
      5.1 General Comments..........................................10 
      5.2 Content Censorship and Control............................11 
          5.2.1 Government Censorship ..............................11 
          5.2.2 Private Control of Content .........................11 
      5.3 Discrimination Among Users and Content....................12 
      5.4 Competition and Choice....................................13 
      5.5 User Consent..............................................13 
      5.6 Internationalization......................................14 
      5.7 Accessibility.............................................14 
      5.8 Personal Privacy..........................................15 
          5.8.1 Consumer Privacy and Data Protection ...............16 
          5.8.2 Privacy vis-a-vis the Government ...................17 
   6. Conclusion....................................................17 
   Security Considerations..........................................17 
   References.......................................................18 
   Acknowledgments..................................................20 
   Authors' Addresses...............................................20 
    
    
1. Introduction and Rationale for this Document 
    
   This document suggests public policy questions that the authors 
   believe should be considered and possibly addressed within the IETF 
   when it is working on new or revised standards or protocols.  This 
   document offers questions to be considered, rather than guidelines to 
   be followed.  These questions are somewhat similar to the "Security 
   Considerations" currently required in IETF documents.  [RFC2316]. 
    
   This document is inspired by and directly modeled on [RFC 3426], 
   entitled "General Architectural and Policy Considerations" and 
   published by the Internet Architecture Board in November 2002.  In 
   RFC 3426, the IAB suggests architectural questions that should be 
   considered in design decisions, without asserting that there are 
   clear guidelines that should be followed in all cases.  This document 
   attempts to follow in the spirit of RFC 3426 by raising questions to 
 
Morris & Davidson      Expires - December 2003                [Page 2] 
Internet-Draft       Public Policy Considerations            June 2003  
 
   be considered without asserting that any particular answers must be 
   followed. 
    
   This document is motivated by the recognition that technical design 
   decisions made within the IETF and other standards bodies can have 
   significant impacts on public policy concerns.  One well known 
   example of this possible impact can be found in the implementation of 
   IPv6 on Ethernet networks.  [RFC 2464], published in December 1998, 
   specified that the IPv6 address for a computer on an Ethernet network 
   would incorporate the unique MAC address associated with the Ethernet 
   adapter.  After the publication of RFC 2464, a significant policy 
   concern arose because the use of the unique and unchangeable MAC 
   address would significantly reduce a user's ability to conduct 
   private and/or anonymous communications using IPv6.  The IETF 
   responded to those concerns by publishing in January 2001 [RFC 3041], 
   entitled "Privacy Extensions for Stateless Address Autoconfiguration 
   in IPv6". 
    
   The goal of this document is that potential public policy impacts of 
   technical design decisions will be identified and considered during 
   the initial design process.  This type of policy consideration 
   already happens in many cases within the IETF, but not in any 
   systematic way or with any assurance that public policy concerns will 
   be identified in most cases. 
    
   A common assertion within the IETF is that "we don't do public 
   policy."  The goal of this document is NOT to suggest that the IETF 
   should "do" policy in the sense of intentionally conducting extensive 
   debates on public policy issues.  But, as much as the IETF 
   appropriately tries not to "do" policy, many of its actions and 
   decisions squarely and significantly impact on public policy 
   concerns.  This document seeks to encourage the IETF to acknowledge 
   those times when a design decision might affect a policy concern, so 
   that the community can make a reasoned decision on whether and how to 
   address the concern in the particular situation. 
    
   The authors see a range of important reasons why the IETF should seek 
   to be aware of the potential public policy impacts of its design 
   decisions, but will only suggest one here:  The chance that IETF 
   standards will be widely deployed and then widely accepted in the 
   market is higher if those standards minimize harmful social impacts. 
    
   To be clear, it is not the view of the authors that impact on public 
   policy concerns must be avoided at all costs (if that were even 
   possible), or that if a particular proposed standard adversely 
   affects a public concern (say, privacy) that the standard should as a 
   matter of course be rejected.  Some beneficial technologies might 
   unavoidably have secondary harmful impacts, and the benefits may 
   outweigh the harms.  More generally, some technologies (such as those 
 
Morris & Davidson      Expires - December 2003                [Page 3] 
Internet-Draft       Public Policy Considerations            June 2003  
 
   that facilitate government surveillance) might intentionally 
   compromise a public concern such as privacy.  Similarly, the inherent 
   goal of some technologies (such as those that discriminate among 
   traffic to provide assured levels of quality of service) might 
   simultaneously be viewed by some as beneficial and by others as 
   harmful. 
    
   In all of these cases, there may well be good reasons to develop the 
   technology notwithstanding the asserted harms to a policy concern.  
   The central goal of this paper is simply to suggest that impacts on a 
   public concern should not happen without clear recognition of the 
   impacts, and without appropriate consideration of whether it is 
   possible to minimize harmful impacts while still meeting the design 
   requirements. 
    
    
2. Scope of this Document 
    
   The purported scope of this document is admittedly ambitious.  This 
   document cannot possibly predict and identify all possible societal 
   impacts of future IETF design decisions.  It does try, however, to 
   identify a broad range of possible public policy impacts that 
   experience suggests are most likely to arise.  This document is a 
   first draft, and will require at least a few iterations before it 
   covers a reasonably full range of potential issues.  The authors 
   invite comments, and specifically seek suggestions of specific 
   historic examples within the IETF where a public policy concern was 
   raised by a technology proposal.  The more concrete examples this 
   document can contain, the more useful it will be to the IETF 
   community. 
    
   There are two broad categories of public policy impacts that this 
   document does NOT seek to cover with any thoroughness.  First, this 
   document does not articulate the full range of concerns raised by 
   traditional security problems in the network.  The IETF is already 
   appropriately focused on security issues, and those in the Security 
   Area are well able to identify and articulate the types of technical 
   design decisions that can lead to security problems.  Many of the 
   privacy concerns highlighted in this document raise related security 
   concerns. 
    
   Second, this document does not attempt to identify the enormous range 
   of POSITIVE societal impacts that flow from network technology.  The 
   vast majority of the work of the IETF -- from the introduction of an 
   entirely new method of Internet use to the fine tuning of an existing 
   routing protocol -- yields concrete and important social benefits.  
   This document does not discuss these positive benefits, but takes as 
   a given that technology proposals will not advance within the IETF 

 
Morris & Davidson      Expires - December 2003                [Page 4] 
Internet-Draft       Public Policy Considerations            June 2003  
 
   unless at least some portion of the community views the proposals as 
   beneficial. 
    
   This document is by no means an exhaustive list of public policy 
   concerns that relate to the Internet.  This draft has instead focused 
   on policy issues that the authors believe are most likely to arise in 
   the IETF context.  In addition, the authors articulate a perspective 
   that is in part a function of their country and culture.  It is the 
   authors' hope that over time this document can be expanded to include 
   the concerns of a broader set of communities. 
    
    
3. A Few Basic Definitions 
    
   This document will use a limited number of defined terms, which 
   admittedly will not be precisely applicable in all situations: 
    
   TECHNOLOGY shall refer to a technical standard or innovation being 
   considered within the IETF, whether it is a "new" technology or 
   standard or a modification to an "old" technology or standard. 
    
   END USER shall refer to the user at one or the other end of a network 
   communication, or an automated or intelligent proxy for a user 
   located at the end of the communication.  Thus, a concern over, for 
   example, the privacy of the End User would be applicable in cases 
   where a client-side application communicated on behalf of an End 
   User.  In some contexts, a corporation or other organized collection 
   of human users might stand in the role of an End User.  In some but 
   not all contexts, a communication might be from one End User to 
   another End User; in other context, a communication might be between 
   a Service Provider (defined below) and an End User. 
    
   ACCESS PROVIDER shall refer to the entity that most directly provides 
   network access to an End User or Service Provider.  In the case of 
   End Users on the public Internet, a Access Provider will often be an 
   Internet Service Provider that provides dedicated or dial-up network 
   access.  In other cases a Access Provider might be a company 
   providing access to its employees, or a university providing access 
   to its students and faculty. 
    
   SERVICE PROVIDER shall refer to an entity (human, corporate or 
   institutional) that provides or offers services or content to End 
   Users over the network (regardless of whether charges are sought for 
   such services or content).  Thus, for example, a web site would be 
   viewed as a Service Provider. 
    
   A given entity (such as a company offering content on the web) might 
   be viewed as an Access Provider (vis-a-vis its employees), as an End 

 
Morris & Davidson      Expires - December 2003                [Page 5] 
Internet-Draft       Public Policy Considerations            June 2003  
 
   User (vis-a-vis the ISP from which it obtains network access), and as 
   a Service Provider (vis-a-vis End Users elsewhere on the Internet). 
    
   TRANSIT PROVIDERS shall refer to one or more entities that transport 
   communications between the Access Providers at either end of a 
   communication.  Transit Providers are often thought to transport 
   packets of communications without regard to their content (other 
   than, of course, their destination), but increasingly some Transit 
   Providers may handle traffic differently depending on the type of 
   traffic. 
    
   THIRD PARTY shall refer to any individual or entity other than End 
   Users, Access Providers, Service Providers, and Transit Providers.  
   For a given communication, Third Parties could include, for example, 
   governments seeking to execute lawful interceptions, hackers seeking 
   to interfere with or intercept communications, or in some situations 
   entities that provide, under contract, content or functionality to a 
   Service Provider (such as, for example, an entity that serves 
   advertisements for insertion in a web page). 
    
   In some cases the distinction between a Transit Provider and a Third 
   Party may blur, if the Transit Provider manipulates or discriminates 
   among traffic based on characteristics such as its content, sender, 
   or receiver.  Similarly, the line between a Service Provider and a 
   Third Party may blur as more service functions are contracted out. 
    
    
4. Questions about Technical Characteristics or Functionality 
    
   In this section we list questions to ask in designing protocols.  The 
   issues raised by the questions are discussed in more depth in Section 
   5 below.  We are not suggesting that each of these questions requires 
   an explicit answer -- some questions will be more relevant to one 
   design decision than to another. 
    
   There is not a one-to-one correspondence between the questions listed 
   in this section and the discussions in Section 5.  Instead, for each 
   group of questions listed below, there are one or more references to 
   later substantive discussions. 
    
   Some of the questions will be easy to answer for a given technology.  
   Others will require creative thinking to assess whether a proposed 
   technology might be misused to achieve a result not intended by the 
   technology proponents. 
    
   This first draft addresses the most common and well-known areas of 
   public policy concern, focusing on areas most likely to arise in the 
   IETF context.  Subsequent drafts may include a broader range of 
   policy concerns. 
 
Morris & Davidson      Expires - December 2003                [Page 6] 
Internet-Draft       Public Policy Considerations            June 2003  
 
    
   Bottlenecks, Choke-Points and Access Control: 
    
   * Would the Technology facilitate any bottlenecks or choke-points in 
   the network through which significant amounts of particular types of 
   traffic must flow? 
    
   * Would the Technology permit a Third Party (including a government) 
   to exert control over End Users' use of the Internet as a whole? 
    
   * Would the Technology permit a Transit Provider or Third Party 
   (including a government) to exert control over the use of particular 
   content, functionality, or resources? 
    
   * Would the Technology permit an Access Provider or Service Provider 
   to exert control over particular content, functionality, or 
   resources, other than that known by the End User to be controlled by 
   the Access Provider or Service Provider? 
    
   * Would the Technology permit Third Party (including a government) to 
   require that particular content or functionality be confined (or 
   "zoned") into, or excluded from, any particular subpart of the 
   Internet (such as a particular Global Top Level Domain)? 
    
            See discussions of "Content Censorship and Control," 
            "Personal Privacy," "Discrimination Among Users and 
            Content," "Competition and Choice," and "User Consent." 
    
   Alteration or Replacement of Content: 
    
   * Would the Technology permit a Third Party to alter any of the 
   content of a communication without (a) the express instruction or 
   consent of the Service Provider and the End User, or (b) the 
   knowledge of the Service Provider or the End User? 
    
            See discussions of "Content Censorship and Control" and 
            "User Consent." 
    
   Monitoring or Tracking of Usage: 
    
   * Would the Technology permit the monitoring or tracking by a Third 
   Party of the use of particular content, functionality, or resources? 
    
            See discussion of "Personal Privacy." 
    




 
Morris & Davidson      Expires - December 2003                [Page 7] 
Internet-Draft       Public Policy Considerations            June 2003  
 
   Retention, Collection, or Exposure of Data: 
    
   * Would the Technology require or permit the retention of any 
   information about individual packets or communications, or individual 
   End Users, either (a) beyond the conclusion of the immediate network 
   or communications event, or (b) for longer than a reasonably brief 
   period of time in which a communications "session" can be concluded?  
    
   * Would the Technology permit the reading or writing of any file on 
   an End User's computer without the explicit knowledge of the End 
   User? 
    
   * Would the Technology permit or require that information other than 
   location and routing information (such as, for example, personal 
   information or search terms) be made a part of a URL or URI used for 
   a communication? 
    
   * Would the Technology permit or require that personal or 
   confidential information be made available to any Third Party, 
   Transit Provider, or Access Provider? 
    
            See discussion of "Personal Privacy." 
    
   Persistent Identifiers and Anonymity: 
    
   * Would the Technology require or permit the association of a 
   persistent identifier with a particular End User, or a computer used 
   by one or more End Users? 
    
   * Would the Technology reduce the ability of a content provider to 
   provide content anonymously? 
    
   * Would the Technology reduce the ability of an End User to access 
   content or utilize functionality anonymously? 
    
            See discussion of "Personal Privacy." 
    
   Access by Third Parties: 
    
   * Would the Technology permit any Third Party to have access to 
   packets to and from End Users without the explicit consent of the End 
   Users? 
    
   * Would the Technology permit or require any Third Party to store any 
   information about an End User, or an End User's communications (even 
   with the knowledge and consent of the End User)? 
    
            See discussions of "Personal Privacy" and "User Consent." 
    
 
Morris & Davidson      Expires - December 2003                [Page 8] 
Internet-Draft       Public Policy Considerations            June 2003  
 
   Discrimination among Users, or among Types of Traffic: 
    
   * Would the Technology require or permit an Access Provider or 
   Transit Provider to provide differing levels of service or 
   functionality based on (a) the identity or characteristic of the End 
   User, or (b) the type of traffic being handled? 
    
   * Would the Technology likely lead to a significant increase in cost 
   for basic or widely-used categories of communications? 
    
   * Would likely implementations of a new mode of communication require 
   such a financial or resource investment so that the mode would 
   effectively not be available to individuals, or small or non-profit 
   entities? 
    
            See discussion of "Discrimination Among Users and Content." 
    
   Internationalization and Accessibility 
    
   * Would the Technology function with the same level of quality, ease 
   of use, etc., across a broad range of languages and character sets? 
    
   * Would the likely implementations of the Technology be as useful to 
   mainstream End Users as to non-mainstream End Users (such as, for 
   example, End Users with disabilities)? 
    
   * Would the Technology likely reduce the ability of non-mainstream 
   End Users (such as, for example, End Users with disabilities) to 
   utilize any common application or network functions? 
    
            See discussions of "Internationalization" and  
            "Accessibility." 
    
   Innovation, Competition, and End User Choice and Control 
    
   * Would the Technology reduce the ability of future designers to 
   create new and innovative uses of the Internet, or new methods to 
   accomplish common network functions? 
    
   * Would the Technology likely reduce the number of viable competitive 
   providers of any common application or network functions? 
    
   * Would the Technology likely reduce the ability of small or poorly-
   funded providers to compete in the provision of any common 
   application or network functions? 
    
   * Would the Technology likely reduce the number or variety of methods 
   available to the End User to accomplish common application or network 
   functions? 
 
Morris & Davidson      Expires - December 2003                [Page 9] 
Internet-Draft       Public Policy Considerations            June 2003  
 
    
   * Would the Technology likely reduce the level of control the End 
   User can exercise over common application or network functions? 
    
            See discussion of "Competition and Choice." 
    
    
5. Discussion of Potential Public Policy Concerns 
    
   Below are brief discussions of common categories of public policy 
   concern that might be raised by technologies developed by the IETF.  
   The discussions are not intended to present comprehensive analyses of 
   the policy concern, but are intended to assist in identifying 
   situations in which the concern is implicated and should be 
   considered. 
    
5.1 General Comments 
    
   The fundamental design principles of the Internet, including 
   openness, interoperability, and the end-to-end principle, have 
   themselves been critical contributors to the value of the Internet 
   from a public policy perspective.  Thus, as a first rule of promoting 
   healthy public policy impacts, the IETF should continue to maintain 
   and promote the architectural goals that it has historically pursued. 
    
   Because of this congruence between architectural values and public 
   policy values, many of the design considerations in RFC 3426, 
   "General Architectural and Policy Considerations," directly promote 
   an Internet that is supportive of good public policy values.  As one 
   of many examples, Section 12.1 discusses the value of user choice, 
   and quotes [CWSB02] to say that "user empowerment is a basic building 
   block, and should be embedded into all mechanism whenever possible."  
   User choice is a fundamental public policy concern, discussed more 
   below. 
    
   [CWSB02], titled "Tussle in Cyberspace: Defining Tomorrow's 
   Internet," is itself a valuable exploration of the intersection 
   between technology design and public policy concerns.  A key premise 
   of [CWSB02] is that "different stakeholders that are part of the 
   Internet milieu have interests that may be adverse to each other, and 
   these parties each vie to favor their particular interests."  Many of 
   the "tussles" that [CWSB02] analyzes are situations in which public 
   policy considerations should be assessed in making design decisions.  
   More broadly, [CWSB02] provides to technology designers a conceptual 
   framework that recognizes the existence of "tussles" and seeks to 
   accommodate them constructively within a design. 
    


 
Morris & Davidson      Expires - December 2003               [Page 10] 
Internet-Draft       Public Policy Considerations            June 2003  
 
5.2 Content Censorship and Control 
    
   As used here, the concept of censorship can encompass both 
   governmental and private actions. 
    
5.2.1 Government Censorship 
    
   "Censorship" is most commonly thought of as government-imposed 
   control or blocking of access to content.  Many believe that as a 
   matter of public policy, censorship should be minimized or avoided.  
   For example, in May 2003 the Council of Europe stated in its 
   "Declaration on freedom of communication on the Internet" that 
   "Public authorities should not, through general blocking or filtering 
   measures, deny access by the public to information and other 
   communication on the Internet, regardless of frontiers." [COE03].  
   But not all censorship is viewed by all as contrary to public policy.  
   In November 2002 in [COE02], the same Council of Europe specifically 
   endorsed government regulation of "hate speech" on the Internet. 
    
   Some technology is intended to control access to content.  The 
   Platform for Internet Content Selection of the World Wide Web 
   Consortium, [PICS], for example, was in part designed to facilitate 
   the limitation of access by some users (children, for example) to 
   certain types of content. 
    
   Harder to identify are technologies not intended for content control 
   but which can be used to censor or restrict access to content.  Any 
   technology that creates or permits bottlenecks or choke-points in the 
   network, through which significant traffic must pass, increases the 
   risk of censorship.  Governments seeking to censor content or 
   restrict access to the Internet will exploit network bottlenecks 
   (albeit often bottlenecks created by network topology not technology 
   standards).  [ZE02] documents Saudi Arabia's routing of all Internet 
   traffic through central proxy servers, and [KB01] discusses the 
   response of China and Cuba to the Internet, to achieve such ends. 
    
   Governments also seek to control access to content through means 
   other than direct censorship.  In the United States, for example, 
   [CIPA] requires that libraries that receive certain government 
   funding must use content filtering technology on Internet access they 
   offer to patrons, and [DOTKIDS] requires the creation of a subdomain 
   of the .US domain to be used only for children-suitable content. 
    
5.2.2 Private Control of Content 
    
   Governments are not the only entities that attempt to restrict the 
   content to which Internet users have access.  In some cases Access 
   Providers (commonly Internet Service Providers) seek to control the 
   content available to their customers.  Some do so with full knowledge 
 
Morris & Davidson      Expires - December 2003               [Page 11] 
Internet-Draft       Public Policy Considerations            June 2003  
 
   and consent of the customers (to provide, for example, a "family 
   friendly" online experience).  Others, however, favor certain content 
   (for example, that of contractual business partners) over competing 
   content, and do so without the clear understanding of their 
   customers. 
    
   Whether such private content control is contrary to public policy 
   will turn on a host of specific considerations (including notice and 
   alternative choice), but undeniably such content control raises 
   policy concerns.  [CMCS02] illustrates, for example, the current 
   debate over "network neutrality" in the United States.  These policy 
   concerns are commonly phrased in terms of discrimination among 
   content, and are discussed more fully in the next section. 
    
5.3 Discrimination Among Users and Content 
    
   In a simplistic conception of the early Internet, all traffic of any 
   kind was broken into packets and all packets were treated equally 
   within the network.  This idea has promoted a broad and strong 
   perception of equality within the Internet -- one class of traffic 
   will not take priority over other classes, and a lone individual's 
   packets will be treated the same as a large corporation's packets. 
    
   Any technology that moves away from this notion of equality -- even 
   technologies that are clearly beneficial -- raise significant public 
   policy questions, including "who controls the preferential 
   treatment," "who qualifies for it," "will it require additional 
   expenditure to obtain it," and "how great a disparity will it 
   create." 
    
   Thus, for example, quality of service and content distribution 
   networks both raise questions about what and who will be favored, 
   whether the rough equality of the Internet will be lost, and whether 
   the financially strong will come to dominate the Internet and make it 
   less useful for the less well off.  [BM00], for example, explores the 
   policy concerns raised by content distribution networks. 
    
   The concern over discrimination addresses both discrimination based 
   on identity of user, and on type of traffic.  Content distribution 
   networks enable, for example, individual web sites able to afford the 
   CDN services to be delivered more quickly than competing web sites 
   that are not able to afford such services.  In contrast, a core focus 
   of quality of service efforts is on the need to provide enhanced 
   levels of service to some types of traffic (e.g., Internet 
   telephony).   
    
   Concern about discrimination does not suggest that technologies that 
   handle certain categories of traffic more efficiently should never be 
   pursued.  The concern, however, may in some cases suggest that an 
 
Morris & Davidson      Expires - December 2003               [Page 12] 
Internet-Draft       Public Policy Considerations            June 2003  
 
   efficiency enhancement be structured so as to be available to the 
   broadest classes of traffic or users. 
    
5.4 Competition and Choice 
    
   Critical elements of the Internet's development and success have been 
   the ability to create new and innovative uses of the network, the 
   relative ease in creating and offering competitive services, 
   products, and methods, and the ability of Internet users to choose 
   from a range of providers and methods.  Anything that reduces 
   innovation, competition, or user choice raises significant public 
   policy concerns. 
    
   Indeed, the need for competition and user choice is perhaps greater 
   now than in earlier days of the Internet.  There is a greater 
   divergence today in the interests and agendas of users and service 
   providers than in the past, and that divergence makes it more 
   important that users be able to choose among service providers (in 
   part to seek providers that they trust the most). 
    
   [CWSB02] extensively addresses the important need for competition and 
   user choice, and provides detailed suggestions and guidelines for 
   Internet designer to consider. 
    
5.5 User Consent 
    
   A familiar public policy concern over user consent focuses on the use 
   of personal data (as discussed more fully below under "Privacy").  
   The usage here, however, has a broader meaning:  the consent (or lack 
   of consent) of a user regarding an action or function executed by or 
   within the network.   
    
   Many actions performed using IETF protocols require the specific 
   initiation by a user, and the user's consent can fairly be assumed.  
   Thus, if a user transmits a request using SIP, the Session Initiation 
   Protocol, it is safe to assume that the user consents to the normal 
   handling and execution of the SIP request. 
    
   Other actions performed using IETF protocols are not initiated by a 
   user, but are so inherently a part of normal network operations that 
   consent can be assumed.  For example, if in the middle of the network 
   certain packets are slowed by congestion, it is safe to assume 
   sufficient consent for congestion control mechanisms and rerouting of 
   the packets. 
    
   Uncertainty about consent arises, however, in areas where IETF 
   protocols can be viewed as deviating from some conception of 
   "normal."  A simple example relates to the evolution of caching, 
   where as caching of various types of data became the norm, there 
 
Morris & Davidson      Expires - December 2003               [Page 13] 
Internet-Draft       Public Policy Considerations            June 2003  
 
   emerged a need to be able to set flags to prevent caching, which in a 
   sense can be thought of as a form of negative consent. 
    
   Middle boxes and other functions that deviate from the historic 
   "norm" -- the end-to-end principle -- also can raise issues of 
   consent.  For example, section 3 of [RFC3238], titled "IAB 
   Architectural and Policy Considerations for Open Pluggable Edge 
   Services," explores a range of consent and data integrity issues 
   raised by the OPES protocol proposals.  As that analysis makes clear, 
   the consent issue is not necessarily confined to the consent of the 
   client in a client/server transaction, but may also involve the 
   consent of the server to an action undertaken on the request of the 
   client. 
    
5.6 Internationalization 
    
   [RFC3426] calls on protocol designers to ask the key question about 
   "Internationalization": 
    
   "Where protocols require elements in text format, have the possibly 
   conflicting requirements of global comprehensibility and the ability 
   to represent local text content been properly weighed against each 
   other?" 
    
   [RFC3426] explores the significant challenges raised by the need to 
   balances these conflicting goals, and raises the possibility that the 
   historic preference for the use of case-independent ASCII characters 
   in protocols may need to change to accommodate a broader set of 
   international languages. 
    
5.7 Accessibility 
    
   The concept of "accessibility" addresses the ability of persons with 
   disabilities to use the Internet in general and the full range of 
   applications and network functions that are commonly available to 
   persons without disabilities. 
    
   Although focused on the World Wide Web, [W3C WAI-TA] illustrates the 
   concern and explains that a focus on accessibility is needed "to 
   ensure that the full range of core technologies of the Web are 
   accessible . . . .  Barriers exist when these technologies lack 
   features needed by users with visual, hearing, physical, cognitive or 
   neurological disabilities, or when the accessibility potential in the 
   technology is not carried through into the Web application or Web 
   content.  For instance, in order for a multimedia presentation to be 
   accessible to someone who is blind, the markup language for the 
   presentation must support text equivalents for images and video; the 
   multimedia player used must support access to the text equivalents; 
   and the content author must make appropriate text equivalents 
 
Morris & Davidson      Expires - December 2003               [Page 14] 
Internet-Draft       Public Policy Considerations            June 2003  
 
   available. These text equivalents can then be rendered as speech or 
   braille output, enabling access to the content regardless of 
   disability or device constraints." 
    
   Many policy concerns about accessibility relate specifically to the 
   user interfaces used by applications, and as such these concerns 
   generally fall outside of the province of the IETF.  But in the 
   Applications Area and to a lesser extent elsewhere within the IETF, 
   some design decisions could ultimately constrain the accessibility of 
   applications based on IETF protocols. 
    
   The World Wide Web Consortium's Web Accessibility Initiative [W3C 
   WAI] reflects a very well developed and comprehensive analysis of the 
   technical and design issues raised by accessibility concerns. 
    
5.8 Personal Privacy 
    
   Individual privacy concerns are often divided into two components:  
   First, "consumer privacy" (also termed "data protection") commonly 
   addresses the right of individuals to control information about 
   themselves generated or collected in the course of commercial 
   interactions.  Second, "privacy rights vis-a-vis the government" 
   addresses individuals' protection against unreasonable government 
   intrusions on privacy, including the interceptions of communications.   
    
   In the IETF context, a third category of privacy concern -- privacy 
   against private interception of or attacks on data or communications 
   -- is largely covered by the IETF's focus on security considerations.  
   Although security considerations are crucial to privacy 
   considerations, "consumer privacy" and "privacy vis-a-vis the 
   government" raise significantly different issues than traditional 
   security considerations.  With security considerations, a key focus 
   is on maintaining the privacy of information against unauthorized 
   attack.  Other forms of privacy, however, focus not on unauthorized 
   access to information, but on the "secondary use" of information for 
   which access was (at least temporarily) authorized.  The question 
   often is not "how can I keep you from seeing my information" but "how 
   can I give you my information for one purpose and keep you from using 
   it for another." 
    
   The questions raised in Section 4 above do not differentiate between 
   the different categories of privacy, because for most purposes within 
   the IETF, technologies that create risk for one type of privacy 
   likely also create risk for other types of privacy.  Once a potential 
   privacy concern is identified, however, the different types of 
   privacy concern may present different public policy considerations.  
   Indeed, the policy considerations may well be in tension -- a 
   technology that permits a lawful governmental interception of a 

 
Morris & Davidson      Expires - December 2003               [Page 15] 
Internet-Draft       Public Policy Considerations            June 2003  
 
   communication may also increase the risk of unlawful private 
   interception. 
    
   Privacy considerations are too numerous and multifaceted to be 
   adequately addressed in this document.  The discussion below only 
   briefly covers the key privacy issues.  A forthcoming Internet-Draft 
   on "Privacy Considerations for Internet Protocols" will address 
   privacy issues more thoroughly. 
    
5.8.1 Consumer Privacy and Data Protection 
    
   Consumer privacy protection in many parts of the world is based on  
   "fair information practices," which were authoritatively detailed in 
   [OECD] by the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development.  
   Fair information practices include the following principles: 
    
      * Notice and Consent - before the collection of data, the data 
   subject should be provided: notice of what information is being 
   collected and for what purpose and an opportunity to choose whether 
   to accept the data collection and use. In Europe, data collection 
   cannot proceed unless data subject has unambiguously given his 
   consent (with exceptions).  
    
      * Collection Limitation - data should be collected for specified, 
   explicit and legitimate purposes. The data collected should be 
   adequate, relevant and not excessive in relation to the purposes for 
   which they are collected. 
    
      * Use/Disclosure Limitation - data should be used only for the 
   purpose for which it was collected and should not be used or 
   disclosed in any way incompatible with those purposes. 
    
      * Retention Limitation - data should be kept in a form that 
   permits identification of the data subject no longer than is 
   necessary for the purposes for which the data were collected. 
    
      * Accuracy - the party collecting and storing data is obligated to 
   ensure its accuracy and, where necessary, keep it up to date; every 
   reasonable step must be taken to ensure that data which are 
   inaccurate or incomplete are corrected or deleted. 
    
      * Access - a data subject should have access to data about 
   himself, in order to verify its accuracy and to determine how it is 
   being used. 
    
      * Security - those holding data about others must take steps to 
   protect its confidentiality. 
    

 
Morris & Davidson      Expires - December 2003               [Page 16] 
Internet-Draft       Public Policy Considerations            June 2003  
 
   Many of these fair information practices are relevant to IETF 
   protocols.  Even seemingly benign data and server logs can reveal 
   important information about individuals users.  It is not sufficient 
   to address the risk of a technical attack on a body of data, because 
   privacy considerations must address the risk of non-technical attacks 
   on data (through legal process, rogue employees, etc.). 
    
5.8.2 Privacy vis-a-vis the Government 
    
   Although privacy is internationally recognized as a human right, most 
   governments claim the authority to invade privacy through the 
   following means, among others: 
    
      * interception of communications in real-time;  
      * interception of traffic data (routing information) in real-time;  
      * access to data stored by service providers, including traffic 
   data being stored for billing purposes; and  
      * access to data stored by users.  
    
   These means of access to communications and stored data should be 
   narrowly defined and subject to independent controls under strict 
   standards.  Real-time interception of communications should take 
   place only with prior approval by the judicial system, issued under 
   standards at least as strict as those for police searches of private 
   homes. 
    
   In 1999, in the "Raven" discussions, the IETF considered whether it 
   should take action to build wiretapping capability into the Internet.  
   Ultimately, as detailed in [RFC2804], the community decided that an 
   effort to build wiretapping capability into the Internet would create 
   significant and unacceptable security risks. 
    
    
6. Conclusion 
    
   This document has sought to identify a range of public policy 
   concerns that may arise in the work of the IETF.  The authors invite 
   comments and suggestions about ways to make this document more useful 
   and complete. 
    
    
Security Considerations 
    
   This document does not propose any new protocols or changes to old 
   protocols, and therefore does not involve any security considerations 
   in that sense.  Many of the privacy issues discussed here also raise 
   security issues, but this document is not intended to be a 
   comprehensive look at security issues.  
    
 
Morris & Davidson      Expires - December 2003               [Page 17] 
Internet-Draft       Public Policy Considerations            June 2003  
 
    
References 
    
   [BM00]      Berman, J. & Morris, J., "The Broadband Internet: The End 
                  of the Equal Voice?", Computers, Freedom & Privacy 
                  Conference, April 2000.  URL 
                  "http://www.cdt.org/publications/broadbandinternet.pdf
                  ". 
    
   [CIPA]      United States Congress, "Children's Internet Protection 
                  Act", December 2000.  URL 
                  "http://www.cdt.org/legislation/106th/speech/001218cip
                  a.pdf". 
    
   [COE02]     Council of Europe, "Additional Protocol to the Convention 
                  on Cybercrime concerning the criminalisation of acts 
                  of a racist and xenophobic nature committed through 
                  computer systems," November 7, 2002.  URL 
                  "http://www.coe.int/T/E/Legal_affairs/Legal_co-
                  operation/Combating_economic_crime/Cybercrime/Racism_o
                  n_internet/PC-RX(2002)24E-1.pdf". 
    
   [COE03]     Council of Europe, "Declaration on freedom of 
                  communication on the Internet," May 28, 2003.  URL 
                  "http://cm.coe.int/stat/E/Public/2003/adopted_texts/de
                  clarations/dec-28052003.htm". 
    
   [CMCS02]    Cooper, M., Murray, C., Chester, J., & Schwartzman, A., 
                  Letter to High-Tech Broadband Coalition, August 16, 
                  2002.  URL 
                  "http://www.mediaaccess.org/programs/broadband/chester
                  ltr090302.pdf". 
    
   [CWSB02]    Clark, D., Wroslawski, J., Sollins, K., and Braden, R., 
                  "Tussle in Cyberspace: Defining Tomorrow's Internet", 
                  SIGCOMM 2002.  URL 
                  "http://www.acm.org/sigcomm/sigcomm2002/papers/tussle.
                  html". 
    
   [DOTKIDS]   United States Congress, "Dot Kids Implementation and 
                  Efficiency Act of 2002", November 2002.  URL 
                  "http://www.kids.us/content_policy/kids_efficiency_act
                  .pdf". 
    
   [KB01]      Kalathil, S. & Boas, T., "The Internet and State Control 
                  in Authoritarian Regimes: China, Cuba, and the 
                  Counterrevolution", July 2001.  URL 
                  "http://www.ceip.org/files/pdf/21KalathilBoas.pdf". 
    
 
Morris & Davidson      Expires - December 2003               [Page 18] 
Internet-Draft       Public Policy Considerations            June 2003  
 
   [OECD]      Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development, 
                  "OECD Guidelines on the Protection of Privacy and 
                  Transborder Flows of Personal Data," 1980. URL 
                  "http://www.oecd.org/EN/document/0,,EN-document-0-
                  nodirectorate-no-24-10255-0,00.html". 
    
   [PICS]      World Wide Web Consortium, "Platform for Internet Content 
                  Selection."  URL "http://www.w3.org/PICS/". 
    
   [RFC2026]   Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 
                  3", BCP 9, RFC 2026, October 1996. 
    
   [RFC2119]   Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate 
                  Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997 
    
   [RFC2316]   Bellovin, S., "Report of the IAB Security Architecture 
                  Workshop", RFC 2316, April 1998. 
    
   [RFC2464]   Crawford, M., "Transmission of IPv6 Packets Over Ethernet 
                  Networks", RFC 2464, December 1998. 
    
   [RFC2804]   IAB & IESG, "IETF Policy on Wiretapping", RFC 2804, May 
                  2000. 
    
   [RFC3041]   Narten, T. & Draves, R., "Privacy Extensions for 
                  Stateless Address Autoconfiguration in IPv6", RFC 
                  3041, January 2001. 
    
   [RFC3238]   Floyd, S. & Daigle, L., "IAB Architectural and Policy 
                  Considerations for Open Pluggable Edge Services", RFC 
                  3238, January 2002. 
    
   [RFC3426]   Floyd, S., ed., "General Architectural and Policy 
                  Considerations," RFC 3426, November 2002. 
    
   [W3C WAI]   World Wide Web Consortium, "Web Accessibility 
                  Initiative".  URL "http://www.w3.org/WAI/". 
    
   [W3C WAI-TA]   World Wide Web Consortium, "WAI Technical Activity".  
                  URL "http://www.w3.org/WAI/Technical/Activity.html". 
    
   [ZE02]      Zittrain, J. & Edelman, B., "Documentation of Internet 
                  Filtering in Saudi Arabia," September 2002.  URL 
                  "http://cyber.law.harvard.edu/filtering/saudiarabia/". 
    
    



 
Morris & Davidson      Expires - December 2003               [Page 19] 
Internet-Draft       Public Policy Considerations            June 2003  
 
Acknowledgments 
    
   The authors would like to thank Sally Floyd and the Internet 
   Architecture Board for devising the approach to policy considerations 
   used in [RFC 3426], which this document tries to follow. 
    
    
Authors' Addresses 
    
   John B. Morris, Jr. 
   Center for Democracy & Technology 
   1634 I Street, NW, Suite 1100 
   Washington, D.C. 20006 
   USA 
   Email: jmorris@cdt.org 
    
   Alan B. Davidson 
   Center for Democracy & Technology 
   1634 I Street, NW, Suite 1100 
   Washington, D.C. 20006 
   USA 
   Email: abd@cdt.org 
    
    
    
    
   PLEASE SEND COMMENTS AND SUGGESTIONS TO jmorris@cdt.org 
    





















 
Morris & Davidson      Expires - December 2003               [Page 20] 
