
draft          BCP for the Internet White Pages Service   September 96


	Best Current Practice for the Internet White Pages Service

		     Tue Sep 24 15:29:10 MET DST 1996


			 Harald Tveit Alvestrand
				 UNINETT
		      Harald.T.Alvestrand@uninett.no





				Peter Jurg
				 SURFnet
			  Peter.Jurg@surfnet.nl






    Status of this Memo

    Please send comments to the author.

    The following text is required by the Internet-draft rules:

    This document is an Internet Draft.  Internet Drafts are working
    documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its
    Areas, and its Working Groups. Note that other groups may also
    distribute working documents as Internet Drafts.

    Internet Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
    months. Internet Drafts may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by
    other documents at any time.  It is not appropriate to use
    Internet Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than
    as a "working draft" or "work in progress."

    Please check the I-D abstract listing contained in each Internet
    Draft directory to learn the current status of this or any other
    Internet Draft.

    The file name of this version is draft-ietf-ids-ds-bcp-01.txt





Alvestrand, Jurg           Expires March 97                   [Page 1]

draft          BCP for the Internet White Pages Service   September 96


    1.  Summary and recommendations


    This document makes the following recommendations for
    organizations on the Internet:

     (1)   An organization SHOULD publish public E-mail addresses and
	   other public address information about Internet users
	   within their site.

     (2)   The organization MUST do this in accordance with the laws
	   of the country in which it resides, and SHOULD also follow
	   the recommendations of [1]

     (3)   The preferable way for publishing the information is by
	   using X.500 as its data structure and naming scheme. The
	   organization MAY additionally publish it using additional
	   data structures such as whois++.

     (4)   The organization SHOULD make the published information
	   available to LDAP clients, by supporting an LDAP server for
	   those data.

     (5)   The organization SHOULD NOT attempt to charge for simple
	   access to the data.

    In addition, it makes the following recommendations for various
    and sundry other parties:


     (1)   E-mail vendors SHOULD include LDAP lookup functionality
	   into their products, either as built-in functionality or by
	   providing translation facilities.

     (2)   Internet Service providers SHOULD help smaller
	   organizations follow this recommendation, either by
	   providing services for hosting their data, by helping them
	   find other parties to do so, or by helping them bring their
	   own service on-line.

     (3)   All interested parties SHOULD make sure there exists a
	   single X.500 name space in the world, and that all names in
	   this name space are resolvable.






Alvestrand, Jurg           Expires March 97                   [Page 2]

draft          BCP for the Internet White Pages Service   September 96


    The rest of this document is justification and details for this
    recommendation.


    2.  Introduction

    The Internet is used for information exchange and communication
    between its users. It can only be effective as such if users are
    able to find each others addresses. Therefore the Internet
    benefits from an adequate White Pages Service, i.e., a directory
    service offering (Internet) address information related to people
    and organizations.

    This document describes the way in which the Internet White Pages
    Service (from now on abbreviated as IWPS) is best exploited using
    todays experience, todays protocols, todays products and todays
    procedures.

    Experience [2] has shown that a White Pages Service based on self-
    registration of users or on centralized servers tends to gather
    data in a haphazard fashion, and, moreover, collects data that
    ages rapidly and is not kept up to date.

    The most vital attempts to establish the IWPS are based on models
    with distributed (local) databases each holding a manageable part
    of the IWPS- information. Such a part mostly exists of all
    relevant IWPS- information from within a particular organization
    or from within an Internet service provider and its users. On top
    of the databases there is a directory services protocol that
    connects them and provides user access. Today X.500 is the most
    popular directory services protocol on the Internet, connecting
    the address information of about 1.5 million individuals and 3,000
    organizations. Whois++ is the second popular protocol. X.500 and
    Whois++ may also be used to interconnect other information than
    only IWPS- information, but here we only discuss the IWPS
    features.

    Note: there are other, not interconnected, address databases on
    the Internet that are also very popular for storing address
    information about people. "Ph" is a popular protocol for use with
    a stand-alone database.  There are over 300 registered ph
    databases on the Internet. Inter connection of databases however,
    is highly recommended for an IWPS, since it ensures that data can
    be found. Hence ph as such is not considered to be a good





Alvestrand, Jurg           Expires March 97                   [Page 3]

draft          BCP for the Internet White Pages Service   September 96


    candidate for an IWPS, but future developments may change this
    situation (see section 13).

    Currently X.500 must be recommended as the directory services
    protocol to be used for the IWPS. However, future technology may
    make it possible to use other protocols as well or instead. When
    such technology becomes available and experiments show that they
    work, this document will be updated.

    The sections 3-7 below contain recommendations related to the
    publication of information in the IWPS that are independent of a
    directory services protocol. The sections 8-12 discuss X.500
    specific issues. In section 13 some future developments are
    discussed as they can be foreseen at the time of writing this
    document.



    3.  Who should publish IWPS- information and how?

    IWPS- information is public address information regarding
    individuals and organizations. IWPS- information of an individual
    should be published and maintained by an organization that has a
    direct, durable link with this individual, like in the following
    cases:


    -    The individual is employed by the maintainers organization

    -    The individual is enrolled in the university/school that
	 maintains the data

    -    The individual is a (personal) subscriber of the maintainers
	 Internet service

    The organization that maintains the data does not have to store
    the data in a local database of its own. Though running a local
    database in the X.500 or Whois++ service is not a too difficult
    job, it is recommended that Internet service providers provide
    database facilities for those organizations among its customers
    that only maintain a small part of the IWPS- information or dont
    have enough system management resources. This will encourage such
    organizations to join the IWPS. Collection of IWPS- information
    and keeping it up-to-date should always be in the hands of the





Alvestrand, Jurg           Expires March 97                   [Page 4]

draft          BCP for the Internet White Pages Service   September 96


    organization the information relates to.



    4.  What kind of information should be published?

    The information to be published about an individual should at
    least include:

    -    The individuals name

    -    The individuals e-mail address, in RFC-822 format; if not
	 present, some other contact information is to be included

    -    Some indication of the individuals relationship with the
	 maintainer

    When X.500 is used as directory services protocol the last
    requirement may be fulfilled by using the "organizationalStatus"
    attribute (see [3]) or by adding a special organizational unit to
    the local X.500 name space that reflects the relation (like
    ou=students or ou=employees).

    Additionally some other public address information about
    individuals may be included in the IWPS:

    -    The individuals phone number

    -    The individuals fax number

    -    The individuals postal address

    -    The URL of the individuals home page on the Web

    In the near future it will be a good idea to also store public key
    information.  Organizations should publish the following
    information about themselves in the IWPS:

    -    The URL of the organizations home page on the Web

    -    Postal address

	 Fax numbers






Alvestrand, Jurg           Expires March 97                   [Page 5]

draft          BCP for the Internet White Pages Service   September 96


	 Internet domain

	 Various names and abbreviations for the organization that
	 people can be expected to search for, such as the English
	 name, and often the 1st component of the domain name.


    Organizations may also publish phone numbers and a presentation of
    themselves.


    5.  Data management

    Data management, i.e.,  Collecting the IWPS- information and
    keeping it up-to-date is a task that must not be underestimated
    for larger organizations. The following recommendations can be
    made with respect to these issues:


    -    An organization should achieve an executive level commitment
	 to start a local database with IWPS- information. This will
	 make it much easier to get cooperation from people within the
	 organization that are to be involved in setting up a
	 Directory Service.

    -    An organization should decide on the kind of information the
	 database should contain and how it should be structured. It
	 should follow the Internet recommendations for structuring
	 the information. Besides the criteria in the previous
	 section, [3] and [4] should be followed if X.500 is used as
	 directory services protocol.

    -    An organization should define criteria for the quality of the
	 data in the Directory, like timeliness, update frequency,
	 correctness, etc. These criteria should be communicated
	 throughout the organization and contributing entities should
	 commit to the defined quality levels.

    -    Existing databases within an organization should be used to
	 retrieve IWPS- and local information, to the greatest extent
	 possible. An organization should involve the people who
	 maintain those databases and make sure to get a formal
	 written commitment from them to use their data source. The
	 organization should rely on these people, since they have the





Alvestrand, Jurg           Expires March 97                   [Page 6]

draft          BCP for the Internet White Pages Service   September 96


	 experience in management and control of local, available
	 data.

    -    The best motivation for an organization to join the IWPS is
	 that they will have a local database for local purposes at
	 the same time. A local database may contain more, not
	 necessarily public, information and serve more purposes than
	 is requested for in the IWPS. In connecting to the IWPS an
	 organization must "filter out" the extra local information
	 and services that is not meant for the public IWPS using the
	 directory services protocol.

    6.  Legal issues

    Most countries have privacy laws regarding the publication of
    information about people. They range from the relaxed US laws to
    the UK requirement that information should be accurate to the
    Norwegian law that says that you cant publish unless you get
    specific permission from the individual. Every maintainer of IWPS-
    information should publish data according to the national law of
    the country in which the local database which holds the
    information resides.

    Some of these are documented in [5] and [1].

    A maintainer of IWPS- information should also follow some common
    rules, even when they are not legally imposed:

    -    Publish only correct information.

    -    Give people the possibility to view the information stored
	 about themselves and the right to withhold information or
	 have information altered.

    -    Dont publish information "just because its there". Publish
	 whats needed and whats thought useful, and no more.

    Given the number of data management and legal issues that are
    involved in publishing IWPS- information, good consulting services
    are vital to have smaller companies quickly and efficiently join
    the IWPS. Internet service providers are encouraged to provide
    such services.







Alvestrand, Jurg           Expires March 97                   [Page 7]

draft          BCP for the Internet White Pages Service   September 96


    7.  Do not charge for lookups

    A very common question with respect to the IWPS is how it has to
    be financed. In the current IWPS it believed that due to todays
    technological constraints, charging users is harmful to the
    viability of the service.  There are several arguments for this
    belief:

    -    Micropayment technology is not available at the moment.

    -    Subscription services require either that the customer sign
	 up to multiple search services or that the services are
	 linked "behind the scene" with all kinds of bilateral
	 agreements; both structures have unacceptably high overhead
	 costs and increase the entry cost to the service.

    -    The current directory services protocols do not support
	 authentication to a level that would seem appropriate for a
	 service that charges.

    Therefore it is strongly recommended that all lookups by users in
    the IWPS are for free.  This, of course, does not limit in any way
    the ability to use the same IWPS dataset to support other services
    where charging may be appropriate.



    8.  Use X.500

    The IWPS based on the X.500 protocol has a relatively wide
    deployment. The current service contains about 3,5 million entries
    of individuals and 3,000 of organizations. It is coordinated by
    Dante, an Internet service provider in the UK, and known as
    "Nameflow/Paradise".

    Though X.500 is sometimes criticized by the fact that its
    functionality is restricted by the hierarchical naming structure
    it imposes, it provides a reasonably good functionality as has
    been shown in several pilots by organizations [5], [2], [6], [7]
    that are now running a production X.500 IWPS. User interfaces also
    determine the functionality the X.500 IWPS offers. Usually they
    offer lookups in the IWPS based on the following user input:







Alvestrand, Jurg           Expires March 97                   [Page 8]

draft          BCP for the Internet White Pages Service   September 96


    -    The name of a person

    -    The name of an organization this person can be related to

    -    The name of a country

    As a result they will provide the publicly available information
    about the person in question. Most user interfaces offer the
    possibility to list organizations in a country and users in an
    organization to help users to make their choice for the input. It
    may also be possible to use part of the names as input or
    approximate names.

    Specific user interfaces can provide lookups based on other input,
    like e-mail addresses of people or postal addresses of
    organizations. Such possibilities may however violate privacy
    laws.

    Organizations are strongly encouraged to use the X.500 protocol
    for joining the IWPS. The current service is based on the X.500
    1988 standard [8] and some Internet-specific additions to the
    protocol that connects the local databases [10] and to the access
    protocol [9]. Organizations should use X.500 software based on
    these specifications and additionally supports [11] for the
    transportation of OSI protocols over the Internet.

    For recommendations on which attributes to use in X.500 and how to
    use them (either for public IWPS- information or additional local
    information the reader is referred to [3] and [4]. For specific
    non-public local purposes also new attributes (and object classes)
    may be defined.  Generally it should be recommended to use as much
    as possible the multi-valuedness of attributes in X.500 as this
    will improve the searching functionality of the service
    considerably. For example, the organizationalName attribute which
    holds the name of an organization or the commonName attribute
    which holds the name of a person should contain all known aliases
    for the organization or person. In particular it is important to
    add "readable" variants of all attributes that people are expected
    to search for, if they contain national characters.

    Another recommendation that can be made is that replication of
    data [10] between local databases is used in order to improve the
    performance of the service. Since replicating all entries of a
    part of the IWPS from one local database in another may violate





Alvestrand, Jurg           Expires March 97                   [Page 9]

draft          BCP for the Internet White Pages Service   September 96


    local privacy laws, it is recommended to restrict replication to
    country and organizational entries and knowledge references (which
    tell where to go for which part of the IWPS). Of course privacy
    laws are not violated when the replicating database is managed by
    the same organization as the one that masters the information. So
    local replication between two databases within the same
    organization is highly recommended.

    In general replication within one country will usually be less a
    legal problem than across country borders.

    Recommendations fo the operation of a database in the in X.500
    infrastructure can be found in [12].

    X.500 is not recommended to be used for:


    -    A Yellow Pages service with a large scope. See [5].

    -    Searching outside the limited patterns listed here, in
	 particular searching for a person without knowing which
	 organization he might be affiliated to.

    -    Publishing information in other character sets than ASCII,
	 some of the Latin-based European scripts and Japanese (the
	 T.61 character sets). ISO is revising X.500, but products
	 that support the revision arent available yet.

    9.  Use the global name space

    Some people, for instance when using Novell 4 servers, have
    decided that they will use X.500 or X.500-like services as an
    internal naming mechanism, without coordinating with an outside
    source.

    This suffers from many of the same problems as private IP
    addresses, only more so: your data may need significant
    restructuring once you decide to expose them to the outer world.

    A globally accessible X.500 service requires a globally connected
    X.500 name space. See [3] and [4] for recommendations on how
    create a local part of the global name space.

    Though the standard is not very clear about this and the most





Alvestrand, Jurg           Expires March 97                  [Page 10]

draft          BCP for the Internet White Pages Service   September 96


    recent version (93) appears not to support it, in practice the
    X.500 name space is only manageable if there is a single root
    context operated under a cooperative agreement. However, one can
    be sure that there will be turf battles over its control.

    If those turf battles arent decided outside the actual running
    service, the effect on the service quality will be ruinous.

    This document appeals to all players in the field to let existing
    practice alone until a better system is agreed and is ready to go
    into place; at the moment, the root context of the day is operated
    by the DANTE NameFlow project.

    More information on DANTE NameFlow is found at the URL

    http://www.dante.net/nameflow.html



    10.  Use LDAP

    At the moment, LDAP as documented in [9] is the protocol that
    offers the most X.500 functionality in places where it is not
    feasible to implement the full OSI stack.

    It is implemented on a lot of platforms, including several PC-type
    platforms, and is popular in a multitude of commercial offerings.

    A concerted effort to make LDAP available is the publication
    method that gives the widest access to the data.

    In addition, DSAs must implement the necessary linkages to make
    sure they are properly integrated into the naming/referral tree;
    in most cases, this will mean that they should implement the X.500
    DSP protocol at least.

    (The question of whether one gateways LDAP to DAP or DAP to LDAP
    is irrelevant in this context)











Alvestrand, Jurg           Expires March 97                  [Page 11]

draft          BCP for the Internet White Pages Service   September 96


    11.  Make services available

    The technical investment in running an X.500 service is not
    enormous, see for example [5].



    12.  Future developments

    Today [September 1996] there are several enhancements to be
    expected with respect to IWPS technology.

    The most important one to be mentioned here is the creation of a
    "Common Indexing Protocol" that must enable the integration of
    X.500, Whois++ and protocols that use stand-alone databases. Such
    a protocol would not only enable integration but would offer at
    the same time the possibility to explore yellow pages services and
    enhanced searches, even if used for X.500 only.

    Once these developments reach stability, they may be referenced by
    later versions of this BCP document.


    13.  Security considerations

    The security implications of having a directory are many.


    -    People will have a standard way to access the information
	 published.

    -    People will be able to gather parts of the information for
	 purposes you never intended (like publishing directories,
	 building search engines, headhunting or making harassing
	 phone calls).

    -    People will attempt to access more of the information than
	 you intended to publish, by trying to break security
	 functions or eavesdropping on conversations other users have
	 with the Directory.

    -    If modification over the Net is possible, people will attempt
	 to change your information in unintended ways. Sometimes
	 users will change data by mistake, too; not all change is





Alvestrand, Jurg           Expires March 97                  [Page 12]

draft          BCP for the Internet White Pages Service   September 96


	 malicious.

    The first defense for directory security is to limit your
    publication to stuff you can live with having publicly available,
    whatever happens.

    The second defense involves trying to impose access control. LDAP
    supports a few access control methods, including the use of
    cleartext passwords. Cleartext passwords are not a secure
    mechanism in the presence of eavesdroppers; this document
    encourages use of stronger mechanisms if modification is made
    available over the open Internet.  Otherwise, modification rights
    should be restricted to the local intranet.

    The third defense involves trying to prevent "inappropriate"
    access to the directory such as limiting the number of returned
    search items or refuse list operations where they are not useful
    to prevent "trolling". Such defenses are rarely completely
    successful, because it is very hard to set limits that
    differentiate between an innocent user doing wasteful searching
    and a malicous data troller doing carefully limited searches.

    Future enhancements may include using encrypted sessions, public
    key logins and signed requests; such mechanisms are not generally
    available today.


    14.  References


    [1]  Directory Services and Privacy Issues, E. Jeunik and E.
	 Huizer.  Proceedings of Joint European Networking Conference
	 1993, Trondheim

    [2]  Building an X.500 Directory Service in the US, B. Jennings,
	 RFC1943

    [3]  Building Naming and Structuring Guidelines for X.500
	 Directory Pilots, P.  Barker, S. Kille, T. Lenggenhager,
	 RFC1617

    [4]  The COSINE and Internet X.500 Schema. P. Barker & S. Kille,
	 RFC1274






Alvestrand, Jurg           Expires March 97                  [Page 13]

draft          BCP for the Internet White Pages Service   September 96


    [5]  Introducing a Directory Service, SURFnet report 1995

    [6]  Paradise International Reports, University College London,
	 April 1991 - April 1994

    [7]  Naming Guidelines for the AARNet X.500 Directory Service,
	 Michaelson and Prior, RFC 1562

    [8]  CCITT Blue Book, Volume VIII - Fascicle VIII.8, November 1988

    [9]  Lightweight Directory Access Protocol, W. Yeong, T. Howes, S.
	 Kille, RFC1777

    [10] Replication and Distributed Operations extensions to provide
	 an Internet Directory using X.500, S. Kille, RFC1276

    [11] ISO transport services on top of the TCP: Version: 3, M.
	 Rose, D. Cass, RFC1006

    [12] Recommendations for an X.500 Production Directory Service, R.
	 Wright et al., RFC1803



    15.  Authors address

    Harald Tveit Alvestrand
    UNINETT
    P.O.Box 6883 Elgeseter
    N-7002 TRONDHEIM
    NORWAY

    +47 73 59 70 94
    Harald.T.Alvestrand@uninett.no

    Peter Jurg
    SURFnet
    P.O.Box 19035
    NL-3501 DA UTRECHT
    THE NETHERLANDS

    +31 30 2305305
    Peter.Jurg@surfnet.nl






Alvestrand, Jurg           Expires March 97                  [Page 14]

draft          BCP for the Internet White Pages Service   September 96



















































Alvestrand, Jurg           Expires March 97                  [Page 15]

