


Internet Research Task Force (IRTF)                     Bosubabu.Sambana 
Internet-Draft                                            
Intended status: Information                             16 October 2021
Expires: 18 April 2022

                  
               Internet Protocol version 16 (IPv16)
          draft-sambana-irtf-internet-protocol-sixteen-00



Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.
 
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF). Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts. The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.
   
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
   at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress".
  
   This Internet-Draft will expire on 18 April 2022.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2021 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors. All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal 
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with
   respect to this document. 
  
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your 
   rights and restrictions with respect to this document. 
   Code Components extracted from this document must include 
   Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of the 
   Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as 
   described in the Simplified BSD License.




   
Sambana             Expires 18 April 2022                       [Page 1]

Internet-Draft      Internet Protocol version 16(IPv16)     October 2021

   

Abstract
 
   The present invention Internet Protocol Version 16 (IPv16) 
   service for allowing relates to the creation of an extended new 
   version of Internet Protocol version 16 and its supports to current 
   technologies and future technologies too without any interrupt. 
   I propose New Internet Protocol version for technology upgradation 
   and limitless end user connectivity and create new classes F and 
   Class H, and Class I for extended to present classes and its 
   performed Public, private, protected environment access with UWW 
   for at the User Level, it is performed to operate both I and H 
   Classes for Unlimited and Infinity High Security with multicast and 
   Virtual IP address each block connectivity for an universal users
   and interstellar and expand universe users allocations. 
   
   IP Address is run single IP address inherited desired 
   Sub-IP address and extended upto X power n with Virtual IP and 
   IP subsequences upto 2 power of x-n,proposed new series of 
   1024.1024.1024.1024 and VirtualIP works similar current way,and
   introduce Universal Wide Web (UWW) also Communicate Interstellar
   objects and Galaxies using Radio Signals are integrated with the 
   proposed architecture, and Virtual IP - IPv16 to expand the internal
   space communications very quickly with secured allocated channels. 
   Secured allocated individualrecognized block channels are connected
   with Internet and resolve tointerrupt signals and message transfer
   delayed problem, transfer data with secure way along with working
   mechanism the same existing technologies and IPv16 will adapt
   identifiedand undefined problems of IPv6 computer technology
   and network transmission problems to resolve the gaps between
   IPv6 to IPv16 and supports upcoming future technologies
   and versions too.
  












Sambana                  Expires 18 April 2022                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft      Internet Protocol version 16(IPv16)     October 2021




Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     1.1.  Field of Invention . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6 
     1.2.  Internet Protocol  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     1.3.  Internet Protocol version 16 (IPv16) . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   2.  Background of IPv16 Invention  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     2.1.  Internet Protocol Architeture. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     2.2.  Internet Protocol version 4 (IPv4) . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     2.3.  Internet Protocol version 6 (IPv6) . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     2.4.  Limitation of IPv4 . . . . . . .  .. . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     2.5.  Advantages of IPv16 . . . . . . .  . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     2.6.  The need for IPv16 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   3.  Deatailed Description of IPv16 Invention . . . . . . . . . . . 16
     3.1.  Internet Protocol Architeture. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
     3.2.  Internet Protocol version 4 (IPv4) . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
     3.3.  Internet Protocol version 6 (IPv6) . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
     3.4.  Limitation of IPv4 . . . . . . .  .. . . . . . . . . . . . 23
     3.5.  Advantages of IPv16 . . . . . . .  . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
     	3.5.1.  IPv16 Datagram Format . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
        3.5.2.  IPv16 Classifications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
        3.5.3.  IPv16 Architecture  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
     3.6.  Technical Problem  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
     3.7.  Solution Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
     3.8.  Advantageous Effects of Invention  . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
     3.9.  Industrial Applicability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
   4.  Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
   5.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
   6.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
   7.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
     7.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
     7.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
   Authors  Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32



   


Sambana                   Expires 18 April 2022                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft       Internet Protocol version 16(IPv16)    October 2021




# 1. Introduction

   The Internet is the global system of interconnected computer 
   networks that uses the Internet protocol suite (TCP/IP) to 
   communicate between networks and devices. It is a network of 
   networks that consists of private, public, academic, business, 
   and government networks of local to global scope, linked by a broad 
   array of electronic, wireless, and optical networking technologies. 
  
   The Internet carries a vast range of information resources and 
   services, such as the inter linked hypertext documents and 
   applications of the World Wide Web (WWW), electronic mail, 
   telephony, and file sharing.

   The word internet was used as early as 1849, meaning 
   Interconnected or Interwoven. The word Internet was used in 
   1974 as the shorthand form of Internetwork.

   The Internet is in reality a simple facilitating channel that 
   allows many users to interconnect with many services. 
   The Internet has been used initially as a means to send an email 
   or to communicate and transfer files. In the last few years, 
   it has become what is best termed an electronic marketing and 
   distribution channel.
  
   The Internet protocol suite resulted from research and development 
   conducted by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) 
   in the late 1960s. After initiating the pioneering ARPANET in 1969, 
   DARPA started work on several other data transmission technologies. 

   In 1972, Robert E. Kahn joined the DARPA Information Processing 
   Technology Office, where he worked on both satellite packet 
   networks and ground based radio packet networks and recognized the 
   value of being able to communicate across both. 
  
   In the spring of 1973, Vinton Cerf, who helped develop the 
   existing ARPANET Network Control Program (NCP) protocol, joined 
   Kahn to work on open architecture interconnection models to design 
   the next protocol generation for the ARPANET.
 
   


Sambana                    Expires 18 April 2022                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft       Internet Protocol version 16(IPv16)    October 2021




   In 1975, a two network IP communications test was performed 
   between Stanford and University College London. In November 1977, 
   a three network IP test was conducted between sites in the US,
   the UK, and Norway. Several other IP prototypes were developed 
   at multiple research centers between 1978 and 1983. Before the 
   January 1, 1983 Flag Day, the Internet used NCP instead of TCP 
   as the transport layer protocol.

   In 1991,the IETF decided that the current version of IP,called IPv4, 
   had outlived its design. The new version of IP, called either IPng 
   (Next Generation) or IPv6 (version 6), was the result of a long and 
   tumultuous process that came to a head in 1994 when the IETF gave a 
   clear direction for IPv6. 
   
   IPv6 is designed to solve the problems of IPv4.It does so by 
   creating a new version of the protocol which serves the function of 
   IPv4 but without t h e same limitations of IPv4. 
  
   IPv6 is not different from IPv4 is what you have learned in IPv4 
   will be valuable when you deploy IPv6. 

   The differences between IPv6 and IPv4 are in five major areas 
   are addressing and routing, security, network address 
   translation, administrative workload, and support for mobile
   devices. IPv6 also includes an important feature, a set of 
   possible migration and transition plans from IPv4. Since 1994, 
   over 30 IPv6 RFCs have been published. 

   Changing IP means changing dozens of Internet protocols and 
   conventions, ranging from how IP addresses are stored in DNS 
   (domain name system) and applications, to how datagrams are 
   sent and routed over Ethernet, PPP, Token Ring, FDDI, and every 
   other medium, to how programmers call network functions. 

   The IETF, though, is not so insane as to assume that everyone 
   is going to change everything overnight.So, there are also 
   standards and protocols, and procedures for the coexistence of 
   IPv4 and IPv6,tunnelling IPv6 in IPv4, tunneling IPv4 in IPv6, 
   running IPv4 and IPv6 on the same system (dual stack) for an 
   extended period, and mixing and matching the two protocols in 
   a variety of environments.






Sambana                     Expires 18 April 2022               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft       Internet Protocol version 16(IPv16)    October 2021


   

## 1.1. Field of Invention

   The present invention Internet Protocol Version 16 (IPv16) 
   service for allowing relates to the creation of an extended new 
   version of Internet Protocol version 16 and its supports to 
   current technologies and future technologies too without 
   any interrupt. 

   I propose New Internet Protocol version for technology upgradation 
   and limitless end user connectivity and create new classes F and 
   Class H,and Class I for extended to present classes and its 
   performed Public, private,protected environment access with UWW for 
   at the User Level, it is performed to operate both I and H Classes 
   for Unlimited and Infinity High Security with multicast and 
   Virtual IP address each block connectivity for Universal users and 
   Interstellar and Expand Universe users allocations. 

   The present invention mainly focused on IPv16 will create a new 
   financial market of the entire globe due to the upgrade of new 
   technologies and impact of social needs to will come new 
   technology companies and its generate financial markets and improve 
   the global economy.The IPv16 supports and gives Intelligent adopted 
   platforms because the entire IPv16 is working based on Artificial 
   Intelligence and Blockchain Technology.

## 1.2. Internet Protocol

   the Internet Protocol provides for the carriage of datagrams from 
   a source host to destination hosts, possibly passing through one 
   or more routers and networks in the process.A datagram is a finite
   length packet of bits containing a header and a payload.Both hosts 
   and routers on the Internet are involved in processing IP headers. 
   The hosts must create them and the routers must examine them to 
   make routing decisions,and modify them as the IP packets make their 
   way from the source to the destination.TCP is a protocol designed 
   to provide its clients at a higher layer of protocol a reliable, 
   sequenced, flow-controlled end to end octet-stream.

   The essence of Internet facilitation and accessibility is the set 
   of protocols available to the community to allow access by wide 
   variety of hosts in a complex and fully distributed fashion. 
   The protocols are at the heart of Internet success. 

   


  
Sambana                      Expires 18 April 2022              [Page 6]

Internet-Draft       Internet Protocol version 16(IPv16)    October 2021



   They are the software and system agreements that allow disparate 
   machines and software to talk across equally disparate networks.The 
   current protocols focus on data transactions, with some innovation 
   allowing images and limited multimedia, namely voice and video. 

   The future challenge will be the development of new and innovative 
   protocols to allow both low end user access to growing while at the 
   same time enriching the capability of the information transferred. 
   The key underlying protocol structure that makes the Internet 
   function is the Transport Control Protocol or Internet Protocol,
   TCP/IP protocol suite. 

   This protocol allows for the easy and ready flow of data from one 
   user to another by agreements at various levels of the network to 
   handle, process, manage and control the underlying data packets. 
   Protocols such as TCP by IP will be the heart of the evolution of 
   the Internet.We shall focus later on such protocols as applied to 
   multimedia and new access methods. One can best understand the 
   protocol evolution by looking more closely at TCP/IP.

   The first part of the address identifies the network (NET ID) on 
   which the host resides, the second part identifies the host(Host ID) 
   on the given network.At the beginning of the Internet,five address 
   classes had been defined to identify the border between Net ID and 
   host-ID and a fixed way.The idea of classes helps a router to decide
   how many bits of a given IP address identify a network number and 
   how many bits are therefore available for host numbering in the 
   classes.

   Classes A, B, and C had been created to provide different network 
   addresses ranges.Additionally, Class D is the range of IP multicast 
   addresses, that is they have no topological structure. Finally, 
   class E had been reserved for research experiments and is not used 
   on the Internet. 

   The usage of classes has a long tradition on the Internet and was 
   the main reason for IP address depletion which first was overcome 
   by classless routing and NAT and finally by IPv6. The first byte 
   (or octet) of an IP address identifies the classes, For example, 
   the address 205.176.253.5 is a class C address are identied.

   

   

Sambana                   Expires 18 April 2022                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft       Internet Protocol version 16(IPv16)    October 2021



   The classful method of identifying network IDs based on the given 
   IP address class is inflexible and leads to address space depletion.
   Class C networks are too small for most organizations but class A 
   and B are too large. The waste of the IP address space happened by 
   giving class B or class A address space to customers which do not 
   need the entire space. LANs were getting bigger and bigger and 
   logical separation of an organizations network.
   
## 1.3. Internet Protocol version 16(IPv16)

   The significant objective is to identify the key access network 
   interface requirements and access configurations to provide a secure 
   encrypted effective gateway from telecommunications access multiple 
   networks and telecommunications access components to IP networks 
   including both wired and wireless accesses along with Virtual IP 
   connectivity access.

   In Near Future IPv16 over IPv6 and IPv4 tunnels are widely used to 
   connect large regional IPv16  networks, because it is relatively 
   hard to construct an International or cross continent native 
   relationship recommendation of IPv16 network. This makes the 
   characteristics of IPV16 of IPV16 over IPv4, IPv6 security tunnels 
   very vital to performance of the global IPv16 Internet operations.

























Sambana                   Expires 18 April 2022                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft       Internet Protocol version 16(IPv16)    October 2021




# 2. Background of IPv16 Invention 

   The Internet is the global system of interconnected computer 
   networksthat uses the Internet protocol suite (TCP/IP) to 
   communicate between networks and devices.It is a network of networks
   that consists of private, public, academic, business, and government 
   networks of local to global scope, linked by a broad array of 
   electronic, wireless, and optical networking technologies along 
   with proposed virtual networks. 

   The proposed future Internet architecture carries a gigantic range 
   of data or information resources and services, such as the inter 
   linked hypertext documents and applications of the World Wide Web 
   (WWW), electronic mail, telephony, and file sharing along with data
   exchange, save data storage into online(Cloud), Interact with 
   security matters and Artificial Intelligence applications in 
   everywhere for mankind.

   The Internet is in reality a simple simplifying communication 
   channel that allows unlimited users to interconnect with
   countless services.    

   The Internet has been used initially as a means to send an email
   or to communicate and transfer files. In the last few years, it 
   has become what is best termed an electronic marketing and 
   distribution channel and the strongest weapon in every field 
   becausethe Internet integrates with daily life. currently, everyone 
   completely,literally depends on the online environment due to every 
   field incorporate for effective outcomes with very few periods 
   including operations.Future Internet architecture also supports 
   existing architecture along with upcoming technologies.

   The Internet Protocol IPv16 suite resulted from IPv6 designed 
   to solve the problems of IPv4 and IPv6. It does so by creating
   a new version of the protocol which serves the function of IPv4 
   but without the same limitations of IPv4.The IPv6 is not different 
   from IPv4 is what you have learned in IPv4 will be valuable when 
   you deploy IPv6. 

   The major differences between IPv6 and IPv4 are in the 
   significant areas are addressing and routing, security, 
   network address translation, administrative workload, and support
   for mobile devices and other PDAs.
  
   IPv6 also includes an important feature such as a set of possible 
   migration and transition plans from IPv4. Since 1994, morethan 30 
   IPv6 RFCs have been published. 

   
 


Sambana                     Expires 18 April 2022               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft       Internet Protocol version 16(IPv16)    October 2021



   Changing IP means changing the huge number of Internet protocols 
   and conventions, ranging from how IP addresses are stored in DNS
   (Domain Name System) and applications, to how datagrams are sent 
   and routed over Ethernet, PPP, Token Ring, FDDI, and every other
   medium, to how programmers call network functions.

## 2.1.  Internet Protocol Architecture

   The IP security architecture (IPsec) provides cryptographic
   protection for IP datagrams in IPv4 and IPv6 network packets. 
   This protection can include confidentiality, strong integrity 
   of the data, data authentication, and partial sequence integrity. 
   Partial sequence integrity is also known as replay protection.

   Network architecture is understood as the set of layers and layer 
   protocols that constitute the communication system. Network 
   architectures offer different ways of solving a critical issue when 
   it comes to building a networks those are transfer data quickly and 
   efficiently by the devices that make up the network.

   The Internet protocol suite provides end to end data communication 
   specifying how data should be packetized, addressed, transmitted, 
   routed, and received. This functionality is organized into four 
   abstraction layers, which classify all related protocols according 
   to each protocols scope of networking. 

   From lowest to highest, the layers are the link layer, containing 
   communication methods for data that remains within a single network 
   segment link, the internet layer, providing internetworking between 
   independent networks are the transport layer, handling host to host 
   communication and the application layer, providing process to 
   process data exchange for applications.

   The characteristic architecture of the Internet Protocol Suite is 
   its broad division into operating scopes for the protocols that 
   constitute its core functionality.The defining specification of the 
   suite is RFC 1122,which broadly outlines four abstraction layers. 

   These have stood the test of time, as the IETF has never modified 
   this structure. As such a model of networking, the Internet Protocol 
   Suite predates the OSI model, a more comprehensive reference 
   framework for general networking systems.





Sambana                    Expires 18 April 2022               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft       Internet Protocol version 16(IPv16)    October 2021


   
## 2.2. Internet Protocol version 4 (IPv4)
   
   Internet Protocol version 4 (IPv4) is the fourth version of the 
   Internet Protocol (IP) and it is the first version of the 
   protocol to be widely deployed. Together with IPv6, it is at the
   core of standards based internetworking methods of the Internet.
   IPv4 is still by far the most widely deployed Internet Layer 
   protocol. It uses 32 bit addressing and allows for 4,294,967,296 
   unique addresses. 

   Even though the name seems to imply that it's the fourth 
   generation of the key Internet Protocol, version 4 of IP was the 
   first that was widely used in modern TCP/IP. 

   IPv4, as it is sometimes called to differentiate it from the 
   newer IPv6, is the Internet Protocol version in use on the Internet
   today, and implementation of the protocol is running on hundreds 
   of millions of computers. 

   It provides the basic datagram delivery capabilities upon which all 
   of TCP/IP functions and it has proven its quality in use over more
   than two decades.

   The fifth major goal of IPv6 is VPNs, virtual private networks.
   The new IPSec security protocols, Encapsulating Security Protocol
   and Authentication header are addons to IPv4. IPv6 builds in and
   requires these protocols, which will mean that secure networks will
   be easier to build and deploy in an IPv6 world. 

   The user wants to create unlimited IP addresses for their 
   requirements,like 1024.1024.1024.1024 - ( 1 to 2 power x - n ).   

   If networks are not available in the remote area, but communications 
   are run without any delay. The proposed Virtual IP a node connected 
   and verify surrounding any network is available, then message 
   transformation with a quantum encrypted secure channel.

   Unfortunately,the device was lost due to various reasons, at the 
   same time IP address was also not used.These kinds of problems are 
   resolved via IPv16 and millions of IP addresses to return to life.   

   I have one IP address connected with a device. upcoming days, 
   creating a virtual environment to IP address, and the retrieval of 
   entire data from their online connectivity.



 
  Sambana                  Expires 18 April 2022               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft       Internet Protocol version 16(IPv16)    October 2021




   The same mechanism is also work to Deep Space Network Communications 
   for Interstellar galaxy Space communications along with Earth 
   communications too.

## 2.3. Internet Protocol version 6 (IPv6)

   Internet Protocol version 6 (IPv6) is a version of the Internet 
   Protocol (IP) intended to succeed IPv4, which is the protocol 
   currently used to direct almost all Internet traffic. IPv6 stands 
   for Internet Protocol version 6 also known as IPng 
   (IP next generation) is the second version of the Internet 
   Protocol to be used generally across the virtual world. 

   The first version was IPv4. IPng was designed to take an 
   evolutionary step from IPv4. It was not a design goal to take a 
   radical step away from IPv4. Functions that work in IPv4 were 
   kept in IPng. 

   Functions that do not work were removed. The Internet operates by 
   transferring data between hosts in packets that are routed across 
   networks as specified by routing protocols. These packets require 
   an addressing scheme, such as IPv4 or IPv6, to specify their 
   source and destination addresses. Each host, computer, or another 
   device on the Internet requires an IP address to communicate. 
   
   The growth of the Internet has created a need for more addresses 
   than are possible with IPv4. Like IPv4, IPv6 is an internet-layer
   protocol for packet-switched internetworking and provides 
   end-to-end datagram transmission across multiple IP networks.

   While IPv4 allows 32 bits for an IP address and therefore has 
   232(4294967296) possible addresses, IPv6 uses 128-bit addresses, 
   for an address space of 2128 addresses. 

   This expansion allows for many more devices and users on the 
   internet as well as extra flexibility in allocating addresses and 
   efficiency for routing traffic.It also eliminates the primary need 
   for network address translation,which gained widespread deployment 
   as an effort to alleviate IPv4 address exhaustion.
		  
## 2.4. Limitations of IPv4

   Since the 1980 it has been apparent that the number of available 
   IPv4 addresses is being exhausted at a rate that was not initially 
   anticipated in the design of the network. This was the driving 
   factor for the introduction of class full networks, for the 
   creation of CIDR addressing. 

   But despite these measures, the IPV4 addresses are being consumed 
   at an alarming rate and it is estimated that 2010 would be the last 
   year for IPV4, some sources say they may last until 2012. 

   

   
   
Sambana                   Expires 18 April 2022                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft       Internet Protocol version 16(IPv16)    October 2021

   

   The primary reason for IPV4 exhaustion is huge growth in the number 
   of internet users, mobile devices using an Internet connection, and 
   always on devices such as ADSL modems and cable modems. This brings
   us to the development and adoption of IPV6 as an alternate solution.
 
## 2.5. Advantages of Ipv16

   With such a huge address space, ISPs will have sufficient IP 
   addresses to allocate enough addresses to every customer so that 
   every IP device has a truly unique address whether it is behind a 
   firewall or not.Network Address Translation has become a very common
   technique to deal with the shortage of IP addresses. Unfortunately, 
   NAT does not work very well for many Internet applications, ranging 
   from old dependable, such as NFS and DNS, to newer applications such 
   as group conferencing. 

   NAT has also impeded business to business direct network 
   connections, requiring baroque and elaborate address translators 
   to make everything work reliably, scaling poorly, and offering a 
   highly vulnerable single point of failure.

   One of the goals of IPv6 address space expansion is to make NAT 
   unnecessary, improving total connectivity, reliability, and 
   flexibility.IPv6 will reestablish transparency and end to end
   traffic across the Internet. The new IPv6 addresses are large and
   cumbersome to deal with,so IPv6 reduces the number of people who 
   have to read and write them. 

   A second major goal of IPv6 is to reduce the total time which people 
   have to spend configuring and managing systems. An IPv6 system can 
   participate in stateless autoconfiguration, where it creates a 
   guaranteed-unique IP address by combining its LAN MAC address with
   a prefix provided by the network router DHCP is not needed, of 
   course, DHCP is still useful for other parameters, such as DNS 
   servers, and is supported as DHCPv6 where needed. 

   IPv6 also offers a middle ground between the two extremes with 
   protocols such as SLP (Service Location Protocol), which may make 
   the lives of network managers easier. High bandwidth multimedia and 
   fault tolerance applications are the focus of the fourth major 
   goal of IPv6. 

 
  


Sambana                   Expires 18 April 2022                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft       Internet Protocol version 16(IPv16)    October 2021



   Multimedia applications can take advantage of multicast, the 
   transmission of a single datagram to multiple receivers. Although 
   IPv4 has some multicast capabilities, these are optional, and not 
   every router and host supports them. With IPv6, multicast
   is a requirement. 
 
   IPv6 also defines a new kind of service, called anycast. Like 
   multicast,anycast has groups of nodes that send and receive 
   packets.But when a packet is sent to an anycast group in IPv6,
   it is only delivered to one of the members of the group. 

   This new capability is especially appropriate in a fault 
   tolerant environment,web servers and DNS servers could all 
   benefit from IPv6 anycast technology. Another aspect of VPNs 
   built into IPv6 is Quality of Service. IPv6 supports the same QoS 
   features as IPv4, including the DiffServ indication, as well as a 
   new 20-bit traffic flow field. Although the use of this part of 
   IPv6 is not defined,it is provided as a solid base to build 
   QoS protocols. 

   Even Network failure or any other issues have occurred self-esteem 
   duplicate acknowledgment sent to sender and at the same time 
   receiver also receive the same information for end to end 
   connectivity, in the way Intelligent self resolve mechanism to 
   detects when the queue is processing and predict entire processing 
   queue operations and guided supervised learning techniques and 
   identified targeted node connectivitythrough Unsupervised Learning 
   techniques to resolve multiple connectivities at the same time. 

   High investments in new IPv4 and IPv6 setups, fixes, or complex 
   configurations for IPv4 and IPv6 (especially NATs and internal 
   counters) should be avoided,if possible because they are 
   investments in a technology that will slowly be phased 3 out. 

   When you reach the point where this becomes necessary,evaluate IPv16. 
   Whatever you invest in IPv16 is an investment in future technology. 
   
  

  

Sambana                    Expires 18 April 2022               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft       Internet Protocol version 16(IPv16)    October 2021



   Here the list of indicators that it may be time for you to consider 
   or integrate IPv6 are

   o  Your IPv4 network or NAT implementation needs to be fixed or 
      extended.

   o  You are running out of address space.

   o  You want to prepare your network for applications that are based 
      on advanced features of IPv4 and IPv6.

   o  You need end-to-end security for a large number of users and you 
      do not have the address,or you struggle with a NAT implementation.

   o  Your hardware or applications reach the end of their lifecycle 
      and must be replaced. Make sure you buy products that support 
      IPv16, even if you do not enable it right away.

## 2.6. The need for IPv16

   As long IPv4 and IPv6 networks do what you need them to do, let 
   them run as well as and welcome to upgrade to new protocol version
   too. But when an IPv4 network hits the limits for some reason, 
   choose IPv6. IPv6 is mature enough to be used in corporate and 
   commercial networks, as many case studies and d deployments 
   worldwide show. 

   In the way IPv16 is the upgrade of both version works and 
   functionalities the same, security provides the same with extended 
   Intelligent Block wise interconnectivity with genesis block to end 
   to end user connectivity during the packet delivery, if any Third 
   Party or Untrusted person connect within this queue, here no chance
   to connect at any case due to all queue are run with an encrypted 
   module,and internally any error raised self driven mechanism will 
   automatically detect and resolve this issue the same on the 
   running queue without any interrupt. 


















Sambana                    Expires 18 April 2022               [Page 15]

Internet-Draft       Internet Protocol version 16(IPv16)    October 2021




# 3. Detailed Description of IPv16 Invention 

   The proposed work and presents the related knowledge and background 
   for a better understanding of our proposed system. The entire 
   working mechanism is described is Figure 1, 2 and 3

   In Near Future IPv16 over IPv6 and IPv4 tunnels are widely used to 
   connect large regional IPv16  networks, because it is relatively 
   hard to construct an International or cross-continent native 
   relationshiprecommendation of IPv16 network. This makes the 
   characteristics of IPV16 of IPV16 over IPv4,IPv6 security tunnels 
   very vital to performance of the global IPv16 Internet operations.

   Migrating from IPv16 and IPv4, IPv6 in an instant is possible 
   because of the vast number of internet expansions and of their 
   great users.

   Many organizations and Top class MNCs are becoming more and more 
   dependent on the Internet on the Internet for their daily 
   utilization and work, and they, therefore, cannot tolerate downtime 
   for the replacement of the IP Protocol. As we expected in the 
   upcoming days, there will not be one special day on which IPv6 and 
   IPv6 will be turned off and IPv16 turned on because those protocols 
   can coexist without any problems.

   The migration from IPv4, IPv6 to IPv16, must be implemented node
   by node by using auto configuration procedures to eliminate the 
   need to configure the IPv16 host manually. In this way, users can 
   immediately benefit from the many advantages of IPv16, while 
   maintaining the possibilities of communicating with IPv6 and IPv4 
   users or peripherals.Consequently, there is no reason to delay, 
   updating from IPv6 to IPv16.

   IPv6 also defined a new kind of service, called anycast, like 
   multicast, and proposed IPv16 is multicast and Virtual IP with 
   Unlimited and Infinity High Security with multicast and Virtual IP 
   address each block connectivity. Universal users and Interstellar 
   and Expand Universe users allocations.

   


   
   


Sambana                    Expires 18 April 2022               [Page 16]

Internet-Draft       Internet Protocol version 16(IPv16)    October 2021



   When packet sends from sender to receiver, during the packet 
   transmission, and proposed system predict cum calculating time 
   delay, throughput, error rate, automatically, then after colliding 
   or interrupt occurred, immediately duplicate virtual address or 
   packet received from a damaged packet, simultaneal information 
   sends to sender and receiver. In this session, Virtual IP plays 
   a key role in this critical way.

   IPv16 supports and enhances the same Quality of Service (QoS) 
   features as IPv4 and IPv6.

   The invention of Internet Protocol Version 16 (IPv16) comprises of 
   Create a secure and new protocol version for the Internet protocol 
   system working based on Artificial Intelligence and Blockchain 
   Technologies.

   o  In the way IPv16 is the upgrade of both version works and 
      functionalities the same, security provides the same with 
      extended Intelligent  Block wise interconnectivity with genesis 
      block to end-to-end user connectivity during the packet delivery, 
      if any Third Party or Untrusted person connect within this queue, 
      here no chance to connect at any case due to all queue are run 
      with an encrypted module, and internally any error raised 
      self-driven mechanism will automatically detect and resolve this 
      issue the same on the running queue without any interrupt.

   o  Even Network failure or any other issues have occurred 
      self esteem duplicate acknowledgment sent to sender and at the 
      same time receiver also receive the same information for 
      end-to-end connectivity, in the way Intelligent self-resolve 
      mechanism to detects when the queue is processing and predict 
      entire processing queue operations and guided supervised learning 
      techniques and identified targeted node connectivity through  
      Unsupervised Learning techniques to resolve multiple 
      connectivities at the same time.

   o  In the Technology up-gradation, classes extensions, IP address 
      extensions, create virtual IP address, and limitless connection 
      through virtual IP address and holographic projection also 
      performed.

   o  Integrated with intelligent or self-driven network virtual 
      assistance during safely packet delivery IPv16 is mature enough 
      to be used in corporate and business and universal and space 
      celestial object connectivity through virtual IP addresses.

   


   

Sambana                     Expires 18 April 2022              [Page 17]

Internet-Draft       Internet Protocol version 16(IPv16)    October 2021




   o  This protocol creates a virtual IP address along with a 
      shareable identity with authentication by the owner of 
      individual IP.

   The invention as claimed, Universal Wide Web (UWW), describes
   the expandable Inter-Galactic and outer Space connectivity through 

   o  Deep Space Connectivity along with Communicate Interstellar 
      objects and Galaxies using Radio Signals are integrated with 
      the proposed architecture, and Virtual IP - IPv16 to expand the 
      internal space communications very quickly with secured 
      allocated channels.

   o  Extension of WWW (World Wide Web), and integrated with Virtual 
      Holographic connectivity with Cryptographic Security end-to-end 
      tunneling connectivity.

   o  Communicate Interstellar objects and Galaxies using Radio 
      Signals are integrated with the proposed architecture, and 
      Virtual IP - IPv16 to expand the internal space communications 
      very quickly with secured allocated channels and allocated 
      secured individual recognized block channels are connected with 
      Internet and resolve to interrupt signals and message transfer 
      delayed problem, transfer data with secure manner working 
      mechanism the same existing technologies and support 
      future technologies also.

   o  The proposed Universal Wide Web illustrates to work the same as 
      World Wide Web and the main aim is to create expand to the 
      Future Internet Architecture and upgrade and merge existing WWW 
      architecture.

   The invention as claimed, Create new class F and Class H and
   Class I for extended to present classes and IP ADDRESS are run 
   single IP address inherited desired Sub-IP address 

   o  2 power of 10 address Space along with the Bit Transfer rate of 
      each transmission

   o  Net ID, Host ID are there, but I proposed Virtual Block ID

   o  Creates a virtual IP address

   o  1024.1024.1024.1024 after assigned task, to perform Virtual IP 
      address as per user requirements, and address is 1024 KB and this 
      architecture supports Updated and current technologies
  
  
   

Sambana                    Expires 18 April 2022               [Page 18]

Internet-Draft       Internet Protocol version 16(IPv16)    October 2021



   o  1024.1024.1024.1024-X-Xn , where X means 1,2,3,n

   o  Proposed Class F range of First Octet Range of 256 to 511, 
      and Binary Bit Sequence of 0000 0001 0000 0000 to
      0000 0010 0000 1110, and Default Subnet Mask is 1024.0.0.0 
      and User Level operations are Private Mode, which means protect 
      private module with encrypted chain operations.

   o  Proposed Class G range of First Octet Range of 512 - 638, and 
      Binary Bit Sequence of 0010 0000 0000 0000 to 
      0000 0010 0111 1110 and Default Subnet Mask is 1024.1024.0.0 
      and User Level operations are Protect Channel and 
      Universal Wide Web, which means protect private and public
      modules with encrypted chain operations.

   o  The First Octet Range of 639 is used for special purposes for 
      future needs and connectivity to any version.

   o  Proposed Class H range of First Octet Range of 640 - 767, and 
      Binary Bit Sequence of 0000 0010 1000  0000 to 
      0000 0010 1111 1111 and Default Subnet Mask is 1024.1024.1024.0 
      along with LoopBack Genesis Link, and User Level operations are 
      Protect Channel (Universal Wide Web) which means protect private 
      and public modules access with encrypted chain operations. 

   o  Proposed Class I range of First Octet Range of 768-1024 and 
      Binary Bit Sequence of 0000 0000 0011 0000 0000 to 
      0000 0010 0000 0000 and Default Subnet Mask is 1024.1024.1024.0 
      along with LoopBack Genesis Link, and User Level operations are 
      Protect Channel (Universal Wide Web), which means protect private 
      and public modules access with encrypted chain operations.

   o  Net ID,Host ID are there, but I proposed Virtual Block ID.

   o  At the User Level, it is performed to operate both I and H 
      Classes for Unlimited and Infinity High Security with multicast 
      and Virtual IP address each block connectivity. Universal users 
      and Interstellar and Expand Universe users allocations.

   o  Figure 1, 2 and 3 represent a full description of the entire 
      IPv16 Classes apart from Classes A to I, newly added F to I have 
      its functionalities and requirements for existing technologies 
      and upcoming versions along with future technologies, how to 
      work, and Bit Sequence, Default Subnet Mark along with User 
      Level requirements,and the full description of the entire IPv16 
      datagram and architecture along with the working environment 
      and its functionalities.

  

Sambana                   Expires 18 April 2022                [Page 19]

Internet-Draft       Internet Protocol version 16(IPv16)    October 2021



 The invention as claimed, Blockchain enhanced Security coverage
   
   o  Transmit Life-Time Virtual Connectivity.

   o  IPv16 support and proposed new areas of virtual gateways along 
      with Create a Virtual IP address for secure transmission. 

   o  The entire IPv16 Classes apart from Classes A to I newly added 
      F to I have its functionalities and requirements for existing 
      technologies and upcoming versions along with future 
      technologies, how to work, and Bit Sequence, Default Subnet 
      Mark along with User Level requirements.

   o  This IPv16 Datagram represents an entire basic transfer unit 
      connected with a packet switched network. Datagrams are 
      typically structured in header and payload sections, and they 
      provide a connectionless communication service across a packet 
      switched network without any interrupts. This Figure 1 shows 
      how to interact with every operation.

   o  Initially Versions and Header length connected to types of class
      and Traffic classes of packet transfer of every end to end 
      connectivity, and Flow control working as previous versions.

   The invention as claimed, Create Duplicate Acknowledgment for Error 
   Detection and Correction

   o  IPv16 will adapt unidentified and undefined problems of IPv6 
      computer technology and network transmission problems to resolve 
      the gaps between IPv6 to IPv16 and upcoming technologies and
      versions too.

   o  During message transmission,if any network or any other failures
      have occurred, an Intelligent Self-driven system automatically 
      analyzes the processing queue and guide according to data leaks
      and failures, sendnecessary action to be taken without any 
      queue interrupt.

   o  Address Space and checksum, Error Control, Flow control, and 
      Transmission Control process are the same on existing 
      technologies to upgrade version,during transmission any problems 
      are raised, Intelligent prediction system analysis entire 
      operations at every movement in the layer transmission. 



       


Sambana                    Expires 18 April 2022               [Page 20]
 
Internet-Draft       Internet Protocol version 16(IPv16)    October 2021



   o  Internal Layer message transmission authenticated Fibonacci 
      chain series connectivity linked with every stage level operation 
      module at every conversation from source to the destination if 
      any data leaks are awake, predict the mechanism and behavior of 
      node connectivity with detecting entire route mapping once before 
      transmission, and sends duplicate acknowledgment as per receiver
      requirements.
   
   Whenever or whatever you invest in IPv16 is an investment in IPv16 
   is a Future Technology. Here are the following specifications that 
   may be time for you to consider or integrate IPv4 and IPv6.

   o  Users IPv4 or IPv6 network or NAT implementation needs to be 
      fixed or extended and supported to IPv16, as the same features 
      and same functionalities.

   o  Users are running out of address space with limited or extended 
      configurated NAT implementations.

   o  Users are running out of address space with limited or extended 
      configurated NAT implementations.

   o  Users want to prepare the users network for applications that 
      are based on advanced features of IPv16 and integrated with 
      IPv4 and IPv6.

   o  Users want to prepare their network for applications that are 
      based on network extended possibilities.

   o  Users need end-to-end block encrypted security for a limitless 
      number of users and you do not have the address space or you or 
      user or customer struggle with a  NAT implementation at a user 
      level, and resolves this issue through IPv16.

   o  Users or your hardware or applications reach the end of their 
      lifecycle and then immediately virtual duplicate packet 
      collision occurred then First In First OUT(FIFO) priority on 
      their existing queue without any disturbance.

## 3.1. When to choose IPv16
   
   As long IPv4 and IPv6 networks do what you need them to do, let 
   them run, But when an IPv4 and IPv6 network hits the limits for 
   various reasons, choose IPv16 in near future, maybe Technology 
   upgradation, classes extensions, IP address extensions, create 
   virtual IP address, and limitless connection through virtual IP
   address and holographic projection also performed. 

   




Sambana                   Expires 18 April 2022                [Page 21]

Internet-Draft       Internet Protocol version 16(IPv16)    October 2021



   Integrated with intelligent or self driven network virtual 
   assistance during safely packet delivery IPv16 is mature enough to 
   be used in corporate and business and universal and space 
   celestial object connectivity through virtual IP addresses.

   IPv16 is most flexible to workspace communications, and expendable 
   universal object categorization, and the interstellar universe and 
   space planet or object communications, because limitless extended 
   addresses one increased based on utilization.

## 3.2. The Migration from IPv4, IPv6 to IPv16

   The year from 1997 to 2000 will be characterized by the adoption 
   of IPv6 by Internet Service Providers(ISPs) and users. During 1997,
   users still have problems related to the newness of products, but 
   distributed on routers on work stations, and computers,
   Laptops,(PDA) Personal Digital Assistances.

   At that point of time, companies or organizations will begin to 
   migrate,less or migrate, less or more gradually, to IPv6 and 
   IPv16, and new network technologies are integrated with current
   way, it is time to update all networks as the same way existing 
   environment, and supports future technologies to, 

   The curiosity of functional goals of the migration are as follows 

   o  IPv4 and IPv6 hosts must interoperate and supports IPv16 
      functionalities and interconnectivity operations.

   o  The key uses of IPv16 hosts and routers must be thought that 
      migration and easy way to implementation of Simple Internet 
      Transition (SIT).

   o  The functional uses of IPv16 hosts and routers must be encrypted 
      distributed over nontraumatic Internet.

   o  Possibility of Progressive and Non-Traumatic Transition,The only 
      requirements for IP4 and IPv6 hosts and routers updated to IPv16, 
      one at a time, without requiring other hosts and routers to be 
      updated simultaneously.

   o  Minimum requirements for updating, The requirement for updating 
      hosts to IPv16 is the availability of a DNS Server to 
      manage IPv16  addresses. No extra requirements are needed 
      for routers.

 



Sambana                 Expires 18 April 2022                  [Page 22]
 
Internet-Draft       Internet Protocol version 16(IPv16)    October 2021



   o  Addressing Simplicity, When a router or host is updated to IPv16, 
      it can also continue to use IPv4 and IPv6 address.
   
   o  Low initial costs and user friendly, No preparatory work is 
      necessary to begin the migration to IPv4 and IPv6 for IPv16.

   o  A structure of IPv6 address that allows the derivations of IPv16 
      from IPv4and IPv6 address.

   o  A technique to encapsulate IPv16 packets inside IPv4 and IPv6 
      Packets (Tunnelling) to allow IPv16 packets to traverse clouds 
      not yet updated to IPv16.

## 3.3. Universal Wide Web (UWW)

   The proposed Universal Wide Web illustrates to work the same as 
   World Wide Web and the main aim is to create expand to the Future 
   Internet Architecture and upgrade and merge existing WWW 
   architecture.

   Communicate Interstellar objects and Galaxies using Radio Signals
   are integrated with the proposed architecture, and Virtual IP - 
   IPv16 to expand the internal space communications very 
   quickly with secured allocated channels and allocated secured 
   individual recognized block channels are connected with Internet 
   and resolve to interrupt signals and message transfer delayed 
   problem, transfer data with secure manner working mechanism the 
   same existing technologies and support future technologies also. 

## 3.4. Interprocess Communication of IPv16

   To avoid message delay during transmission from identified and 
   unidentified sources and an encrypted secure message transfer into 
   Space Communication Medium through Light transmission rate along 
   with Time dilatation effect.

## 3.5. New Classes and its functionalities of IPv16

   Figure 2 represents a full description of the entire IPv16 Classes 
   apart from Classes A to I, newly added F to I have its 
   functionalities and requirements for existing technologies and 
   upcoming versions along with future technologies, how to work, and 
   Bit Sequence,Default Subnet Mark along with User Level requirements.

 
   


Sambana                     Expires 18 April 2022              [Page 23]

Internet-Draft       Internet Protocol version 16(IPv16)    October 2021



   Figure 1 and Figure 2 represent a full description of the entire 
   IPv16 datagram and architecture along with the working environment 
   and its functionalities.


### 3.5.1. IPv16 Datagram Format

       
     +-------+-------------+--------------+----------+---------------+
     | Verson|Header Length|Types of Class|Flow Label|Datagram Length|
     |       |             |              |          |   Bytes       |
     +-------+-------------+--------------+----------+---------------+
     | 160 Bit Identifier  |     Flag     | 13-Bit Fragmentation     |
     +-------+-------------+--------------+---------+----------------+
     |Payload| Next Header | Fibonacci Block Series |Header Checksum |
     |Lenghth|             |     Connectivity       |                |
     +-------+-------------+-------+----------------+----------------+
     |Time-to| Upper Layer to Lower|Header Checksum | Virtualization |
     |-Live  |    Layer Protocol   |                |                |
     +-------+-------------+-------+----------------+----------------+
     |       Options       |     Intelligent Self-Driven System      |
     +---------------------+-----------------------------------------+
     |                   Source Address 1024 Bits                    |
     +-+-----------+-----------+---------+-----------+---------------+
     | |Virtual IP1|Virtual IP2|  -----  |Virtual IPn| Authentication|
     +-+-----------+-----------+---------+-----------+---------------+
     |                   Source Address 1024 Bits                    |
     +------------+-----------+-----------+------+-----------+-------+
     | Next Header|Virtual IP1|Virtual IP2| ---- |Virtual IPn| Option|
     +------------+-----------+-----------+------+-----------+-------+

                       Figure 1 IPv16 Datagram Format

   This IPv16 Datagram represents an entire basic transfer unit 
   connected with a packet-switched network. Datagrams are typically 
   structured in header and payload sections, and they provide a 
   connectionless communication service across a packet-switched 
   network without any interrupts. This Figure.1 shows how to interact
   with every operation.

   Initially Versions and Header length connected to types of class 
   and Traffic classes of packet transfer of every end-to-end
   connectivity, and Flow control working as previous versions.







Sambana                     Expires 18 April 2022              [Page 24]

Internet-Draft       Internet Protocol version 16(IPv16)    October 2021



### 3.5.2. IPv16 Classifications

   These IPv16 Classifications represented Current class and extension 
   classes and integrate with Binary Bit Sequence, and Classes defined 
   with First Octet Range along with default subnet Mask useful to the 
   user level. 

   Proposed new classes from E to I and First Octet Range from 256 to 
   1024, here Internal loops are created until the user required 
   IP addresses are finished, which means the user wantsto create own 
   IP address for needed. if any PDA and Devices are lost
   physically but not lose IP address. 

   The user wants to create unlimited IP addresses for their 
   requirements, like 1024.1024.1024.1024-(1-2x-n).  

   For example, I have one IP address connected with One device, 
   unfortunately, the device was lost, in the way IP address also not 
   working. These kinds of problems are resolved by using IPv16 and 
   save millions of IP addresses to live. 
   
   In the upcoming days, we are creating a virtual environment to 
   IP address, and the retrieval ofentire data from their online 
   connectivity.





















Sambana                    Expires 18 April 2022               [Page 25]

Internet-Draft       Internet Protocol version 16(IPv16)    October 2021



     +-----+-------+-----------------+------------------+-------------+
     |     | First |   Binary Bit    | Deafult Subnet   |             |
     |Class| Octect|    Sequence     |     Mask         |  User Level |
     |	   | Range |		         |                  |             |
     +-----+-------+-----------------+------------------+-------------+
     |     |       |00000000-01111111|                  |             |
     |  A  |0-127  |                 |   255.0.0.0      |             |
     +-----+-------+-----------------+                  |             |
     |     |       |10000000-10111111|                  |             |
     |  B  |128-191|                 |   255.255.0.0    | Public Users|
     +-----+-------+-----------------+                  |             |
     |     |192-223|11000000-11011111|                  |             |
     |  C  |       |                 |   255.255.0.0    |             |
     +-----+-------+-----------------+------------------+-------------+
     |     |224-239|11100000-11101111|         -        |             |
     |  D  |       |                 |                  |  Multicast  |
     +-----+-------+-----------------+------------------+-------------+
     |     |240-255|11110000-11111111|         -        |High Security|
     |  E  |       |                 |                  | Purpose     |
     +-----+-------+-----------------+------------------+-------------+
     |     |       |00000001 00000000|                  |  Private    |
     |  F  |256-511|      to         |   1024.0.0.0     |  Channel    |
     |     |       |00000010 00001110|                  |             |
     +-----+-------+-----------------+------------------+-------------+
     |     |       |00100000 00000000|                  |   Protect   |
     |     |512-638|       to        |   1024.1024.0.0  |   Channel   |
     |  G  |       |00000010 01111110|                  | Universal   |
     |     |       |                 |                  |   Wide Web  |
     +-----+-------+-----------------+------------------+-------------+
     |     |       |                 |                  |Unlimited and|
     |     |       |                 |                  |Infinity High|
     |     |       |00000010 10000000| 1024.1024.1024.0 |Security with|
     |  H  |640-767|      to         | Loop Back Genesis|Multicast and|
     |     |       |00000010 11111111|      Loop        |and VirtualIP|
     |     |       |                 |                  |address each |
     |     |       |                 |                  |Block        |
     +-----+-------+-----------------+------------------+Connectivity.|
     |     |       |                 |                  |Universal    |
     |     |       |                 |                  |Users and    |
     |     |       |00000011 00000000|                  |Interstellar |
     |  I  |768 -  |       to        |1024.1024.1024.   |and Expand   |
     |     |  1024 |00000010 00000000|             1024 |Universe     |
     |     |       |                 |                  |Users        |
     |     |       |                 |                  |allocations  |
     +-----+-------+-----------------+------------------+-------------+
					
                 Figure 2 IPv16 Classes Classifications





Sambana                      Expires 18 April 2022             [Page 26]

Internet-Draft       Internet Protocol version 16(IPv16)    October 2021



### 3.5.3. IPv16 Architecture

   This IPv16 Architecture represents the Architectural Layout of 
   variousmodules to internal connectivity and the entire operational 
   procedures working mechanism.

     +-------------------------+--------------------------------+--
     |     Global Prefix       |          256 Bits              |  
     |        48 Bits          |                                |  
     +---------+-------+-------+---------+---------+------------+--
     |         |       |       |         |         |            | 
     |16 Bits  |16 Bits|16 Bits| 16 Bits | 64 Bits | 128 Bits   |
     |         |       |       |         |         |            |        
     |         |       |       |         |         |            |
     +---------+-------+-------+---------+---------+------------+--
     |Define   |       |       |         |         |            |
     |Address  |       |       |Subnet ID|         |Security ID |
     |Type     |       |       |         |         |Genesis     |
     |Unicast, |  Any  |  Any  |Network  |Interface|Block       |
     |Anycast, |       |       |  ID     |  ID     |Connectivity|
     |Multicast|       |       |         |         |            |
     +---------+-------+-------+---------+---------+------------+--
     |                                   |         |Intelligent |
     |              128 Bits             |128 Bits |Self-Driven |
     |                                   |         |System      |
     +-----------------------------------+---------+------------+--

                --+----------+-----------+-------------+
                  | 256 Bits | 256 Bits  | 256 Bits    |
                  |          |           |             |
                --+----------+-----------+-------------+
                  |          |Intelligent|Fibonacci    | 
                  | 256 Bits |Self-Driven|Block Series |
                  |          |System     |Series       |
                  |          |           |Connectivity |
                --+----------+-----------+-------------+
                  |          |           |             |
                  |          |Protect ID |Sub VirtualIP|
                  | Private  |Virtual ID | Host-Sub-   |
                  | Channel  |Class      |Host-        |
                  |          |Category   |Connectivity |
                  |          |           |             |
                --+----------+-----------+-------------+
                  |          |Secure     | Next        |
                  |256 Bits  |LinkedChain| hdr         |
                  |          |Operations | Option      |
                --+----------+-----------+-------------+


                      Figure 3 IPv16 Architecture






Sambana                    Expires 18 April 2022               [Page 27]

Internet-Draft       Internet Protocol version 16(IPv16)    October 2021



## 3.6. Technical Problem

   IP version 4 (IPv4) is showing its age as unexpected growth 
   problems have appeared. Most notable is the rapid consumption of 
   network addresses and the explosion in performance requirements 
   for intermediate routing nodes.IPv4 was deployed when exceeding the
   theoretical maximum number of four billion nodes was not a 
   possibility. 

   With the advancements and the proliferation of computer technology, 
   that limit will be reached in the next decade. Will your days of
   Web surfing come to an end? Not likely, since 
   the Internet Protocol version 6 (IPv6)

   Communicate Interstellar objects and Galaxies using Radio Signals 
   are integrated with the proposed architecture,and Virtual IP-IPv16 
   to expand the internal space communications very quickly with
   secured allocated channels and allocated secured individual 
   recognized block channels are connected with Internet and resolve 
   to interrupt signals and message transfer delayed problem, transfer 
   data with secure manner working mechanism the same existing 
   technologies and support future technologies also.

## 3.7. Solution to Problem
 
   IPv16 will adapt identified and undefined problems of IPv6 computer 
   technology and network transmission problems to resolve the gaps 
   between IPv6 to IPv16 and upcoming technologies and versions too.
   IPv16 will create new platforms of multiple technologies based on 
   Future Technologies and resolved unmanned.

## 3.8. Advantageous Effects of Invention

   All Advantages of this Innovation and future applications are 
   detailed descriptions available in this documentation,and see 3.4. 

   o  IPv4 and IPv6 hosts must interoperate and supports IPv16 
      functionalities and interconnectivity operations.

   o  The key uses of IPv16 hosts and routers must be thought that 
      migration and easy way to implementation of Simple Internet 
      Transition (SIT). 
 
   o  The functional uses of IPv16 hosts and routers must be 
      encrypted distributed over non-traumatic Internet.





Sambana                    Expires 18 April 2022               [Page 28]

Internet-Draft       Internet Protocol version 16(IPv16)    October 2021



   o  Proposed new classes from E to I and First Octet Range from 
      256 to 1024, here Internal loops are created until the user 
      required IP addresses are finished, which means the user wants 
      to create own IP address for needed. if any PDA and Devices are 
      lost physically but not lose IP address. 

   o  Communicate Interstellar Objects are connected with virtual IP 
      connectivity environments using infinity IP address creations 
      and utilized too.


##3.9. Industrial Applicability
   
   IPv16 has overcome all technological pending needs and supports 
   future technologies, these technologies will create new areas of 
   research and market for mankind. 

   IPv16 will create a new financial market of the entire globe due to 
   the upgrade of new technologies and impact of social needs to will 
   come new technology companies and its generate financial markets and 
   improve the global economy.

   IPv16 supports and gives Intelligent adopted platforms because the 
   entire IPv16 is working based on Artificial Intelligence and 
   Blockchain Technologies.
























Sambana                    Expires 18 April 2022               [Page 29]

Internet-Draft       Internet Protocol version 16(IPv16)    October 2021



# 4. Conclusions

   The proposed IPv16 is a new and extended version of Internet 
   Protocol and it is a significant impact on existing and future 
   technologies for mankind growing and expand identified universal 
   facts and computer science fields and other areas too.

   The proposed system collects the future of the IP protocol also 
   requires analysis. With new approaches for integrating 
   connectionless services with traditional telecommunications 
   services and with new applications and businesses coming into use, 
   likely, a new IP protocol, meeting all the new needs, including 
   additional control requirements will be developed. 
   The architectural implications of this have yet to be determined.


# 5. Security Considerations

   IPv16 addressing and Architecture documents do not have any direct 
   impact on Internet infrastructure security.Authentication of IPv16
   packets is defined in Authentication.

# 6. IANA Considerations

   The IANA has updated the references for the IPv4 and IPv6 Address 
   Architecture in the IANA registries accordingly.
   















Sambana                    Expires 18 April 2022               [Page 30]

Internet-Draft       Internet Protocol version 16(IPv16)    October 2021



# 7.  References

## 7.1.  Normative References

   [1]	Bradner, S., Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
        Levels, BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [2]	Vinton G.Cerf, Edward Cain, The DoD Internet Architecture 
        Model, Computer Networks 7 (1983) 307-318, 0376-5075/83/5, 
        Elsevier Publishers B, V 1983

   [3]	Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, A History of the 
        ARPANET, The First Decade, prepared by Bolt Beranek and Newman, 
        April 1981 (Defense Tech. Info. Center AD A1 15440). 

   [4]	Bosubabu Sambana, Internet Protocol version 16 (IPv16),  
        International Patent Application Number PCT/IN2021/050893

   [5]	Bosubabu Sambana,  Internet Protocol version 16 (IPv16), 
        USA Copyright Number 1-9166062781

   [6]	Bosubabu Sambana, Internet Protocol version 16 (IPv16), 
        Indian Copyright Number: 7986/2021-CO/L

   [7]	Internet Protocols Transition Workbook 
        (J. Postel and E. Feinler, Eds.), SRI International, 
        Network Information Center, Menlo Park CA, 1982. 

   [8]	V. Cerf, The CATENET Model for Internetworking, Internet 
        Experiment Note No. 48, available from SRI International, 
        Network Information Center, Menlo Park, California.

   [9]	B.M.Wood, Open Systems Interconnection - Basic Concepts and 
        Current Status, proc. ICCC 82, London, Sep tember 1982, 
        pp. 775-780.

   [10]	Internet Protocols Implementor's Guide (J. Postel and 
        E. Feinler, Eds.), SRI International, Network Information 
        Center, Menlo Park, CA, 1982.

   [11]	  V. Cerf, and P.T. Kirstein, Issues in Packet Network 
          interconnection,IEEE, V. 66(11), November 1978, 
          pp. 1386-1408. 





Sambana                    Expires 18 April 2022               [Page 31]

Internet-Draft       Internet Protocol version 16(IPv16)    October 2021



   [RFC2119]   Bradner, S., Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate 
               Requirement Levels, BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC2460]   R.Hodden, S.Deering,Internet Protocol, Version 6(IPv6)
               Specification, RFC 2460,Cisco., December 1998.
   
   [RFC4291]   R,Hidden, S.Deering, IP version 6 Architecture,
               RFC 4291,Nolia, February 2006.
  
   [RFC2119]   Bradner, S., Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
               Requirement Levels, BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC2616]   Fielding, R., Gettys, J., Mogul, J., Frystyk, H.,
               Masinter, L., Leach, P., and T. Berners-Lee,Hypertext
               Transfer Protocol-HTTP/1.1, RFC 2616, June 1999.

## 7.2.  Informative References

   [REST]     Fielding, R., Architectural Styles and the Design of
              Network-based Software Architectures, 2000.

   [Fab1999]  Faber, T, Touch, J., and W. Yue, The TIME-WAIT state 
              in TCP and Its Effect on Busy Servers, Proc. 
              Infocom 1999 pp. 1573-1583.
   
   [I-D.ietf-core-coap]
              Shelby, Z., Hartke, K., and C. Bormann, Constrained
              Application Protocol (CoAP), draft-ietf-core-coap-14
              (work in progress), March 2013.
   
Authors' Addresses

   Bosubabu Sambana
   S/o.S.Dandasi
   House.No 20-3-72
   Purushothapuram
   Gandhinagar
   Palasa-532221
   Srikakulam District
   Andhra Pradesh
   India

   Phone: 91 964 064 1136
   Email: bosukalam@gmail.com
   uri: www.bosubabu.com


Sambana                    Expires 18 April 2022               [Page 32]

Internet-Draft       Internet Protocol version 16(IPv16)    October 2021
