Network working group                                      Pradeep Kumar Xplorer
Internet-Draft
Intended status: Standards Track                                  Individual
Expires: Oct 8, 2016                                        April 8, 2016
                                                                
                                                          

                 Single SignON solution to WWW seen as one Giant computer
                         draft-pkx-wwwogc-05

Abstract

    The document describes a SingleSignON solution to WWW seen as one Giant
    computer. As WWW use increases, on average an user has many service login
    accounts they have to manage. It would be better for most users at the 
    expense of some security risk to have one password for all the services and
    a WWW shell and a control panel. Also the WWW as an intelligent being could
    show information to an user interpreting their needs from all their accounts.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on Jun 20, 2015.

Pradeep Kumar Xplorer     Expires Oct 8, 2016             [Page 1]
Internet-Draft    Single SignON to WWW seen as one Giant Computer       Apr 8, 2016

Copyright Notice

Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents
   1. Introduction ............................................... 2
   2. Background ..................................................2
   3. General Information of the service ..........................2
   4. Authors Addresses ...........................................5
   5. Acknowledgements ............................................5

1. Introduction

    To implement a Single SIgnON solution to WWW seen as one Giant computer
    that would help navigate and use the WWW more easily, making passwords
    more manageable and WWW navigation more intuitive. THis is a precursor to
    futuristic project of Information as a bird that flies to the users.

2. Background
        CUrrently as a user i have multiple WWW services, i have a
	hosting account explodingmoon.org and email as pradeep@explodingmoon.org
	and email service from hotmail.com, and yahoo.com and i have a
	kasikorn K-cyber bank account, i have an account with cheaptickets.com
        that i have not used and i can retrieve and reactivate the password,
        i have two accounts with facebook. All accounts are used by me by using
	different usernames/userids and passwords. There might be several other
	services that i have registered and tried and never used and i do not
	remember any of these. If i can just authenticate with WWW and access
	all these serives seamlessly without typing in a password, that would
	lead to a better User experience and would be more time efficient.
        
3. General Information of the service
        
        I want to propose a WWW service that allows a WWW navigator to access all his
        authenticated services by logging just once. I want to propose a Valid registered
        email address as Single SignON key, or a WWW navigators primary email as WWW Single
        SignON Id. So lets say it is pradeep@explodingmoon.org.

Pradeep Kumar Xplorer     Expires Oct 8, 2016                		[Page 2]
Internet-Draft    Single SignOn to WWW seen as one Giant computer            Apr 8, 2016

	I want to propose concept of authentication ID. The authentication ID for an email
	 service is just the email ID. But there could be many different levels of 
        authentication needed to be authorized to perform operations in the WWW, or 
        your desktop. I have a hosting account and access to a control panel in my hosting 
       service, thats a username and password to an application of the hosting service.
        Or it could be an application that I installed in my domain, like a blogging 
        software. I can propose a domainname and domainname/Filename/ where the application
        is installed. But authentication ID can be numerous depending on the Operating 
        systems and kinds of software.So in my case now , I want to see my email 
        pradeep@explodingmoon.org as my primary email id and my SingleSignON Id. 
        I have a hosting account in bluehost.com, and a control panel user and password, 
        I have an additional secondary email @explodingmoon.org
        pradeepkumarxplorer@explodingmoon.org. I have email services in hotmail.com, 
        pradeepan88@hotmail.com, a b2evolution blogging software loaded in
        http://www.explodingmoon.org/FCSP with a username pradeepkumarxplorer 
        and a password.


	Right now theres no way for an Information publisher to know who is accesing his
        or hers website other than their IP addresses. This has been a problem for me as
        a publisher. I wanted to be able to configure my website and say only authenticated 
        users can view my information. So if a user Helena@athens.net accesses my 
        information site, right now I would see an IP address used in Athens Internet 
       Service providers. I should be able to see the SingleSignON Id of Helena@athens.net
       using a visitor tracking software. And by making a query to a WHois database or
       some other Application level tool I should get more info about Helena@Athens.net. 
       I should be able to allow or disallow a user to my website at the HTTP daemon level.
       So I propose two classes of WWW navigators, Authenticated and anonymous.
       I can configure my website to allow anonymous users as well.

	The browser is a common internet application and most users use some publicly
        available services for email, or services of banks, eshops, travel planning etc.
        Public meaning the domainames are advertised and can be obtained as part of
        Information retrieval  searches, Wellsfargo.com, cheaptickets.com etc..

	A User should be able to either browse anonymously or as an authenticated user.
        When a User browse anonymously he or she should be restricted to see some
        contents in the WWW.

	The WWW should be seen as one Giant Computer. The desktop that you see on
        Your device should be known as the WWW desktop.
        A browser should have a Userid and Password field or user can proceed to
        browse anonymously.

	When i log into a computer, i should be able to invoke an Action to 
        Authenticate to WWW Desktop.
Pradeep Kumar Xplorer     Expires Oct 8, 2016               [Page 3]
Internet-Draft    Single SignON to WWW seen as one Giant computer           Apr 8,2016

	The URL field should have next to it a UserName textfield and a Password
	TextField.

	There should be toggle button which shows who the browser user is, an
	Authenticated user or an anonymous user.

	The Desktop and the browser can be configured to accept the Desktops 
	Sessions Username and Password as the WWW Desktops Username and password!.

	If you are registering for first time, you create a Unique WWW User id 
	that would somehow linked to an external authentication.

	Lets say i am able to register to the WWW as Pradeep.
	My WWW id is Pradeep@Desktop.WWW

	If Pradeep@Desktop.WWW never logs into internet again for two years, 
	how would you locate Pradeep@Desktop.WWW . So in the registration there should 
	be something that links Pradeep@Desktop.WWW to a Non internet realm.
	Pradeep's travel document or finger print id or retinal scan or
	that Pradeep carries an Unique Obsidian from California.

	
	So the User can browse as anonymous or as an Authenticated User with 
	other attributes.

	In this design it is only Anonymous and Authenticated. 
	The Single SignON eliminates the need to login multiple times.

	Lets say I have chosen pradeep@explodingmoon.org as my primary email id or
	 SingleSignON id. Registering for pradeepan88@hotmail.com and pradeep@yahoo.com
	Would be easy and just need one button click.

	I am adding these concepts WWW shell

	I propose a WWW shell, where I can do many operations related to SingleSignON 
	identity.

	The WWW shell should have Operations like these.

	Assign Username emailid

	AddtoProfileofUserName Does not want to see Webpages related to 
	Hindi Movie stars
Pradeep Kumar Xplorer     Expires Oct 8, 2016                [Page 4]
Internet-Draft    Single SignON to WWW seen as one Giant computer           Apr 8, 2016

	List SingleSignONUserName AuthenticationPages

	(In this case)

	List pradeep@explodingmoon.org AuthenticationPages

	pradeepan88@hotmail.com

	pradeeplugimwidnaus@yahoo.com

	facebook.com/pdeep

	facebook.com/xplorer.pradeep

	www.bluehost.com/Explodingmoon.org

	www.explodingmoon.org/b2-evolutionInstallDirectory/pxplorer

	www.kasikornbank.com/K-CyberuserId

	www.hover.com/UserId

	pradeepkumarxplorer@gmail.com

	www.cheaptickets.com/UserId

	List ProfileSummary pradeep@explodingmoon.org

	Interests: Fitness, food, Travel, backpacking, Yoga,

	Webhosting, Journals, airtickets, Artificial intelligence,

	Health

	Replicate USername1 Username2

	Merge Username1 Username2 Username3

	Merge ProfileSummary1 ProfileSummary2 ProfileSummary3
Pradeep Kumar Xplorer     Expires Oct 8, 2016               [Page 5]
Internet-Draft    Single SignON to WWW seen as one Giant computer            Apr 8,2016

	Load ProfileSummary3 pradeep@explodingmoon.org

	(May be a Database engine would help Profile management, creation etc)
	The concept of profile is to implement software that allows Information
	to fly to Users.

	I am adding these. A smartcard device can be used for SingleSignON and it can enforce
	additional authentication. I insert a card and the client requests me to put my fingers or
                 place my eyes for retinal scan. In addition information from services not used ot viewed
	can be shown. If i dont login to some domains or servives and the messages in those domains
	or services can be shown to remind me they are not looked at for long time.

	Also browser can be opened with httpsso:// service to be in this mode.

	I also want to propose a Logs file for Webserver available automatically without
	use configuration for the privieleged users or owner of the website. So i own
	http://www.explodingmoon.org, the weblogs should be available to privileged users
	in http://www.explodingmoon.org/Logs and it should show some User Identitiies that
	can be clicked on to find out all the emails, contact phone numbers and whatever the
	User Identity wants to list. This can be made a HTTP standard so i dont have to install
	congigure user tracking. 

Added on Apr 8, 2016
        I now want to propose that an internet session be abel to be linked to a phone
        number. This automatically happens if i am using an Android with a SIM card.
        I should be able to do this from Operating system control panel and the awstats
        or webstatistics should show phone numbers as well as IP address.A verification
        is probably needed and it could be costly.The authentication id could be used
        as the phone number.


4.Authors' Addresses

    Pradeep Kumar Xplorer
    EMail: pradeepan88@hotmail.com
    URI: http://www.explodingmoon.org
         http://www.dhyanayoga.info

5.Acknowledgement

    I have been a publisher of http://www.dhyanayoga.info since 2004/2005 
    and http://www.explodingmoon.org since 2008. I have used bluehost.com 
    for hosting my website and have found the need to know who views my site,
    their email addresses and not just IP address. If i can be shown a 
    Single SignON identity like a primary email address that when clicked
    on expands to other identities that viewers allows to reveal, it would
    be useful to me as a publisher.

Pradeep Kumar Xplorer     Expires Oct 8, 2016               [Page 6]
Internet-Draft    Single SignON to WWW seen as one Giant computer            Apr 8, 2016

