
INTERNET-DRAFT  <draft-feher-bmwg-benchres-term-00.txt>   November 2000 

Network Working Group                                  Gabor Feher, BUTE 
INTERNET-DRAFT                                     Istvan Cselenyi, TRAB 
Expiration Date: May 2001                               Peter Vary, BUTE 
                                                       Andras Korn, BUTE 
                                                                         
                                                           November 2000 
 
  Benchmarking Terminology for Routers Supporting Resource Reservation 
                <draft-feher-bmwg-benchres-term-00.txt> 
    
1. Status of this Memo 
    
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other 
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet- 
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at                 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt                             
    
   The list of Internet-Draft shadow directories can be accessed at       
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html 
    
   This memo provides information for the Internet community. This memo 
   does not specify an Internet standard of any kind. Distribution of 
   this memo is unlimited. 
    
2. Table of contents 
    
   1. Status of this Memo.............................................1 
   2. Table of contents...............................................1 
   3. Abstract........................................................2 
   4. Introduction....................................................2 
   5. Existing definitions............................................3 
   6. Definition of Terms.............................................3 
      6.1 Resource Reservation Protocol Basics........................3 
         6.1.1 Resource Reservation Session...........................3 
         6.1.2 Multicast Resource Reservation Session.................3 
         6.1.3 Reservation Capable Router.............................4 
         6.1.4 Signaling End-point....................................5 
         6.1.5 Reservation Initiator..................................5 
         6.1.6 Signaling Path.........................................6 
      6.2 Traffic Types...............................................7 
         6.2.1 Premium Traffic........................................7 
 
Feher, Cselenyi, Vary, Korn      Expires May 2001               [Page 1]

INTERNET-DRAFT  <draft-feher-bmwg-benchres-term-01.txt>   November 2000 

         6.2.2 Best-Effort Traffic....................................8 
      6.3 Router Load Types...........................................8 
         6.3.1 Session Load...........................................8 
         6.3.2 Signaling Load.........................................9 
         6.3.3 Signaling Burst........................................9 
      6.4 Performance Metrics........................................10 
         6.4.1 Signaling Message Handling Time.......................10 
         6.4.2 Premium Traffic Delay.................................11 
         6.4.3 Best-effort Traffic Delay.............................11 
         6.4.4 Signaling Message Loss................................12 
         6.4.5 Scalability Limit.....................................12 
   7. Acknowledgement................................................13 
   8. References.....................................................13 
   9. Authors' Addresses:............................................14 
    
3. Abstract 
    
   The purpose of this document is to define terminology specific to the 
   performance benchmarking of the resource reservation signaling of IP 
   routers. These terms are used in additional documents that define 
   benchmarking methodologies for routers supporting resource 
   reservation and define reporting formats for the benchmarking 
   measurements. 
    
4. Introduction 
    
   The IntServ over DiffServ framework [3] outlines a heterogeneous 
   Quality of Service (QoS) architecture for multi domain Internet 
   services. Signaling based resource reservation (e.g. via RSVP [5]) is 
   an integral part of that model. While this significantly lightens the 
   load on most of the core routers, the performance of border routers 
   that handle the QoS signaling is still crucial. Therefore network 
   operators, who are planning to deploy this model, shall scrutinize 
   the scalability limitations in reservation capable routers and the 
   impact of signaling on the forwarding performance of the routers. 
    
   An objective way for quantifying the scalability constraints of QoS 
   signaling is to perform measurements on routers that are capable of 
   resource reservation. This document defines a specific set of tests 
   that vendors or network operators can use to measure and report the 
   signaling performance characteristics of router devices that support 
   resource reservation protocols. The results of these tests will 
   provide comparable data for different products supporting the 
   decision process before purchase. Moreover, these measurements 
   provide input characteristics for the dimensioning of a network in 
   which resources are provisioned dynamically by signaling. Finally, 
   these test are applicable for characterizing the impact of control 
   plane signaling on the forwarding performance of routers. 
    
   This benchmarking terminology document is based on the knowledge 
   gained by examination of (and experimentation with) several very 
   different resource reservation protocols: RSVP [5], Boomerang [6], 
   YESSIR [7], ST2+ [8], SDP [9], Ticket [10] and Load Control [11]. 

 
Feher, Cselenyi, Vary, Korn      Expires May 2001               [Page 2]

INTERNET-DRAFT  <draft-feher-bmwg-benchres-term-01.txt>   November 2000 

   Nevertheless, this document aspires to compose terms that are valid 
   in general and not restricted to these protocols. 
    
5. Existing definitions 
    
   RFC 1242 [1] "Benchmarking Terminology for Network Interconnect 
   Devices" and RFC 2285 [2] "Benchmarking Terminology for LAN Switching 
   Devices" contains discussions and definitions for a number of terms 
   relevant to the benchmarking of signaling performance of reservation 
   capable routers and should be consulted before attempting to make use 
   of this document. 
    
   For the sake of clarity and continuity this document adopts the 
   template for definitions set out in Section 2 of RFC 1242. 
   Definitions are indexed and grouped together in sections for ease of 
   reference. 
    
6. Definition of Terms 
    
6.1 Resource Reservation Protocol Basics 
    
   This group of definitions applies to various signaling based resource 
   reservation protocols implemented on IP router devices. 
    
6.1.1 Resource Reservation Session 
    
   Definition: 
      A resource reservation session (or shortly reservation) expresses 
      that routers along the data path between two hosts apply special 
      QoS treatment to a certain traffic flow. 
    
   Discussion: 
      The QoS treatment is specified by giving the amount of networking 
      resources that are dedicated to the traffic flow during the length 
      of the reservation session. Depending on the protocol, there are 
      different approaches to define the network resource requirement of 
      a traffic flow. It can be described by high-level parameters, like 
      the required bandwidth, or the maximum traffic delay; or it can be 
      low-level information, like the parameters of a leaky-bucket model 
      of the traffic flow [12]. 
       
      Each resource reservation session has a unique flow descriptor 
      that identifies the associated traffic flow to the router. In 
      order to obtain unique flow descriptors, typically traffic flow 
      parameters, such as the protocol number and the IP address and 
      port of the source and the destination are used to generate them. 
       
   See Also: 
      Signaling Path 
    
6.1.2 Multicast Resource Reservation Session 
    
   Definition: 

 
Feher, Cselenyi, Vary, Korn      Expires May 2001               [Page 3]

INTERNET-DRAFT  <draft-feher-bmwg-benchres-term-01.txt>   November 2000 

      A multicast resource reservation session (or, in short, multicast 
      reservation) denotes that certain QoS treatment is applied to the 
      packets of every traffic flow related to a multicast group. 
    
   Discussion: 
      Usually, there are several traffic sources and destinations in a 
      multicast group. In order to be able to guarantee the QoS 
      parameters for each packet of the multicast flow, every router 
      that forwards the multicast traffic must dedicate resources to the 
      flow.  
       
      Generally, there are two types of multicast resource reservation 
      protocol: many-to-many multicast and one-to-many multicast 
      protocols. Those of the first type allow reservations for traffic 
      flows that originate from several traffic sources, while those of 
      the second type allow only one traffic source in the whole group. 
      In the case the many-to-many multicast protocols, the amount of 
      resources dedicated to the reservation session does not have to be 
      the same for every involved router. Depending on the capabilities 
      of the resource reservation protocol, the traffic destinations in 
      the multicast group may request different QoS parameters. In 
      addition to the different QoS requirements for the destinations, 
      the protocols may have more than one reservation models that 
      express the resource requirement distribution among the involved 
      routers. (e.g. RSVP SE/WF/FF [5]) 
       
   Issues: 
      Naturally, many-to-many multicast protocols are bound to be more 
      complex than one-to-many or non-multicast protocols. In the many-
      to-many case, each router has to calculate the resource 
      requirements of the multicast reservation session based on the 
      reservation model, the distribution of the traffic sources and 
      destinations on its network interfaces. Either the router has to 
      know all the resource requirements of the destinations at the time 
      the reservation is made or it has to adjust the resource 
      reservation of the multicast reservation session according to 
      newly appearing traffic destination requirements. Both methods 
      cause delays in the multicast reservation session setup. 
       
   Also: 
      Signaling Path 
    
6.1.3 Reservation Capable Router 
    
   Definition: 
      By definition, a router is reservation capable if it understands a 
      resource reservation protocol that signals the set-up or tear-down 
      of resource reservation sessions or changes in an existing 
      reservation session. 
    
   Discussion: 
      Reservation capable routers always maintain states for each 
      reserved flow expressing the current condition of the reservation. 

 
Feher, Cselenyi, Vary, Korn      Expires May 2001               [Page 4]

INTERNET-DRAFT  <draft-feher-bmwg-benchres-term-01.txt>   November 2000 

      Based on the way these states are handled, resource reservation 
      protocols are divided into two categories: soft-state protocols 
      and hard-state protocols. 
       
      In the case of hard-state protocols, the resource reservation 
      session established by a set-up signaling primitive is permanent 
      and is cancelled only when the corresponding tear-down signaling 
      primitive arrives to the router. In the case of the soft-state 
      protocols there are no permanent resource reservations, rather the 
      resource reservation state must be regularly refreshed by 
      appropriate signaling primitives. If no refresh signaling 
      primitives arrives, this is assumed to indicate that the resource 
      reservation session is not maintained any longer; and therefore, 
      the router tears it down without waiting for any explicit request. 
      For this reason, soft-state protocols exhibit more robust behavior 
      than hard-state protocols, since failures in the participants of a 
      reservation session does not cause resource stuck in the routers.  
       
   Issues: 
      Although soft-state protocols are more robust than hard-state 
      protocols, they require that reservation sessions be maintained by 
      regularly sending appropriate signals. These refresh signaling 
      messages may cause a serious increase in router load. To decrease 
      this kind of load, the resource reservation protocol may support 
      various mechanisms to aggregate the refresh signaling messages. 
    
6.1.4 Signaling End-point 
    
   Definition: 
      A signaling end-point is a network node capable of initiating and 
      terminating resource reservation sessions. 
    
   Discussion: 
      Typically, signaling end-points have a separate protocol stack 
      that is capable of generating and understanding the signaling 
      messages. However, in some special cases, the resource reservation 
      initiation is carried out without the notice of the network node. 
      For example, the Boomerang resource reservation protocol 
      encapsulates the reservation requests in an ICMP Echo message. 
      This message is bounced back from the destination network node and 
      as a result the node becomes a signaling end-point without 
      understanding the reservation protocol. 
       
      Reservation gateways are protocol translators that translate the 
      signaling messages of one resource reservation protocol into 
      messages of another resource reservation protocol. Thus the 
      reservation gateway represents two signaling end-points in one, as 
      it is both a signaling terminator and a signaling initiator. 
    
6.1.5 Reservation Initiator 
    
   Definition: 


 
Feher, Cselenyi, Vary, Korn      Expires May 2001               [Page 5]

INTERNET-DRAFT  <draft-feher-bmwg-benchres-term-01.txt>   November 2000 

      The reservation initiator is the signaling end-point that 
      initiates the resource reservation session setup. 
    
   Discussion: 
      Resource reservation protocols can be classified depending on the 
      relationship between the reservation initiators and their role in 
      the traffic flow. 
       
      In the case of receiver-oriented protocols, the traffic 
      destinations, which are the receivers of the data traffic, 
      initiate the reservation session setup, unlike the sender-oriented 
      protocols where this is done by traffic sources. There also are 
      protocols where both the traffic source and destination can act as 
      the reservation initiator. 
       
      The importance of the reservation initiator orientation is only 
      dominant in case of multicast reservation sessions. Generally, in 
      multicast groups the number of traffic destinations changes more 
      frequently than the number of traffic sources. The receiver-
      oriented protocols do not require the traffic sources to change 
      their state and generate signaling messages when a new traffic 
      destination joins or an existing one leaves the group, it is 
      enough that the traffic destination node sends its reservation or 
      tear-down request. 
       
   See Also: 
      Signaling end-point 
      Signaling path 
    
6.1.6 Signaling Path 
    
   Definition: 
      A signaling path is a sequence of network nodes and links along 
      which signaling messages travel from one signaling end-point to 
      the other. 
    
   Discussion: 
      In the case of sender-oriented protocols, the data traffic and the 
      signaling messages are addressed to the IP address of the 
      destination and therefore routed on the same path. Thus the 
      signaling messages are delivered to every router that handles the 
      traffic flow to which the reservation session refers. No more and 
      no fewer routers are affected. However, in the case of receiver-
      oriented protocols, the reservation request and the data traffic 
      are forwarded in opposite directions. And since Internet routing 
      is asymmetric, it is not mandatory that they go through the same 
      routers. To assure that the signaling messages reach every router 
      that handles the traffic flow from the source to the destination, 
      the traffic source issues a special message addressed to the 
      destination marking the path for the reservation. This message is 
      called PATH message in the RSVP protocol. Each router that 
      receives a PATH message remembers the address of the node where 
      the message came from, and when a signaling message arrives 

 
Feher, Cselenyi, Vary, Korn      Expires May 2001               [Page 6]

INTERNET-DRAFT  <draft-feher-bmwg-benchres-term-01.txt>   November 2000 

      carrying reservation information it is forwarded to the stored 
      address, which is the address of the previous node. Thus the PATH 
      message marks out a path along which the reservation message 
      travels backward. 
       
      In the case of a multicast reservation session, the situation is 
      slightly more complicated. The signaling path is rather a 
      signaling mesh where the signaling messages travel from the 
      sources to the destinations. 
       
   Issues: 
      It is not unusual for routers to change their routing from time to 
      time. The reason for the change can be a failure of a neighboring 
      router; the router may also choose an alternative route because of 
      changed traffic conditions. When the routes change, the data 
      traffic will be forwarded along a different path than the 
      signaling messages used in establishing the resource dedications 
      for the reservation session. In order to properly handle this 
      situation, hard-state protocols have to be extremely sophisticated 
      in order to detect the route change and to re-reserve the 
      resources on the new path. However, soft-state protocols do not 
      have to worry about this situation, since the refresh messages can 
      be used to set up the reservation on the new path and the 
      dedicated resources will eventually disappear from routers of the 
      obsoleted path. 
       
      Nowadays, routers capable of load balancing are emerging. This 
      means that when there is more than one route to the destination, 
      the router can share the packets of the traffic flow among the 
      alternative routes. In this case the unaware resource reservation 
      protocols are helpless, since the mechanism allows making a 
      reservation setup along one of the paths only. Additionally, the 
      refresh messages of a soft-state protocol might be shared among 
      the paths, making it impossible to refresh the existing 
      reservation. 
    
6.2 Traffic Types 
    
   This group of definitions defines traffic types forwarded by resource 
   reservation capable routers. 
    
6.2.1 Premium Traffic 
    
   Definition: 
      Premium traffic is a traffic type that the router distinguishes 
      from best-effort traffic (to be defined later) and forwards its 
      packets according to a QoS agreement. 
    
   Discussion: 
      Traffic that corresponds to a resource reservation session in the 
      router is premium traffic. The QoS treatment is defined in the 
      associated flow descriptor that is established by the signaling 
      messages during the reservation session setup. 

 
Feher, Cselenyi, Vary, Korn      Expires May 2001               [Page 7]

INTERNET-DRAFT  <draft-feher-bmwg-benchres-term-01.txt>   November 2000 

       
      The router may distinguish several types of premium traffic (e.g. 
      delay sensitive traffic, loss sensitive traffic, etc.). Different 
      types of premium traffic may receive different QoS treatment. 
       
   Issues: 
      The router has to identify every packet whether it belongs to a 
      resource reservation session or not. This is usually not 
      complicated, as usually packets that are part of a premium traffic 
      flow are often marked in a way that is detected easily (e.g. IP 
      TOS field). However, if a packet claims that it has an associated 
      resource reservation session in the router, the router has to find 
      the flow descriptor, which might be time consuming in routers with 
      vast amounts of resource reservation sessions. 
    
6.2.2 Best-Effort Traffic 
    
   Definition: 
      Best-effort traffic is a traffic type that has no reservation 
      entry in the router. 
    
   Discussion: 
      Traffic flows that do not require QoS guarantees along their path 
      are considered to be best-effort traffic. "Best–effort" means that 
      the router makes its best effort to forward every data packet, but 
      does not guarantee anything. This is the most common type of 
      traffic on today’s Internet. 
    
6.3 Router Load Types 
    
   This group of definitions describes different load component types 
   that are independent of each other and impact only a specific part of 
   the resource reservation capable router's control plane. A 
   combination of such independent load types is used to generate 
   arbitrary load distribution on the router, forming the input function 
   during the benchmarking 
    
6.3.1 Session Load 
    
   Definition: 
      Session load is the load that manifests itself as the excess 
      processing power required to keep track of many reservation 
      session. 
    
   Discussion: 
      All signaling based resource reservation protocol implementation 
      employ a packet classifier algorithm that distinguishes the flows 
      having reservations in the router from the others that do not. 
      Therefore each implementation maintains a list of flow descriptors 
      that is instrumental in keeping track of the resource reservation 
      sessions. Obviously, the more reservation sessions are set up on 
      the router, the more complex traffic classification becomes, and 


 
Feher, Cselenyi, Vary, Korn      Expires May 2001               [Page 8]

INTERNET-DRAFT  <draft-feher-bmwg-benchres-term-01.txt>   November 2000 

      the more time it takes for the classification algorithm to 
      identify a flow. 
       
      Moreover, in most protocols, not only the traffic flows, but also 
      signaling messages that manipulate resource reservations on the 
      router have to identify themselves first, before taking any other 
      actions. This kind of classification gives extra work for the 
      router.  
       
   Measurement unit: 
      The session load is represented by the number of reservation 
      sessions in the router.  
    
6.3.2 Signaling Load 
    
   Definition: 
      Signaling load is the load that manifests itself as the time 
      required to process the incoming signaling messages. 
    
   Discussion: 
      The processing of signaling messages requires processing power 
      that raises load on the control plane of the router. In the case 
      of routers where the control plane and the data plane are not 
      totally independent (for example, certain parts of them are served 
      by the same processor) the signaling load can have an impact on 
      the router's packet forwarding performance as well. 
       
      Most of the resource reservation protocols have several protocol 
      primitives realized by different signaling message types. Each of 
      these message types may require a different amount of processing 
      power from the router. 
    
   Measurement unit: 
      The signaling load is characterized by the signaling intensity, 
      which expresses how many signaling messages arrive to the router 
      within a time unit. The typical unit of the signaling intensity is 
      [1/s], which is the number of signaling messages that arrive 
      within one second. 
    
6.3.3 Signaling Burst 
    
   Definition: 
      The signaling burst denotes a certain number of signaling messages 
      that arrive to the input port(s) of the router without 
      interruption, causing persistent load on the signaling message 
      handler. 
    
   Discussion: 
      Back-to-back signaling messages on one port of the router form a 
      typical signaling burst. However, other cases are imaginable, for 
      example when signaling messages arrive on different ports 
      simultaneously or with an overlap in time (i.e. when the tail of 


 
Feher, Cselenyi, Vary, Korn      Expires May 2001               [Page 9]

INTERNET-DRAFT  <draft-feher-bmwg-benchres-term-01.txt>   November 2000 

      one signaling message is behind the head of another one arriving 
      on another port). 
    
   Measurement unit: 
      The signaling burst is characterized by its length, which is the 
      number of messages that have arrived during the burst. 
    
6.4 Performance Metrics 
    
   This group of definitions is a collection of the measurable effects 
   of the impact a resource reservation protocol has on the router 
   device it is running on. 
    
6.4.1 Signaling Message Handling Time 
    
   Definition: 
      The signaling message handling time (or, in short, signal handling 
      time) is the time that a signaling message spends inside the 
      router before it is forwarded to the next node on the path. 
    
   Discussion: 
      Usually, signaling messages are issued by a signaling end-point 
      and forwarded along the signaling path by the routers. However, in 
      addition to the usual message forwarding, the router also 
      interprets the messages and acts on them. Thus the message 
      handling time is longer than forwarding time of data packets of 
      the same size. Moreover, there are signaling message primitives 
      that are altered during the processing and there may also be 
      messages that are drained by the router or ones that are generated 
      by the router. Thus, the signal message handling time is the time 
      difference between the time when a signaling message is received 
      and the time the corresponding processed signaling message is 
      transmitted. If a message is not forwarded on the router, the 
      signal handling time is immeasurable; therefore it is not defined 
      for such messages. 
    
      In the case of signaling messages that carry information 
      pertaining to multicast flows, the router might issue multiple 
      signaling messages after processing. In this case, by definition, 
      the signal handling time is the time interval elapsed between the 
      arrival of the incoming signaling message and the departure of the 
      last related signaling message. 
    
      Signal handling time is an important characteristic as it directly 
      affects the setup time of a session. It is also an indication of 
      the signal processing capacity of the router as it is correlated 
      to the maximum number of signaling messages that can be processed 
      within a time unit. 
    
      This metric depends on the load on the router, as other tasks may 
      limit the processing power available to signaling message 
      handling. In addition to the router load, the signal handling time 
      may also be dependent on the type of the signaling message. For 

 
Feher, Cselenyi, Vary, Korn      Expires May 2001              [Page 10]

INTERNET-DRAFT  <draft-feher-bmwg-benchres-term-01.txt>   November 2000 

      example, it usually takes a shorter time to tear down a resource 
      reservation session within a router node than to set it up. 
    
   Issues: 
      In the case of soft-state protocols, the refresh messages are 
      usually generated automatically by the protocol stack and 
      propagated along the signaling path based on internal timers 
      without user interaction. Moreover, each network node along the 
      signaling path might have an individual agreement on the refresh 
      time interval with its neighboring nodes. Thus, the incoming 
      refresh message is not forwarded on; instead, a new message is 
      generated when the internal timer expires. Other soft-state 
      protocols do not stop the refresh messages, rather let them 
      refresh the whole signaling path. In the former case it is 
      impossible to measure the signaling message handling time of a 
      refresh message. 
    
   Measurement unit: 
      The typical unit of the signaling message handling time is 
      microseconds. 
    
6.4.2 Premium Traffic Delay 
    
   Definition: 
      Premium traffic delay is the forwarding time of a packet that 
      belongs to a premium traffic flow passing through a resource 
      reservation capable router. 
    
   Discussion: 
      Premium traffic packets must be classified first in order to find 
      the resources dedicated to the flow. The time of the 
      classification is added to the usual forwarding time that a router 
      would spend on the packet without any resource reservation 
      capability. 
       
      There are routers where the processing power is shared between the 
      control plane and the data plane. This means that the processing 
      of signaling messages may have an impact on the data forwarding 
      performance of the router. In this case the premium traffic delay 
      metric reflects the influence the two planes have on each other. 
    
   Measurement unit: 
      The typical unit of the premium traffic delay is the microsecond. 
    
6.4.3 Best-effort Traffic Delay 
    
   Definition: 
      Best-effort traffic delay is the forwarding time of a packet that 
      does not belong to any premium traffic flow passing through a 
      resource reservation capable router. 
    
   Discussion: 


 
Feher, Cselenyi, Vary, Korn      Expires May 2001              [Page 11]

INTERNET-DRAFT  <draft-feher-bmwg-benchres-term-01.txt>   November 2000 

      It is obvious that the classification algorithms do not have any 
      influence on the best-effort traffic. However, the processing 
      power sharing between the control and data plane may cause delays 
      in the forwarding procedure of each packet. 
    
   Measurement unit: 
      The typical unit of the best-effort traffic delay is the 
      microsecond. 
    
6.4.4 Signaling Message Loss 
    
   Definition: 
      Signaling message loss is the ratio of the expected and the actual 
      number of signaling messages leaving a resource reservation 
      capable router. 
       
   Discussion: 
      Signaling messages are generally generated at signaling end-points 
      and forwarded through routers. However, traffic congestion can 
      arise in heavily loaded routers, and, as a result, signaling 
      messages might be lost. This metric is therefore suitable for 
      sounding out the scalability limits of a resource reservation 
      capable router.  
       
      However, in the case of soft-state protocols where the refresh 
      messages generated individually, it may be difficult to detect 
      lost signaling messages. Thus, signaling loss only considers 
      signaling messages that leave the router as a consequence of 
      processing an entering signaling message. Note that signaling 
      messages in a multicast reservation session might trigger several 
      signaling messages.  
     
   Issues: 
      In the case of routers where network packets are queued in several 
      places, we have to be aware that a signaling message may be 
      delayed seriously. Therefore, it may be hard or impossible to 
      determine whether the signaling message is still in the queues or 
      whether it was dropped due to the congestion. By definition we say 
      that a signaling message is lost in either of the following cases: 
      when a signaling message of the same type that arrived later than 
      the investigated signaling message leaves the router; when the 
      signaling message handling time would exceed the triple of the 
      signaling message handling time measured on other signaling 
      messages under same conditions. 
        
   Measurement unit: 
      Usually, we measure the signaling loss over a longer period of 
      time and then we express it as a percentage value of packet lost. 
      However, in many cases it is enough to know that there was 
      signaling loss. 
    
6.4.5 Scalability Limit 
    

 
Feher, Cselenyi, Vary, Korn      Expires May 2001              [Page 12]

INTERNET-DRAFT  <draft-feher-bmwg-benchres-term-01.txt>   November 2000 

   Definition: 
      The scalability limit is the threshold between the steady state 
      and the overloaded state of the tested equipment. 
    
   Discussion: 
      All existing routers have finite buffer memory and finite 
      processing power. In the steady state of the router, the memory 
      buffers are not fully utilized and the processing power is enough 
      to cope with all tasks running on the router. As the router load 
      increases the router has to postpone more and more task. These 
      tasks (e.g. forwarding certain packets) are stored into the 
      buffers, and processed later. However, there is a certain point 
      where no more buffer memory is available; thus, the router becomes 
      overloaded and is unable to store any more tasks for future 
      processing, so it is forced to drop them. Therefore the overloaded 
      state of the router can be recognized by the fact that some kind 
      of data loss occurs. A resource reservation capable router may 
      drop signaling messages, data packets or entire resource 
      reservation sessions. 
       
      The critical load condition when the router is still in the steady 
      state but the smallest amount of constant load increase would 
      drive it to the overloaded state is the scalability limit of the 
      router. 
    
7. Acknowledgement 
    
   We would like to thank the following individuals for their help in 
   forming this document: Joakim Bergkvist and Norbert Vegh from Telia 
   Research AB, Sweden, Balazs Szabo, Gabor Kovacs from High Speed 
   Networks Laboratory of BUTE. 
    
8. References 
    
   [1]  S. Bradner, "Benchmarking Terminology for Network 
        Interconnection Devices", RFC 1242, July 1991 

   [2]  R. Mandeville, "Benchmarking Terminology for LAN Switching 
        Devices", RFC 2285, February 1998 

   [3]  Y. Bernet, et. al., "A Framework For Integrated Services 
        Operation Over Diffserv Networks", Internet Draft, May 2000, 
        <draft-ietf-issll-diffserv-rsvp-05.txt> 

   [4]  S. Bradner, J. McQuaid, "Benchmarking Methodology for Network 
        Interconnect Devices", RFC 2544, March 1999 

   [5]  B. Braden, Ed., et. al., "Resource Reservation Protocol (RSVP) - 
        Version 1 Functional Specification", RFC 2205, September 1997. 

   [6]  J. Bergkvist, I. Cselenyi, "Boomerang Protocol Specification", 
        Internet Draft, June 1999, <draft-bergkvist-boomerang-spec-
        00.txt> 

 
Feher, Cselenyi, Vary, Korn      Expires May 2001              [Page 13]

INTERNET-DRAFT  <draft-feher-bmwg-benchres-term-01.txt>   November 2000 

   [7]  P. Pan, H. Schulzrinne, "YESSIR: A Simple Reservation Mechanism 
        for the Internet", Computer Communication Review, on-line 
        version, volume 29, number 2, April 1999 

   [8]  L. Delgrossi, L. Berger, "Internet Stream Protocol Version 2 
        (ST2) Protocol Specification - Version ST2+", RFC 1819, August 
        1995 

   [9]  P. White, J. Crowcroft, "A Case for Dynamic Sender-Initiated 
        Reservation in the Internet", Journal on High Speed Networks, 
        Special Issue on QoS Routing and Signaling, Vol 7 No 2, 1998 

   [10] A. Eriksson, C. Gehrmann, "Robust and Secure Light-weight 
        Resource Reservation for Unicast IP Traffic", International WS 
        on QoS'98, IWQoS'98, May 18-20, 1998 

   [11] L. Westberg, Z. R. Turanyi, D. Partain, Load Control of Real-
        Time Traffic, A Two-bit Resource Allocation Scheme, Internet 
        Draft, <draft-westberg-loadcntr-03.txt>, April 2000 

   [12] J. Wroclawski, "The Use of RSVP with IETF Integrated Services", 
        RFC 2210, September 1997 

9. Authors' Addresses: 
    
   Gabor Feher 
   Budapest University of Technology and Economics (BUTE) 
   Department of Telecommunications and Telematics 
   Pazmany Peter Setany 1/D, H-1117, Budapest, Hungary 
   Phone: +36 1 463-3110 
   Email: feher@ttt-atm.ttt.bme.hu 
    
   Istvan Cselenyi 
   Telia Research AB 
   Vitsandsgatan 9B 
   SE 12386, Farsta 
   SWEDEN, 
   Phone: +46 8 713-8173 
   Email: istvan.i.cselenyi@telia.se 
    
   Andras Korn 
   Budapest University of Technology and Economics (BUTE) 
   Institute of Mathematics, Department of Analysis 
   Egry Jozsef u. 2, H-1111 Budapest, Hungary 
   Phone: +36 1 463-2475 
   Email: korn@math.bme.hu 
    
   Peter Vary 
   Budapest University of Technology and Economics (BUTE) 
   Department of Telecommunications and Telematics 
   Pazmany Peter Setany 1/D, H-1117, Budapest, Hungary 
   Phone: +36 1 463-3110 
   Email: kanya@iq.sch.bme.hu 

 
Feher, Cselenyi, Vary, Korn      Expires May 2001              [Page 14]
