
Network Working Group                                     C. Martin, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                                   Verizon
Expires: April 24, 2005                                    A. Atlas, Ed.
                                                                R. Torvi
                                                     Avici Systems, Inc.
                                                                D. Fedyk
                                                         Nortel Networks
                                                        October 24, 2004


               U-turn Alternates for IP/LDP Fast-Reroute
                 draft-martin-isis-local-protect-cap-01

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is subject to all provisions
   of section 3 of RFC 3667.  By submitting this Internet-Draft, each
   author represents that any applicable patent or other IPR claims of
   which he or she is aware have been or will be disclosed, and any of
   which he or she become aware will be disclosed, in accordance with
   RFC 3668.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 24, 2005.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).

Abstract

   This document specifies additional information that can inserted in
   IS-IS LSPs to convey link capabilities that may be useful in certain
   applications.  In particular, an IS may indicate that zero or more of



Martin, et al.           Expires April 24, 2005                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft    draft-atlas-ip-local-protect-uturn-01     October 2004


   its links may be used by an upstream IS as an alternate, SPT-disjoint
   path to an arbitrary destination D.  Additionally, an IS may convey
   that zero or more of its links are explicit marked and/or implicit
   U-turn recipient capable, which may be described as capable of
   identifying traffic as U-turn traffic and redirecting the traffic to
   a suitable alternate.  The immediate applicability for these three
   link capabilities is in support of local protection, provided by a
   U-turn alternate, in the event of a link and/or node failure while
   the IS-IS area is reconverging onto a new topology.

Table of Contents

   1.   Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.   Signaling Link Capabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   3.   Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   4.   References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
        Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
        Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . 7

































Martin, et al.           Expires April 24, 2005                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft    draft-atlas-ip-local-protect-uturn-01     October 2004


1.  Introduction

   Recently, an increasing interest in IGP traffic engineering using
   intelligent metric assignment has led to the development and
   deployment of techniques and methods to manage traffic distribution
   and capacity expansion without explicit source routing [ref].  The
   fundamental premise to this approach is that it reduces operational
   complexity by leveraging existing and well-understood routing methods
   to achieve effectivey the same ends as are possible using explicit
   source routing, without adding any new technology to the routing
   system.  Many carriers have adopted this approach as a means to
   better manage bandwidth utilization and overall network efficiency.
   However, in many environments and under certain failure scenarios,
   the IGP TE approach does not allow for fast restoration, as the IGP
   must reconverge.  While fast IGP convergence is a topic of great
   interest, there is concern that a lower floor exists that, if
   crossed, may have a negative impact on the stability of a network.
   As the network diameter and node degree increase, this floor
   invariably raises in some proportionate manner - that is, the bigger
   the network, the slower the overall convergence.

   Depending on the application, restoration time-tolerance varies.  For
   real-time applications, it is certainly reasonable to expect
   restoration times in the &lt50 msec range.  The Fast Reroute method
   specified in [RSVP-TE FRR] is one such mechanism to achieve these
   restoration times, as a precomputed alternate path can service the
   offered load that was destined for a failed link in a loop-free
   fashion.  However, this requires MPLS TE tunnels, which may not be a
   desirable option for reasons mentioned above - namely, the increase
   in complexity.

   [IPFRR], [FRAMEWORK], and [U-TURN] have proposed an alternative to
   tunnel-based restoration in IP networks that is independent of MPLS.
   Clearly, the ability to traffic engineer for bandwidth efficiency and
   fast restoration are attractive to network operators that are opposed
   to deploying MPLS-based RSVP-TE.  Nevertheless, the destination-based
   nature of the classical IP routing paradigm does not afford any
   guarantee that an alternate path around a failure is loop-free.
   [U-TURN] proposes such a mechanism, however, this mechanism requires
   additional information to be distributed via IS-IS flooding so as to
   convey to routers in an area that the capability exists.

2.  Signaling Link Capabilities

   [RFC3784] defines extensions to IS-IS as specified in [IS-IS] and
   extended in [RFC1195] to allow for traffic engineering parameters to
   be flooded throughout an area.  TLV 22, the extended IS-reachability
   TLV is used to add additional information about an IS's connections



Martin, et al.           Expires April 24, 2005                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft    draft-atlas-ip-local-protect-uturn-01     October 2004


   to other IS's, such as available bandwidth and color, by creating sub
   TLVs within TLV 22.  [ISIS-Link-Cap] introduces the notion of
   extending TLV 22, sub-TLV 19 to signal an IS's capabilities.  The
   initial capabilities proposed in [ISIS-Link-Cap] are orthogonal to
   the two proposed here, as those proposed here do not relate
   explicitly to MPLS CSPF or RSVP-TE Fast Reroute.

   This draft proposes the creation of three new flags in TLV 22, Sub
   TLV 19 for indicating an IS's ability to either break U-turns, act as
   an alternate, or both.  The following bits are defined:

   0x5: Eligible Alternate: When this bit is set, an IS is indicating to
      its neighbors that it considers whether the link can be used as an
      alternate next-hop.
   0x6: Explicit Marked U-turn Recipient Capable: When this bit is set,
      an IS can apply the explicitly marked U-turn packet identification
      method [U-TURN] to identify packets as U-turn packets and redirect
      those U-turn packets towards an appropriate alternate next-hop, if
      such is available.  A neighbor, which wishes to use this link as a
      U-turn alternate next-hop, should mark traffic sent on the link
      into a U-turn alternate.
   0x7: Implicit U-turn Recipient Capable: When this bit is set, an IS
      can apply the implicit U-turn packet identification method
      [U-TURN] to identify packets as U-turn packets and redirect those
      U-turn packets towards an appropriate alternate next-hop, if such
      is available.  A neighbor, which wishes to use this link as a
      U-turn alternate next-hop, should not mark traffic sent on the
      link into a U-turn alternate.

3.  Security Considerations

   This document does not introduce any new security issues.

4  References

   [FRAMEWORK]
              Shand, M., "IP Fast Reroute Framework",
              draft-ietf-rtgwg-ipfrr-framework-02.txt (work in
              progress), October 2004.

   [IPFRR]    Atlas, A., "Basic Specification for IP Fast-Reroute:
              Loop-free Alternates",
              draft-ietf-rtgwg-ipfrr-spec-base-01.txt (work in
              progress), October 2004.

   [IS-IS]    "Intermediate System to Intermediate System Intra-Domain
              Routing Exchange Protocol for use in Conjunction with the
              Protocol for Providing the Connectionless-mode Network



Martin, et al.           Expires April 24, 2005                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft    draft-atlas-ip-local-protect-uturn-01     October 2004


              Service (ISO 8473)", ISO 10589.

   [ISIS-Link-Cap]
              Vasseur, J. and S. Previdi, "Definition of an IS-IS Link
              Attribute sub-TLV", draft-vasseur-isis-link-attr-01.txt
              (work in progress), July 2004.

   [RFC1195]  Callon, R., "Use of OSI IS-IS for routing in TCP/IP and
              dual environments", RFC 1195, December 1990.

   [RFC3784]  Smit, H. and T. Li, "Intermediate System to Intermediate
              System (IS-IS) Extensions for Traffic Engineering (TE)",
              RFC 3784, June 2004.

   [RSVP-TE FRR]
              Pan, P., Swallow, G., Atlas, A., Gan, D., Vasseur, J.,
              Jork, M. and D. Cooper, "Fast Reroute Extensions to
              RSVP-TE for LSP Tunnels",
              draft-ietf-mpls-rsvp-lsp-fastreroute-07.txt (work in
              progress).

   [U-TURN]   Atlas, A., "U-turn Alternates for IP/LDP Fast-Reroute",
              draft-atlas-ip-local-protect-uturn-01.txt (work in
              progress), October 2004.


Authors' Addresses

   Christian Martin (editor)
   Verizon
   1880 Campus Commons Drive
   Reston, VA  20191
   USA

   EMail: cmartin@verizon.com


   Alia K. Atlas (editor)
   Avici Systems, Inc.
   101 Billerica Avenue
   N. Billerica, MA  01862
   USA

   Phone: +1 978 964 2070
   EMail: aatlas@avici.com






Martin, et al.           Expires April 24, 2005                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft    draft-atlas-ip-local-protect-uturn-01     October 2004


   Raveendra Torvi
   Avici Systems, Inc.
   101 Billerica Avenue
   N. Billerica, MA  01862
   USA

   Phone: +1 978 964 2026
   EMail: rtorvi@avici.com


   Don Fedyk
   Nortel Networks
   600 Technology Park
   Billerica, MA  01821
   USA

   Phone: +1 978 288 3041
   EMail: dwfedyk@nortelnetworks.com

































Martin, et al.           Expires April 24, 2005                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft    draft-atlas-ip-local-protect-uturn-01     October 2004


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Martin, et al.           Expires April 24, 2005                 [Page 7]
