

CCAMP Working Group                                                  
Internet Draft                                         Young Hwa Kim 
Document: draft-kim-ccamp-cc-protection-04.txt          byung Ho Yae 
Expires: April 2004                                      Jin Ho Hahm 
                                                          Avri Doria 
                                                                ETRI 
                                                       Jun Kyun Choi 
                                                                 ICU 
                                                      Jae Cheol Ryou 
                                                                 CNU 
                                                                                        
                                                        October 2003 
                   
                   
                   
 Requirements for Providing Resilience of Control Channels in GMPLS 
                   
                   
                   
Status of this Memo 
    
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 [1].  
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that      
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
    
    
Abstract 
    
   This document describes requirements for providing the resilience 
   capability of control channels in GMPLS whose control channels can be 
   separated from the data channels. This contribution, as a document 
   that proposes the requirements about resilience of control channels 
   handles related terminologies, base concepts, possible configurations, 
   necessities and requirements, additional considerations including the 
   relationship with other protocol such as LMP. 
 
 
Kim et al                  Expires - April 2004               [Page 1] 
Internet Draft      draft-kim-ccamp-cc-protection-04.txt    October 2003 
 
 
 
 
 
Table of Contents 
    
   1. Summary for Sub-IP Area........................................2 
   2. Main Changes from The Previous Version.........................3 
   3. Conventions Used in This Document..............................3 
   4. Introduction...................................................3 
   5. Control Networks...............................................4 
   6. Concepts for Resilience of Control Channels....................6 
   7. Necessities for Resilience of Control Channels.................6 
   8. Requirements for Resilience of Control Channels................8 
   9. Functions for Resilience of Control Channels..................10 
   Security Considerations..........................................10 
   References.......................................................10 
   Author's Addresses...............................................11 
    
    
1.  Summary for Sub-IP Area 
 
1.1.  Summary 
 
   See the Abstract above. 
 
 
1.2.  Related Documents 
    
   draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-architecture-07.txt, May 2003. 
   draft-ietf-ccamp-lmp-08.txt, March 2003.   
   draft-ietf-mpls-generalized-signaling-09.txt, August 2002. 
    
    
1.3.  Where Does it Fit in the Picture of the Sub-IP Work 
 
   This work fits in the CCAMP WG. 
 
 
1.4.  Why Is It Targeted at This WG 
 
   This draft is targeted at the CCAMP WG because this draft specifies 
   requirements for the resilience capability of the control channels in 
   GMPLS. As such it is believed to fit within the charter because it 
   deals with multi-layer protection and restoration mechanisms that 
   have not yet been specified. A resultant specification from 
   thisrequirements could involve a new protocol or an extension to the 
   Link Management Protocol (LMP). 
    
    
 
 
Kim, et al                                                    [Page 2] 
Internet Draft      draft-kim-ccamp-cc-protection-04.txt    October 2003 
 
 
1.5.  Justification of Work 
    
   The WG should consider this document as it addresses requirements for 
   the resilience capability of control channels that have not been 
   addressed. These are link management mechanisms that have a direct 
   relation to GMPLS protocols such as [LMP]. 
    
    
2.  Main Changes from The Previous Version 
    
   Several changes from the previous version (*03.txt) are as follows:  
    
   - updates of editing errors. 
    
   - as the review consequence of the latest ITU-T relevant documents, 
   clarification of the resilience capability of control plane into that 
   of control channels from the title to the section 9; 
    
   - updates of references with the latest ITU-T and IETF documents. 
    
    
3.  Conventions Used in This Document 
    
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119.  
    
   Terms such as ASTN, UNI, and NNI used in this document refer to 
   [G.807]. 
    
    
4.  Introduction 
    
   As described in [LMP], a control channel is a pair of mutually 
   reachable interfaces that are used to carry control packets between 
   nodes for routing, signaling and link management. In addition to the 
   transport of control packets between nodes within a network, it is 
   possible to do transparent relay of routing information between 
   neighboring networks those control channels. A control entity is the 
   functional process responsible for running signaling, link management, 
   and routing protocols. The term 'control plane' represents aspects of 
   control networks comprising those control channels and control 
   entities used to transport control packets for signaling, link 
   management, and routing.  
    
   The survivability of the control plane refers to the ability of a 
   control network to maintain an acceptable level of control services 
   during one more failures of one or more control channels or control 
   entities. The survivability of control channels is covered in this 
 
 
Kim, et al                                                    [Page 3] 
Internet Draft      draft-kim-ccamp-cc-protection-04.txt    October 2003 
 
 
   document. The survivability of control entities and LSPs between 
   ingress and egress nodes are out of the scope of this document. 
    
   In traditional MPLS, there is an implicit one-to-one association of a 
   control channel to a data channel. Under the one-to-one association 
   control channels and data channels, the protection of control 
   channels may be resolved using the protection schemes for data 
   channels such as 1+1, 1:1, and 1:1 protection or by using the re-
   routing capability of control plane. In other words, where there is 
   fate sharing, i.e. when control channels are not separated from the 
   data channels, there is no need to consider the specific resilience 
   capability for the control channels.  
    
   However, as indicated in [GMPLS-ARCH], a control channel can be 
   separated from the data channel. To allow for the control channels 
   between adjacent nodes to be separated from the associated data-
   bearing links means that there is not a one-to-one association 
   between a control channel and a data channel. Consequently, it means 
   there may be a need for considering the resilience capability for 
   these control channels. If there is no protection mechanism allowing 
   dynamic configuration of control channels between relevant nodes, 
   these nodes have to determine  alternative control channels based on 
   the operator intervention of the management plane or the existing 
   control channel management of LMP. This may result in the degradation 
   of the service provided by a control network. 
    
   In the end, to resolve these problems in control networks, GMPLS 
   nodes have to keep the resilience capability of control channels. for 
   the purpose, to be begin, we have to define a framework or guideline 
   for the capability. This document describes basic concepts of control 
   networks, related terminologies, requirements, and functions to be 
   provided. Then, detailed protection mechanisms of control channels 
   will be covered in a new separate specification, or in an extension 
   of the LMP specification. 
    
    
5.  Control Networks 
    
   As indicated in [G.807], a control network supports the control plane 
   by the act of transferring service-related information between the 
   user and the network and also between network entities. The control 
   network is based upon common control channels, thereby allowing a 
   network operator the capability of developing a separate control 
   network. Common control channels are associated with data channels in 
   the following ways (the following is based on the description 
   contained in [G.807]) :    
    
 
 
Kim, et al                                                    [Page 4] 
Internet Draft      draft-kim-ccamp-cc-protection-04.txt    October 2003 
 
 
   - In associated mode, control messages related to traffic between two 
   network elements are transferred over control channels that directly 
   connect the two network elements;    
    
   - In non-associated mode, control messages between two network 
   elements A and B are routed over several control channels, while 
   traffic signals are routed directly between A and B. The control 
   channels used may vary with time and network conditions;  
    
   - In quasi-associated mode, control messages between nodes A and B 
   follow a predetermined routing path over several control channels 
   while the traffic channels are routed directly between A and B.    
    
   In addition to these control modes, as indicated in [O-UNI], types of 
   network configurations to transport control messages are as follows:    
    
   - In in-fiber type, control messages are carried over a control 
   channel embedded in the data-carrying optical link between network 
   elements;    
    
   - In out-of-fiber type, control messages are carried over a dedicated 
   control channel between adjacent nodes, which is separated from the 
   data-bearing optical links.  
    
   In the case of out-of-fiber type, we can consider a situation that 
   control channels within a fiber that includes data channels can  
   control data channels in that fiber. This scenario is a variant to 
   the configuration where the control channel is physically separated 
   from the fiber including the data channels.  
    
   A similar concept with a control network is found in the signaling 
   communication network (SCN) within the automated switched transport 
   network (ASTN) in ITU-T. As indicated in [G.7712], there may be 
   several physical implementations for the SCN. For example, embedded 
   control channels (ECC) interfaces, LAN interfaces, and WAN interfaces 
   are possible. Here, there is an important reason for the 
   survivability function of control plane: as described in the 
   recommendation, common to each topology is that alternative diverse 
   paths exist between the communication entities (i.e., the ASTN 
   capable network elements). That is, network elements themselves of 
   ASTN may keep alternative control channels such as ECC interfaces, 
   LAN interfaces, and WAN interfaces. Of course, in case of ECC, there 
   may be several direct and indirect interfaces between nodes. 
    
   However, this document focuses on the resilience aspects of control 
   channels between nodes, while [G.7712] and [G.8080] focus on the 
   protection and restoration of control paths over control plane 
   between ingress and egress nodes. For an example, one way of 
 
 
Kim, et al                                                    [Page 5] 
Internet Draft      draft-kim-ccamp-cc-protection-04.txt    October 2003 
 
 
   achieving reliable SCN is to use of packet 1+1 protection for 
   connection-oriented protocol such as MPLS. 
    
    
6.  Concepts for Resilience of Control Channels 
    
   To provide the resilience capability of control channels, several 
   protection concepts for a higher layer could be introduced. For 
   example, these include control packet path, active and standby 
   control channels, physical control channels, protection groups, etc. 
   This section defines these terminologies. Other concepts may also 
   required and can be identified in the future.  
    
   - Control information type : It is the control information type such 
   as routing, signaling, and link management in GMPLS. In more detail, 
   OSPF, IS-IS, and BGP variants are candidates for routing, CR-LDP and 
   RSVP-TE are ones for signaling, and LMP and the protection protocol 
   to be proposed are candidates for link management.  
    
   - Active control channels : these are physical control channels which 
   are currently carrying the control information type. An active 
   control channel becomes a standby control channel when it can not 
   carry the control information due to a failure.  
    
   - Standby control channels : they are physical control channels which 
   are not carrying the control information. Once any of standby control 
   channels is used to carry the control information, the standby 
   control channel becomes an active control channel.  
    
   - Physical control channels : they are timeslots or wavelengths which 
   have been assigned a control channel identifier to carry control 
   information. A physical control channel could not be used for 
   carrying data traffic.  
    
   - Protection group : It is a group of physical control channels using 
   the same type of network configuration or belonging to similar 
   aspects within the same network configuration. 
    
    
7.  Necessities for Resilience of Control Channels 
    
   As indicated in [LMP], a control network could keep at the same time 
   in-fiber and out-of-fiber configurations.   
    
   In general, there may be several advantages of out-of-fiber over in-
   fiber such as the followings:  
    
 
 
Kim, et al                                                    [Page 6] 
Internet Draft      draft-kim-ccamp-cc-protection-04.txt    October 2003 
 
 
   - When using the overhead bytes of SONET/SDH as a control channel, 
   in-fiber may require more resources such as HDLC controllers whereas 
   out-of-fiber could reduce the number of these resources;    
    
   - In case of only in-fiber, it looks that there is no room or no need 
   for protecting control channels. However, out-of-fiber may apply the 
   various and effective software based protection schemes;    
    
   - In-fiber is difficult to separate control plane from transport 
   plane, whereas out-of-fiber is easy to separate control plane;  
    
   - Because in-fiber provides the connection control function only 
   within a single fiber, in-fiber could not provide the connection 
   control function beyond a single fiber, whereas out-of-fiber has no 
   restriction about the number of fibers for the connection control 
   function.  
    
   When the out-of-fiber configuration is used, control channels may be 
   shared to handle several fibers. If there is no protection of control 
   channels at that situation, a failure of the active control channel 
   may cause the problem like temporary suspension of control entities 
   although they are running well. If the recovery of failed control 
   channel takes a long time, the failure will result in loss of service 
   of the control plane. In case of RSVP-variant protocols, if there is 
   no self-refresh procedure, the failure of control channels may result 
   effects such as unwanted connection teardown. In particular, as 
   described in [G.7712], such a failure may impact restoration when 
   ASTN is used to provide restoration of existing connections. It is 
   therefore critical for the control network to provide resiliency when 
   transporting restoration messages. Consequently, to provide the 
   resilience capability of control channels, it is reasonable to use 
   out-of-fiber rather than in-fiber for GMPLS.  
    
   In addition, for the support of concepts such as link bundling, 
   explicit data channel identification, and non-impact between failures 
   of control channels and data channels, the separation between control 
   plane and transport plane has been introduced in MPLS and GMPLS, see 
   [GMPLS-ARCH] and [GMPLS-SIG]. This situation means that failure of 
   control channel does not cause failure of data channels. However, if 
   there is no recovery even beyond the time limits, it may result in 
   the deletion of previously established connections, or invoke 
   operator intervention to manually treat the failure of control 
   channel. It may degrade the quality of service from the view-point of 
   connection control. As indicated in [LMP], there may not be any 
   active control channels available while the data links are still in 
   use. For many applications, it is unacceptable to tear down 
   connections. And, at this situation, the data links under the failed 
   control channel may not be guaranteed the same level of service with 
 
 
Kim, et al                                                    [Page 7] 
Internet Draft      draft-kim-ccamp-cc-protection-04.txt    October 2003 
 
 
   that of control channel before a failure. In [LMP], it is said that 
   the TE link is in a degraded state.   
    
   Eventually, in order to provide the stable and reliable communication 
   environment between control entities of control plane in the out-of- 
   fiber configuration, the protection mechanism of control channels 
   could be applied under the possible network configurations. 
    
    
8.  Requirements for Resilience of Control Channels 
    
   To introduce the resilience capability of control channels into 
   control plane, several requirements have to be identified. These 
   include configuration of control networks, priorities in control 
   channels, choice between reverting and non-reverting modes, relation 
   to LMP, and so on. 
    
    
8.1.  Configuration of Control Networks 
    
   To simplify the approach to the problem domain for the resilience 
   capability of control channels, we assume that a single control 
   channel carries all control packets such as routing, signaling, and 
   link management.  
    
   The support of resilience capability of control channels requires 
   either that the number of active control channels between two nodes 
   has to be greater than one, or there has to be a single active 
   control channel and more than one standby control channel. The 
   important thing is that a pair of adjacent nodes should be configured 
   to know which of the mechanisms is being used.  
    
   If there are several simultaneous active control channels between two 
   nodes with the same control network configuration, at least two 
   control channels among them could be used to carry the same control 
   messages with different sequence numbers on which a receiving node 
   ignores the control packet that arrives late. In this case, the 
   resilience capability of control channels are sufficient with more 
   than two simultaneous active control channels and the processing 
   capability of sequence numbers in routing, signaling, and link 
   management protocols. However, we have to take into account the CPU 
   processing ability and unnecessary overhead because at least twice as 
   many control packets are generated and at least half of them are 
   ignored. 
    
   The more appropriate environment for the resilience capability of 
   control channels is for a control network to  keep a single active 
   control channel and several standby control channels at a time. Then, 
   when a failure on the active control channel occurs, based on the 
 
 
Kim, et al                                                    [Page 8] 
Internet Draft      draft-kim-ccamp-cc-protection-04.txt    October 2003 
 
 
   provisioning rules such as protection group and standby control 
   channels list, it can  switch the failed control channel over to one 
   of standby control channels that becomes a active control channel. Of 
   course, the switch-over has to be possible via automatic operation or 
   operator intervention.   
    
   The separation of control packet types into more than one control 
   channels requires is also possible and requires investigation. But, 
   regardless of separation and non-separation of control packet types, 
   the protection function of control channels should know about which 
   control channel carries which control packet types. 
    
    
8.2. Priorities in Control Channels 
    
   If there is more than a single protection group within a control 
   network, we could assume the priority between protection groups. As a 
   simple example, control channels of associated mode could be PG-1, 
   control channels of quasi-associated mode could be PG-2, and finally 
   control channels of non-associated mode could be PG-3. Here, we could 
   assume that PG-1 is assigned the highest priority, PG-2 is assigned 
   the higher priority, and PG-3 is assigned the lowest priority, based 
   on factors such as network configuration and transmission speed of 
   control channels. Control channels within the same and other 
   protection groups could be switched via automatic operation or 
   operator intervention based on provisioning rules assigned to each 
   control channel. 
    
    
8.3. Reverting and Non-reverting Modes 
    
   Reverting mode may cause the unnecessary protection operation within 
   the same protection group. Although the priority of an control 
   channel is lower than that of another control channel recovered from 
   failure, it is appropriate to keep the current status for more simple 
   protection operation. That is, non-reverting mode shall be applied 
   within the same protection group. However, recovery between 
   protection groups is different from that within the same protection 
   group. It is preferable to use reverting mode than non-reverting mode 
   to provide better quality of service (QoS) from the perspective of 
   the control plane. 
    
    
8.4. Relation to LMP 
    
   Using the neighbor discovery of LMP, the configuration of control 
   channels is resolved. In case of in-fiber type, automatic 
   configuration of control channels is possible. However, In case of 
   out-of-fiber type, there is still no automatic configuration 
 
 
Kim, et al                                                    [Page 9] 
Internet Draft      draft-kim-ccamp-cc-protection-04.txt    October 2003 
 
 
   mechanism of control channels, and the work for the automatic 
   configuration is  progressing in IETF. If the automatic configuration 
   of control channels for out-of-fiber is supported, more natural 
   mechanisms for protecting control channels may be supported. In 
   addition, there may be a dispute whether LMP is performed first, or 
   the protection function of control channels is performed first. It is 
   desirable to first of all perform the protection function than LMP 
   and other GMPLS protocols. As a whole, LMP has several procedures 
   which are relevant for the support of the resilience capability of 
   control channels. The relation of protection to LMP requires 
   investigation. 
    
    
9.  Functions for Resilience of Control Channels 
    
   The possible functions to be provided for the resilience capability 
   of control channels include but are not limited to:  
    
   - The function of negotiating the control network configuration;  
    
   - The function of negotiating protection attributes such as control 
   modes, standby control channels list, and etc about a control 
   channel;   
    
   - The function of inquiry into the protection attributes that an 
   entity requests the information of protection attributes to the other 
   to compare with the own attributes;   
    
   - The function of automatic switchover that an entity requests a 
   switchover of the active control channel to one of standby control 
   channels without operator's intervention when the active control 
   channel suffers a failure, or on the reverting recovery;   
    
   - The function of manual switchover of a control channel through the 
   operator intervention. 
    
    
Security Considerations 
    
   Security issues are not considered in this proposal. However, It  
   looks that the security considerations mentioned in [LMP] may be  
   applied in this protocol at the same. 
    
    
References 
    
    
   [G.807] ITU-T Recommendation G.807, "Requirements for Automatic  
   Switched Transport Networks (ASTN)", July 2001.  
 
 
Kim, et al                                                   [Page 10] 
Internet Draft      draft-kim-ccamp-cc-protection-04.txt    October 2003 
 
 
    
   [G.7712] ITU-T Recommendation G.7712, "Architecture and Specification 
   of Data Communications Network", March 2003. 
    
   [G.8080] ITU-T Recommendation G. 8080, " Architecture for the 
   automatically switched optical network (ASON)", March 2003. 
    
   [O-UNI] OIF, OIF2000.125.7, "User Network Interface (UNI) 1.0  
   Signaling Specification", October 2001.  
    
   [GMPLS-ARCH] Eric Mannie, "Generalized Multi-Protocol Label Switching 
   (GMPLS) Architecture", Internet Draft, draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-
   architecture-07.txt, May 2003.  
    
   [LMP] J. Lang, et al, "Link Management Protocol", Internet Draft, 
   draft-ietf-ccamp-lmp-08.txt, March 2003.  
    
   [GMPLS-SIG] Lou Berger, et al, "Generalized MPLS Signaling Functional 
   Description", Internet Draft, draft-ietf-mpls-generalized-signaling-
   09.txt, August 2002. 
    
 
Author's Addresses 
    
   Young Hwa Kim  
   ETRI  
   61 Gajeong-dong, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon, 305-350  
   Phone: +82 42 860 5819  
   E-mail: yhwkim@etri.re.kr  
    
   Byung Ho Yae 
   ETRI  
   61 Gajeong-dong, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon, 305-350  
   Phone: +82 42 860 5819  
   E-mail: bhyae@etri.re.kr  
    
   Jin Ho Hahm  
   ETRI  
   161 Gajeong-dong, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon, 305-350  
   Phone: +82 42 860 6048  
   E-mail: jhhahm.etri.re.kr  
    
   Avri Doria   
   ETRI   
   161 Gajeong-dong, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon, 305-350   
   Phone: +82 42 860 1019 
   E-mail: avri@etri.re.kr 
       
   Jun Kyun Choi   
 
 
Kim, et al                                                   [Page 11] 
Internet Draft      draft-kim-ccamp-cc-protection-04.txt    October 2003 
 
 
   Information and Communications University (ICU) 
   58-4 Hwa Ahm Dong, Yuseong, Daejeon, 305-732   
   Phone: +82-42-866-6122   
   Email: jkchoi@icu.ac.kr   
    
   Jae Cheol Ryou  
   Dept. of Computer Science, Chungnam National University (CNU)  
   220 Gung-dong, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon, 305-764  
   Phone: +82 42 821 7443  
   E-mail: jcryou@home.cnu.ac.kr 
      
 
 
 
Kim, et al                                                   [Page 12] 