



v6ops                                                         J. Jaeggli
Internet-Draft                                                    Fastly
Intended status: Informational                                   M. Hite
Expires: August 18, 2014                                       M. Byerly
                                                                   Zynga
                                                       February 14, 2014


 Close encounters of the icmp type 2 kind (near misses with ICMPv6 PTB)
               draft-v6ops-jaeggli-pmtud-ecmp-problem-00

Abstract

   This document calls attention to the problem posed to ICMP type 2
   (PTB) messages by using stateless loading balancing in front of
   statelful services.  It discusses operational mitigations that can
   mitigate this kind of failure.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 18, 2014.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2014 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of




Jaeggli, et al.          Expires August 18, 2014                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft           misses with ICMPv6 PTB            February 2014


   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   3.  mitigation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     3.1.  Implementation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   4.  Improvements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   5.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   6.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   7.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5

1.  Introduction

   The operators of large internet applications face some challenges
   associated with scaling their infrastructure.  One approach in the
   toolbox, used in conjunction with others is the stateless
   distribution of incoming tcp sessions to stateful servers or to
   middle boxes known as load-balancers (which could be layer-4 devices
   or full application proxies) using an ecmp hash.  Distribution of
   traffic in this fashion presents a problem when dealing with icmp
   signaling that does not match the values used compute the hash
   employed to distribute incoming traffic.  A case that is particularly
   problematic operationally is path MTU discovery (PMTUD).

2.  Problem

   A common application for stateless load-balancing of TCP or UDP flows
   is to perform an initial subdivision of flows in front of a stateful
   load-balancer tier or multiple servers such that the workload can be
   divided into managable chunks.  The division is performed using ECMP
   forwarding and a stateless but sticky algorythm for hashing the flows
   across the available paths.  This is constrained form of anycast
   distribution where all anycast destinations are eqidistant
   topologically from the upstream router making the last nexthop
   forwarding decision.  In this approach the hash used in path
   selection has to use available headers, typically IP-source/IP-
   destination/protocol/source-port/destination-port for TCP or UDP
   though it could be limited to IP-source / IP-destination or in the
   case of IPv6 IP-source/IP-destination/flow-label.

   A problem common to this approach to distribution through hashing is
   it's impact on path-mtu-discovery.  An ICMP6 type 2 PTB message
   generated on the path taken by packets originating from a statelessy
   load balanced server will have the anycast address as desintation and



Jaeggli, et al.          Expires August 18, 2014                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft           misses with ICMPv6 PTB            February 2014


   will be statelessly load-balanced to one of the stateful
   loadbalancers.  While the ICMPv6 PTB message contains as much of the
   packet that could not be forwarded as possible the payload does not
   factor into the forwarding decision and it is not possible to
   reconstruct the results of the inward bound hashing decision (by
   reverseing the order of the source/dest/source port/dest port/
   protocol number or equivalent hash).

   An example packet flow and topology follow.


   ptb -> router ecmp -> nexthop L4/L7 load balancer -> destination

     router --> load-balancer 1 --->
          \\--> load-balancer 2 ---> load-balanced service
           \--> load-balancer N --->


                                 Figure 1

   The router ECMP decsion is used because it is part of the forwarding
   architecture, can be performed at what amounts to line-rate and is
   also not depedant on the existance of shared memory or coordination
   across a distributed forwarding architecture.  The ECMP decision is
   determinstic with resepct to packets having the same hash.

   The typical case where ICMPv6 PTB messages are recieved at the load-
   balancer is where the path MTU from the client to the load-balancer
   is limited by a tunnel, which the client is itself not aware of.  In
   the case of a TCP connection where TLS is employed, the first packet
   that is likely to exceed a tunnel MTU lower than that specified by
   the MSS on the client and the load-balancer/server is the serverhello
   and certificate (With http the client is likely to send the first
   packet exceeding the MTU given the loquatious nature of http
   clients).

   Direct experience says that the frequency of PTB messages is fairly
   low as a percentage of traffic is pretty low, and that says a lot
   about native vs tunneled multicast deployment and techniques such as
   happy-eyeballs may actually contribute some amelioration to the IPv6
   client experience.  Still the expectation is that PMTUD should work
   and that unecessary breakage of client traffic should work.

   Some final oberservations are that it is typically not possible even
   if potentially desirable to be able to independantly set the TCP mss
   for different address families.  The problem as described does also
   impact IPv4, however the ability to fragment on wire and the relative
   rarity of sub-1500 byte MTUs that are not coupled to changes in



Jaeggli, et al.          Expires August 18, 2014                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft           misses with ICMPv6 PTB            February 2014


   client behavior (client vpn tunnels for example typically set the MTU
   accordingly for perfomance reasons) makes the problem sufficiently
   rare that some depolyments simply choose to ignore it.

3.  mitigation

   Mitigation of the issue of effectively random distribution of ICMPv6
   PTB messages involves insuring that the packet in question is
   distributed to the load-balancer responsible for for the flow for
   which it is generated.  Mitigation could be done by looking into
   payload of the ICMP message as the load balancer would (to determine
   which TCP flow it was associated with) before making a forwarding
   decision.

   Alternative mitigation is predicated distributing the PTB message to
   all load-balancers under the assumption that the one that needs it
   will be able to match it to a flow and the others will safely discard
   it.  Such distribution has signficant implications for resource
   consumption (it might result in a 10 or more fold increase in the
   amount of ICMP PTB traffic) and the potential for DOS if not
   carefully employed.  Fortunately the number of flows for which this
   problem occurs is relatively small (10 or fewer pps on 1Gb/s or more
   worth of https traffic) and sensible ingress rate limits can protect
   the load-balancer tiers with potential fallout only under
   circumstances of deliberate duress.

3.1.  Implementation

   1.  Filter-based-forwarding matches next-header ICMP6 ICMP type-2 and
       matches a next hop on a particular subnet directly attached to
       both border routers.  (Filter is policed to 1000pps)

   2.  Filter is applied on input side of all external interfaces

   3.  A proxy located at the next hop forwards ICMP6 type-2 packets
       recived at the nexthop to an ethernet multicast address (example
       ff:ff:ff:ff:ff:ff) on all specificed subnets.  This was
       necessitated by, The routers inability (in IPv6) to forward the
       same packet to multiple nexthops.

   4.  load balancer(s) recieve and discard or process packet as needed

4.  Improvements

   There are several ways to imagine that improvements could be made to
   the situation with respect load balancing ICMP PTB.





Jaeggli, et al.          Expires August 18, 2014                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft           misses with ICMPv6 PTB            February 2014


   1.  Routers with sufficient capacity within the lookup process could
       parse all the way through the L3 or L4 header in the ICMP Payload
       begining at bit offset 32 of the ICMP header.  By reordering the
       elements of the hash to match the inward direction of the flow
       the PTB could be directed to the same nexthop as the incoming
       packets in the flow.

   2.  The Fib could be programed with a multicast distribution tree
       that included all of the necessary nexthops.

5.  Acknowledgements

6.  IANA Considerations

   This memo includes no request to IANA.

7.  Security Considerations

Authors' Addresses

   Joel Jaeggli
   Fastly
   Mountain View, CA
   US

   Email: joelja@gmail.com


   Matt Hite
   Zynga
   Redwood City, CA
   US

   Email: mhite@zynga.com


   Matt Byerly
   Zynga
   HI
   US

   Email: mbyerly@zynga.com









Jaeggli, et al.          Expires August 18, 2014                [Page 5]
