INTERNET-DRAFT                                                  R. Jain,
Expires: July 2000                                           T. Raleigh
                                                  Telcordia Technologies
                                                     (formerly Bellcore)

                                                        M. Bereschinsky,
                                                        C. Graff
                                                           US Army CECOM
                                                           February 2000


                Mobile IP with Location Registers (MIP-LR)
                       <draft-jain-miplr-00.txt>



Status of this Memo

This document is only intended to provide information for the Internet
community.  It does not aim to specify an Internet standard.

Distribution of this memo is unlimited.

This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with all
provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.  Internet-Drafts are working
documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas, and
its working groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute working
documents as Internet-Drafts.

Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference material
or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at:
    http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at:
    http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.


Abstract

This document is intended only to provide information to the Internet
community.  The Mobile IP (MIP) protocol for IP version 4 provides
continuous Internet connectivity to mobile hosts, without requiring any
changes to existing routers and higher-layer applications.  This




Mobile IP-LR                                                    [Page  1]


Expiration Date May  2000                                       Nov. 1999


document describes an alternative protocol, Mobile IP with Location
Registers (MIP-LR), where the sender first queries a database, called a
Location Register, to obtain the recipients current location.  MIP-LR
is designed for operation in tactical military environments, enterprise
environments or within logical administrative domains, as it requires a
sending host to be aware which hosts implement the MIP-LR protocol.
MIP-LR gives up the transparency of MIP for several benefits in the
areas of survivability, performance and interoperability. 

MIP-LR improves survivability for situations where the mobile's home
network is particularly vulnerable (e.g. in the forward area of a
battlefield), by allowing location registers to be placed and
replicated outside the home network.  This document describes how
replicated location registers can be managed by Translation Server or
Quorum schemes.  In terms of performance, MIP-LR avoids triangle
routing and tunneling, and reduces the load on the home network as well
as the home agents.  MIP-LR provides improved interoperability with
protocols such as RSVP for providing QoS guarantees.  Finally, MIP-LR
is interoperable with MIP, such that hosts which implement only MIP can
continue to operate as expected (provided the provisions required by
MIP, such as Home and Foreign Agents, are appropriately provided)
without gaining any of the benefits of MIP-LR.  We have developed a
working version of the MIP-LR protocol running on Linux hosts.


Table of Contents

1. INTRODUCTION                                               2
   1.1 MOBILE IP                                              3
   1.2 SURVIVABILITY                                          4
   1.3 PERFORMANCE     	                                      5
   1.4 INTEROPERABILITY                                       6
2. MOBILE IP WITH LOCATION REGISTERS                          7
   2.1 MIP-LR OPERATION                                       8
       2.1.1 Subnet discovery                                 8
       2.1.2 Registration                                     8
       2.1.3 Packet delivery                                  8
       2.1.4 Cache maintenance                                9
       2.1.5 Determining hosts which speak MIP-LR             9
    2.2 OBTAINING THE HLR ADDRESS                            10
    2.3 DISCUSSION OF MIP-LR DESIGN                          11
       2.3.1 Interoperability with MIP                       11
       2.3.2 Survivability of VLRs                           12
       2.3.3 Eliminating VLRs                                12
3. MANAGING MULTIPLE HLRs                                    13
    3.1 TRANSLATION SERVERS                                  13




Mobile IP-LR                                                    [Page  2]


Expiration Date May  2000                                       Nov. 1999


       3.1.1 Single Translation Server                       14
       3.1.2 Multiple Translation Servers                    17
    3.2 QUORUM CONSENSUS                                     18
4. REMARKS                                                   21
5. SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS                                   22
6. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS                                           22
7. AUTHORS' ADDRESSES                                        22


1. Introduction

This document is intended only to provide information to the Internet
community.  It provides a protocol similar in many respects to Mobile
IP, but provides certain attractive features for particular types of
networks.  Since Mobile IP has already been approved for the standards
track this draft is submitted for informational purposes only.  We have
developed a running version of the proposed protocol on Linux hosts.

The document describes the Mobile IP with Location Registers (MIP-LR)
protocol that is designed to provide mobile hosts with continuous
Internet access.  MIP-LR is designed specifically for closed domains,
rather than the Internet at large, and thus makes design trade-offs
different from those made by Mobile IP.  In particular, it gives up the
transparency of Mobile IP for improved survivability, performance, and
interoperability with RSVP.  It can also interoperate with MIP.
MIP-LR addresses the following four limitations of MIP:

1. Home Agent Location.  The mobile's Home Agent must be located in its
home network.

2. Home Agent Vulnerability.  There is no scheme to allow multiple,
geographically distributed Home Agents located outside the Home Network
to serve the user.

3. Triangle Routing.  All packets destined to the mobile host must
traverse its home network.

4. Tunneling.  Packets destined to the mobile must be tunneled
(typically by being encapsulated inside another IP packet) enroute.

The first two limitations inhibit survivability, particularly in a
military scenario where the mobile's home network may be in a
vulnerable forward area.  The second two limitations imply a
performance penalty and also inhibit interoperability with other
protocols like RSVP which rely on inspecting the original IP packet
header.




Mobile IP-LR                                                    [Page  3]


Expiration Date May  2000                                       Nov. 1999



MIP-LR uses a set of databases, called Location Registers, to maintain
the current Care-Of Address (COA) of the mobile host.  When a mobile
host moves from one subnet to another, it registers its current COA
with a database called a Home Location Register (HLR).  When a
correspondent host has a packet to send, it first queries the HLR to
obtain the mobile host's COA, and then sends packets directly to the
mobile host.  Observe that the mapping from the mobile host's permanent
IP address to its COA is done by the IP layer at the correspondent host
and is transparent to higher-layer protocols; the reverse mapping is
done at the mobile.  The correspondent host caches the mobile host's
COA to avoid querying the HLR for every subsequent packet destined for
the mobile host.  The mobile host maintains a list of correspondent
host's with which it is in active communication and informs them if it
moves to a different subnet (as is done in Mobile IP for IPv6).

This document is organized as follows.  The rest of this section
briefly describes MIP and motivates the need for MIP-LR by describing
some of the limitations of MIP in more detail.  In sec.  2 we describe
MIP-LR.  In sec. 3 we discuss how the survivability of MIP-LR can be
enhanced further by using replicated mobility databases, and present
two schemes for managing the replicated databases.  Finally, in sec. 4
we end with brief remarks.

1.1 Mobile IP 

The operation of the Mobile IP protocol (MIP) [1] for supporting
continuous Internet connectivity for mobile hosts (MH) can be
summarized as follows.  An MH is always identified by the IP address it
has when in its home network, called its home address.  The home
network contains an entity (typically, a router) called the Home Agent
(HA) that maintains information about the mobile host's current
location.  When a mobile host is visiting a foreign network mobility
support is provided by a Foreign Agent (FA) in the foreign subnet.  A
mobile host discovers whether it is in the home or a foreign network
either because it receives agent advertisement messages broadcast
periodically on the local subnet by the Home and Foreign Agents or
because they respond to agent solicitation messages the mobile host
broadcasts.  In its home network, the mobile host operates without
mobility services.  In a foreign network, the mobile host uses the
Foreign Agents address as a Care-of Address (COA), or obtains a COA by
some external means such as the Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol
(DHCP) [2], in which case it is called a co-located COA.  The mobile
host registers the mapping from its home address to its COA (called a
mobility binding) by sending a registration request to the Home Agent
via the Foreign Agent.




Mobile IP-LR                                                    [Page  4]


Expiration Date May  2000                                       Nov. 1999



Any Correspondent Host (CH) wishing to communicate with the MH need not
be aware the mobile host has moved; it simply sends IP packets
addressed to the mobile host's home address.  These packets are routed
via normal IP routing to the mobile host's home network, where they are
intercepted by the HA (e.g.  by means of a proxy ARP mechanism).  The
latter tunnels the packet (typically, encapsulates each such packet in
another IP packet which contains the mobile host's COA as the
destination address) to the mobile host's new location.  If the COA is
the FAs address the FA detunnels (decapsulates) the packet and delivers
the original packet to the mobile host.  Otherwise, if it is a
co-located COA, the mobile host decapsulates the packet itself.  Note
that packets from the mobile host to the correspondent host need not
necessarily be tunneled; the mobile host can simply send them directly
to the correspondent host.

1.2 Survivability 

Both MIP (as well as MIP with Route Optimization, MIP-RO, summarized
below) suffer from some limitations when it comes to the
fault-tolerance of a critical element of the protocols, namely the Home
Agent.  The first is the requirement that the Home Agent must reside in
the home network of the mobile host so that it can intercept IP packets
(delivered by normal IP routing to the home network) destined for the
mobile host while the latter is visiting a foreign network.  In MIP,
after the mobile host registers, the Home Agent sends out a gratuitous
ARP to update the ARP cache entries of all hosts on the home network,
mapping the mobile host's IP address to the Home Agent's link-layer
address, and subsequently begins using proxy ARP to reply to ARP
requests for the mobile host's IP address with it's (the Home Agent's)
own link-layer address.  A packet destined for the mobile host from
anywhere in the Internet reaches the gateway on the mobile host's home
network by usual IP routing, and then reaches the Home Agent because of
the gratuitous and proxy ARPs.  If the Home Agent is not located in the
home network, gratuitous and proxy ARP can still be used within the
Home Agent's subnet to allow the Home Agent to intercept packets
originated from hosts within the home network which are destined for
the mobile host.  However, normal IP routing will not deliver packets
from the rest of the Internet to the Home Agent, but only to the
gateway on the mobile host's home network.  Unless normal IP routing is
modified or the usual intent and semantics of the routing protocols are
modified it seems difficult to overcome this limitation in MIP and

In situations where the home network is vulnerable to failure this
becomes a serious problem.  For example, consider mobile devices being
used by military personnel in a battle zone.  The home network of a




Mobile IP-LR                                                    [Page  5]


Expiration Date May  2000                                       Nov. 1999


particular user would be his or her company or platoon, but requiring
the Home Agent to be in the home network would place the HA at a highly
vulnerable location.  Instead, it is essential that it be possible to
place the Home Agent at a secure distant location.  Similar
considerations arise for other scenarios (e.g.  disaster relief).

The second limitation of MIP and MIP-RO is that it is not possible at
present to replicate the Home Agent at various locations distributed
throughout the network (and outside the home network) in order to
achieve survivability.

1.3 Performance 

A well-known problem with MIP is that it uses triangle routing, i.e.,
packets from the correspondent host to the mobile host must in general
travel via three (sub)networks: the correspondent host's subnet, the
home agents subnet, and the subnet where the mobile host is currently
located.  Triangle routing incurs potentially significant overheads in
the delay and network resources consumed for communication with mobile
hosts.  Triangle routing also places significant load on the home
network and the Home Agent for processing every packet destined for the
mobile host (and if co-located COAs are not used, on the Foreign
Agent).

An extension to the basic MIP protocol called Route Optimization
(MIP-RO) [3] avoids triangle routing.  It can be summarized as
follows.  When the Home Agent intercepts an IP packet destined for the
mobile host it informs the sender, i.e., the correspondent host, of the
mobile host's current COA.  This is called a binding update message, and
it also contains a Lifetime field indicating for how long the binding
is valid.  The correspondent host caches this information and sends
subsequent packets by tunneling them directly to the mobile host's COA.
The correspondent host issues binding requests to the Home Agent to
refresh the binding before the Lifetime expires.  When the MH moves to
a new subnet the outdated mobility binding maintained at the
correspondent host is updated as follows.  The mobile registers with
the new Foreign Agent, which not only forwards the registration to the
Home Agent but also informs the old Foreign Agent.  If the old Foreign
Agent receives a packet from a correspondent host destined for the
mobile host it issues a binding warning message to the Home Agent,
which in turn issues a binding update message to the correspondent
host; in addition, the old Foreign Agent can (optionally) tunnel the
packet to the mobile host's new COA.  

A problem with MIP-RO is that packets sent by the correspondent host
still use the triangle route until the correspondent host receives the




Mobile IP-LR                                                    [Page  6]


Expiration Date May  2000                                       Nov. 1999


binding update message.  In addition, the bandwidth and protocol
overhead associated with tunneling of packets is still present.
Finally, as we discuss below, interoperability issues arise when MIP-RO
is used in conjunction with other protocols that rely on examining IP
headers of data packets for their operation.

1.4 Interoperability 

Consider the scenario where a protocol such as RSVP [4] is used to
provide Quality-of-Service guarantees for communications between
correspondent and mobile hosts.  The RSVP protocol provides a mechanism
for reserving resources along the path from a source host to a
destination host so that subsequent data packets are guaranteed to have
certain bandwidth available and meet certain delay bounds.  The
operation of RSVP can be summarized as follows.  The source host sends
an initial signaling packet (called a Path message) to record the route
taken to the destination.  The destination node determines the network
resources needed to meet the desired QoS, and replies with a resource
reservation packet (a Resv message) which travels, in reverse, exactly
the route taken by the Path message, and as it does so, reserves
bandwidth and processing resources at the routers along the reverse
path.  Subsequent data packets sent by the correspondent host thus
enjoy guaranteed bandwidth and resources.  RSVP also supports data
packet filtering, enabling a receiver to specify in the Resv message
which packets may utilize the reserved resources (e.g.  only packets
from a given sender IP address and port.)

Problems arise when RSVP is used in conjunction with MIP or MIP-RO.
Firstly, routers will not be able to recognize a Path message
encapsulated while being tunneled, and thus will not record the
information required for reservations to be effected by the resource
reservation message.  Thus the portion of the route where tunneling is
used is viewed as a non-RSVP cloud, i.e., a network which does not
support RSVP.  The second problem is that routers along the tunneled
portion of the route will not be able to implement data packet
filtering, thus defeating one of the major beneficial features of RSVP
[5].  While in MIP the tunneled portion of the route is from the HA to
the mobile host (or the FA if co-located COAs are not used), in MIP-RO
tunneling is used for the entire direct route from the CH to the mobile
be reserved along the triangle route from the correspondent host to the
mobile host.

With MIP-RO, since RSVP issues Path messages periodically (in order
to overcome the effects of routing changes, etc., that may take place
in a fixed network), eventually resources will be reserved along the
direct route to the mobile host.  However, this also raises some




Mobile IP-LR                                                    [Page  7]


Expiration Date May  2000                                       Nov. 1999


issues.  How soon the direct route to the mobile host is used now
depends not only on the binding update delay but also the frequency
at which Path messages are sent.  RSVP has a local repair facility
which allows the routing process at the CH to inform RSVP that a
routing change has taken place, thus triggering the immediate
transmission of a Path message without waiting for the Path refresh
timer to expire.  However, local repair is currently not a
requirement of RSVP, and if a host does not implement it the Path
message will be sent only when the timer expires (typically it may
have a period of the order of 30 seconds.) In any case, unnecessary
delay and resource consumption will still result, and the QoS
guarantees desired may not be achieved since packets sent along the
triangle route receive different treatment than those sent directly.
MIP-RO.



2. Mobile IP with Location Registers 

In this section we will first describe the operation of MIP-LR assuming
there is only a single HLR serving the mobile host; later we will
describe the extensions for survivability.  The basic flavor of
MIP-LR is conveyed in the following diagram.


                     +-----+         
                     | HLR |          
                     |     |          +-------+ 
                     +-----+          | VLR   |
     2) Correspondent  /|\            |       | 
        host queries    |             +-------+
        mobile's HLR    |                /|\     1) Mobile node
        for mobile's    |                 |         receives 
        current IP     \|/               \|/        advertisements
        address.      +----+          +--------+    from VLR, 
                      |host| =======> | mobile |    and registers
                      +----+          | node   |    with HLR
                                      +--------+
                             3) Host
                                sends packets
                                directly to
                                mobile


To motivate the description of MIP-LR, consider the major functions
performed by the Home and Foreign Agents in MIP and MIP-RO:




Mobile IP-LR                                                    [Page  8]


Expiration Date May  2000                                       Nov. 1999



1.  Agent and network discovery: Home and Foreign agents broadcast (or
multicast) agent advertisements and respond to solicitations.  This
enables the mobile host to determine whether it is in its home or a
foreign network.

2.  Database maintenance: The Home Agent maintains the mapping from the
mobile host's IP address to its COA.  The Foreign Agent maintains the
reverse mapping and/or the mapping from the mobile host's IP address to
its link-layer (hardware) address in the foreign network.

3.  Tunneling.  The Home and Foreign agents encapsulate (and
decapsulate) packets and forward them appropriately.

4.  COA allocation.  The Foreign Agent assigns a COA to the mobile host
(if co-located COAs are not used.) 

In MIP-LR we eliminate the tunneling function.  In addition, the
database mapping the mobile host's IP address to its COA is maintained
by an entity we call the Home Location Register (HLR), by analogy with
cellular systems, since it is queried in a manner analogous to how the
HLR is queried in cellular systems to determine the mobile host's
location.  As we will see shortly, unlike the Home Agent, it need not
necessarily be located in the home network.  In keeping with the
cellular analogy, the Foreign Agent is re-named the Visitor Location
Register (VLR).

2.1 MIP-LR operation

2.1.1 Subnet discovery 

Subnet discovery in MIP-LR is carried out as in MIP, using agent
advertisements and solicitations by the HLR and VLR.

2.1.2 Registration 

The location of a mobile host is always registered at the HLR.  When
the mobile is at home the HLR simply maintains the identity mapping.
When the mobile host moves to a foreign network it obtains a COA for
that subnet, as for MIP.

2.1.3 Packet delivery 

A Correspondent Host wishing to send a packet to the mobile host for
the first time must first discover the IP address of the mobile host's
HLR (we will describe this process below, but for the moment note that




Mobile IP-LR                                                    [Page  9]


Expiration Date May  2000                                       Nov. 1999


it needs to be carried out relatively infrequently.)  The correspondent
host then issues a query to the HLR, which returns the mobile host's
COA as well as the remaining registration Lifetime.  The correspondent
host then directly sends the packet to the mobile host's COA. The IP
layer at the correspondent host thus hides the mapping from the mobile
host's IP address to its COA from higher layers protocols (e.g. TCP)
and the IP layer at the mobile host does the same for the reverse
mapping.  The correspondent host caches the mobile host's COA and uses
the cached binding for subsequent packets destined to the mobile host.
The correspondent host must refresh its binding cache by querying the
HLR again before the mobile host's remaining registration Lifetime
expires.

2.1.4 Cache maintenance 

The mobile host maintains a list of correspondent hosts that have sent
messages to it during the current registration Lifetime.  When the
mobile host moves to a new subnet it informs these hosts of its new COA
in the new subnet by means of a Binding Update message.  This mechanism
for updating the cache at correspondent hosts is similar to that
defined for Mobile IP in IPv6 [6].  We refer to this as eager caching
and omit further details here.  

Packets from the correspondent host which are in flight, i.e., after
the mobile has moved but before the binding update has reached the
correspondent, may reach the old subnet and be lost.  However, MIP-LR
allows the use of a mechanism similar to that in MIP-RO, where the VLR
in the old subnet is notified when the mobile has registered at the new
subnet, and the old VLR can forward packets to the new VLR.  Unlike
MIP-RO, the old VLR need not send a binding warning to the HLR in this
case.

2.1.5 Determining hosts which speak MIP-LR 

In MIP and MIP-RO the correspondent host does not take any special
action when communicating with mobile hosts.  MIP-LR sacrifices this
transparency for improved survivability, performance, and
interoperability with RSVP.  Thus in MIP-LR the correspondent host must
issue a query to the HLR to discover the mobile's current address.  In
principle, this query could be sent for all hosts, fixed and
mobility-capable, that a correspondent host wishes to communicate
with.  For certain specialized enterprise environments, (e.g.  military
battlefield environments) where the substantial majority of hosts are
mobility-capable this may be reasonable. However, this would not be
efficient in the situation where most hosts are fixed.  In that case,
the correspondent host must be able to discover, before launching the




Mobile IP-LR                                                    [Page 10]


Expiration Date May  2000                                       Nov. 1999


query to the HLR, whether the destination host is fixed or is
mobility-capable.  In addition, if the destination host is
mobility-capable, the correspondent host must discover whether it
implements MIP-LR.  Since the latter requirement subsumes the former,
it is sufficient for the correspondent host to discover which hosts
speak MIP-LR.

Different possible approaches to doing this are:  

1.  Address space partitioning.  Certain address ranges in the
enterprise system are known to belong to mobility-capable hosts.  An
example of address space partitioning is in the public telephone system
(e.g. 800 numbers.) While this is not useful in general, for closed
networks where a system administrator has control over a private IP
address space this might be feasible.

2. An off-line discovery mechanism, e.g.  a notification or directory
scheme.  Correspondent hosts within the enterprise system are
periodically notified, or periodically discover by querying a
directory, which hosts are mobility-capable and implement MIP-LR. For a
given host this information only changes when its status changes, i.e.,
it is first introduced into the system or when it is upgraded from
being a fixed to a mobility-capable host.  Thus the period for
obtaining this information is dependent upon the characteristics of the
network installation, but typically would be of the order of hours or
even days.  During the interval after a mobility-capable host changes
status but before this information has been obtained by the other hosts
in the system, it can still receive packets, although less
efficiently, as follows.  The mobility-capable host registers with the
HLR as per MIP-LR.  A correspondent host that erroneously believes this
mobility-capable host is fixed sends the packet to the destinations
permanent IP address without querying the HLR.  If the destination host
is in its home network, the packet is delivered correctly.  Otherwise,
if the host has moved, an ICMP message indicating that the host is
unreachable will be returned to the correspondent; at that point the
correspondent queries the HLR and obtains the destinations COA and
subsequently communicates with the host using MIP-LR.


2.2 Obtaining the HLR address 

In this section we discuss how the correspondent host obtains the
address of the mobile host's HLR.  As we shall see, this is related to
the issues of HLR survivability, and later we present two alternative
schemes for obtaining the HLR address as well as maintaining HLR
survivability.  If the HLR serving the mobile host was located in the




Mobile IP-LR                                                    [Page 11]


Expiration Date May  2000                                       Nov. 1999


mobile's network, the following approach could be used.  The
correspondent host uses the mobile host's permanent IP address to issue
the query. If the mobile host is at home, the mobile responds with the
identity mapping.  If the mobile is away from away from home and has
registered, the query will be trapped by the HLR, e.g. by using a
link-layer mechanism such as issuing a proxy and gratuitous ARP message
mapping the mobile host's permanent IP address to the HLRs link-layer
address.  The HLR will respond to the query with the mobile host's COA.

However, for survivability the HLR may not be located in the mobile's
home network.  In that case, two possibilities arise: that a single HLR
suffices, or multiple HLRs are required.  In a small system it might be
possible that a single HLR suffices to support all the mobile hosts in
the system.  In that case every correspondent host may be configured
with the address of the HLR; to improve survivability, the HLR can be
implemented on a commercial hot-standby fault-tolerant platform.  In
general, however, multiple HLRs may be required to distribute the
workload, to reduce the network communication cost of contacting the
HLR, and to obtain survivability, by scattering the HLRs throughout the
network.  In section 3 we suggest two possible approaches for
maintaining the multiple HLRs.

2.3 Discussion of MIP-LR Design 

In this section we briefly discuss some of the design implications
and alternatives for MIP-LR.

2.3.1 Interoperability with MIP 

Although MIP-LR is designed for closed enterprise environments, it can
interoperate with hosts outside the environment using MIP as follows.
Packets from correspondent hosts outside the system are trapped at the
border gateways.  The border gateway (or a host attached to the
gateway) searches its cache or queries the HLR to obtain the mobile's
COA and tunnels the packet to the mobile.  To interoperate in this
fashion the mobile must have the ability to decapsulate packets.  This
method of interoperability is similar to what is carried out by Network
Address Translators (NAT) to permit multiple local IP addresses on a
closed subnet to share a limited pool of globally unique IP addresses
for communication.  MIP-LR can interoperate with hosts using MIP, even
inside the closed network, as follows.  There is a Home Agent in the
mobile's home network, as required by MIP, which can also act as an
HLR.  Mobiles obtain co-located COAs from DHCP servers as permitted by
MIP, and register with the Home Agent in addition to the HLRs.  Packets
addressed to the mobile host's permanent address are delivered to its
home network and tunneled to the mobile as for MIP.  We omit further




Mobile IP-LR                                                    [Page 12]


Expiration Date May  2000                                       Nov. 1999


details for brevity.  

Note that hosts which speak only MIP in a mixed environments where both
protocols interoperate do not suffer any additional penalties.  One
could imagine a subset of hosts in the closed environment which have
been configured to use MIP-LR, and these nodes would then obtain
additional benefits.  

2.3.2 Survivability of VLRs

We have focused on survivability of HLRs.  Survivability of VLRs is
obviously equally important.  However, this can be ensured by existing
methods for ensuring survivability of a computer connected to a local
IP subnet, and numerous protocols have been developed for this.
Ensuring VLR (or Foreign Agent) survivability itself does not impinge
directly on the central protocol functions of message routing performed
by MIP-LR (or MIP, for that matter).

2.3.3 Eliminating VLRs

An alternative design for MIP-LR is one where the VLR or Foreign Agent
is eliminated.  The advantage of this approach is that there is no
Foreign Agent function necessary in every subnet capable of supporting
mobile hosts.  Many of the mechanisms and arguments for eliminating
Foreign Agents and using co-located COAs have been presented previously
in the MoquitoNet system [7].  Here we consider some specific to
MIP-LR.

As mentioned previously, in MIP and MIP-RO the Foreign Agent detunnels
(typically by decapsulating) packets tunneled to the mobile host, can
allocate a COA, and performs functions for the mobile to discover the
subnet it is in (agent advertisement and response to solicitations).
With no Foreign Agents we can separate these functions and deal with
them as follows.  Since there is no tunneling, no decapsulation is
required.  Allocation of COA can be handled by existing methods to
perform dynamic address allocation, e.g. DHCP.  And for subnet
discovery we place a simple Advertisement Agent (AA) in each subnet
(which may in fact be the subnet router, appropriately-configured).

Eliminating the VLR or Foreign Agent helps to improve the survivability
of the mobility management scheme, especially for subnets that may be
particularly vulnerable to failure (e.g.  platoons in the forward area
of a battlefield.) Although an Advertisement Agent is still introduced
specifically to support mobility, note that it's functions are much
simpler than those of a Foreign Agent, so that recovery is far simpler
if an Advertisement Agent fails.




Mobile IP-LR                                                    [Page 13]


Expiration Date May  2000                                       Nov. 1999



To provide survivability of VLRs or Foreign Agents, multiple hosts in
the subnet would have to be able to serve in that role and perform all
the functions outlined above.  In contrast, for survivability of
Advertisement Agents, a host serving as a backup need only be able to
issue broadcasts specifying the identity of its subnet and respond to
solicitation messages.  An additional issue that arises then is that of
IP address usage. We have discussed these issues in [17].



3. Managing Multiple HLRs 

So far we have discussed that survivability of the HLR in MIP-LR is
enhanced by being able to place the HLR outside the home network when
the latter is vulnerable. We now turn our attention to the situation
where multiple HLRs are introduced for survivability reasons (and
possibly to improve performance and reduce network resource
consumption.)  With multiple HLRs, a method is required for maintaining
them.  We present two alternative methods in this section.

3.1 Translation Servers 

We introduce databases, called Translation Servers (TS), which store
the mapping from a host's IP address to the IP address of the HLR
serving that host.  Since this information does not change frequently,
a correspondent host can cache the response for relatively long periods
of time.

In the context of this approach we consider the situation where there
are layers of vulnerability in the network.  For example, consider a
military scenario where host machines belong to various levels of the
military hierarchy (brigade, platoon, squad, etc.)  There are more
hosts at the lower levels of the hierarchy than at higher levels and
typically they are more mobile.  In addition, hosts as well as links at
the lower levels are more vulnerable to attack, failure, and
destruction.  As discussed previously, if a host is at a low level in
the hierarchy, it is desirable to place its HLR outside the home
network; however, the further away the HLR is placed, the greater the
cost of mobile host registration (and, in general, of packet delivery
to mobile hosts).  We thus assume that HLRs are placed at locations
that are less vulnerable than those of individual hosts, and TS are
placed at higher levels in the hierarchy which, for our purposes, can
be regarded as being essentially secure.  (Again, for fault-tolerance,
the TS may be implemented on hot-standby platforms.)





Mobile IP-LR                                                    [Page 14]


Expiration Date May  2000                                       Nov. 1999


Introducing TS provides a useful indirection step that allows for
flexibility in managing and assigning mobile hosts to HLRs.  Thus,
given that HLRs are less vulnerable than hosts but still not secure,
HLRs will fail from time to time.  In addition, HLRs may become
overloaded; or as a host moves the communication cost and delay to
communicate with its HLR may increase to an unacceptable level; or it
may be desirable to assign the mobile host to an HLR which is located
close to the majority of its correspondent hosts.  Thus for a variety
of reasons we assume that it will be desirable to be able to change the
HLR serving a given mobile host.  Maintaining the mapping from a mobile
host's IP address to its HLRs IP address in a TS provides a convenient
mechanism for dynamically reassigning mobile hosts to HLRs.  Notice
that the mobile host itself need not know its own HLRs address; the
mobile can discover it dynamically by querying the TS also.

3.1.1 Single Translation Server

For the moment, assume that a single TS suffices for the entire system,
and its address is known to all hosts.  Then the mobile host performs
registration using the procedure given in pseudo-code below, where r >
0 is the number of HLRs the mobile host must register at for
survivability.  Note that the same procedure is used when the mobile
registers because it has moved or because its current registration
Lifetime is about to expire.  Registration requests and responses use
datagrams to avoid the overhead of connection setup but are
retransmitted when timeouts occur to provide a degree of reliability.

register(r){
    Registration_state = TRYING;
        /* HLR_list is list of HLRs MH is currently assigned to. */
        /* MH.IP is this mobile host∆s permanent IP address. */
        /* The second argument of query_TS specifies known HLRs */
        /* and third argument specifies total number of HLRs */
        /* desired. */

   if (length(HLR_list) < r)
      HLR_list = query_TS(MH.IP, HLR_list, r);
      Pending_HLR = HLR_List;
      while (Registration_state != SUCCESS){
         Retries = 0;
         while (Retries++ < MAX_RETRY){
            Issue timestamped registration request for all 
                Pending_HLR 
            if (ACK received from all Pending_HLRs before timeout){
                  Registration_state = SUCCESS;
                  return;




Mobile IP-LR                                                    [Page 15]


Expiration Date May  2000                                       Nov. 1999


            }
            else if (ACK received from some HLRs before timeout){
               Registration_state = PARTIAL_SUCCESS;
               Update Pending_HLR list
            }
      }
      /* One or more of the r HLRs has failed */
      /* TS returns other HLRs and updates its own records */
      Pending_HLR = query_TS(MH.IP, HLR_List, Pending_HLR, r);
      Update HLR_List 
   }
}


In the register procedure the choice of the number of HLRs at which the
mobile must register (i.e., r) can be left to the mobile, or it can be
left to the TS with the mobile providing a hint in its query request
(i.e., query_TS()) based upon its current requirements.  The choice of
which particular HLRs serve the mobile host is left to the TS.  This is
because we assume that the TS will have better knowledge of the
availability of HLRs in the system than the mobile, and may assign
mobile hosts to HLRs based on a variety of criteria, e.g. proximity,
load balancing, etc.  (The design of this assignment algorithm is
outside the scope of the present document.)    If one of the r HLRs has
failed since the last registration by the mobile host, the registration
request sent by the mobile host to that HLR fails.  In that case the
mobile requests another HLR from the TS and attempts to register
there.  The TS returns a new HLR and updates its own records.  Note
that after at least one registration request succeeds (i.e., state
PARTIAL_SUCCESS is reached) the mobile may choose to allow other
activities (e.g., initiating communication with other correspondent
hosts) to continue in parallel with the registration process.  This is
so that if (one or more) HLRs have failed the mobile is not blocked
until registration is complete at all r HLRs.

find(MH.IP, r){
    if (COA with unexpired Lifetime for this MH exists in Binding 
        Cache)
		return (COA);
    Pending_HLR = null;
    if (HLR_List for this MH does not exist in HLR_List cache)
        HLR_list = query_TS(MH.IP, Pending_HLR, r);
	Phase = 0;
	while (Phase++ < MAX_PHASE){
			/* Choose some HLR(s) to query */
		Pending_HLR = select(HLR_list);




Mobile IP-LR                                                    [Page 16]


Expiration Date May  2000                                       Nov. 1999


		Retries = 0;
		while (Retries++ < MAX_RETRY){
			Issue binding request to all Pending_HLR
			if (reply received from any pending HLRs before 
				timeout){
				Put COA & Lifetime with latest timestamp in 
					Binding Cache
				Update HLR_List in HLR_List cache if necessary
				return (COA);
			}
			/* Pending HLRs have all failed.  Retry by some */
			/* policy, e.g. Binary Exponential Expansion */
			Pending_HLR = retrypolicy(Phase, Retries, r);
		}
		/* All HLR(s) in HLR_List have failed.  */
		/* Query TS for m alternates using some retry policy */
		m = retrypolicy(Phase, Retries, r);   
		HLR_list = query_TS(MH.IP, Pending_HLR, m);
		Pending_HLR = null;
	}
	return (FAIL);
}

A correspondent host wishing to contact the mobile host carries out the
find() procedure.  The correspondent obtains a list of r HLRs serving the
mobile from the TS.  (The number as well as the identity of HLRs which
the TS actually returns could be left up to the TS.)  This list is
maintained in a cache, called the HLR_List cache, separate from the
Binding Cache which keeps the mobile's COA.  The correspondent selects
and queries a subset of the HLRs assigned to the mobile, and uses the
COA with the latest timestamp. If a choice is available the
correspondent selects an HLR to query using any criterion it chooses
(proximity, randomly, etc.)   Since the mobile host always registers at
all the HLRs it is assigned to, the strategy where the correspondent
host chooses only one HLR out of the HLRs returned by the TS is called
a Write-all-Read-any strategy.  

Note that essentially the same procedure is used whether the
correspondent is trying to contact the mobile for the first time,
trying to contact the mobile for the first time after the Lifetime of
the cached mobility binding (mapping the mobile host's IP address to
its COA) has expired, or it is trying to refresh its cached mobility
binding before the current Lifetime of the binding expires.  

The number of HLRs requested by the correspondent, as well as the
strategy it uses to query the HLRs, reflects a balance between latency




Mobile IP-LR                                                    [Page 17]


Expiration Date May  2000                                       Nov. 1999


and resource consumption.  If latency is to be minimized, the
correspondent requests all the HLRs serving the mobile (r is set to a
special value ALL) and queries all of them in parallel; to minimize
resource consumption, the correspondent queries one HLR at a time.  We
suggest the following Binary Exponential Expansion policy as a
compromise: the correspondent host requests the addresses of all HLRs
(r = ALL), and at each retry (Retries is incremented), it queries
2**Retries HLRs in parallel.  There are race conditions present in the
protocol when failures occur, so that for short intervals the HLRs
assigned to a mobile may contain inconsistent information and the
correspondent may obtain incorrect results.  Similar situations occur
in MIP and MIP-RO also, even without replication of location
information.  The costs of using more complex protocols to avoid this
do not seem justified, particularly in a mobile wireless environment
where the underlying communication links are expensive and may not be
well-behaved.  Our approach is to simplify the protocols and rely upon
retransmissions and retries at the correspondent host instead.

To summarize, the scheme presented in this section: (1) assumes the
existence of a TS with an address known by all hosts in the system; (2)
for the HLRs assigned to a given mobile host, a Write-all-Read-any
protocol is used; (3) in case of HLR failure, the mobile requests
alternative HLRs from the TS, and other activities at the mobile can
continue; (3) in case of HLR failure, the correspondent uses a Binary
Exponential Expansion policy.  

3.1.2 Multiple Translation Servers

Multiple TS would only be required to provide additional survivability,
reduce the latency of TS queries by distributing load, or to reduce the
bandwidth consumption due to TS queries by scattering them throughout
the network.  For most closed network scenarios a single
(fault-tolerant) TS probably suffices.  This is because we assume the
TS is in a secure location and the load on the TS is likely to be low.

A mobile host contacts a TS only: (1) the first time it is installed,
if it is not pre-configured with its list of HLRs; (2) if HLR failures
occur and replacements are required.  A correspondent host contacts a
TS only:  (1) when sending a packet to a mobile for the very first
time; (2) if the mobility binding for a host it wishes to contact has
expired or been deleted from the cache and the list of HLRs serving the
mobile has expired or been deleted from the HLR_List cache; (3) if HLR
failures occur and alternate HLRs are required.  

Thus the TS workload will be high only if: (1) cache sizes at mobiles
or correspondent hosts are very small, or (2) there are many mobile




Mobile IP-LR                                                    [Page 18]


Expiration Date May  2000                                       Nov. 1999


hosts who are contacted by correspondent hosts for the first time or
after long intervals, or (3) if there are frequent HLR failures.

We propose the following scheme if multiple TS are required in the
system.  Each host in the system knows the addresses of all the t TS in
the system, and in addition has a hash function f which maps a mobile
host's IP address to one or more integers j, where 0 < j < (t + 1), and
TSaddr(j) is the IP address of a TS serving the mobile.  When the set
of HLRs serving a mobile host is to be updated (for load balancing,
failure recovery, addition of new HLRs, etc.) then all the TS serving
the mobile are updated.  However, to find the set of HLRs serving the
user, only one of the TSs need be queried; since TS queries are likely
to be much more frequent than updates, the scheme makes the query
process less expensive than update.

Note that with this scheme changing the set of set of HLRs serving a
mobile does not require changing any information (the TS addresses or
the hash function f) at any host.  This information is only modified if
the set of TSs is changed (an infrequent operation) or more TSs are
added to support increased workload (an even more infrequent
operation).  Even in that case, modifying the hash function itself can
be avoided, using a technique based on dynamic hashing [9,10] as
follows.  (For ease of exposition in the following we assume that
although there are multiple TS, each mobile is only served by a single
TS; extension to the case where a mobile is served by multiple TS is
straightforward.)  Let f return a large number of bits, and we use k of
them (e.g. the least significant k bits) as an index into Tsaddr, the
table of TS addresses.  Now suppose a particular TS, TS(j), is
overloaded and a new TS is to be added.  At TS(j), the hash function f
is applied to the address of each mobile served by that TS, except now
instead of using k bits returned from f, we use (k + 1) bits.  The
extra bit returned by f is examined; if it is zero the record for that
mobile (mapping the mobile's IP address to the list of its serving
HLRs) is moved to the new TS; otherwise, it remains in the old TS.
Once all the records in TS(j) have been thus processed, the address of
the new TS is broadcast to all hosts in the system and each host
increments k; the new TS can now be used to offload queries and updates
to TS(j).

Observe that this scheme does not require modifying the HLRs, or any of
the TSs that is not overloaded, or any modification to the software in
any host, making it highly suitable for on-line system upgrade.  

3.2 Quorum Consensus 

In this section we present an alternative scheme for maintaining




Mobile IP-LR                                                    [Page 19]


Expiration Date May  2000                                       Nov. 1999


multiple HLRs that does not use Translation Servers.  Instead, it is
assumed that every host in the system knows the address of all HLRs in
the system, and a quorum consensus method is used.  Quorum consensus
has been previously proposed as method of maintaining replicas in
distributed database systems [9] We first describe a basic Quorum
Consensus (QC) algorithm to introduce quorums.  The Basic QC
Algorithm.  In Basic QC, we define a Read Threshold (RT) value and a
Write Threshold (WT) value such that h < RT + WT < (2h + 1) and h/2 <
WT < (h + 1), where h is the total number of HLRs.  A mobile host must
ensure that it registers its COA, along with a timestamp, with any WT
number of HLRs; a correspondent host must read any RT number of HLRs
and use the value with the latest timestamp.  The conditions on WT and
RT ensure that the set of HLRs written by the mobile host (the write
quorum) always intersects with the set of HLRs read by the
correspondent host (the read quorum.)  The identities of the HLRs in
the read and write quorums do not matter for QC to maintain the mobile's
COA correctly.  The mobile and correspondent hosts can thus use any
suitable criterion (randomization, proximity, etc.) to select them.
Note that randomization provides load-balancing and keeping the
identities of the quorum members arbitrary enhances survivability.


                    0
                   / \
                  1___2
                 / \ / \
                3___4___5
               / \ / \ / \
              6___7___8___9
             / \ / \ / \ / \
           10__11__12___13__14

      Figure 1: Example of the Triangle Lattice (TL) System 
                for d = 5 [12]

Also observe that the QC algorithm can be implemented within the
general framework of the routines register() and find() described in
Section 3.1.1, since it basically replaces the query_TS() routine.  In
particular, the Binding Cache and the HLR_List cache are still
maintained.  We omit further details due to lack of space.  

Quorum algorithms are evaluated using several criteria [11], the most
important being quorum size, defined as the size of the smallest quorum
in the system, since that determines the cost (in terms of bandwidth
consumption or message complexity) of accessing the members of the
quorum. The cost of failures is the additional number of processors




Mobile IP-LR                                                    [Page 20]


Expiration Date May  2000                                       Nov. 1999


that must be contacted in order to establish a quorum when failures
occur.  In the case of the Basic QC algorithm, the quorum size is O(h)
and the cost of a failure is O(1).

Many variations of quorum algorithms have been designed to improve the
performance of quorum systems.  We use a class of quorum systems called
a planar quorum, and specifically a Triangular Lattice (TL) [12] and
develop an optimized version of TL called Optimistic TL (OTL) suitable
for our application.

We first describe the basic TL system using an example (see Figure 1).
In the TL algorithm the processors in the system (in our case, the
HLRs) are assumed to be at the vertices of a virtual triangle lattice.
A quorum consists of a minimal path connecting two of the sides of the
triangle, and a second minimal path connecting the first minimal path
to the third side.  For example, in Figure 6 the set {1, 4, 8, 9, 12}
is a quorum.  It is straightforward to see that any two quorums
intersect.  It is easy to show that quorum size for TL equals d, the
length of a side of the triangle.  The cost of a failure is O(1); in
fact it is 6, since at most 6 processors have to be contacted to find
an alternate processor from amongst those surrounding the failed
processor.

Optimistic TL algorithm.  An issue with most quorum systems, including
TL, is that a relatively large number of processors must be contacted
even when there are no failures. For our application, in the case of
Basic QC O(h) HLRs must be contacted; TL reduces this to O(h). In the
case of registrations, this is acceptable since the timing and extent
of failures cannot be predicted; for queries, however, it is desirable
to reduce the number of HLRs contacted without increasing the latency
of obtaining the mobile's COA.  Unlike general quorum applications
(mutual exclusion, replica control, etc.), where the reader and writer
of a quorum generally do not communicate directly, in our application
the reverse is true: the quorum system is designed to enable them to
communicate.

We exploit the special nature of our application to develop Optimistic
TL (OTL) which consists of two simple optimizations to TL:

1. The first time a correspondent host searches for a mobile, it must
contact all the HLRs in the quorum.  However, as a result of this query
the correspondent becomes aware of the set of HLRs, S,  |S| > 0, that
lies at the intersection of the read and write quorums, namely, the
HLR(s) with the latest value of the mobile's COA.  For subsequent
queries, the correspondent contacts only one of the intersecting HLRs,
say H in S.  If there is no response within the timeout period when the




Mobile IP-LR                                                    [Page 21]


Expiration Date May  2000                                       Nov. 1999


correspondent queries H, the correspondent infers that H has failed or
is no longer part of the mobile's write quorum. The correspondent then
queries one of the HLRs in S-H  if |S-H|  > 0, or the 6 HLRs adjacent
to the failed node otherwise.

2. In MIP-LR (as in Mobile IP for IPv6 [6]) the mobile maintains a
list, Active_CH, of correspondent hosts with which it is in active
communication, i.e., hosts with which it has exchanged a packet within
the current registration Lifetime.  The mobile adds to each entry in
this list a single bit, First, which is set when the correspondent host
is added to the list.  When the mobile changes registration areas it
sends binding updates to all correspondent hosts on the Active_CH list
as usual.  In addition, for hosts with First set, the mobile includes
in the binding update message the indices of the HLRs in its current
quorum, thus informing the correspondent of its entire quorum, and
resets First.  (If the mobile refreshes its registration before it has
moved, it also sends its quorum list to the hosts with First set, and
resets First.)



4. Remarks

Our contributions in this document are as follows.  We present the
design of a protocol, MIP-LR, that provides enhanced survivability over
basic Mobile IP and Mobile IP with Route Optimization by:

  1.  allowing HLRs to be placed outside the home network, and hence
outside subnets that may be especially vulnerable to failure.

  2. Allowing HLRs to be replicated outside the Home Network.

MIP-LR also provides improved performance over MIP by avoiding triangle
routing and encapsulation of data packets, and better interoperability
with protocols such as RSVP which attempt to provide QoS guarantees.

We note that given the basic framework of using location registers for
MIP, the ideas behind the numerous variations of PCS and cellular
location register schemes which aim to make them more efficient (by
forwarding [13], profile replication [14], local anchoring [15],
hierarchical organization [16] and other methods) can be applied and
leveraged for IP networks, although obviously some modifications may be
required in the details.  Finally, we observe that the techniques
presented for maintaining multiple HLRs (Translation Servers and
Optimistic Triangle Lattice Quorum) can be applied to PCS and cellular
schemes and potentially other areas.  




Mobile IP-LR                                                    [Page 22]


Expiration Date May  2000                                       Nov. 1999





5. Security considerations

Security issues are not discussed in this document.  



6. Acknowledgments

We thank Tony McAuley, Archan Misra, Sue Thompson, and Danny Yang of
Bellcore, Li Fung Chang of AT&T, as well as Mitesh Patel of U. S. Army
CECOM for their comments and many useful discussions.



7. Authors' addresses

Ravi Jain
Telcordia Technologies (formerly Bellcore)
445 South Street
Morristown, NJ 07960
Phone (973) 829-3178
Email: rjain@telcordia.com

Thomas Raleigh
Telcordia Technologies (formerly Bellcore)
445 South Street
Morristown, NJ 07960
Phone (973) 829-4321
Email: tom@telcordia.com

Michael Bereschinsky
US Army CECOM
Fort Monmouth, NJ
Phone (732) 427-2634
E-mail: bereschi@doim6.monmouth.army.mil 

Charles Graff
US Army CECOM
Fort Monmouth, NJ
Phone (732) 427-4456
E-mail: graff@doim6.monmouth.army.mil






Mobile IP-LR                                                    [Page 23]


Expiration Date May  2000                                       Nov. 1999



REFERENCES

[1]  Perkins, C., (ed.), IP Mobility Support, RfC 2002, Oct. 1996.

[2]  Droms, R., Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol, Internet RfC 1541,
Oct. 1993.

[3]  Johnson, D. B., and C. Perkins (eds.), Route Optimization in
Mobile IP, Internet Draft, draft-ietf-mobileip-optim-06.txt, Nov.
1997.

[4]  Braden, R., et al, Resource ReSerVation Protocol (RSVP) -- Version
1 Functional Specification, Internet draft,
draft-ietf-rsvp-spec-16.txt, June 1997.

[5]  Zhang, L., S. Deering, D. Estrin, S. Shenker and D. Zappala, RSVP:
A New Resource ReSerVation Protocol, IEEE Network, Sep. 1993.

[6]  Perkins, C., and D. Johnson, Mobility support in IPv6, Proc.
Mobicom '96, 27-37, Nov. 1996.

[7]  Mary Baker et al., Mobility Support in MosquitoNet, Proc. MobiCom
'95, Nov. 1995.

[8]  Jain, R., T. Raleigh, C. Graff and M. Bereschinsky, Mobile
Internet Access and QoS Guarantees using Mobile IP and RSVP with
Location Registers, Proc. ICC '98, June 1998.

[9]  Bernstein, P., Hadzilocas and Goodman, Distributed Databases,
Addison-Wesley, 1988.

[10]  Jain, R., S. Rajagoplan, and L. F. Chang, Phone number
portability for PCS systems with ATM backbones using distributed
dynamic hashing, IEEE J. Sel. Areas Comm., 96-105, Jan. 1997.

[11]  Naor, M. and A. Wool, The load, capacity and availability of
quorum systems, Proc. IEEE Symp.  Foundations of Computer Science,
214-225, 1994.

[12]  Bazzi, R., Planar Quorums, Proc. Tenth Intl. Workshop on
Distributed Alg., Springer-Verlag, Oct.  1996.

[13]  Jain, R., and Y. -B. Lin, An auxiliary user location strategy
employing forwarding pointers to reduce network impacts of PCS, ACM
Wireless Networks, 1995.




Mobile IP-LR                                                    [Page 24]


Expiration Date May  2000                                       Nov. 1999



[14]  Jannink, J., D. Lam, N. Shivakumar, J. Widom, D. C. Cox,
Efficient and flexible location management techniques for wireless
communication systems, Proc. ACM MobiCom 96, Nov. 1996.

[15]  Ho, J. S. M., and I. F. Akyildiz, Local anchor scheme for
reducing location tracking costs in PCNs, Proc. ACM MobiCom 95, Nov.
1995.

[16]  Wang, J. Z., A fully distributed location registration strategy
for universal personal communications, IEEE J. Sel. Areas. Comm., Aug.
1993.

[17]  Jain, R., T. Raleigh, D. Yang, L. F. Chang, C. Graff, M.
Bereschinsky and M. Patel, Mobile IP with Location Registers: Improving
performance, availability and interoperability, Proc. IEEE Infocom,
Mar. 1999.
