
Network Working Group                         Tissa Senevirathne(Force10)  
Internet Draft                                Waldemar Augustyn 
Document: draft-senevirathne-vmi-frame-02.txt Pascal Menezes (TeraBeam) 
Category: Informational                       Marc Lasserre (RiverStone) 
                                               
                                              February 2002  
    
        A Framework for Virtual Metropolitan Internetworks (VMI) 
 
 
Status of this Memo 
     
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 [1].  
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of 
   six months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
   documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts 
   as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in 
   progress."  
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt  
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
    
   For potential updates to the above required-text see: 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-guidelines.txt 
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
1. Abstract 
    
   In this document we present framework for VPLS (Virtual Private LAN 
   services) and point-to-point Layer 2 VPN services. These two models 
   are collectively referred to as VMI (Virtual Metropolitan 
   Internetworks). 
    
  
Senevirathne, et al.,    Expires-August 2002 
 
                 draft-senevirathne-vmi-frame-02.txt    February 2002 
 
2. Introduction 
    
   Over the last several years, the available bandwidth in the core 
   networks has increased dramatically, at the same time offering price 
   per Mbyte has gone down. Most businesses today have multi site 
   office complexes. Some of these organizations are exploring the 
   opportunity of outsourcing their inter site enterprise network to 
   Service Providers. With the opportunities in this segment 
   increasing, Service Providers are building a new class of network 
   service based on Metropolitan Area Networks. This new class of 
   services intends to provide a virtual Internetwork for customers who 
   wish to connect their geographically dispersed sites using public 
   networks at very high speeds. In this document we define these 
   networks as Virtual Metropolitan Internetwork or VMI. The service 
   that provides VMI is defined as Virtual Metropolitan Internetwork 
   Services, VMIS. 
    
   In the past, both the service and the business models were mainly 
   dictated by the network infrastructure installed by the Service 
   Providers. Here, we envision the opposite relationship. A Provider∆s 
   business model and its customer service requirements would derive 
   the network infrastructure and its capabilities. The architecture of 
   a Provider∆s infrastructure consists of a backbone transport 
   mechanism, network management and accounting, traffic engineering 
   and QoS capabilities etc. Hence, with a given infrastructure a 
   Provider may only be able to satisfy some subset of requirements and 
   business models. In this document we present, different 
   infrastructure models and identify the types of requirements and 
   business models that can be satisfied within the architecture. 
    
2.1. VMI Taxonomy 
    
   In this section we define Taxonomy and Analogy of Virtual 
   Metropolitan Internetworkto facilitate considerations of problems at 
   hand. 
    
   o VMI Infrastructure. A collection of VMI Service Provider∆s 
     equipment and methods used to implement VMI service. All 
     VMI networks share a common infrastructure. 
    
   o VMI Network. A virtual network service offered by a VMI 
     Service Provider, as seen by a Customer. Multiple, 
     mutually exclusive networks exist within the same, shared 
     infrastructure. 
    
   o VMI Service Management. A VMI Service Provider∆s means 
     of managing operations of VMI networks. 
    
    
   Given the above taxonomy, VMI can be viewed as a stack of disks on a 
   base or "Tower of Disks". Each of the disks represents a separate 
  
Senevirathne, et al.     Expires-August 2002                        2 
 
                 draft-senevirathne-vmi-frame-02.txt    February 2002 
 
   virtual network. The base represents the Infrastructure. The pin in 
   the middle represents the Service Management. 
    
                                | 
                        ----------------- 
                       |                 | VMI-2 
                        ----------------- 
                                | 
                                | 
                                | <--------- Service Management 
                                | 
                                | 
                        ----------------- 
                       |                 | VMI-1 
                        ----------------- 
                                | 
                      --------------------- 
                     |                     | Infrastructure 
                      --------------------- 
    
    
2.2. Network Service Model for Virtual Metropolitan Internetwork 
    
   Presently there are several models that are used to provide VMI 
   Services. Each of these models may suit customers based on their 
   requirement. Some service providers exclusively support only one 
   model; such providers may not be able to accommodate some customer 
   requirement. In this section we summarize possible service models 
   that different customers may require.  
    
   o Full mesh, many-to-many network model 
    
   o Partial mesh model 
    
   o point-to-multipoint (hub and spoke) model 
    
   o point-to-point model 
    
   o hierarchical, multi domain model 
    
    
3. Building blocks (Elements) of VMI 
    
   Building blocks of VMI can be broadly classified into following 
   elements. 
    
      o Backbone Transport methods 
       
      o Access methods 
       
  
Senevirathne, et al.     Expires-August 2002                        3 
 
                 draft-senevirathne-vmi-frame-02.txt    February 2002 
 
      o VMI configuration, membership and end-point discovery 
       
      o Network Management and accounting  
       
      o VMI Forwarding instance 
       
      o Encapsulation 
       
      o Quality of service 
       
4. VMIS Specifications  
    
   VMIS specifications  derive the service model. VMIS specifications  
   can be broadly classified into several areas. 
    
   o number of sites that required to be connected. 
    
   o Required network topology; hub and spoke with sites connecting to 
     the data center, fully meshed Local Area Network or combination. 
    
   o Type of connectivity required; Layer 2 or IP routing. 
    
   o Traffic engineering and QoS requirements. 
    
   o Security; traffic separation, payload encryption and 
     authentication. 
    
   o Billing requirements; wholesale models vs. per byte billing. 
    
   o Service Level Agreement (SLA); Time of the day bandwidth vs. flat 
     bandwidth 
    
   o Traffic reporting and accounting; statistics, exceptions, etc. 
    
   o Gateway Functions; option for the Provider to offer extra services 
     on the private VMI networks. 
 
 
5. Service Characteristics 
5.1. Network Models 
5.1.1. Many-to-many network model 
    
   Many-to-many VMI network model is ideally suited for customers who 
   want to have multiple sites connected, via a public network, to form 
   a one single network. In this topology, either they extend their 
   Local Network as a layer 2 connectivity or may choose to introduce 
   to create a routed virtual core. Many-to-many Virtual Metropolitan 
   Internetwork model is particularly useful for the environment where 
  
Senevirathne, et al.     Expires-August 2002                        4 
 
                 draft-senevirathne-vmi-frame-02.txt    February 2002 
 
   service offering is to extend the customer's enterprise network 
   using the shared network. Many-to-many VMI model is by far the most 
   general model. Using this model, one may construct any of the other 
   models.  
    
              ------                         ------- 
   Customer 1|      |                       |       | Customer 1 
   --------- | PE A |                       | PE B  |------  
    Site A   |      |       ---             |       | Site B 
              ------       |   |             ------- 
                |    \     |   |            /   | 
                |     -----|   | -----------    | 
                |      ----|---|--------        | 
                |     |                 |       | 
                |     |                 |       | 
                 -----|  Metro Core     |------- 
                      |                 | 
                       ----|---|-------- 
                           |   |    | 
                           | Virtual|Internet 
                            ---     | 
                             |      | 
                             |      | 
                          -------   | 
            Customer 1   |       |  | 
          -------------- | PE C  |-- 
            Site C       |       | 
                          ------- 
    
   Simple many-to-many Virtual Metropolitan Internetwork 
    
    
5.1.2. Point-to-multipoint or hub and spoke network model 
    
   The point-to-multipoint model is a subset the of many-to-many-point 
   model. Point-to-multi-point model may be used for services that 
   requires connectivity to a centralized site from several remote 
   sites. Such a service is very similar to more traditional frame 
   relay deployment. Unlike frame relay networks, VMI point-to-
   multipoint network may provide additional services that are beyond 
   the capabilities of classical frame relay networks.  
    
5.1.3. Point-to-point network model 
    
   The point-to-point network model is the simplest of all VMI network 
   models. Due to its simplicity, point-to-point model can be used for 
   a variety of services that could not be provisioned using other 
   service models. As an example, providing video or voice services 
   require strict end-to-end timing. Providing such end-to-end timing 
  
Senevirathne, et al.     Expires-August 2002                        5 
 
                 draft-senevirathne-vmi-frame-02.txt    February 2002 
 
   using other service models may not be possible. VMI point-to-point 
   services are  classified into two categories: 
 
   o The VMI services that require data services, either in packet or 
     cell form are called Data service VMI (DSVMI). 
    
   o The VMI service that require emulation of some characteristics of 
     a transport media, such as SONET are called, in this document, 
     Circuit Emulation VMI (CEVMI). 
    
    
5.2. Hierarchical Interconnection model 
    
   In situations where connectivity spans different administrative 
   domains, or the complexity of the infrastructure warrants 
   subdivisions, a hierarchical interconnection model is applicable. 
   Here we assume that there is a remote service provider that has 
   agreed to participate in VMI services. 
    
    
                                ^ 
                                | to pop(4L) 
                                | 
                            ---------- 
                           |          | 
                   <-------| pop(3L)  |---------> to other pop(3L) 
                            ---------- 
                         /              \   
                        /                \ 
                       /                  \  
                      /                    \ 
            ---------                        ---------- 
           |         |                      |          | to other  
     <-----| pop(2L) | -------------------- |  pop (2L)|-----> 
            ---------                        ----------  pop (2L) 
                |  UNION                         |  UNION 
    ---------------------------             ------------------------- 
   |                           |           |                          | 
   |  --------        -------- |           |                          | 
   | |        |     |         ||           |                          | 
   | | pop(1L)| ----| pop(1L) ||           |                          | 
   |  --------        -------- |           |                          | 
   |     |              |      |           |                          | 
   |  ---------     ---------  |           |                          | 
   | | Local   |   | Local   | |           |                          | 
   | | confederate | confederate           |                          | 
   | |         |   |         | |           |                          | 
   |  --------      ---------  |           |                          | 
    ---------------------------             -------------------------- 
    
   Sample Hierarchical Interconnection model 
  
Senevirathne, et al.     Expires-August 2002                        6 
 
                 draft-senevirathne-vmi-frame-02.txt    February 2002 
 
    
   The above diagram depicts a hierarchical interconnection model. The 
   local confederates are the more traditional VMI service providers. 
   The first level POP connects multiple of local confederates. 
   collection of local confederates that are below a single first level 
   pop is considered as a "UNION". The Unions are interconnected using 
   second level POP. 
    
5.3. Deployments 
5.3.1. Transparent Deployment 
    
   In the transparent model, customers may consider the VMI as a 
   virtual and transparent extension to their Local Network. In other 
   words; all the sites appear as access points in the same Local 
   Network. 
 
   The Transparent point-to-multi-point and many-to-many models are 
   mainly used by the customers who wish to extend the Local Network 
   over the VMI without any network layer address translation. Due to 
   the anatomy of these models, network edge devices that provide 
   interface between the customer sites may require to implement 
   specific forwarding policies. In more traditional frame relay 
   networks; when deploying hub and spoke models; concepts such as 
   split horizon may be implemented to prevent reflection of broadcast 
   traffic. However when providing transparent deployment model 
   customers may wish to have connectivity from remote site to a remote 
   site.  Cost concern customers who do not wish to purchase fully 
   meshed many-to-many network and yet achieve many-to-many 
   reachability may also use point-to-multi-point deployment. VMI 
   service providers who wish to offer transparent deployment model 
   MUST have forwarding policies defined to properly forward inter-site 
   traffic. A simple such policy is to treat each virtual connection as 
   a separate circuit. A more complex forwarding policies may require 
   to be defined if all the virtual links to be treated like a single 
   interface and yet achieve inter-site forwarding. 
    
5.3.2. Routable deployment 
    
   In the routable model the VMI access points may be considered as 
   belonging to the same sub-network. Thus VMI edge devices providing 
   routing functionality. However, customers may wish to maintain their 
   private address space shielded from the VMI control plane. At the 
   same time, VMI Service Providers may not wish to maintain customer 
   address space. As such, VMI infrastructure may require having 
   technologies that could transport customer's traffic using some 
   local addressing and transport mechanisms.  
    
  
Senevirathne, et al.     Expires-August 2002                        7 
 
                 draft-senevirathne-vmi-frame-02.txt    February 2002 
 
5.4. Demarcation Point 
    
   The VMI service recognizes the need for proper demarcation between 
   the administrative entities involved in the service.  Each entity 
   participating in the service must be able to extend its operations 
   management and monitoring system to guarantee the delivery of its 
   obligations.   
    
   o Customer-Provider. This type of relationship is sometimes referred 
     to as Ùretailˆ.  In this case, the Provider must have the means 
     for proving with reasonable certainty that the service, as 
     described in SLA, is provided throughout the Providers network up 
     to the demarcation points.  These demarcation points are typically 
     devices owned by the provider that directly connect to customer∆s 
     equipment.  In cases of transparent deployment of VMI services, 
     these devices can be very simple supporting little more than Layer 
     1 loopbacks.   In cases of routed deployment of VMI services, the 
     devices are considerably more complex.  Typically, these are 
     switches or routers that are Provider owned or managed but reside 
     on customer premise. 
    
   o Provider-Provider. This type of relationship is sometimes referred 
     to as Ùwholesaleˆ.  In this case, too, the essential objective is 
     to prove with reasonable certainty that the service  provided to 
     another Provider is operational throughout the network up  to the 
     demarcation point. 
    
   o Service domain-Service domain. Even within a single organization, 
     it is useful to define demarcation points between major service 
     domains. This type of demarcation is similar to Provider-Provider. 
    
5.5. Scaling 
    
   It is important that the VMIS architecture is able to support a 
   large number of customers with each customer having multiple sites 
   requiring  unconstraint connectivity.  
    
   Typically, scalable solutions attempt to place per-VMI parameters in 
   the edge devices while keeping core networks free from the need to 
   maintain any state or VMI specific data. The basic premise behind 
   this strategy is that the infrastructure can grow, potentially 
   indefinitely, by adding edge devices with all per-VMI data localized 
   in these devices. 
    
   This strategy works well if the solution can further localize the 
   per-site data to the devices directly attaching to the customer 
   site. As an example if an edge device needs to learn MAC addresses 
   of the nodes participating in a VMI, it is more scalable if the 
   learning is limited to the MAC addresses originating in the site 
   directly attached to the device.  Otherwise, if that device has to 
   learn all MAC addresses, including those originating at other sites, 
  
Senevirathne, et al.     Expires-August 2002                        8 
 
                 draft-senevirathne-vmi-frame-02.txt    February 2002 
 
   the device may be overwhelmed by some large sites, perhaps connected 
   via large edge devices. 
    
5.6. Data Security and Authentication 
    
   In VMI Services, customer's data is exposed to the shared network at 
   the Provider side. A VMI service provider might use services from 
   other upstream providers for global backbone connectivity. Hence, 
   privacy may be an issue. Traditionally, it has been the 
   responsibility of the customer to use their own technology, such as 
   IPSec, to provide privacy, but with VMI service offerings of speeds 
   in the range of 1Gbps, the performance of CE based solutions becomes 
   an issues. It is quite attractive if the VMI service provider can 
   offer encryption and security. It is quite possible, a customer 
   sharing the infrastructure with the competitors. Hence, it is 
   required that customers have ability to protect and authenticate 
   data.  
    
   o Simple Traffic Separation. In many situations a simple, virtual 
     separation of traffic may be sufficient. This style of security, 
     frequently referred to as Frame-Relay-like, has gained wide 
     acceptance in the market place. The provider is entrusted with 
     making sure VMI traffic remains inaccessible to other customers. 
     The level of security protects against attacks from other 
     Customers, but not from the Provider itself. 
    
   o Advanced Security. For more sensitive applications, more secure 
     means, involving encryption and authentication techniques, are 
     necessary. Essentially there are two approaches to solve this. In 
     the first approach, customers may choose to install on premise 
     data encryption devices. Here, there needs to be an out of band 
     management connectivity between encryption devices. In the second 
     approach Service provider edge devices may themselves provide data 
     encryption and authentication.  
    
   In the case of many-to-many connectivity, Security Association 
   establishment and Encryption key distribution become more complex.  
    
   The security solution for point-to-point VMI depends on the type of 
   VMI service provided. Hence, the security solution provided for 
   DSVMI may be different from the CEVMI. Within the DSVMI, based on 
   the payload types different security solution may be needed. As an 
   example, when transporting IP only payloads one may choose IP Sec 
   solution whereas when transporting Layer 2 payloads, service 
   providers may require to provide a security solution that is 
   protocol agnostic. Regardless, some customers may wish to have an on 
   premise security solution. Especially, CEVMI customers may use a 
   front-end scramblers/encryptors. 
    
  
Senevirathne, et al.     Expires-August 2002                        9 
 
                 draft-senevirathne-vmi-frame-02.txt    February 2002 
 
5.7. Transport mechanisms in the core 
    
   There are multiple transport mechanisms capable of providing the 
   necessary connectivity. Choice of the appropriate transport depends 
   on the set of requirements that a given Service Provider wants to 
   address. As an example, a Provider may choose to have a complete 
   Layer 2 topology with simpler layer 2 protocol to provide redundancy 
   and reconfiguration. On the other hand, if a  Provider chooses to 
   support the entire set of requirements, he may choose more 
   sophisticated protocol such as MPLS. In theory, it is possible that 
   multiple transport mechanisms are supported in the core.  
    
   It is possible that a VMI Service Provider enrolls a customer where 
   all the sites are NOT within the footprint of the provider. This 
   would be the case if the VMI service provider uses one set of 
   transport mechanisms (e.g. MPLS) within its footprint and another 
   (e.g. IP-Sec, GRE, etc.) for service consistency through some public 
   backbone (Internet). Obviously various usage policies (QoS) would 
   have to be different based on the available resources.  
    
   When providing a CEVMI service, the transport method should be able 
   to tunnel the circuits over the VMI infrastructure. The transport in 
   the VMI core should be capable of supporting emulation of Time 
   Division Multiplexed (TDM) circuits. The chosen transport method 
   should be able to provide required reliability, end-to-end timing, 
   service provisioning etc., as agreed upon in the SLA.  
  
   When providing a DSVMI service, at least the following issues must 
   be taken into consideration when selecting a Transport Mechanism: 
   end-to-end QoS, type of payload (Layer 2/ IP), reliability, 
   reconfiguration. 
    
    
5.8. QoS and Traffic Engineering 
    
   Customers may now wish to have the same QoS and Traffic Engineering 
   characteristics as they do in a locally connected network. Hence, 
   now the problem is not providing end-to-end QoS service but 
   providing network wide QoS and traffic engineering. In general, a 
   given flow, whether Layer 2 or 3, is point-to-point in nature. The 
   broadcast and multicast nature of local networks can be emulated 
   using set of fully meshed point-to-point networks. This approach 
   simplifies the problem and reduces the issue to providing required 
   QoS level per point-to-point link. If all sites are symmetric in QoS 
   and Traffic Engineering requirements, the management of QoS and 
   parameters becomes simple. However, in practice, different sites may 
   have varying Traffic engineering parameters. In such configurations, 
   it is important that participating nodes have knowledge of the 
   requirements of the other nodes and impose shaping and policing 
   appropriately. 
    
  
Senevirathne, et al.     Expires-August 2002                       10 
 
                 draft-senevirathne-vmi-frame-02.txt    February 2002 
 
   Consider the deployment scenario below. When, node A is sourcing 
   broadcast traffic it is required not to over-subscribe the link 
   between A-C, which is only 50% incoming rate of ingress port A'. 
   Hence, it is essential that participating nodes are capable of 
   performing egress traffic shaping, as required. 
    
                       B(node)   
                      / |  
        5 Mbits/sec  /  | 
                    /   | 
                   /    | 
   5 Mbits/sec    /     | 
   --------A'-- A(node) | 5 Mbits/sec 
                  \     | 
                   \    | 
                    \   | 
      2.5 Mbits/sec  \  | 
                      \C(node) 
    
   The discovery of these parameters can be either via an automatic 
   process or via manual configuration. It is possible that some of 
   these information can be piggy backed to routing protocols such as 
   OSPF and BGP and advertised to other devices, thereby reducing the 
   management burden. Alternatively, one may have a system wide 
   management system that would provision the services. 
    
   The QoS and Traffic Engineering service in Circuit emulation VMI 
   (CEVMI) may require satisfying different Traffic Engineering 
   parameters than Data Service VMI (DSVMI). Exact set of parameters 
   depends on the Type of circuit emulation service offered and 
   customer requirements. As an example, if the ATM circuits are 
   emulated customer may wish to have only UBR service or CBR service. 
   Another example is a customer who wishes to extend Frame Relay 
   network over the VMI. When offering Circuit Emulation services, 
   transport protocol in the VMI core should be capable of satisfying 
   different requirements of different categories of circuits. 
    
5.9. Reliability 
    
   Different customers may require different levels of reliability. The 
   reliability is here defined as protection against  service 
   infrastructure failures. The protection against such failures should 
   be built into the infrastructure and backbone transport protocols. 
   The protection can be defined in many flavors such as 
   Primary/Secondary, Fast Reroute. Protection can also have additional 
   attributes such as time to restore (50 msec) as well. As an example, 
   MPLS fast reroute and backup path protection may be needed for some 
   customers who mandate higher level of reliability. The methods for 
   providing desired level of reliability for Circuit Emulation VMI 
   (CEVMI) may be different from methods for providing desired level of 
   reliability for Data Service VMI (DSVMI). When providing certain 
  
Senevirathne, et al.     Expires-August 2002                       11 
 
                 draft-senevirathne-vmi-frame-02.txt    February 2002 
 
   Circuit Emulation VMI, providers must maintain timing requirements. 
   The committed levels of reliability may be included in Service Level 
   Agreement. Thus, Service Providers are legally bound to satisfy 
   these requirements. Inability to provide agreed upon reliability 
   levels may have financial and/or legal ramifications. At the same 
   time, these levels of protection may be essential for operation of 
   their applications. 
    
   Providing redundancy in point-to-multipoint deployments may be much 
   simpler than many-to-many deployment model. It is anticipated that 
   when purchasing a SLA, the redundancy is specified for the entire 
   VMI service rather than per site basis. Hence provisioning such 
   redundancy in a many-to-many network may cause serious complexities 
   and expenses to the VMI service providers.  
    
5.10. Reconfiguration 
    
   It is important to provide uninterrupted services to the customers 
   during maintenance and upgrades. Thus, methods are essential to be 
   built into the infrastructure for graceful reconfiguration during 
   maintenance. Unlike redundancy provided to address required 
   reliability, the redundancy required during maintenance is temporary 
   and may be configured manually. 
    
5.11. Service Provisioning and End Point Discovery 
                                                 
   A system wide network provisioning may be administratively 
   prohibitive due to the number and diversity of the end points. A 
   more suitable approach for large providers is to perform 
   provisioning only at the end points and use control protocol or 
   signaling method to automatically provision the required service 
   parameters. 
    
5.12. Service Gateway 
    
   For many providers, it is desirable to offer additional services 
   beyond the standard, private network connectivity. VMI can allow an 
   orderly access to customers∆ VMI networks for the purpose of 
   supplying value added services. One important service of that kind 
   is connecting the entire VMI to the public Internet. Other services 
   can offer DHCP, local DNS, NAT, etc. 
    
6. Security Considerations 
 
   This document does not discuss specific security solutions. This 
   document, however, identifies and states the security requirements 
   in Virtual Metropolitan Internetworks. 
    
  
Senevirathne, et al.     Expires-August 2002                       12 
 
                 draft-senevirathne-vmi-frame-02.txt    February 2002 
 
    
7. References 
 
   1  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3", BCP 
      9, RFC 2026, October 1996. 
    
    
8. Acknowledgments 
    
   The on going work at the IETF and the work presented in the cited 
   references has greatly influenced the work presented in this 
   document. Authors also wish to extend appreciations to their 
   respective employers and various other people who volunteered to 
   review this work and provided comments and feedback. 
    
9. Author's Addresses 
    
   Tissa Senevirathne  
   Nortel Networks  
   2305 Great America Pkwy 
   Santa Clara, CA 95051  
   Phone: 408 565 2571  
   Email: tsenevir@nortelnetworks.com 
    
   Waldemar Augustyn 
   Email: waldemar@nxp.com 
    
   Pascal Menezes 
   TeraBeam Networks  
   2300 Seventh Ave  
   Seattle, WA 98121 
   Email: Pascal.Menezes@Terabeam.com 
    
   Marc Lasserre 
   RiverStone Networks 
   5200 Great America Parkway 
   Santa Clara, CA 95054 USA  
   Phone: (408) 878-6500 
   Email: marc@riverstonenet.com
  
Senevirathne, et al.     Expires-August 2002                       13 
 
                 draft-senevirathne-vmi-frame-02.txt    February 2002 
 
    
Full Copyright Statement 
 
   "Copyright (C) The Internet Society (date). All Rights Reserved. 
   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published 
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any 
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph 
   are included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this 
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for 
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be 
   followed, or as required to translate it into 
 
  
Senevirathne, et al.     Expires-August 2002                       14 