


Network Working Group                                           Pradeep Kumar Xplorer
Internet-Draft                                                    google
Intended status: Standards Track                                 Mar 26, 2021
Expires: Sept 26,2021

			Parallel distributed information retrieval services
                       draft-pradeepkumarxplorer-topurl-00

Abstract
    Have a way to know worldwide http accesses and bird eyes view of http traffic and topurls
of the day

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 22, 2021.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2021 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of




Freed                  Expires September 26, 2021               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft              topurls               March 2021


   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

1.  Introduction

The same computers that keep root zone database of TLDs should have some
file that has all http url accesses in WWW and count.

If i access dhyanayoga.info/Californian.html the file or database would have an 
entry dhyanayoga.info/Californian.html 1
if someone else accesses the count would increase



   

Freed                  Expires September 26, 2021               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft              topurls		March 2021


 
Author's Address

   Pradeep Kumar Xplorer
   Google

   Email: pradeepan88@hotmail.com













































Freed                  Expires September 16, 2021            