



Network Working Group                                          R. Sparks
Internet-Draft                                                    Oracle
Intended status: Informational                                T. Kivinen
Expires: July 30, 2015                                     INSIDE Secure
                                                        January 26, 2015


                     Tracking Reviews of Documents
                 draft-sparks-genarea-review-tracker-00

Abstract

   Several review teams ensure specific types of review are performed on
   Internet Drafts as they progress towards becoming RFCs.  The tools
   used by these teams to assign and track reviews would benefit from
   tighter integration to the Datatracker.  This document discusses
   requirements for improving those tools without disrupting current
   work flows.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on July 30, 2015.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2015 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of



Sparks & Kivinen          Expires July 30, 2015                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft               Review Tracking                January 2015


   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Overview of current workflows . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  Requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     3.1.  Secretary focused . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     3.2.  Reviewer focused  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     3.3.  Review Requester and Consumer focused . . . . . . . . . .   8
     3.4.  Statistics focused  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   4.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   5.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   6.  Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   7.  Changelog . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     7.1.  00  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   8.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   Appendix A.  A starting point for Django models supporting the
                review tool  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11

1.  Introduction

   As Internet Drafts are processed, reviews are requested from several
   review teams.  For example, the General Area Review Team (Gen-Art)
   and the Security Directorate (Secdir) perform reviews of documents
   that are in IETF Last Call.  Gen-art performs a follow-up review when
   the document is scheduled for an IESG telechat.  These teams also
   perform earlier reviews of documents on demand.  There are several
   other teams that perform similar services, often focusing on specific
   areas of expertise.

   The secretaries of these teams manage a pool of volunteer reviewers.
   Documents are assigned to reviewers, taking various factors into
   account.  For instance, a reviewer will not be assigned a document
   for which he is an author or shepherd.  Reviewers are given a
   deadline, usually driven by the end of last call or a telechat date.
   The reviewer sends each completed review to the team's mailing list,
   and any other lists that are relevant for document being reviewed.
   Often, a thread ensues on one or more of those lists to resolve any
   issues found in the review.

   The secretaries and reviewers from several teams are using a tool
   developed and maintained by Tero Kivinen.  Much of its design
   predates the modern Datatracker.  The application currently keeps its
   own data store, and learns about documents needing review by
   inspecting Datatracker and tools.ietf.org pages.  Most of those pages



Sparks & Kivinen          Expires July 30, 2015                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft               Review Tracking                January 2015


   are easy to parse, but the last-call pages, in particular, require
   some effort.  Tighter integration with the Datatracker would simplify
   the logic used to identify documents ready for review, make it
   simpler for the Datatracker to associate reviews with documents, and
   allow users to reuse their Datatracker credentials.  It would also
   make it easier to detect other potential review-triggering events,
   such as a document entering working group last call, or when a RFC's
   standard level is being changed without revising the RFC.  Tero
   currently believes this integration is best achieved by a new
   implementation of the tool.  This document captures requirements for
   that reimplementation, with a focus on the workflows that the new
   implementation must take care not to disrupt.  It also discusses new
   features, including changes suggested for the existing tool at its
   issue tracker [art-trac].

   For more information about the various review teams, see the
   following references

                     +---------+---------------------+
                     | Gen-Art | [Gen-Art] [RFC6385] |
                     | Secdir  | [Secdir]            |
                     +---------+---------------------+

2.  Overview of current workflows

   This section gives a high-level overview of how the review team
   secretaries and reviewers use the existing tool.  It is not intended
   to be comprehensive documentation of how review teams operate.
   Please see the references for those details.

   A team's secretary periodically (typically once a week) checks the
   tool for documents it has identified as ready for review.  The tool
   has compiled this list from Last Call announcements and telechat
   agendas.  The secretary creates a set of assignments from this list
   into the reviewer pool, choosing the reviewers in roughly a round-
   robin order.  That order can be perturbed by several factors.
   Reviewers have different levels of availability.  Some are willing to
   review multiple documents a month.  Others may only be willing to
   review a document every other month.  The assignment process takes
   exceptional conditions such as reviewer vacations into account.
   Furthermore, secretaries are careful not to assign a document to a
   reviewer that is an author, shepherd, responsible WG chair, or has
   some other already existing association with the document.  The
   preference is to get a reviewer with a fresh perspective.  The
   secretary may discover reasons to change assignments while going
   through the list of documents.  In order to not cause a reviewer to
   make a false start on a review, the secretaries complete the full
   list of assignments before sending notifications to anyone.  This



Sparks & Kivinen          Expires July 30, 2015                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft               Review Tracking                January 2015


   assignment process can take several minutes, and it is possible for
   new last calls to be issued while the secretary is making
   assignments.  The secretary typically checks to see if new documents
   are ready for review just before issuing the assignments, and updates
   the assignments if necessary.  The issued assignments are sent to the
   review team list and are reflected in the tool.  For those teams
   handling different types of reviews (Last Call vs Telechat for
   example), the secretary typically processes the documents for each
   type of review separately, and potentially with different assignment
   criteria.  In Gen-art, for example, the Last Call reviewer for a
   document will almost always get the follow-up Telechat review
   assignment.  Similarly, Secdir assigns any re-reviews of a document
   to the same reviewer.  Other teams may choose to assign a different
   reviewer.

   Reviewers discover their assignments through the announcement to the
   list or by looking at their queue in the tool.  (Most reviewers only
   check the tool when they see they have an assignment via the list).
   A reviewer has the opportunity to reject the assignment for any
   reason.  The secretary will find another volunteer for any rejected
   assignments.  The reviewer can indicate that the assignment is
   accepted in the tool before starting the review.

   The reviewer sends a completed review to the team's list, and any
   other lists relevant to the review.  For instance, many last call
   reviews are also sent to the IETF general list.  The teams typically
   have a template format for the review.  Those templates usually start
   with a summary, describing the conclusion of the review.  Typical
   summaries are "Ready for publication" or "On the right track, but has
   open issues".  The reviewer uses the tool to indicate that the review
   is complete, provides the summary, and has an opportunity to provide
   a link to the review in the archives.  (Note, however, that having to
   wait for the document to appear in the archive to know the link to
   paste into the tool is a significant enough impedance that this link
   is often not provided by the reviewer.  The Secdir secretary manually
   collects these links from the list and adds them to the tool.)

   Occasionally, a document is revised between when a review assignment
   is made and when the reviewer starts the review.  Different teams can
   have different policies about whether the reviewer should review the
   assigned version or the current version.

3.  Requirements








Sparks & Kivinen          Expires July 30, 2015                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft               Review Tracking                January 2015


3.1.  Secretary focused

   o  A secretary must be able to see what documents are ready for
      review of a given type (such as a Last Call review)

   o  A secretary must be able to assign reviews for documents that may
      not have been automatically identified as ready for a review of a
      given type.  (This allows the secretary to work around errors and
      handle special cases, including early review requests.)

   o  A secretary must be able to work on and issue a set of assignments
      as an atomic unit.  No assignment should be issued until the
      secretariat declares the set of assignments complete.

   o  It must be easy for the secretary to discover that more documents
      have become ready for review while working on an assignment set.

   o  The tool should make preparing the assignment email to the team's
      list easy.  For instance, the tool could prepare the message, give
      the secretary an opportunity to edit it, and handle sending it to
      the list.

   o  A secretary must be able to easily see who the next available
      reviewers are, in order.

   o  A secretary must be able to edit a Reviewer's availability, both
      in terms of frequency, not-available-until-date, and skip-next-
      n-assignments.  (See the description of these settings in the
      Reviewer focused section.)

   o  The tool should make it easy for the secretary to identify that a
      reviewer is already involved with a document.  The current tool
      allows the secretary to provide a regular expression to match
      against the document name.  If the expression matches, the
      document is not available for assignment to this reviewer.  For
      example, Tero will not be assigned documents matching '^draft-
      (kivinen|ietf-tcpinc)-.*$'.  The tool should also take any roles,
      such as document shepherd, that the Datatracker knows about into
      consideration.

   o  The tool should make it easy for the secretary to see key features
      of a document ready for assignment, such as its length, its
      authors, the group and area it is associated with, its title and
      abstract, and any other personnel (such as the shepherd and
      reviewers already assigned from other teams) involved in the
      draft.





Sparks & Kivinen          Expires July 30, 2015                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft               Review Tracking                January 2015


   o  The tool must make it easy for the secretary to detect and process
      re-review requests on the same version of a document (such as when
      a document has an additional last call only to deal with new IPR
      information).

   o  Common operations to groups of documents should be easy for the
      secretary to process as a group with a minimum amount of
      interaction with the tool.  For instance, it should be possible to
      process all the of documents described by the above bullet with
      one action.  Similarly, for teams that assign re-reviews to the
      same reviewer, issuing all re-review requests should be a simple
      action.

   o  The tool must make it easy for the secretary to see the result of
      previous reviews from this team.  In Secdir, for example, if the
      request is for a revision that has only minor differences, and the
      previous review result was "Ready", a new assignment will not be
      made.

   o  The tools must make it easy for the secretary to see the recent
      performance of a reviewer while making an assignment (see
      Section 3.4).  This allows the secretary to detect overburdened or
      unresponsive volunteers earlier in the process.

   o  A secretary must be able to withdraw a review assignment.

3.2.  Reviewer focused

   o  A reviewer must be able to indicate availability, both in
      frequency of reviews, and as "not available until this date."  The
      current tool speaks of frequency in these terms:



         Assign at maximum one new review per week

         Assign at maximum one new review per fortnight

         Assign at maximum one new review per month

         Assign at maximum one new review per two months

         Assign at maximum one new review per quarter

   o  Reviewers must be able to indicate that they should be skipped the
      next n times they would normally have received an assignment.





Sparks & Kivinen          Expires July 30, 2015                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft               Review Tracking                January 2015


   o  A reviewer must be able easily discover new review assignments.
      (The tool might send email directly to an assigned reviewer in
      addition to sending the set of assignments to the team's list.
      The tool might also use the Django Message framework to let a
      reviewer that's logged into the Datatracker know a new review
      assignment has been made.

   o  Reviewers must be able to see their current set of outstanding
      assignments, completed assignments, rejected assignments.  The
      presentation of those sets should either be separate, or, if
      combined, the sets should be visually distinct.

   o  A reviewer must be able to reject a review assignment, optionally
      providing the secretary with an explanation for the rejection.

   o  A reviewer must be able to indicate that have accepted and are
      working on an assignment

   o  It should be possible for a reviewer to reject or accept a review
      either by using the tool's web interface, or by replying to the
      review assignment email.

   o  A reviewer must be able to indicate that a review is complete,
      capturing where the review is in the archives, and the high-level
      review-result summary

   o  It must be possible for a reviewer to clearly indicate which
      version of a document was reviewed.  Documents are sometimes
      revised between when a review was assigned and when it is due.
      The tool should note the current version of the document, and
      highlight when the review is not for the current version.

   o  It must be easy for a reviewer to submit a completed review.



      -  The current workflow, where the reviewer sends email to the
         team list (possibly copying other lists) and then indicates
         where to find that review must continue to be supported.  The
         tool should make it easier to capture the link to review in the
         list archives (perhaps by suggesting links based on a search
         into the archives).

      -  The tool should allow the reviewer to enter the review into the
         tool via a web form.  The tool will ensure the review is posted
         to the appropriate lists, and will construct the links to those
         posts in the archives.




Sparks & Kivinen          Expires July 30, 2015                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft               Review Tracking                January 2015


      -  The tool could also allow the reviewer to submit the review to
         the tool by email (perhaps by replying to the assignment).  The
         tool would then ensure the review is posted to the appropriate
         lists.

3.3.  Review Requester and Consumer focused

   o  It should be easy for an AD or group chair to request any type of
      review, but particularly an early review, from a review team.

   o  It should be possible for that person to withdraw a review
      request.

   o  It must be easy to find all reviews of a document when looking at
      the document's main page in the Datatracker.  The reference to the
      review must make it easy to see any responses to the review on the
      lists it was sent to.

   o  It must be easy to find all reviews of a document when looking at
      search result pages, and other lists of documents such as the
      documents on a telechat agenda.

3.4.  Statistics focused

   o  It must be easy to see the following, across all teams, a given
      team, or a given reviewer, and independently across all time, or
      across configurable recent periods of time:



      -  How many reviews have been completed

      -  How many reviews are in progress

      -  How many in progress reviews are late

      -  How many completed reviews were late

      -  How many reviews were not completed at all

      -  Average time to complete reviews (from assignment to
         completion)

   o  It must be easy to see, for all teams, for a given team, or for a
      given reviewer, across all time, or across configurable recent
      periods:





Sparks & Kivinen          Expires July 30, 2015                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft               Review Tracking                January 2015


      -  Total counts of reviews in each review state (done, rejected,
         etc.)

      -  Total counts of completed reviews by result (ready, ready with
         nits, etc.)

   o  Where possible, the above statistics should be visible as a time-
      series graph.

   o  It should be possible view the correlation between completed
      reviews results with number of discuss positions taken on a given
      document.  Future enhancements may allow ADs to indicate their
      position was informed by a given review to help make this view
      more meaningful.

4.  Security Considerations

   This document discusses requirements for tools that assist review
   teams.  These requirements do not affect the security of the Internet
   in any significant fashion.  The tools themselves have authentication
   and authorization considerations (team secretaries will be able to do
   different things than reviewers).  None of these have been identified
   as non-obvious.

5.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no actions for IANA.

6.  Acknowledgments

   Tero Kivinen and Henrik Levkowetz were instrumental in forming this
   set of requirements and in developing the initial Django models in
   the appendix.

7.  Changelog

7.1.  00

   o  Initial Version

8.  Informative References

   [Gen-Art]  "General Area Review Team Guidelines", Work in Progress ,
              January 2015,
              <http://trac.tools.ietf.org/area/gen/trac/wiki>.






Sparks & Kivinen          Expires July 30, 2015                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft               Review Tracking                January 2015


   [RFC6385]  Barnes, M., Doria, A., Alvestrand, H., and B. Carpenter,
              "General Area Review Team (Gen-ART) Experiences", RFC
              6385, October 2011.

   [Secdir]   "Security Directorate", Work in Progress , January 2015,
              <http://trac.tools.ietf.org/area/sec/trac/wiki/
              SecurityDirectorate>.

   [art-trac]
              "Area Review Team Tool - Active Tickets", Work in Progress
              , January 2015,
              <https://wiki.tools.ietf.org/tools/art/trac/report/1>.

Appendix A.  A starting point for Django models supporting the review
             tool

 from django.db import models
 from ietf.doc.models import Document
 from ietf.person.models import Email
 from ietf.group.models import Group, Role

 from ietf.name.models import NameModel

 class ReviewRequestStateName(NameModel):
     """ Requested, Accepted, Rejected, Withdrawn, Overcome By Events,
         No Response , Completed  """

 class ReviewTypeName(NameModel):
     """ Early Review, Last Call, Telechat """

 class ReviewResultName(NameModel):
     """Almost ready, Has issues, Has nits, Not Ready,
        On the right track, Ready, Ready with issues,
        Ready with nits, Serious Issues"""

 class Reviewer(models.Model):
     """
     These records associate reviewers with review team, and keeps track
     of admin data associated with the reviewer in the particular team.
     There will be one record for each combination of reviewer and team.
     """
     role        = models.ForeignKey(Role)
     frequency   = models.IntegerField(help_text=
                                   "Can review every N days")
     available   = models.DateTimeField(blank=True,null=True, help_text=
                         "When will this reviewer be available again")
     filter_re   = models.CharField(blank=True)
     skip_next   = models.IntegerField(help_text=



Sparks & Kivinen          Expires July 30, 2015                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft               Review Tracking                January 2015


                          "Skip the next N review assignments")

 class ReviewResultSet(models.Model):
     """
     This table provides a way to point out a set of ReviewResultName
     entries which are valid for a given team, in order to be able to
     limit the result choices that can be set for a given review, as a
     function of which team it is related to.
     """
     team        = models.ForeignKey(Group)
     valid       = models.ManyToManyField(ReviewResultName)

 class ReviewRequest(models.Model):
     """
     There should be one ReviewRequest entered for each combination of
     document, rev, and reviewer.
     """
     # Fields filled in on the initial record creation:
     time          = models.DateTimeField(auto_now_add=True)
     type          = models.ReviewTypeName()
     doc           = models.ForeignKey(Document,
                            related_name='review_request_set')
     team          = models.ForeignKey(Group)
     deadline      = models.DateTimeField()
     requested_rev = models.CharField(verbose_name="requested_revision",
                             max_length=16, blank=True)
     state         = models.ForeignKey(ReviewRequestStateName)
     # Fields filled in as reviewer is assigned, and as the review
     # is uploaded
     reviewer      = models.ForeignKey(Reviewer, null=True, blank=True)
     review        = models.OneToOneField(Document, null=True,
                                                    blank=True)
     reviewed_rev  = models.CharField(verbose_name="reviewed_revision",
                                      max_length=16, blank=True)
     result        = models.ForeignKey(ReviewResultName)


Authors' Addresses

   Robert Sparks
   Oracle
   7460 Warren Parkway
   Suite 300
   Frisco, Texas  75034
   USA

   Email: rjsparks@nostrum.com




Sparks & Kivinen          Expires July 30, 2015                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft               Review Tracking                January 2015


   Tero Kivinen
   INSIDE Secure
   Eerikinkatu 28
   HELSINKI  FI-00180
   FI

   Email: kivinen@iki.fi












































Sparks & Kivinen          Expires July 30, 2015                [Page 12]
