
draft-leroux-tewg-inter-area-te-reqs-00.txt                December 2003 
 
 
                                                     JP Vasseur (Editor) 
                                                     Cisco Systems, Inc. 
                                             Jean-Louis Le Roux (Editor) 
                                                          France Telecom 
                                                           Ting-Wo Chung 
                                                             Bell Canada 
                                                           Raymond Zhang 
                                            Infonet Services Corporation 
                                                            Kenji Kumaki 
                                                        KDDI Corporation 
                                                         Parantap Lahiri 
                                                                     MCI 
                                                          Yuichi Ikeriji 
                                          NTT Communications Corporation 
                                                                         
IETF Internet Draft 
Expires: June, 2004                                                
                                                        December, 2003 
 
 
                                     
                                     
               draft-leroux-tewg-inter-area-te-reqs-00.txt 
                                     
                                     
            MPLS Inter-area Traffic Engineering requirements 
 
 
 
Status of this Memo 
 
This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with all 
provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026. Internet-Drafts are 
Working documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its 
areas, and its working groups.  Note that other groups may also 
distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts. 
 
Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference material 
or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
 
The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt. 
The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 





  
                                                                     1 
 
 

draft-leroux-tewg-inter-area-TE-reqs-00.txt                 December 2003 
 
 
Abstract 
 
This document lists the detailed set of requirements for the support of 
inter-area MPLS Traffic Engineering (inter-area MPLS TE) which could 
serve as a guideline to develop the required set of protocol 
extensions. 
 
Conventions used in this document 
 
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
"SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119]. 
 
 
Content 
 
1. Terminology 
2. Introduction 
3. Overview of the requirements and objectives 
3.1 Inter-area resources optimizations 
3.2 Inter-area Qos guarantees 
3.3 Fast recovery acrros IGP areas 
4. Application scenario 
5. Detailed requirements for inter-area MPLS Traffic Engineering 
5.1 Objective to preserve IGP/RSVP scalability 
5.2 Inter-area MPLS TE operations and interoperability 
5.3 Protocol signalling and path computation 
5.4 Path optimality 
5.5 Support of diversely routed inter-area TE LSPs 
5.6 Reoptimization of inter-area TE LSP 
5.7 Support of fast recovery of inter-area TE LSP 
5.8 DS-TE support 
5.9 Hierarchical TE LSP support 
5.10 Soft preemption 
5.11 Auto-discovery 
5.12 Mapping of traffic to inter-area TE LSP 
5.13 Inter-area MPLS TE management 
5.13.1 Inter-area MPLS TE MIB requirement 
5.13.2 Inter-area MPLS TE fault management requirements 
6 Evaluation criteria 
6.1 Scalability 
6.2 Performances 
6.3 Complexity and risks 
6.4 Backward compatibility 
7. Security issues 
 
References 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                     2 
 
 

draft-leroux-tewg-inter-area-TE-reqs-00.txt                 December 2003 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 











































 
                                                                     3 
 
 

draft-leroux-tewg-inter-area-TE-reqs-00.txt                 December 2003 
 
 
 
1.      Terminology 
  
LSR: Label Switch Router 
 
LSP: MPLS Label Switched Path 
 
CSPF: Constraint-based Shortest Path First. 
 
Inter-area MPLS TE: TE LSP whose Head-end LSR and Tail-end LSR do  
not reside within the same IGP area or both Head-end  
LSR and Tail-end LSR are in the same IGP area but the TE LSP  
transiting path may be across different areas 
 
IGP area: OSPF area or IS-IS level 
 
ABR: Area Border Router (i.e router used to connect two IGP areas (ABR 
in OSPF or L1/L2 router in IS-IS) 
 
2.      Introduction 
 
The set of MPLS Traffic Engineering mechanisms documented in [RSVP-TE] 
may be deployed by Service Providers to achieve some of the most 
important objectives of network traffic engineering as described in 
[TE-OVW]. 
  
These objectives are summarized as listed below: 
 
      - Supporting end-to-end services requiring QoS guarantees 
      - Performing network resource optimization 
      - Providing fast recovery 
 
However, the current set of MPLS traffic engineering mechanisms can 
only be used within a single IGP area.  
    
This document discusses the set of requirements a solution must or 
should satisfy in order to support the same set of functionalities 
across multiple IGP areas. Since the scope of requirements will vary 
between Operators, some requirements will be mandatory (MUST) whereas 
others will be optional (SHOULD). 
 
3.      Overview of the requirements and objectives 
 
3.1.    Introduction 
 
MPLS Traffic Engineering has been deployed in many OperatorsÆ networks 
for its capability to efficiently optimize the network bandwidth usage. 
One possible approach in the context of inter-area MPLS TE consists in 
deploying MPLS TE on a per-area basis but such an approach has several 
limitations: 

 
                                                                     4 
 
 

draft-leroux-tewg-inter-area-TE-reqs-00.txt                 December 2003 
 
 
        -Basically per-area TE provides sub-optimal traffic engineering 
        by optimizing resource independently in each area. And what 
        many operators want is to optimize their areas as a whole, i.e. 
        as if there was only one area (flat network). 
        - The required traffic level aggregation at the ABR levels 
        implies some constraints that do not lead to efficient traffic 
        engineering, 
        - The traffic aggregation does not allow to provide bandwidth 
        guarantees on a per inter-area TE LSP basis, 
        - The inter-area traffic cannot be protected with local 
        protection mechanisms such as [FAST-REROUTE] in case of ABR 
        node failure. 
 
3.2.    Inter-area resource optimization 
 
For the reasons mentioned above, it is desired to extend the current 
set of [RSVP-TE] mechanisms in order to be able to set up MPLS TE LSP 
across multiple IGP areas in order to efficiently achieve inter-area TE 
optimization. 
 
3.3.    Inter-area QoS guarantees  
 
The DiffServ IETF working group has defined a set of mechanisms 
described in [DIFF_ARCH], [DIFF_AF] and [DIFF_EF] or [MPLS-Diff] that 
can be activated at the edge or over a DiffServ domain to contribute to 
the enforcement of a (set of) QoS policy(ies), which can be expressed 
in terms of maximum one-way transit delay, inter-packet delay 
variation, loss rate, etc. Many Operators have some or full deployment 
of Diffserv implementations in their networks today, either across the 
entire network or at least at the edge of the network. In situations 
where strict QoS bounds are required, admission control inside the 
backbone of a network is in some cases required in addition to current 
Diffserv mechanisms. When the propagation delay can be bounded, the 
performance targets, such as maximum one-way transit delay may be 
guaranteed by providing bandwidth guarantees along the Diffserv-enabled 
path.  
 
It may also be desired to compute inter-area paths offering a shortest 
path across multiple areas that satisfy some bandwidth constraints, as 
currently possible within a single IGP area. For the sake of 
illustration, if the IGP metrics reflects the propagation delay, it may 
be needed to be able to find the optimal (shortest) path satisfying 
some bandwidth constraints across multiple areas: such a path would be 
the path offering the minimal propagation delay. 
 
One typical example of this requirement is to provide bandwidth 
guarantees over an end-to-end path for VoIP traffic classified as EF 
(Expedited Forwarding [DIFF_EF]) class in a Diffserv-enabled network. 
Another increasing popular deployment is driven by the need to carry 
pseudo-wire connection between gateways residing in different IGP 

 
                                                                     5 
 
 

draft-leroux-tewg-inter-area-TE-reqs-00.txt                 December 2003 
 
 
areas. When the EF path is extended across multiple IGP areas, inter-
area bandwidth guarantee along with other constraints is then required. 
 
3.4.    Fast recovery across IGP areas 
 
As traffic sensitive application are getting deployed, one of the key 
requirements is to provide fast recovery (on the order of tens of 
msecs) mechanisms in case of network element failure (link/SRLG/node), 
which cannot be achieved with current IGPs. Hence, a strong requirement 
for inter-area MPLS TE is to provide fast recovery mechanisms to 
protect (some) inter-area traffic in case of link/node/SRLG failure. 
Note that this includes the failure of any link/SRLG/node within any 
IGP area and the failure of ABRs. It is worth highlighting that 
additional constraint like bandwidth guarantee during failure (while 
inter-area protected TE LSP are rerouted onto their respective backup 
tunnel) may also be required. This implies the ability to optimize the 
backup tunnel path in order to minimize the amount of backup bandwidth 
and limit the propagation delay increase during failure (along the 
backup tunnel path) for some traffic. 
 
4.      Application scenario 
 
<---area1---><---area0---><----area2-----> 
 ------R1-ABR1-R2-------ABR3------- 
|           |             |        | 
|   R0      |             |    R4  | 
|   R5       |             |        | 
 ---------ABR2----------ABR4------ 
 
- ABR1, ABR2, ABR3 and ABR4 are ABRs 
- R0, R1, R5: LSRs in area 1 
- R2: an LSR in area 0 
- R4: an LSR in area 2 
 
Typically, an inter-area TE LSP will be set up between R0 and R4 where 
both LSRS belong to different IGP areas. Note that the solution MUST 
support the capability to protect such an inter-area TE LSP from the 
failure on any link/SRLG/Node within any area and the failure of any 
traversed ABR. 
 
In some cases, it might also be possible to have an inter-area TE LSP 
from R0 to R5 transiting via the back-bone area (or any other levels 
with IS-IS). 
 
5.      Detailed requirements for inter-area MPLS Traffic Engineering 
 
5.1.    Objectives to preserve IGP/RSVP scalability 
 
Being able to achieve the requirements listed in this document MUST be 
performed while preserving the IGP scalability, which is of the utmost 
importance. Hence, the set of mechanisms defined to meet those 
 
                                                                     6 
 
 

draft-leroux-tewg-inter-area-TE-reqs-00.txt                 December 2003 
 
 
requirements MUST not require IGP extra-load which could compromise the 
IGP scalability. In particular, a solution satisfying those 
requirements MUST require for the IGP to carry some unreasonable amount 
of extra information and MUST not significantly increase the frequency 
of IGP flooding. Likewise, the solution MUST also preserve the 
scalability of RSVP TE ([RSVP-TE]). Moreover, the solution MUST 
preserve the concept of IGP hierarchy (no TE link information flooded 
across areas). 
 
5.2.    Inter-area MPLS TE operations and interoperability 
 
The inter-area MPLS TE solution MUST be consistent with requirements 
discussed in [TE-REQ] and the derived solution MUST be such that it 
will interoperate seamlessly with current intra-area MPLS TE mechanism 
and inherit its capability sets from [RSVP-TE]. See also [TE-REQ]. 
 
The proposed solution MUST allow to provision at the Head/Tail end with 
end-to-end RSVP signalling (eventually with loose paths) traversing 
across the interconnected ABRs, without further provisioning required 
along the transit path. 
 
5.3.    Protocol signaling and path computation 
 
The proposed solution MUST provide the ability to explicitly specify a 
set of LSRs including ABRs by means of strict or loose hops for the 
inter-area TE LSP. 
 
The solution SHOULD also allow the head-end LSR to explicitly specify 
the hops across the transit area on which path the constraints are met.  
 
In addition, the proposed solution SHOULD also provide the ability to 
specify and signal that certain loose or strict nodes and resources to 
be explicitly excluded in the inter-area TE LSP path establishment. If 
multiple signaling methods are proposed in the solution (e.g contiguous 
LSP, stitched or nested LSP), the Head-end LSR MUST have the ability to 
signal the required signaling method on a per-LSP basis. 
 
5.4.    Path optimality 
 
As already pointed out, the solution SHOULD provide the capability for 
the Head-end LSR to dynamically compute an optimal path satisfying a 
set of specified constraints defined in [TE-REQ] across multiple areas. 
Note that this requirement document does not mandate that all inter-
area TE LSP require the computation of an optimal inter-area path: some 
inter-area TE LSP path may be computed via some mechanisms not 
guaranteeing an optimal end to end path whereas some other inter-area 
TE LSP paths carrying sensitive traffic could be computed making use of 
some mechanisms allowing to dynamically compute an optimal end to end 
path. Note that regular constraints like bandwidth, affinities, à MUST 
also be taken into account in the computation of an optimal end to end 
path. In the context of this requirement document, an optimal path is 
 
                                                                     7 
 
 

draft-leroux-tewg-inter-area-TE-reqs-00.txt                 December 2003 
 
 
defined as the shortest path across multiple areas taking into account 
either the IGP or TE metric. In other words, such a path is the path 
that would have been computed making use of some CSPF algorithm in the 
absence of areas. 
 
5.5.    Support of diversely routed inter-areas TE LSPs 
 
There are several cases where the ability to compute diversely routed 
TE LSP paths may be desirable: 
 
(1) A single TE LSP across multiple areas satisfying the required set 
of constraints cannot be found, in which case this may require load 
splitting. 
 
(2) Multiple TE paths may be required to limit the impact of a network 
element failure to a portion of the traffic.  As an example, two VoIP 
gateways may load balance the traffic among a set of inter-area TE 
LSPs. 
 
(3) Path protection (e.g. 1:1 or 1:N) as discussed in [MPLS-Recov]. 
 
Hence, the solution SHOULD be able to provide the ability to compute 
diversely routed inter-area TE LSPs paths. In particular, if such paths 
obeying the set of constraints exist, the solution SHOULD be able to 
compute them. For the sake of illustration, there are some algorithms 
that may not always allow to find diversely routed TE LSPs because they 
make use of a two steps approach that cannot guarantee to compute two 
diversely routed TE LSP paths even if such a solution exist. This is in 
contrast with other methods that simultaneously compute the set of 
diversely routed paths and that can always find such paths if they 
exist.  
 
5.6.    Reoptimization of inter-area TE LSP 
 
The solution MUST provide the ability to reoptimize in a non disruptive 
fashion (make before break) an inter-area TE LSP, should a more optimal 
appear in any traversed area. The Operator should be able to trigger 
such a reoptimization on a timer or event-driven basis. It should also 
be possible to trigger such a reoptimization manually. 
 
Moreover, the solution SHOULD provide the ability for the Head-end LSR 
to be informed of the existence of a more optimal path in a downstream 
area and keep a strict control on the reoptimization process. Hence, 
the Head-end LSR, once informed of a more optimal path in some 
downstream areas, could decide (or not) to gracefully perform an end to 
end path reoptimization, according to the inter-area TE LSP 
characteristics. 
 
The ABR should check for optimality of the TE LSPs established through 
it based on a timer or triggered by an event. Option of providing 
manual trigger to check for optimality should also be provided. 
 
                                                                     8 
 
 

draft-leroux-tewg-inter-area-TE-reqs-00.txt                 December 2003 
 
 
 
5.7.    Support of fast recovery of inter-area TE LSP 
 
The solution MUST provide the ability to benefit from fast recovery 
making use of the local protection techniques specified in [FAST-
REROUTE] in both the case of an intra-area network element failure 
(link/SRLG/Node) and an ABR node failure. Note that different 
protection techniques SHOULD be usable in different part of the network 
to protect an inter-area TE LSP. This is of the utmost importance in 
particular in the case of an ABR node failure that typically carries a 
great deal of inter-area traffic. Moreover, the solution SHOULD allow 
to compute and set up a backup tunnel following an optimal path that 
offers bandwidth guarantees during failure along with other potential 
constraints (like bounded propagation delay increase along the backup 
path). 
 
5.8.    DS-TE support 
 
The proposed inter-area MPLS TE solution SHOULD also satisfy core 
requirements documented in [DS-TE] and interoperate seamlessly with 
current intra-AS MPLS DS-TE mechanism [DSTE-PROT]. 
 
5.9.    Hierarchical LSP support 
 
In case of large inter-area MPLS deployment potentially involving a 
large number of edge LSRs, it can be desirable/necessary to introduce 
some level of hierarchy in the core in order to reduce the number of 
states on core LSRs. Hence, the proposed solution SHOULD allow inter-
area TE LSP aggregation (also referred to as LSP nesting) such that 
individual tunnels can be carried onto one or more aggregating LSP.  
One such mechanism, for example is described in [MPLS-LSPHIE]. The 
solution SHOULD also provide the ability to advertise some TE LSPs as 
links as specified in [MPLS-LSPHIE]. 
 
5.10.   Soft preemption 
 
The solution MUST support the ability to make use of the soft 
preemption mechanisms for inter-area TE LSP such as one defined in 
[SOFT-PREEMP]. 
 
5.11.   Auto-discovery 
 
Because the number of LSRs participating in some TE mesh might be quite 
large, it might be desirable to provide some discovery mechanisms 
allowing an LSR to automatically discover the LSRs members of the TE 
mesh(es) that it belongs to. The discovery mechanism SHOULD be 
applicable across multiple IGP areas, and SHOULD not impact the IGP 
scalability, provided that IGP extensions are used for such a discovery 
mechanism. 
 
5.12.   Mapping of traffic to inter-area TE LSP 
 
                                                                     9 
 
 

draft-leroux-tewg-inter-area-TE-reqs-00.txt                 December 2003 
 
 
 
In the case of intra-area MPLS TE, there are currently several 
possibilities to steer traffic to some intra-area TE LSP: the TE LSP 
can be automatically taken into account in the RIB computation, static 
routing can be used, à In the case of inter-area TE LSP, the proposed 
solution SHOULD at least support static routing coupled with recursive 
routing. For instance, an Operator should be able to route all the 
traffic sent to the set of routes announced by a (MP-)BGP speaker by 
means of a single static route to the corresponding BGP next hop 
address. 
 
5.13.   Inter-area Path selection policy 
 
For inter-area TE LSPs whose Head-End and Tail-End reside in the same 
IGP area, there may be intra-area and inter-area feasible paths. In case 
the shortest path is an inter-area path, an operator may either want to 
avoid, as far as possible, crossing area and thus prefer selecting a 
sub-optimal intra-area path, or conversely may prefer to use a shortest 
path, even if it crosses areas. Thus, the solution MUST allow to enable 
or disable area crossing, for inter-area TE LSPs whose Head-End and 
Tail-End reside in the same area. 
 
5.14.   Inter-area routing policy 
 
In case of inter-area TE LSP failure in the backbone or tail-end area, 
it may be interesting to allow the ABR upstream to the failure to try to 
recover the LSP using a procedure such as defined in [CRANKBACK]. This 
may reduce the recovery delay, but with the risk of multiple crankbacks, 
sub-optimal path, à The solution SHOULD provide the ability to 
allow/disallow crankback via signaling on a per-LSP basis. 
 
5.15.   Inter-area MPLS TE fault management requirements 
 
In a MPLS network, a SP wants to detect both control plane and data 
plane failures.  But tools for fault detection over LSPs haven't been 
widely developed so far.  SPs today manually troubleshoot such failures 
in a hop-by-hop fashion across the data path.  If they detect an error 
on the data plane, they have to check the control plane in order to 
determine where the faults come from. 
 
The proposed solution SHOULD be able to interoperate with fault 
detection mechanisms of intra-area TE. 
 
The solution SHOULD support [LSP-PING] and [MPLS-TTL]. 
 
[LSP-PING] provides a mechanism to verify the data plane liveliness of 
MPLS TE LSPs. However, the mechanism does not include a method to 
verify the link/node protection paths. 
 
As for the backup paths, it is not possible to verify the data plane 
until such protection paths are actually in use. A control plane 
 
                                                                    10 
 
 

draft-leroux-tewg-inter-area-TE-reqs-00.txt                 December 2003 
 
 
mechanism allowing to check the validity of the backup paths is 
desired. The solution should be able to automatically verify the backup 
paths for inter-area TE LSP. 
 
6.      Evaluation criteria 
 
6.1.    Performances 
 
The solution SHOULD clearly be evaluated with respects to the following 
criteria: 
(1) Optimality of the computed inter-area TE LSP path, 
(2) Optimality of the computed backup tunnel path protecting against 
the failure of an ABR, capability to share bandwidth among backup 
tunnels protecting independent facilities. 
 
(3) Inter-area TE LSP set up time, 
 
Other criteria may be added in further revisions of this draft 
 
6.2.    Complexity and risks 
 
The proposed solution (s) SHOULD not introduce unnecessary complexity 
to the current operating network to such a degree that it would affect 
the stability and diminish the benefits of deploying such solution over 
SP networks. 
 
6.3.    Backward Compatibility 
 
The deployment of inter-area MPLS TE SHOULD not have impact on existing 
MPLS TE mechanisms to allow for a smooth migration or co-existence. 
 
7.      Security Considerations 
 
Inter-area MPLS-TE does not raise any new security issue, beyond those 
of intra-area MPLS-TE. 
 
References 
 
[RSVP] Braden, et al, " Resource ReSerVation Protocol (RSVP) û Version 
1, Functional Specificationö, RFC 2205, September 1997. 
 
[RSVP-TE] Awduche, et al, "Extensions to RSVP for LSP Tunnels", RFC 
3209, December 2001. 
 
[TE-OVW], Awduche, et al, "Overview and Principles of Internet Traffic 
Engineering", RFC 3272, May 2002. 
 
[TE-REQ], Awduche et. al., "Requirements for Traffic Engineering 
over MPLS", RFC2702, September 1999. 
 

 
                                                                    11 
 
 

draft-leroux-tewg-inter-area-TE-reqs-00.txt                 December 2003 
 
 
[REFRESH-REDUCTION] Berger et al, ôRSVP Refresh Overhead Reduction 
Extensionsö, RFC2961, April 2001. 
 
[FAST-REROUTE] Ping Pan, et al, "Fast Reroute Extensions to RSVP-TE for 
LSP Tunnels", draft-ietf-mpls-rsvp-lsp-fastreroute-03.txt, December 
2003. 
 
[BANDWIDTH-PROTECTION] Vasseur et all, ôMPLS Traffic Engineering Fast 
reroute: bypass tunnel path computation for bandwidth protection ©,  
draft-vasseur-mpls-backup-computation-01.txt, October 2002, Work in 
progress. 
 
[OSPF-TE] Katz, D., Yeung, D., Kompella, K., "Traffic Engineering 
Extensions to OSPF Version 2", draft-katz-yeung-ospf-traffic-
09.txt(work in progress). 
 
[ISIS-TE] Li, T., Smit, H., "IS-IS extensions for Traffic Engineering", 
draft-ietf-isis-traffic-04.txt (work in progress) 
 
[SECOND-METRIC] Le faucheur, ôUse of IGP Metric as a second TE Metricö, 
Internet draft, draft-lefaucheur-te-metric-igp-02.txt. 
 
[MULTIPLE-METRICS] Fedyk D., Ghanwani A., Ash J., Vedrenne A. ôMultiple 
Metrics for Traffic Engineering with IS-IS and OSPFö, Internet draft,  
draft-fedyk-isis-ospf-te-metrics-01.txt 
 
[PATH-COMP] Vasseur et al, ôRSVP Path computation request and reply 
messagesö,  draft-vasseur-mpls-computation-rsvp-04.txt, work in 
progress. 
 
[RSVP-CONSTRAINTS] Kompella, K., "Carrying Constraints in RSVP", 
(work in progress). 
 
[OSPF-TE-CAP] Vasseur, Psenak. "OSPF TE TLV capabilities", draft-
vasseur-mpls-ospf-te-cap-00.txt, October 2002 (Work in Progress). 
 
[OSPF-CAP] Lindem et all ô Extensions to OSPF for Advertising Optional 
Router Capabilitiesö, draft-ietf-ospf-cap-01.txt, work in progress. 
 
[ISIS-CAP] Aggarwal et all, ôExtensions to IS-IS for Advertising 
Optional Router Capabilitiesö, work in progress 
 
[LSP-ATTRIBUTE] Farrel A. et al, "Encoding of Attributes for 
Multiprotocol Label Switching (MPLS) Label Switched Path (LSP) 
Establishment Using RSVP-TE", (work in progress). 
 
[GMPLS-OVERLAY] G. Swallow et al, "GMPLS RSVP Support for the Overlay 
Model", (work in progress). 
 
[EXCLUDE-ROUTE] Lee et all, Exclude Routes - Extension to RSVP-TE, 
draft-ietf-ccamp-rsvp-te-exclude-route-00.txt, work in progress. 
 
                                                                    12 
 
 

draft-leroux-tewg-inter-area-TE-reqs-00.txt                 December 2003 
 
 
     
[INTER-AREA-TE] Kompella et all,öMulti-area MPLS Traffic Engineeringö,           
draft-kompella-mpls-multiarea-te-04.txt, June 2003. 
 
[LSPPING] Kompella, K., Pan, P., Sheth, N., Cooper, D.,Swallow, G., 
Wadhwa, S., Bonica, R., " Detecting Data Plane Liveliness in MPLS", 
Internet Draft <draft-ietf-mpls-lsp-ping-02.txt>, October 2002. (Work 
in Progress) 
 
[MPLS-TTL], Agarwal, et al, "Time to Live (TTL) Processing in MPLS   
Networks", RFC 3443 Updates RFC 3032) ", January 2003 
 
[INTER-AS-TE-REQS] Zhang et al, ôMPLS Inter-AS Traffic Engineering 
requirementsö, draft-ietf-tewg-interas-mpls-te-req-03.txt (work in 
progress). 
 
[LOOSE-PATH-REOPT] Vasseur and Ikejiri, ôReoptimization of an explicit 
loosely routed MPLS TE pathsö, draft-vasseur-mpls-loose-path-reopt-
02.txt, June 2003, Work in Progress. 
 
[NODE-ID] Vasseur, Ali and Sivabalan, ôDefinition of an RRO node-id 
subobjectö,  draft-ietf-mpls-nodeid-subobject-01.txt, June 2003, Work 
in progress. 
 
[LSP-HIER] Kompella K., Rekhter Y., "LSP Hierarchy with Generalized 
MPLS TE", draft-ietf-mpls-lsp-hierarchy-08.txt, March 2002. 
 
[MPLS-TTL], Agarwal, et al, "Time to Live (TTL) Processing in MPLS 
Networks", RFC 3443 (Updates RFC 3032) ", January 2003. 
 
[INTER-AS-TE-LINK] JP Vasseur, ½ Inter-ASBR TE Link type ©, draft-
vasseur-ccamp-inter-as-link-type-00, Work in progress. 
 
[MPLS-Recov] V. Sharma, et al, "Framework for Multi-Protocol Label 
Switching (MPLS)-based Recovery", RFC 3469 February 2003 
 
 
Authors' Address: 
 
JP Vasseur 
Cisco Systems, Inc. 
300 Beaver Brook Road 
Boxborough , MA - 01719 
USA 
Email: jpv@cisco.com 
 
Jean-Louis Le Roux 
France Telecom 
2, avenue Pierre-Marzin 
22307 Lannion Cedex 
France 
 
                                                                    13 
 
 

draft-leroux-tewg-inter-area-TE-reqs-00.txt                 December 2003 
 
 
E-mail: jeanlouis.leroux@francetelecom.com 
 
Ting-Wo Chung 
Bell Canada 
181 Bay Street, Suite 350, Toronto, Ontario, Canada, M5J 2T3 
Email: ting_wo.chung@bell.ca  
 
Raymond Zhang 
Infonet Services Corporation 
2160 E. Grand Ave. 
El Segundo, CA 90025 
USA 
Email: raymond_zhang@infonet.com  
 
Kenji Kumaki 
KDDI Corporation 
Garden Air Tower 
Iidabashi, Chiyoda-ku, 
Tokyo 102-8460, 
JAPAN 
E-mail : ke-kumaki@kddi.com 
 
Yuichi Ikejiri   
NTT Communications Corporation   
1-1-6, Uchisaiwai-cho, Chiyoda-ku   
Tokyo 100-8019   
JAPAN   
Email: y.ikejiri@ntt.com   
 
Parantap Lahiri 
MCI  
22001 louden county pky   
Ashburn, VA 20147  
USA  
E-mail: parantap.lahiri@mci.com  
















 
                                                                    14 
 
 

