



Network Working Group                                           J. Arkko
Internet-Draft                                                  Ericsson
Intended status: Informational                                 T. Hardie
Expires: 8 September 2022                                          Cisco
                                                                T. Pauly
                                                                   Apple
                                                            M. Kühlewind
                                                                Ericsson
                                                            7 March 2022


Considerations on Application - Network Collaboration Using Path Signals
                draft-iab-path-signals-collaboration-00

Abstract

   This document discusses principles for designing mechanisms that use
   or provide path signals, and calls for standards action in specific
   valuable cases.  RFC 8558 describes path signals as messages to or
   from on-path elements, and points out that visible information will
   be used whether it is intended as a signal or not.  The principles in
   this document are intended as guidance for the design of explicit
   path signals, which are encouraged to be authenticated and include a
   minimal set of parties and minimize information sharing.  These
   principles can be achieved through mechanisms like encryption of
   information and establishing trust relationships between entities on
   a path.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 8 September 2022.







Arkko, et al.           Expires 8 September 2022                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft             Path Signals Collab                March 2022


Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2022 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Principles  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     2.1.  Intentional Distribution  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     2.2.  Minimum Set of Entities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     2.3.  Control of the Distribution of Information  . . . . . . .   7
     2.4.  Minimize Information  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     2.5.  Carrying Information  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     2.6.  Protecting Information and Authentication . . . . . . . .   9
     2.7.  Limiting Impact of Information  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   3.  Further Work  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   4.  Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   5.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15

1.  Introduction

   RFC 8558 defines the term "path signals" as signals to or from on-
   path elements.  Today path signals are often implicit, e.g. derived
   from cleartext end-to-end information by e.g. examining transport
   protocols.  For instance, on-path elements use various fields of the
   TCP header [RFC0793] to derive information about end-to-end latency
   as well as congestion.  These techniques have evolved because the
   information was available and its use required no coordination with
   anyone.  This made such techniques more easily deployed than
   alternative, potentially more explicit or cooperative approaches.
   Such techniques had some drawbacks as well, such as having to
   interpret information designed to be carried for another purpose.

   Today, applications and networks have often evolved their interaction
   without comprehensive design for how this interaction should happen
   or which information would be desired for a certain function.  This
   has lead to a situation where sometimes information is used that



Arkko, et al.           Expires 8 September 2022                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft             Path Signals Collab                March 2022


   maybe incomplete, incorrect, or only indirectly representative of the
   information that was actually desired.  In addition, dependencies on
   information and mechanisms that were designed for a different
   function limits the evolvability of the protocols in question.

   The unplanned interaction ends up having several negative effects:

   *  Ossifying protocols by introducing unintended parties that may not
      be updating

   *  Creating systemic incentives against deploying more secure or
      otherwise updated versions of protocols

   *  Basing network behaviour on information that may be incomplete or
      incorrect

   *  Creating a model where network entities expect to be able to use
      rich information about sessions passing through

   For instance, features such as DNS resolution or TLS setup have been
   used beyond their original intent, such as in name-based filtering.
   MAC addresses have been used for access control, captive portal
   implementations that employ taking over cleartext HTTP sessions, and
   so on.

   A large number of protocol mechanisms today fall into one of two
   categories: authenticated and private communication that is only
   visible to the a very limited set nodes, often one on each "end"; and
   unauthenticated public communication that is visible to all nodes on
   a path.

   Exposed information encourages pervasive monitoring, which is
   described in RFC 7258 [RFC7258], and may also be used for commercial
   purposes, or form a basis for filtering that the applications or
   users do not desire.  But a lack of all path signaling, on the other
   hand, may be harmful to network management, debugging, or the ability
   for networks to provide the most efficient services.  There are many
   cases where elements on the network path can provide beneficial
   services, but only if they can coordinate with the endpoints.  It
   also affects the ability of service providers and others to observe
   why problems occur [RFC9075].

   As such, this situation is sometimes cast as an adversarial tradeoff
   between privacy and the ability for the network path to provide
   intended functions.  However, this is perhaps an unnecessarily
   polarized characterization as a zero-sum situation.  Not all
   information passing implies loss of privacy.  For instance,
   performance information or preferences do not require disclosing the



Arkko, et al.           Expires 8 September 2022                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft             Path Signals Collab                March 2022


   content being accessed, the user identity, or the application in use.
   Similarly, network congestion status information does not have reveal
   network topology or the status of other users, and so on.

   Increased deployment of encryption is changing this situation.
   Encryption provides tools for controling information access and
   protects again ossification by avoiding unintended dependencies and
   requiring active maintenance.

   The increased deployment of encryption provides an opportunity to
   reconsider parts of Internet architecture that have used implicit
   derivation of input signals for on-path functions rather than
   explicit signaling, as recommended by RFC 8558 [RFC8558].

   For instance, QUIC replaces TCP for various applications and ensures
   end-to-end signals are only be accessible by the endpoints, ensuring
   evolvability [RFC9000].  QUIC does expose information dedicated for
   on-path elements to consume by using explicit signals for specific
   use cases, such as the Spin bit for latency measurements or
   connection ID that can be used by load balancers
   [I-D.ietf-quic-manageability].  This information is accessible by all
   on-path devices but information is limited to only those use cases.
   Each new use case requires additional action.  This points to one way
   to resolve the adversity: the careful design of what information is
   passed.

   Another extreme is to employ explicit trust and coordination between
   all involved entities, endpoints as well as network devices.  VPNs
   are a good example of a case where there is an explicit
   authentication and negotiation with a network path element that is
   used to optimize behavior or gain access to specific resources.
   Authentication and trust must be considered in multiple directions:
   how endpoints trust and authenticate signals from network devices,
   and how network devices trust and authenticate signals from
   endpoints.

   The goal of improving privacy and trust on the Internet does not
   necessarily need to remove the ability for network elements to
   perform beneficial functions.  We should instead improve the way that
   these functions are achieved and design new protocols to support
   explicit collaboration where it is seen as beneficial.  As such our
   goals should be:

   *  To ensure that information is distributed intentionally, not
      accidentally;

   *  to understand the privacy and other implications of any
      distributed information;



Arkko, et al.           Expires 8 September 2022                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft             Path Signals Collab                March 2022


   *  to ensure that the information distribution is limited the
      intended parties; and

   *  to gate the distribution of information on the participation of
      the relevant parties

   These goals for exposure and distribution apply equally to senders,
   receivers, and path elements.

   Going forward, new standards work in the IETF needs to focus on
   addressing this gap by providing better alternatives and mechanisms
   for building functions that require some collaboration between
   endpoints and path elements.

   We can establish some basic questions that any new network functions
   should consider:

   *  What is the minimum set of entities that need to be involved?

   *  What is the minimum information each entity in this set needs?

   *  Which entities must consent to the information exchange?

   *  What is the effect that new signals should have?

   If we look at many of the ways network functions are achieved today,
   we find that many if not most of them fall short the standard set up
   by the questions above.  Too often, they send unnecessary information
   or fail to limit the scope of distribution or providing any
   negotiation or consent.

   Designing explicit signals between applications and network elements,
   and ensuring that all other information is appropriately protected,
   enables information exchange in both directions that is important for
   improving the quality of experience and network management.  This
   kind of cleanly separated architecture is also more conducive to
   protocol evolvability.

   This draft discusses different approaches for explicit collaboration
   and provides guidance on architectural principles to design new
   mechanisms.  Section 2 discusses principles that good design can
   follow.  This section also provides some examples and explanation of
   situations that not following the principles can lead to.  Section 3
   points to topics that need more to be looked at more carefully before
   any guidance can be given.






Arkko, et al.           Expires 8 September 2022                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft             Path Signals Collab                March 2022


   Beyond the recommandation in [RFC8558], the IAB has provided further
   guidance on protocol design.  Among other documents, [RFC5218]
   provides general advice on incremental deployability based on an
   analysis of successes and failures and [RFC6709] discusses protocol
   extensibility.  The Internet Technology Adoption and Transition
   (ITAT) workshop report [RFC7305] is also recommended reading on this
   same general topic.  [RFC9049], an IRTF document, provides a
   catalogue of past issues to avoid and discusses incentives for
   adoption of path signals such as the need for outperforming end-to-
   end mechanisms or considering per-connection state.

2.  Principles

   This section provides architecture-level principles for protocol
   designers and recommends models to apply for network collaboration
   and signaling.

   While RFC 8558 [RFC8558] focused specifically on "on-path elements",
   the principles described in this document can be applied both to on-
   path signalling and signalling with other elements in the network
   that are not directly on-path, but still influence end-to-end
   connections.  An example of on-path signalling is communication
   between an endpoint and a router on a network path.  An example of
   signalling with another network element is communication between an
   endpoint and a network-assigned DNS server, firewall controller, or
   captive portal API server.

   Taken together, these principles focus on the inherent privacy and
   security concerns of sharing information between endpoints and
   network elements, emphasizing that careful scrutiny and a high bar of
   consent and trust need to be applied.

2.1.  Intentional Distribution

   This guideline is best expressed in RFC 8558:

   "Fundamentally, this document recommends that implicit signals should
   be avoided and that an implicit signal should be replaced with an
   explicit signal only when the signal's originator intends that it be
   used by the network elements on the path.  For many flows, this may
   result in the signal being absent but allows it to be present when
   needed."

   This guideline applies in the other direction as well.  For instance,
   a network element should not unintentionally leak information that is
   not visible to endpoints.  An explicit decision is needed for a
   specific information to be provided, along with analysis of the
   security and privacy implications of that information.



Arkko, et al.           Expires 8 September 2022                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft             Path Signals Collab                March 2022


2.2.  Minimum Set of Entities

   It is recommended that a design identifies the minimum number of
   entities needed to share a specific signal required for an identified
   function.

   Often this will be a very limited set, such as when an application
   only needs to provide a signal to its peer at the other end of the
   connection or a host needs to contact a specific VPN gateway.  In
   other cases a broader set is neeeded, such as when explicit or
   implicit signals from a potentially unknown set of multiple routers
   along the path inform the endpoints about congestion.

   While it is tempting to consider removing these limitations in the
   context of closed, private networks, each interaction is still best
   considered separately, rather than simply allowing all information
   exchanges within the closed network.  Even in a closed network with
   carefully managed elements there may be compromised components, as
   evidenced in the most extreme way by the Stuxnet worm that operated
   in an airgapped network.  Most "closed" networks have at least some
   needs and means to access the rest of the Internet, and should not be
   modeled as if they had an impenetrable security barrier.

2.3.  Control of the Distribution of Information

   Trust and mutual agreement between the involved entities must
   determine the distribution of information, in order to give adequate
   control to each entity over the collaboration or information sharing.

   The sender needs to agree to sending the information.  Any passing of
   information or request for an action needs to be explicit, and use
   protocol mechanisms that are designed for the purpose.  Merely
   sending a particular kind of packet to a destination should not be
   interpreted as an implicit agreement.

   At the same time, the recipient of information or the target of a
   request should agree to receiving the information.  It should not be
   burdened with extra processing if it does not have willigness or a
   need to do so.  This happens naturally in most protocol designs, but
   has been a problem for some cases where "slow path" packet processing
   is required or implied, and the recipient or router is not willing to
   handle this.

   In both cases, all involved entities must be identified and
   potentially authenticated if trust is required as a prerequisite to
   share certain information.





Arkko, et al.           Expires 8 September 2022                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft             Path Signals Collab                March 2022


   Many Internet communications are not performed on behalf of the
   applications, but are ultimately made on behalf of users.  However,
   not all information that may be shared directly relates to user
   actions or other senstive data.  All information shared must be
   evaluated carefully to identify potential privacy implications for
   users.  Information that directly relates to the user should not be
   shared without the user's consent.  It should be noted that the
   interests of the user and other parties, such as the application
   developer, may not always coincide; some applications may wish to
   collect more information about the user than the user would like.
   How to achieve a balance of control between the actual user and an
   application representing an user's interest is out of scope for this
   document.

2.4.  Minimize Information

   Each party should provide only the information that is needed for the
   other parties to perform the task for which collaboration is desired,
   and no more.  This applies to information sent by an application
   about itself, information sent about users, or information sent by
   the network.

   An architecture can follow the guideline from RFC 8558 in using
   explicit signals, but still fail to differentiate properly between
   information that should be kept private and information that should
   be shared.

   In looking at what information can or cannot easily be passed, we
   need to consider both, information from the network to the
   application and from the application to the network.

   For the application to the network direction, user-identifying
   information can be problematic for privacy and tracking reasons.
   Similarly, application identity can be problematic, if it might form
   the basis for prioritization or discrimination that the application
   provider may not wish to happen.

   On the other hand, as noted above, information about general classes
   of applications may be desirable to be given by application
   providers, if it enables prioritization that would improve service,
   e.g., differentiation between interactive and non-interactive
   services.

   For the network to application direction there is similarly sensitive
   information, such as the precise location of the user.  On the other
   hand, various generic network conditions, predictive bandwidth and
   latency capabilities, and so on might be attractive information that
   applications can use to determine, for instance, optimal strategies



Arkko, et al.           Expires 8 September 2022                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft             Path Signals Collab                March 2022


   for changing codecs.  However, information given by the network about
   load conditions and so on should not form a mechanism to provide a
   side-channel into what other users are doing.

   While information needs to be specific and provided on a per-need
   basis, it is often beneficial to provide declarative information
   that, for instance, expresses application needs than makes specific
   requests for action.

2.5.  Carrying Information

   There is a distinction between what information is passed and how it
   is carried.  The actually sent information may be limited, while the
   mechanisms for sending or requesting information can be capable of
   sending much more.

   There is a tradeoff here between flexibility and ensuring the
   minimality of information in the future.  The concern is that a fully
   generic data sharing approach between different layers and parties
   could potentially be misused, e.g., by making the availability of
   some information a requirement for passing through a network.  This
   is undesirable.

   This document recommends that the protocols that carry information
   are specific to the type of information that is needed to carry the
   minimal set of information (see Section 2.4) and can establish
   sufficient trust to pass that information (see Section 2.6).

2.6.  Protecting Information and Authentication

   Some simple forms of information often exist in cleartext form, e.g,
   ECN bits from routers are generally not authenticated or integrity
   protected.  This is possible when the information exchanges do not
   carry any significantly sensitive information from the parties.
   Often these kind of interations are also advisory in their nature
   (see also section {#impact}).

   In other cases it may be necessary to establish a secure channel for
   communication with a specific other party, e.g., between a network
   element and an application.  This channel may need to be
   authenticated, integrity protected and confidential.  This is
   necessary, for instance, if the particular information or request
   needs to be share in confidence only with a particular, trusted node,
   or there's a danger of an attack where someone else may forge
   messages that could endanger the communication.






Arkko, et al.           Expires 8 September 2022                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft             Path Signals Collab                March 2022


   Authenticated integrity protections on signalled data can help ensure
   that data received in a signal has not been modified by other
   parties, but both network elements and endpoints need to be careful
   in processing or responding to any signal.  Whether through bugs or
   attacks, the content of path signals can lead to unexpected behaviors
   or security vulernabilities if not properly handled.

   However, it is important to note that authentication does not equal
   trust.  Whether a communication is with an application server or
   network element that can be shown to be associated with a particular
   domain name, it does not follow that information about the user can
   be safely sent to it.

   In some cases, the ability of a party to show that it is on the path
   can be beneficial.  For instance, an ICMP error that refers to a
   valid flow may be more trustworthy than any ICMP error claiming to
   come from an address.

   Other cases may require more substantial assurances.  For instance, a
   specific trust arrangement may be established between a particular
   network and application.  Or technologies such as confidential
   computing can be applied to provide an assurance that information
   processed by a party is handled in an appropriate manner.

2.7.  Limiting Impact of Information

   Information shared between a network element and an endpoint of a
   connection needs to have a limited impact on the behavior of both
   endpoints and network elements.  Any action that an endpoint or
   network element takes based on a path signal needs to be considered
   appropriately based on the level of authentication and trust that has
   been established, and be scoped to a specific network path.

   For example, an ICMP signal from a network element to an endpoint can
   be used to influence future behavior on that particular network path
   (such as changing the effective packet size or closing a path-
   specific connection), but should not be able to cause a multipath or
   migration-capable transport connection to close.

   In many cases, path signals can be considered to be advisory
   information, with the effect of optimizing or adjusting the behavior
   of connections on a specific path.  In the case of a firewall
   blocking connectivity to a given host, endpoints should only
   interpret that as the host being unavailable on that particular path;
   this is in contrast to an end-to-end authenticated signal, such as a
   DNSSEC-authenticated denial of existence [RFC7129].





Arkko, et al.           Expires 8 September 2022               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft             Path Signals Collab                March 2022


3.  Further Work

   This is a developing field, and it is expected that our understanding
   will continue to grow.  Among the recent changes are much higher use
   of encryption at different protocol layers and the consolidation of
   more and more traffic to the same destinations; these have greatly
   impacted the field.

   While there are some examples of modern, well-designed collaboration
   mechanisms, clearly more work is needed.  Many complex cases would
   require significant developments in order to become feasible.

   Some of the most difficult areas are listed below.  Research on these
   topics would be welcome.

   *  Business arrangements.  Many designs - for instance those related
      to quality-of-service - involve an expectation of paying for a
      service.  This is possible and has been successful within
      individual domains, e.g., users can pay for higher data rates or
      data caps in their ISP networks.  However, it is a business-wise
      much harder proposition for end-to-end connections across multiple
      administrative domains [Claffy2015] [RFC9049].

   *  Secure communications with path elements.  This has been a
      difficult topic, both from the mechanics and scalability point
      view, but also because there is no easy way to find out which
      parties to trust or what trust roots would be appropriate.  Some
      application-network element interaction designs have focused on
      information (such as ECN bits) that is distributed openly within a
      path, but there are limited examples of designs with secure
      information exchange with specific nodes.

   *  The use of path signals for reducing the effects of denial-of-
      service attacks, e.g., in the form of modern "source quench"
      designs.

   *  Ways of protecting information when held by network elements or
      servers, beyond communications security.  For instance, host
      applications commonly share sensitive information about the user's
      actions with other nodes, starting from basic data such as domain
      names learned by DNS infrastructure or source and destination
      addresses and protocol header information learned by all routers
      on the path, to detailed end user identity and other information
      learned by the servers.  Some solutions are starting to exist for
      this but are not widely deployed, at least not today [Oblivious]
      [PDoT] [I-D.arkko-dns-confidential] [I-D.thomson-http-oblivious].
      These solutions address also very specific parts of the issue, and
      more work remains.



Arkko, et al.           Expires 8 September 2022               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft             Path Signals Collab                March 2022


   *  Sharing information from networks to applications.  There are some
      working examples of this, e.g., ECN.  A few other proposals have
      been made (see, e.g., [I-D.flinck-mobile-throughput-guidance]),
      but very few of those have seen deployment.

   *  Sharing information from applications to networks.  There are a
      few more working examples of this (see Section 1).  However,
      numerous proposals have been made in this space, but most of them
      have not progressed through standards or been deployed, for a
      variety of reasons [RFC9049].  Several current or recent proposals
      exist, however, such as [I-D.yiakoumis-network-tokens].

   *  Data privacy regimes generally deal with more issues than merely
      whether some information is shared with another party or not.  For
      instance, there may be rules regarding how long information can be
      stored or what purpose information may be used for.  Similar
      issues may also be applicable to the kind of information sharing
      discussed in this document.

4.  Acknowledgments

   The authors would like to thank everyone at the IETF, the IAB, and
   our day jobs for interesting thoughts and proposals in this space.
   Fragments of this document were also in
   [I-D.per-app-networking-considerations] and
   [I-D.arkko-path-signals-information] that were published earlier.  We
   would also like to acknowledge [I-D.trammell-stackevo-explicit-coop]
   for presenting similar thoughts.  Finally, the authors would like to
   thank Adrian Farrell, Toerless Eckert, Martin Thomson, Mark
   Nottingham, Luis M.  Contreras, Watson Ladd, Vittorio Bertola, Andrew
   Campling, Eliot Lear, Spencer Dawkins, Christian Huitema, and Jeffrey
   Haas for useful feedback in the IABOPEN sessions and on the list.

5.  Informative References

   [Claffy2015]
              kc Claffy, . and D. Clark, "Adding Enhanced Services to
              the Internet: Lessons from History", TPRC 43: The 43rd
              Research Conference on Communication, Information and
              Internet Policy Paper , April 2015.

   [I-D.arkko-dns-confidential]
              Arkko, J. and J. Novotny, "Privacy Improvements for DNS
              Resolution with Confidential Computing", Work in Progress,
              Internet-Draft, draft-arkko-dns-confidential-02, 2 July
              2021, <https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-arkko-dns-
              confidential-02.txt>.




Arkko, et al.           Expires 8 September 2022               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft             Path Signals Collab                March 2022


   [I-D.arkko-path-signals-information]
              Arkko, J., "Considerations on Information Passed between
              Networks and Applications", Work in Progress, Internet-
              Draft, draft-arkko-path-signals-information-00, 22
              February 2021, <https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-
              arkko-path-signals-information-00.txt>.

   [I-D.flinck-mobile-throughput-guidance]
              Jain, A., Terzis, A., Flinck, H., Sprecher, N.,
              Arunachalam, S., Smith, K., Devarapalli, V., and R. B.
              Yanai, "Mobile Throughput Guidance Inband Signaling
              Protocol", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-flinck-
              mobile-throughput-guidance-04, 13 March 2017,
              <https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-flinck-mobile-
              throughput-guidance-04.txt>.

   [I-D.ietf-quic-manageability]
              Kuehlewind, M. and B. Trammell, "Manageability of the QUIC
              Transport Protocol", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft,
              draft-ietf-quic-manageability-14, 21 January 2022,
              <https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-ietf-quic-
              manageability-14.txt>.

   [I-D.per-app-networking-considerations]
              Colitti, L. and T. Pauly, "Per-Application Networking
              Considerations", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-
              per-app-networking-considerations-00, 15 November 2020,
              <https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-per-app-networking-
              considerations-00.txt>.

   [I-D.thomson-http-oblivious]
              Thomson, M. and C. A. Wood, "Oblivious HTTP", Work in
              Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-thomson-http-oblivious-02,
              24 August 2021, <https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-
              thomson-http-oblivious-02.txt>.

   [I-D.trammell-stackevo-explicit-coop]
              Trammell, B., "Architectural Considerations for Transport
              Evolution with Explicit Path Cooperation", Work in
              Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-trammell-stackevo-
              explicit-coop-00, 23 September 2015,
              <https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-trammell-stackevo-
              explicit-coop-00.txt>.








Arkko, et al.           Expires 8 September 2022               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft             Path Signals Collab                March 2022


   [I-D.yiakoumis-network-tokens]
              Yiakoumis, Y., McKeown, N., and F. Sorensen, "Network
              Tokens", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-
              yiakoumis-network-tokens-02, 22 December 2020,
              <https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-yiakoumis-network-
              tokens-02.txt>.

   [Oblivious]
              Schmitt, P., "Oblivious DNS: Practical privacy for DNS
              queries", Proceedings on Privacy Enhancing Technologies
              2019.2: 228-244 , 2019.

   [PDoT]     Nakatsuka, Y., Paverd, A., and G. Tsudik, "PDoT: Private
              DNS-over-TLS with TEE Support", Digit. Threat.: Res.
              Pract., Vol. 2, No. 1, Article 3,
              https://dl.acm.org/doi/fullHtml/10.1145/3431171 , February
              2021.

   [RFC0793]  Postel, J., "Transmission Control Protocol", STD 7,
              RFC 793, DOI 10.17487/RFC0793, September 1981,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc793>.

   [RFC5218]  Thaler, D. and B. Aboba, "What Makes for a Successful
              Protocol?", RFC 5218, DOI 10.17487/RFC5218, July 2008,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5218>.

   [RFC6709]  Carpenter, B., Aboba, B., Ed., and S. Cheshire, "Design
              Considerations for Protocol Extensions", RFC 6709,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC6709, September 2012,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6709>.

   [RFC7129]  Gieben, R. and W. Mekking, "Authenticated Denial of
              Existence in the DNS", RFC 7129, DOI 10.17487/RFC7129,
              February 2014, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7129>.

   [RFC7258]  Farrell, S. and H. Tschofenig, "Pervasive Monitoring Is an
              Attack", BCP 188, RFC 7258, DOI 10.17487/RFC7258, May
              2014, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7258>.

   [RFC7305]  Lear, E., Ed., "Report from the IAB Workshop on Internet
              Technology Adoption and Transition (ITAT)", RFC 7305,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC7305, July 2014,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7305>.

   [RFC8558]  Hardie, T., Ed., "Transport Protocol Path Signals",
              RFC 8558, DOI 10.17487/RFC8558, April 2019,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8558>.




Arkko, et al.           Expires 8 September 2022               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft             Path Signals Collab                March 2022


   [RFC9000]  Iyengar, J., Ed. and M. Thomson, Ed., "QUIC: A UDP-Based
              Multiplexed and Secure Transport", RFC 9000,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC9000, May 2021,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9000>.

   [RFC9049]  Dawkins, S., Ed., "Path Aware Networking: Obstacles to
              Deployment (A Bestiary of Roads Not Taken)", RFC 9049,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC9049, June 2021,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9049>.

   [RFC9075]  Arkko, J., Farrell, S., Kühlewind, M., and C. Perkins,
              "Report from the IAB COVID-19 Network Impacts Workshop
              2020", RFC 9075, DOI 10.17487/RFC9075, July 2021,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9075>.

Authors' Addresses

   Jari Arkko
   Ericsson
   Email: jari.arkko@ericsson.com


   Ted Hardie
   Cisco
   Email: ted.ietf@gmail.com


   Tommy Pauly
   Apple
   Email: tpauly@apple.com


   Mirja Kühlewind
   Ericsson
   Email: mirja.kuehlewind@ericsson.com
















Arkko, et al.           Expires 8 September 2022               [Page 15]
