





Network Working Group                Arthi Ayyangar (Juniper Networks)
Internet Draft Category: Standards Track
October 2003 Expires: April 2004


                 Inter-region MPLS Traffic Engineering
                 draft-ayyangar-inter-region-te-01.txt

Status of this Memo

This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with all
provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering Task
Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that other groups
may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference material
or to cite them other than as ``work in progress.''

The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

Copyright Notice

Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003).  All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

This draft proposes mechanisms for the establishment and maintenance of
MPLS Traffic Engineering (TE) Label Switched Paths (LSP) that traverse
multiple regions, where a region could be an IGP Area or an Autonomous
System or a GMPLS overlay network. This document also outlines different
mechanisms that an operator could employ within his region to facilitate
the setup of these inter-region TE LSPs.

Conventions used in this document

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
"SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].





Ayyangar             Standards Track                            [Page 1]

Internet Draft    Inter-region MPLS Traffic Engineering     October 2003


1. Terminology

   In the context of this document we define a "TE LSP region", or just
   a "region" as either a single IGP area, or a single Autonomous System
   (AS). Note that a region may itself be formed of multiple regions.
   E.g. a region formed by an AS may be composed of multiple regions,
   each corresponding to an IGP area. Also, this proposal may be
   applicable to other inter-region TE LSP setup scenarios like TE LSP
   across networks with different addressing/routing realms or under
   different administrative domains, but these scenarios will not be
   discussed in detail in this document.

   The notion of 'TE LSP nesting' refers to the ability to carry one or
   more inter-region TE LSPs within another intra-region TE LSP by using
   the MPLS label stacking property at the Head-end of the intra-region
   TE LSP. On the other hand, 'stitching a TE LSP' means to split an
   inter-region LSP and insert a different intra-region LSP, into the
   split. This implies a label swap operation at the Head-end of the
   intra-region LSP. Similar to [LSP_HIER], in the context of this
   document as well, the term FA-LSP always implies one or more LSPs
   nested within another LSP using the label stack construct. And we use
   the term 'LSP segment' when one LSP is split and another LSP is
   inserted into the split (LSP stitching).

   Other terminologies used are:

   LSP - An MPLS Label Switched Path

   LSR - Label Switch Router

   TE LSP - Traffic Engineering Label Switch Path (also referred as LSP
   in this draft)

   TED - TE database

   FA-LSP - Forwarding Adjacency LSP

   GMPLS - Generalized MPLS

   ABR - Area Border Router

   AS - Autonomous System

   ASBR - Autonomous System Border Router

   ERO - Explicit Route Object

   IGP - Interior Gateway Protocol



Ayyangar             Standards Track                            [Page 2]

Internet Draft    Inter-region MPLS Traffic Engineering     October 2003


   CSPF - Constraint-based Shortest Path First

   RRO - Record Route Object

   Protect TE LSP - a TE LSP requesting local protection in the context
   of [FAST-REROUTE]: the local protection desired bit of the SESSION-
   ATTRIBUTE object is set or a FAST-REROUTE object is inserted in the
   RSVP Path message

   PLR - Point of Local Repair; i.e. the head end of a bypass tunnel or
   a detour LSP

   MP - Merge Point; i.e. the LSR where the bypass tunnel or detour
   rejoin the protected LSP

   SP - Service Provider

   HE LSR - Head End Label Switching Router


2. Introduction

   When TE LSPs span multiple regions, there can be multiple approaches
   taken by the solutions to setup such LSPs. The solution proposed in
   [INTER-AS] describes a way to signal a contiguous TE LSP that spans
   multiple ASes and exercise more control at the HE LSR of the TE LSP.
   On the other hand, this document focuses on signaling a TE LSP with
   LSP segments or FA-LSPs in different regions and exercise more
   localized (per region) control on the inter-region TE LSP. Also, the
   solution proposed here applies to TE LSP setup across regions other
   than ASes as well. There are also other differences between the two
   solutions that will not be detailed here.

   This draft builds upon the constructs and mechanisms defined in [LSP-
   HIER] for the setup of TE LSPs spanning multiple regions. The idea is
   to separate the inter-region LSP into different segments at the
   region boundaries such that each region is completely in control of
   it's segment, with respect to its placement and maintenance. The
   signaling mechanisms described in [LSP-HIER] are re-used here to
   setup inter-region TE LSPs. This improves scaling of control plane by
   aggregating the end-to-end LSP requests. So, the control state
   corresponding to the inter-region TE LSP is only present on the
   region boundary LSRs. Also, this helps to achieve a common solution
   to solve the generic problem of establishing TE LSPs crossing
   different "regions", without any significant protocol changes. The
   operator of a region has complete control on the intra-region FA-LSPs
   (with nesting) or the LSP segments (with stitching) which transport
   the inter-region TE LSPs. Since these characteristics are also



Ayyangar             Standards Track                            [Page 3]

Internet Draft    Inter-region MPLS Traffic Engineering     October 2003


   usually desirable while setting up TE LSPs that traverse networks
   under different administrative control or networks with different
   addressing and routing realms, this solution is also applicable to
   the GMPLS overlay model ([GMPLS-OVERLAY]), where the client
   requesting the LSP setup would belong to a region different from the
   core network region.

   [LSP-HIER] uses the Interface Switching Capabilities to construct
   regions and determine region boundaries. This document augments the
   definition of region in [LSP-HIER] by adding two new types of regions
   :- an IGP area (for OSPF)/ level (for ISIS) and an Autonomous System
   (AS). In the former case, the boundaries of the region are the Area
   Border Routers (ABRs) of the area that forms the region: the
   boundaries of the region could be determined by examining the IGP
   information. In the latter case, the boundaries of the region are the
   Autonomous System Border Routers (ASBRs) of the AS that forms the
   region: the boundaries of a region could be determined by examining
   the BGP information. Neither of these cases require the use of the
   Interface Switching Capabilities to construct regions and determine
   regions boundaries.

   The draft abides by the requirements for Inter-AS Traffic Engineering
   listed in [INTER-AS-TE-REQTS] for inter-AS LSP setup where a region
   would correspond to an AS and the requirements for Inter-Area Traffic
   Engineering listed in [INTER-AREA-TE-REQTS] for inter-area TE LSP
   setup where a region would correspond to a single OSPF area or an
   ISIS level.


3. Assumptions and Requirements

   - Each region in all the examples below is assumed to be capable of
   doing Traffic Engineering; i.e. running OSPF-TE or ISIS-TE and RSVP-
   TE and may itself be composed of several other regions (for instance
   when an AS is made of several IGP areas/levels).

   - The inter-region LSPs are signaled using RSVP-TE ([RSVP-TE]).

   - The path (ERO) for the inter-region LSP traversing multiple regions
   is either configured as a set of (loose and/or strict) hops or the
   boundary LSRs for each of the regions along the path are capable of
   dynamically finding the next-hop boundary LSR towards the LSP
   destination when the LSP setup request arrives. This process of being
   able to dynamically determine the next-hop boundary LSR for an LSP
   destination during TE LSP setup will be referred to as "auto-
   discovery" mechanism in the rest of this document. At the simplest,
   auto-discovery can be based on just reachability information. This
   would usually be accompanied with crankback mechanisms to try another



Ayyangar             Standards Track                            [Page 4]

Internet Draft    Inter-region MPLS Traffic Engineering     October 2003


   next-hop boundary LSR, when the path to one next-hop boundary LSR
   fails. While the ability of a region boundary LSR to auto-discover
   the next-hop boundary LSR needs to be a part of the complete inter-
   region TE solution, it will not be discussed here in any further
   detail. Also, this mechanism will be considered to be optional as far
   as inter-region TE LSP setup is concerned. In the absence of any
   auto-discovery mechanism, the configured ERO MUST at least include
   all the boundary LSRs of each region to be traversed along the path.
   Also, the addresses configured in the ERO MUST be reachable by the
   corresponding previous hop boundary LSR.

   - The region boundary LSRs are assumed to be capable of expansion of
   a loose next-hop in the ERO by performing partial CSPF computation to
   that loose hop, instead of to the LSP destination. This way, TE LSP
   path computation is distributed among different regions and no
   topology information needs to be distributed between regions.

   - The paths for the intra-region FA-LSPs or LSP segments, may be pre-
   configured or computed dynamically based on the arriving inter-region
   LSP setup request; depending on the requirements of the transit
   region. When the paths for the FA-LSPs/LSP segments are pre-
   configured, the constraints as well as other parameters like local
   protection scheme for the intra-region FA-LSP/LSP segment are also
   pre-configured. Some local algorithm can be used on the HE LSR of a
   FA-LSP to dynamically adjust the FA-LSP bandwidth based on the
   cumulative bandwidth requested by the inter-region TE LSPs. It is
   recommended to use a threshold triggering mechanism to avoid constant
   bandwidth readjustment as inter-region TE LSPs are set up and torn
   down.

   - While certain constraints like bandwidth can be used across
   different regions, certain other TE constraints like resource
   affinity, color, metric; etc as listed in [RFC2702] could be
   translated differently in different regions. It is assumed that, at
   the region boundary LSRs, there will exist some sort of local mapping
   based on offline policy agreement, in order to translate such
   constraints across region boundaries. This would be something similar
   to 'Inter-AS TE Agreement Enforcement Polices' stated in [INTER-AS-
   TE-REQTS].

   - The intra-region FA-LSPs or LSP segments in packet-switched
   networks are assumed to be unidirectional.

   - When a region boundary LSR at the exit of a region receives a TE
   LSP setup request (Path message) for an inter-region TE LSP, then if
   this LSP had been nested or stitched at the entry region boundary
   LSR, then this exit boundary LSR can determine the corresponding FA-
   LSP or LSP segment from the received Path message. The signaling



Ayyangar             Standards Track                            [Page 5]

Internet Draft    Inter-region MPLS Traffic Engineering     October 2003


   mechanism used to signal an inter-region TE LSP being transported
   either over a FA-LSP or LSP segment is similar to that described in
   [LSP-HIER]. The way to identify an unnumbered FA is described in
   [RSVP-UNNUM]. The same mechanisms will be used here.


   - The Record Route Object (RRO) is an optional object, and if the
   inter-region LSPs do not require features like protection which
   require the RRO in the RSVP messages, then the inter-region LSPs do
   not need to carry the RRO.


4. Basic Operation

4.1. Intra-region FA-LSP/LSP segment setup

   FA-LSPs or LSP segments can be pre-configured on any region boundary
   LSR. But, when the FA-LSP/LSP segment setup is dynamic, then by
   default, only a region boundary LSR that receives an inter-region LSP
   setup request (Path) from a different region SHOULD trigger the setup
   of a FA-LSP or LSP segment in its region. So all boundary LSRs at the
   entry to a region, are candidates for dynamic intra-region FA-LSP/LSP
   segment setup. The HE LSR of an inter-region LSP can be treated as an
   exception to the above clause and MAY be considered as a candidate
   for dynamic FA-LSP/LSP segment setup. Also, the default behavior MAY
   be overridden by configuration, if required.

   When a region boundary LSR receives a Path message with a loose next-
   hop in the ERO, then it carries out the following actions:

   - It checks if the loose next-hop is accessible via the TED. If the
   loose next-hop is not present in the TED and an auto-discovery
   mechanism exists, then it will check if the next-hop at least has IP
   reachability (via IGP or BGP). If the next-hop is not reachable, then
   the LSR will be unable to propagate the Path message any further and
   will send back a PathErr upstream. If the next-hop is reachable, then
   it will find a region boundary LSR to get to the next-hop. In the
   absence of an auto-discovery mechanism, the region boundary LSR
   should be the loose next-hop in the ERO and hence should be
   accessible via the TED, otherwise path computation for the inter-
   region TE LSP will fail.

   - If the next-hop boundary LSR is present in the TED, then if this
   region boundary LSR (receiving the LSP setup request) is a candidate
   LSR for intra-region FA-LSP/LSP segment setup, and if there is no FA-
   LSP/LSP segment from this LSR to the next-hop boundary LSR,
   (satisfying the constraints) it SHOULD signal a FA-LSP/LSP segment to
   the next-hop boundary LSR. If pre-configured FA-LSP(s) or LSP



Ayyangar             Standards Track                            [Page 6]

Internet Draft    Inter-region MPLS Traffic Engineering     October 2003


   segment(s) already exist, then it SHOULD try to select from among
   those intra-region LSPs. Depending on local policy, it MAY signal a
   new FA-LSP/LSP segment if this selection fails. If the FA-LSP/LSP
   segment is successfully signaled or selected, it propagates the
   inter-region Path message to the next-hop following the procedures
   described in [LSP-HIER]. If, for some reason the dynamic FA-LSP/LSP
   segment setup to the next-hop boundary LSR fails, a PathErr is sent
   upstream for the inter-region LSP. Similarly, if selection of a pre-
   configured FA-LSP/LSP segment fails and local policy prevents dynamic
   FA-LSP/LSP segment setup, then a PathErr is sent upstream for the
   inter-region TE LSP.

   - If, however, this region boundary LSR is not a FA-LSP/LSP segment
   candidate, then it SHOULD simply compute a CSPF path upto the next-
   hop boundary LSR (carry out an ERO expansion to the next-hop boundary
   LSR) and propagate the Path message downstream. The outgoing ERO may
   be modified after an ERO expansion to the loose next-hop.

   The above procedures do not apply when a region boundary LSR receives
   a Path message with strict next-hop. Also, detailed explanation of
   signaling a FA-LSP versus an LSP segment follows in Section 5.

   Note that this mode of operation depends on TE LSP attributes
   requested in the LSP_ATTRIBUTES object (see [RSVP-ATTRIBUTES] and
   [INTER-AS]) of the inter-region TE LSP. As described in Section 1,
   the solution proposed in [INTER-AS] enables an operator to signal a
   contiguous inter-AS TE LSP. So, the following bit may be set in the
   Attributes Flag TLV of LSP_ATTRIBUTES object to control the desired
   behavior on the intermediate nodes.

   0x02: Contiguous LSP required bit: when set this indicates that a
   boundary LSR MUST not perform any nesting or stitching on the TE LSP
   and the TE LSP MUST be routed as any other TE LSP (it must be
   contiguous end to end). When this bit is cleared, a boundary LSR can
   decide to perform either nesting or stitching.

   The details of the LSP_ATTRIBUTES object can be found in [RSVP-
   ATTRIBUTES] and the above bit in the Attributes Flag TLV is defined
   in [INTER-AS].


4.2. Inter-area LSP setup

   Several schemes have been proposed for inter-area TE (see [INTER-
   AREA]). This draft proposed an additional method. In this case, each
   region corresponds to a single IGP area and the ABRs will form the
   region boundaries.




Ayyangar             Standards Track                            [Page 7]

Internet Draft    Inter-region MPLS Traffic Engineering     October 2003


   A-B-C-D: inter-area TE LSP path

   B, B', C, C': ABRs

        +--------------+ +-----------------+ +--------------+
        |Area1         | |   Area0         | |Area2         |
        |               B                   C               |
        |A             | |                 | |             D|
        |               B'                  C'              |
        |              | |                 | |              |
        +--------------+ +-----------------+ +--------------+

   Let us consider a scenario where A initiates the setup of an inter-
   area TE LSP from A to D. When the Path message reaches B, B performs
   the following set of actions:

   - It determines the egress LSR from its region along the LSP path
   (say C), either from the ERO or by using some constraint-aware auto-
   discovery mechanism or based simply on reachability information.

   - B will check if it has a FA-LSP or LSP segment to C matching the
   constraints carried in the inter-region Path message. If not, B will
   setup a FA-LSP or LSP segment from B to C. Note that once the FA-
   LSP/LSP segment is setup, it may be advertised as a link within that
   region (see [LSP-HIER]) (area 0 in this example). The FA-LSP or LSP
   segment could have also been pre-configured.

   - In the Path message for the FA-LSP/LSP segment, B also signals
   whether it will do a one-to-one LSP stitching or whether it will nest
   the inter-region LSP over the intra-region FA-LSP. The details of
   nesting versus stitching and how this behavior is signaled, are
   described in Section 5.

   - Also, there could be multiple FA-LSPs/LSP segments between B and C.
   So, B needs to select one FA-LSP/LSP segment from these, for the
   inter-region LSP through Area 0. The mechanism and the criterion used
   to select the FA-LSP/LSP segment is local to B and will not be
   described here in detail. e.g. if we have multiple pre-configured FA-
   LSPs/LSP segments, a local policy may prefer to use FA-LSPs (nesting)
   for most inter-region LSP requests. And it may select the LSP
   segments (stitching) only for some specific inter-region LSPs.

   - Once it has selected the FA-LSP/LSP segment for the inter-region
   LSP, using the signaling procedures described in [LSP-HIER] B sends
   the Path message for inter-region LSP to C. Note that irrespective of
   whether B does nesting or stitching, the Path message for the inter-
   region TE LSP is always forwarded to C. C then repeats the exact same
   procedures and the Path message for the inter-area TE LSP will reach



Ayyangar             Standards Track                            [Page 8]

Internet Draft    Inter-region MPLS Traffic Engineering     October 2003


   the destination D. If C cannot find a path obeying the set of
   constraints for the inter-region TE LSP, then C MUST send a PathErr
   message to B. Then B can in turn either select another FA-LSP/LSP
   segment to C if such an LSP exists or select another egress boundary
   LSR (C' in the example above). Note also, that B may be configured to
   forward the PathErr upto the inter-region HE LSR without trying to
   select another egress LSR.

   - The Resv message for the inter-area TE LSP is sent back from D to
   A. When the Resv message arrives at C, depending on whether C is
   nesting or stitching, C will install the appropriate label actions
   for the packets arriving on the inter-region LSP. Similar procedures
   are carried out at B as well, while processing the Resv message.

   As the Resv message for the inter-region LSP, traverses back from D
   to A, each LSR along the Path may record an address into the RRO
   object carried in the Resv. According to [RSVP-TE], the addresses in
   the RRO object may be a node or interface addresses. The link
   corresponding to an unnumbered FA-LSP/LSP segment will have the
   ingress and egress LSR Router-IDs as the link addresses ([RSVP-
   UNNUM]). So when C sends the Resv message to B, C will record it's
   Router ID in the RRO object. So, the inter-area TE LSP from A to D
   would have an RRO of A-B-C-D or A-<other hops>-B-C-D, depending on
   whether the source region is setting up a FA-LSP/LSP segment or not.
   If the FA-LSPs/LSP segments are numbered, then the addresses assigned
   to the FA-LSP/LSP segment will be recorded in the RRO object.

4.3. Inter-AS LSP setup

   In this case, each region corresponds to a single AS and the ASBRs
   define the region boundaries. As per the ERO loose-hop expansion
   explained in Section 4.1, however, the FA-LSPs or LSP segments will
   only be originated by the ASBRs at the entry to the AS. A few
   examples of the inter-AS LSPs:

   A to F (LSR to LSR), CE1 to CE2 (CE to CE), R1 to R2 or R1 to R3, CE1
   to F (CE to ASBR)

   AS1, AS2, AS3: Three ASes either belonging to same SP or different
   SPs

   B,B',C,C',D,D',E,E': ASBRs

   R1, R2, R3: Other LSRs within the respective ASes


         +---------------+  +-----------------+  +---------------+
         |AS1            |  |AS2              |  |AS3            |



Ayyangar             Standards Track                            [Page 9]

Internet Draft    Inter-region MPLS Traffic Engineering     October 2003


         |             B |--|C              D |--|E              |
     CE1-|A              |  |                 |  |              F|-CE2
         |      R1     B'|--|C'     R2      D'|--|E'    R3       |
         |               |  |                 |  |               |
         +---------------+  +-----------------+  +---------------+

   The procedures for establishing an inter-AS TE LSP are very similar
   to that of the inter-area TE LSP described above. The main difference
   here from the inter-area case, is the presence of the ASBR-ASBR
   link(s). If the ASBRs are connected by a single hop link, then they
   typically would not be running an IGP between them. Even when there
   are multiple hops between the ASBRs, although there would be some IGP
   running between the ASBRs; the TE information for the ASBR-ASBR links
   is not usually available. E.g. TE information corresponding to links
   B-C and B'-C' is not usually available. Also, two adjacent ASes could
   be running different IGPs. It is useful to have the TE information
   for the links originated by the ASBR to take into account the TE
   parameters on that link during CSPF computation on the ASBR.  The
   proposal here is for the ASBR to add the TE information corresponding
   to the links that it originates in it's local TE database, although
   no real IGP adjacency exists on those links.

   As a further optimization, if this TE information corresponding to
   the links originated by the ASBR is made available in the TED of
   other LSRs in the same region that the ASBR belongs to, then the CSPF
   computations for inter-AS TE LSP path in that region can also account
   for constraints on the ASBR-ASBR link. This will improve the chance
   of successful path computation upto the next AS in case of a
   bottleneck on some ASBR-ASBR links and it reduces one level of
   crankback. Note that no topology information is flooded and these
   links are not used in IGP SPF computations. Only the TE information
   for the links originated by the ASBR is advertised using standard IGP
   TE extensions ([OSPF-TE], [ISIS-TE]).

   E.g. B and B' would add in their respective TEDs, TE information
   corresponding to links B-C and B'-C' respectively. Note that this may
   need some additional configuration on B and B' to associate their
   links to the nexthop ASBR nodes C and C' respectively in the TED.
   This is because the ASBRs usually only have EBGP nexthop information.
   Now, so that CSPF in AS1 can take into account the TE parameters for
   links B-C and B'-C' the ASBRs B and B' would need to advertise the TE
   information for B-C and B'-C' in AS1's IGP.

   If the TE information for the ASBR links is not available on the
   ASBRs, then the ASBRs cannot perform any CSPF computations and any
   path that the TE LSP takes between the ASBRs (including bypass
   tunnels, detours) SHOULD be configured as a set of strict interface
   hops.



Ayyangar             Standards Track                           [Page 10]

Internet Draft    Inter-region MPLS Traffic Engineering     October 2003


   Similarly, if the TE information of the ASBR links is not advertised
   into the corresponding region, then we can compute a TE LSP path only
   upto the exit ASBR in that AS (instead of being able to compute a
   path upto the entry ASBR in the next AS). While the solution does not
   mandate the flooding of TE information for basic operation; it is
   preferable to do so. Also, this solution requires an ASBR to support
   RSVP-TE signaling in case it is participating in inter-AS TE LSP
   setup.

   In the above topology, for an LSP setup from CE1 to CE2, the FA-
   LSPs/LSP segments may be setup between C-D and potentially E-F.  The
   Path message in this case traverses along CE1-A-B-C-D-E-F-CE2. In the
   RRO sent in the Resv message, the ASBRs which are ingress into the AS
   (like C, E, C', E') can record the interface address corresponding to
   the ASBR-ASBR link in the RRO.

   Between the ASBRs regular RSVP-TE signaling procedures are carried
   out. In case the ASBRs (say B and C) are more than one hop away, then
   instead of creating RSVP state for every inter-AS LSP traversing B
   and C; one MAY decided to aggregate these requests by setting up a
   FA-LSP between the ASBRs to nest the inter-AS LSP requests. As per
   the definition in 4.1, boundary LSR B, by default is not a candidate
   to initiate a FA-LSP or LSP segment setup. But this behavior MAY be
   overridden by configuration. In this case, the zone between the ASBRs
   is treated as another region.



5. Nesting versus Stitching at region boundaries

   An LSR at the region boundary, may either 'nest' several inter-region
   LSPs into a single intra-region FA-LSP, or it may choose to split the
   inter-region LSP and insert an intra-region LSP segment into the
   split. We refer to the latter action as 'stitching' in this document.
   This is a decision local to the region. Stitching may be done either
   due to a local configuration or due to technology (e.g., wavelength
   LSPs). While a boundary LSR in one region may choose to stitch, a
   boundary LSR in another region could choose to nest. e.g. one may
   choose to stitch the inter-area LSPs and nest the inter-AS LSPs or
   vice versa.

   LSP stitching as proposed in the document is considered to be a
   special case of LSP hierarchy and may be used when hierarchy is just
   not possible. E.g. if the inter-region TE LSP is a fiber-switched
   LSP, then no further hierarchy is possible and this LSP may be
   stitched to an intra-region FSC LSP segment.

   The signaling mechanisms for both stitching and nesting are basically



Ayyangar             Standards Track                           [Page 11]

Internet Draft    Inter-region MPLS Traffic Engineering     October 2003


   similar to that proposed in [LSP-HIER], except for additional flag
   bits signaled to indicate stitching behavior, as explained below.
   Also, in both cases the intra-region TE LSP is a different LSP from
   the inter-region TE LSP. This gives the region more autonomy over the
   placement and maintenance of it's intra-region FA-LSP or LSP
   segments. As explained in later sections, this has benefits like
   containing re-optimizations within a region. The main difference is
   that nesting facilitates scaling of both control and forwarding
   planes by reducing both control and forwarding state on the core LSRs
   in the region.

   Since it is more scalable and more suitable to most packet-switched
   networks, nesting will be the prefered default behavior within a
   region. If, however, the region boundary LSR desires to do one-to-one
   stitching, then it MUST indicate this in the Path message for the
   intra-region LSP segment. This signaling is needed so that the egress
   LSR for the LSP segment knows in advance, how the ingress for the LSP
   segment plans to map traffic on to the LSP segment. This will allow
   it to allocate the correct label(s) as explained below. Also, so that
   the HE LSR can ensure that correct stitching actions were carried out
   at the egress LSR, a new flag has been defined below in the RRO
   subobject to indicate that the LSP segment may be used for stitching.

   In order to request LSP stitching, we define a new flag bit in the
   Attributes Flags TLV of the LSP_ATTRIBUTES object defined in [RSVP-
   ATTRIBUTES]:

   0x04: LSP stitching desired

   This flag will be set in the Attributes Flags TLV of the
   LSP_ATTRIBUTES object in the Path message for the intra-region LSP
   segment by the HE LSR of the LSP segment (region boundary LSR) that
   desires LSP stitching. This flag SHOULD not be modified by any other
   LSRs in that region.

   An intra-region LSP segment can only be used for stitching if
   appropriate label actions were carried out at the agress LSR of the
   LSP segment. In order to indicate this to the HE LSR for the LSP
   segment, the following new flag bit is defined in the RRO sub-object:

   0x20 : LSP segment stitching ready

   If an egress LSR receiving a Path message, supports the
   LSP_ATTRIBUTES object and the Attributes Flags TLV as well, and also
   recognizes the 'LSP stitching desired' flag bit, but cannot support
   the requested stitching behavior, then it MUST send back a PathErr
   message with an error code of "Routing Problem" and an error sub-
   code=16 "Stitching unsupported" to the HE LSR of the intra-region LSP



Ayyangar             Standards Track                           [Page 12]

Internet Draft    Inter-region MPLS Traffic Engineering     October 2003


   segment.

   If an egress LSR receiving a Path message with the 'LSP stitching
   desired' flag set, recognizes the object, the TLV and the flag and
   also supports the desired stitching behavior, then it MUST allocate a
   non-NULL label for that LSP segment in the corresponding Resv
   message. Now, so that the HE LSR can ensure that the correct label
   actions will be carried out by the egress LSR and that the LSP
   segment can be used for stitching, the egress LSR MUST set the 'LSP
   segment stitching ready' bit defined in the RRO sub-object. Also,
   when the egress LSR for the LSP segment receives a Path message for
   an inter-region LSP using this LSP segment, it SHOULD first check if
   it is also the egress for the inter-region TE LSP. If the egress LSR
   is the egress for both the intra-region LSP segment as well as the
   inter-region TE LSP, and it requires Penultimate Hop Popping (PHP),
   then the LSR MUST send back a Resv refresh for the intra-region LSP
   segment with a new label corresponding to the NULL label. The egress
   LSR SHOULD always allocate a NULL label in the Resv message for the
   inter-region TE LSP.

   Finally, if the egress LSR for the intra-region LSP segment supports
   the LSP_ATTRIBUTES object but does not recognize the Attributes Flags
   TLV, or supports the TLV as well but does not recognize this
   particular flag bit, then it SHOULD simply ignore the above request.

   An ingress LSR requesting stitching SHOULD examine the RRO sub-object
   flag corresponding to the egress LSR for the intra-region LSP
   segment, to make sure that stitching actions were carried out at the
   egress LSR. It MUST NOT use the LSP segment for stitching if the 'LSP
   segment stitching ready' flag is cleared.

   An ingress LSR stitching an inter-region LSP to an LSP segment MUST
   ignore any Label received in the Resv for the inter-region LSP.


   Example: In case of inter-AS LSP setup from CE1 to CE2 as described
   in 4.3, let us assume that the ASBR C is doing one-to-one LSP
   stitching as described above. So when C receives the inter-AS LSP
   Path message, it will first initiate the setup of an intra-region LSP
   segment to D, if not already present. In the Path message for this
   LSP segment, C will set the "LSP stitching desired" flag in the
   Attributes Flags TLV of the LSP_ATTRIBUTES object. When D receives
   this Path message, D will allocate a non-NULL label (real label for
   swap action) in the Resv message for this LSP segment. Also, D will
   set the "LSP segment stitching ready" flag in the RRO subobject in
   the Resv message. Once the LSP segment is signaled successfully, C
   will then forward the Path message for the inter-AS TE LSP to D,
   which propagates it further. Eventually as the Resv message for the



Ayyangar             Standards Track                           [Page 13]

Internet Draft    Inter-region MPLS Traffic Engineering     October 2003


   inter-AS LSP traverses back from E to D and reaches D, D will
   remember to swap the LSP segment label with the label received for
   the inter-AS LSP from E. Also, D will itself allocate a NULL label in
   the Resv message for the inter-AS TE LSP and sends the Resv message
   to C. C ignores the Label object in the Resv message received from D
   for the inter-AS TE LSP and remembers to swap the label that it
   allocates in the inter-AS Resv message sent to B with the label that
   it had received from say, LSR R2 for the intra-AS LSP segment. In
   this manner, the inter-AS TE LSP is stitched to an intra-region LSP
   segment in AS2. In this example, if the LSP destination for the
   inter-AS LSP had been D, then if this is a packet-switched LSP and if
   D requires PHP, then on receiving the Path message for the inter-AS
   LSP, D will re-send a Resv message for the intra-region LSP segment
   to say R2, by changing the Label to a NULL label.


6. Fast Recovery support using MPLS TE Fast Reroute

   [FAST-REROUTE] describes two methods for local protection for a TE
   LSP in case of node or link failure. This section describes how these
   mechanisms work with the proposed solution for inter-region TE LSP
   setup. Most of the behavior described in the above Fast Reroute
   document is directly applicable to the inter-region TE LSP setup
   case. When a FA-LSP or LSP segment is setup a priori it's local
   protection scheme SHOULD be pre-decided; if it is signaled
   dynamically then the desired protection scheme MAY be derived from
   the inter-region TE LSP.

6.1. Failure within a region (link or node failure)

   In case of any failure affecting a FA-LSP or LSP segment, the
   existing local protection procedures for recovery as defined in
   [FAST-REROUTE] are applicable directly and will take care of local
   protection of the FA-LSP/LSP segment without requiring any new
   extensions. Since an intra-region FA-LSP/LSP segment transports the
   inter-region TE LSP traffic, the inter-region traffic automatically
   gets protected by protecting the corresponding the intra-region FA-
   LSP/LSP segment. However, these local protection schemes using
   backups are usually temporary and the HE LSR for the protected LSP
   needs to be usually notified so that it can compute a new path around
   the failure.

   The failure notification (RSVP Path Error/Notify message "Tunnel
   Locally Repaired") for the FA-LSP/LSP segment SHOULD be sent to the
   respective ingress LSR for that intra-region FA-LSP/LSP segment in
   that region. The ingress LSR for the FA-LSP/LSP segment will then try
   to re-route the FA-LSP/LSP segment around the failure, and the inter-
   region LSPs using the FA-LSP/LSP segment will start taking the new



Ayyangar             Standards Track                           [Page 14]

Internet Draft    Inter-region MPLS Traffic Engineering     October 2003


   path in that region. However, in case the HE LSR in that region is
   unable to find a path around the failure to re-route the intra-region
   FA-LSP/LSP segment, then a failure and repair notification stated
   above (PathErr) for all the affected inter-region TE LSPs MAY be
   propagated to the upstream region towards the HE LSR for the inter-
   region TE LSP. This could be a local policy decision.  Other region
   boundary LSRs along the way could intercept the error message to do
   some kind of crankback. This two-phase approach tries to handle the
   failure first locally within a region as far as possible by
   intercepting the error notification at the region boundary LSR and
   re-routing the intra-region LSP. Only if that fails, do we propagate
   the error notification further upstream.

   Alternatively, instead of intercepting the error notifications and
   following the above two-phase approach, one may choose to always send
   back error notifications back to the HE LSR for the inter-region TE
   LSP in the originating region. This could be a local policy decision.
   In any case, the TE LSP SHOULD be re-routed around the failure using
   the "make-before-break" approach.

   Example: In case of the inter-AS TE LSP setup described in Section
   4.3, let us assume that the FA-LSP/LSP segment traverses R2 in AS2,
   and is node-protected against the failure of R2. In that case, when
   R2 or the corresponding link to R2 fails, then the traffic will be
   locally protected by the corresponding detour or backup path
   (depending on the local protection scheme) associated with the
   protected FA-LSP/LSP segment. When the PathErr/Notify message "Tunnel
   Locally Repaired" reaches C, C may find a new path for the FA-LSP/LSP
   segment and signal it. During this time, the FA-LSP/LSP segment along
   the old path was locally repaired and so traffic will continue to
   take the backup path around the failure. Once the new path for the
   FA-LSP/LSP segment is successfully signaled the traffic is switched
   to the new path and the old path is torn down. Note that since the
   inter-region traffic is sent along the FA-LSP/LSP segment, that
   traffic has been protected as well.

6.2. Failure of link at region boundaries (ASBR-ASBR)

   In the above example for inter-AS TE LSP setup, let us consider the
   failure of link B-C. The LSPs traversing these links are the inter-
   region LSPs. Depending on the type of local protection desired, B
   which is the PLR will have either a bypass tunnel or a detour along a
   path disjoint from link B-C. In order to protect the inter-region
   LSP(s) from a B-C link failure, a NHOP bypass tunnel (if the
   "facility backup" method is used) or a set of detours (one for every
   inter-region protect TE LSP) MUST be pre-configured at B.  Since the
   zone between the ASBRs is not usually TE-enabled, it would usually
   not be possible for the ASBR to compute a complete path around the



Ayyangar             Standards Track                           [Page 15]

Internet Draft    Inter-region MPLS Traffic Engineering     October 2003


   protected link B-C. So backup paths with strict ERO configuration
   must be configured. If, however, the ASBRs do have the TE-information
   for the ASBR-ASBR links, then depending on the topology, a minimum
   path configuration specifying the loose hops may suffice.

   So, in either case, the PLR would select the bypass tunnel or detour
   for a protect TE LSP, terminating at the NHOP. The NHOP is determined
   by looking at the RRO object received in the Resv for the protected
   inter-region TE LSP. e.g. B will select a bypass tunnel terminating
   on C by looking at the RRO at B, which would be C-D-E-F or <link
   address on C>-D-E-F.

   Also, the node where the backup intersects the protected LSP (MP :
   Merge Point) may either be reachable directly from the PLR or it may
   reside in the other AS. e.g. the bypass could either take path B-
   B'-C'-C in which case the MP is C itself or the MP may also be D if
   the only available bypass tunnel path is B-B'-C'-D-C. Therefore,
   mechanisms like 'auto-discovery' of next-hop LSR and ERO loose-hop
   expansion with partial CSPF computation to the first reachable LSR
   may also be applicable to the backup path computation.

   In this solution, the MP for the inter-region LSP will always be a
   region boundary LSR. This is because, the FA-LSP/LSP segment is a
   different LSP (different session) from the inter-region LSP, so the
   inter-region LSP backup can only intersect the protected LSP path at
   the region boundary LSRs.

6.3. Failure of node at region boundary

   Let us again consider the example topology in 4.3 for inter-As LSP
   setup. This gives rise to the following scenarios for protection:

6.3.1. Protecting the last hop boundary LSR (ASBR) in a region

   Example: protecting against failure of node D in AS2.

   Considering the FA-LSP/LSP segment terminating at D, this is the last
   hop for the FA-LSP/LSP segment, so there can be no node-protection
   for D via the FA-LSP/LSP segment. However, as far as the inter-region
   LSP is concerned, its path is along A-B-C-D-E-F and the FA-LSP/LSP
   segment between C and D is a link. So for protecting against D's
   failure, C is the PLR and C will setup a bypass tunnel to the NNHOP
   for this LSP, which is E. Again the NNHOP is determined by examining
   the received RRO for the inter-region LSP. So one or more bypass
   tunnels following C-D'-E must be configured on C to protect against
   node D's failure. It is worth mentioning that this may add some
   additional constraints on the backup path since the bypass tunnel
   path needs to be diverse from the C-D-E path instead of just being



Ayyangar             Standards Track                           [Page 16]

Internet Draft    Inter-region MPLS Traffic Engineering     October 2003


   diverse from the X-D-E path where X is the upstream neighbor of D.
   The consequences are that the path is likely to be longer and if
   bandwidth protection is desired for instance ([FACILITY-BACKUP] more
   resources may be reserved in AS2 than necessary.

6.3.2. Protecting against the LSR at the entry to the region

   Example: protecting against the failure of LSR C in AS2.

   Again, in this case, the FA-LSP/LSP segment offers no protection; so
   one or more backups MUST be configured from the previous hop LSR in
   the inter-region LSP, i.e. B, to the NNHOP with respect to the inter-
   region LSP, i.e. D. A bypass tunnel B-B'-C'-D would protect against
   C's failure. Depending on whether auto-discovery mechanisms are
   available, and whether TE-information for ASBR-ASBR links is
   available, the configuration required on the PLR for the backup could
   be minimal or could require specifying the entire path. The same
   constraints as mentioned above apply in this case.

   When the FA-LSP/LSP Segment is unnumbered, the Router ID of the
   boundary LSR will be recorded in the RRO object (see [RSVP-UNNUM]).
   However, if the FA-LSP/LSP segment is numbered, then bypass tunnel
   selection to protect an inter-region TE LSP with Fast Reroute
   "facility backup" ([FAST-REROUTE]) against the failure of an ASBR-
   ASBR link or an ASBR node would require the support of [NODE-ID].


7. Re-optimization of inter-region LSPs

   In this solution, re-optimization is treated as a local matter to any
   region for both stitching as well as nesting case. The main reason
   being that the inter-region TE LSP is a different LSP (and therefore
   different RSVP session) from the intra-region FA-LSP or LSP segment
   in a region. Therefore, re-optimization in a region is done by re-
   optimizing the intra-region FA-LSPs/ LSP segments.  Since the inter-
   region TE LSPs are transported using FA-LSPs/LSP segments across a
   region, optimality of the inter-region LSPs in a region is dependent
   on the optimality of the corresponding FA-LSPs/LSP segments. If,
   after an inter-region LSP is setup, a more optimal path is available
   within a region; the corresponding FA-LSP(s)/LSP segment(s) will be
   re-optimized using "make-before-break" techniques discussed in [RSVP-
   TE]. Re-optimization of the FA-LSP/LSP segment automatically re-
   optimizes the inter-region LSPs that the FA-LSP/LSP segment
   transports. Re-optimization parameters like frequency of re-
   optimization, criteria for re-optimization like metric or bandwidth
   availability; etc can vary from one region to another and can be
   configured as required, per FA-LSP/LSP segment if it is pre-
   configured or based on some global policy within the region.



Ayyangar             Standards Track                           [Page 17]

Internet Draft    Inter-region MPLS Traffic Engineering     October 2003


   So, in this scheme, since each region takes care of re-optimizing its
   own FA-LSPs/LSP segments, and therefore the corresponding inter-
   region TE LSPs, the make-before-break can happen locally and is not
   triggered by the HE LSR for the inter-region LSP. So, no additional
   RSVP signaling is required for LSP re-optimization and re-
   optimization is transparent to the HE LSR of the inter-region TE LSP.

   If, however, an operator desires to manually trigger re-optimization
   at the HE LSR for the inter-region LSP, then this solution does not
   prevent that. A manual trigger for re-optimization at the HE LSR,
   SHOULD force a re-optimization thereby signaling a "new" path for the
   same LSP (along the optimal path) making use of the make-before-break
   procedure. In response to this new setup request, the boundary LSR
   may either initiate new LSP segment setup, in case the inter-region
   TE LSP is being stitched to the intra-region LSP segment or it may
   select an existing FA-LSP in case of nesting. When the LSP setup
   along the current optimal path is complete, the head end should
   switchover the traffic onto that path and the old path is eventually
   torn down. Note that the HE LSR does not know a priori whether a more
   optimal path exists. Such a manual trigger from the HE LSR of the
   inter-region TE LSP is, however, not considered to be a frequent
   occurrence.



8. Specific requirements for inter-AS TE LSP setup

   In this section, we discuss the proposed solution in light of some of
   the requirements specific to inter-AS traffic engineering as listed
   in [INTER-AS-TE-REQTS]. This covers the Inter-AS TE requirements for
   a single SP administrative domain as well as across multiple SP
   administrative domains. Some of the requirements may have already
   been covered in previous sections and will not be discussed here
   again. Also, while this proposal applies to Inter-Area MPLS TE as
   well, the inter-AS requirements are seen as a super-set of the Inter-
   Area MPLS TE requirements described in [INTER-AREA-TE-REQTS], so this
   will not be discussed again in an inter-area TE context.

8.1. Support of diversely routed inter-region TE LSP

   There may be a need to support diversely routed paths for an inter-
   region TE LSP, either for path protection or load balancing.  RRO
   plays an important role in determining the path along which the TE
   LSP traverses. In case of an intra-area TE LSP, today this tells us
   the "links" traversed by a path. This information is used to compute
   other disjoint paths by excluding the above links in CSPF path
   computation. One must just mention that this method (also called "2
   steps approach") does not always guaranty to find two diverse paths



Ayyangar             Standards Track                           [Page 18]

Internet Draft    Inter-region MPLS Traffic Engineering     October 2003


   even if such paths exist. Also this simple algorithm does not allow
   to find two paths such that the sum of their cost is minimal.  In
   case of an inter-region path setup, it is important to note that CSPF
   computation may be distributed over different LSRs and also the path
   represented by the RRO, need not represent physical links, they could
   be other FA-LSPs/LSP segments. E.g. in 4.1 let us assume that the
   primary path for the LSP from A to D takes A-B-C-D. So a diverse path
   for this LSP may be signaled as A-B'-C'-D. The information for links
   to "exclude" could be signaled as specified in [RSVP-CONSTRAINTS] as
   a constraint or using the mechanisms described in [EXCLUDE-ROUTES].

8.2. Inter-AS MPLS TE Management

   The failure detection and isolation mechanisms proposed by [LSPING]
   can be applied to inter-AS TE management as well. This solution does
   not present any issues for support of either [LSPING] or [MPLS-TTL].

8.3. Confidentiality

   As mentioned in [INTER-AS-TE-REQTS], an inter-AS LSP can cross
   different AS boundaries. This solution does not require another
   region (AS) to expose any of its local addresses within the AS to
   another AS for any signaling needs. Even for local protection using
   Fast-Reroute no special requirements are imposed on the nodes within
   the AS to expose their addresses. This was discussed under Section 6.

8.4. Policy Control at the AS boundaries

   Since this solution is based on per region FA-LSP/LSP segment based
   approach, it inherently provides more control to an SP in setting up
   FA-LSPs/LSP segments and deciding their attributes within his AS.
   Other than that, as stated in [INTER-AS-TE-REQTS], there may be other
   inter-AS TE agreements made with other ASes and implemented as local
   policy on the ASBR. Among other behaviors stated in the above
   document, mapping of constraints and other attributes from the inter-
   region LSP to the intra-region FA-LSP/LSP segment, nesting versus
   stitching behavior, overriding the default ASBR behavior with respect
   to signaling of FA-LSP/LSP segment; etc can also be exercised based
   on local policy configuration.

8.5. Scalability and Extensibility

   This draft provides a common solution to be used for LSPs traversing
   regions of different types and hence can be used not only for inter-
   area and inter-AS TE, but also for setting up LSP paths across GMPLS
   overlay regions.

   The nesting solution especially, adopts a scalable approach based on



Ayyangar             Standards Track                           [Page 19]

Internet Draft    Inter-region MPLS Traffic Engineering     October 2003


   LSP hierarchy, to aggregate several inter-region TE LSP requests onto
   a few intra-region FA-LSPs, thereby reducing both control state as
   well as forwarding state on the transit LSRs within a region.


9. Security Considerations

   This document raises no new security concerns for RSVP. Existing
   security features can be used for signaling inter-region TE LSPs.


10. Intellectual Property Considerations

   Juniper Networks may have intellectual property rights claimed in
   regard to some of the specification contained in this document.


11. Acknowledgements

   Many thanks to Yakov Rekhter, Kireeti Kompella, Pedro Marques and Ina
   Minei for their initial discussions that contributed to the solution
   proposed in the draft. We would also like to thank Yakov Rekhter and
   Kireeti Kompella for their useful comments and suggestions towards
   the draft.


12. References

   [LSP-HIER] Kompella K., Rekhter Y., "LSP Hierarchy with Generalized
   MPLS TE", (work in progress).

   [FAST-REROUTE] Ping Pan, et al, "Fast Reroute Extensions to RSVP-TE
   for LSP Tunnels", (work in progress)

   [INTER-AS] Vasseur, Zhang, "Inter-AS MPLS Traffic Engineering", (work
   in progress).

   [GMPLS-OVERLAY] G. Swallow et al, "GMPLS RSVP Support for the Overlay
   Model", (work in progress).

   [RSVP-ATTRIBUTES] Ferrel A. et al, "Encoding of Attributes for
   Multiprotocol Label Switching (MPLS) Label Switched Path (LSP)
   Establishment Using RSVP-TE", (work in progress).

   [INTER-AREA] Kompella et al, "MPLS Inter-area Traffic Engineering",
   (work in progress).

   [INTER-AS-TE-REQTS] Zhang et al, "MPLS Inter-AS Traffic Engineering



Ayyangar             Standards Track                           [Page 20]

Internet Draft    Inter-region MPLS Traffic Engineering     October 2003


   requirements", (work in progress).

   [INTER-AREA-TE-REQTS] Boyle J., "Requirements for support of Inter-
   Area and Inter-AS MPLS Traffic Engineering", (work in progress).

   [RSVP-TE] Awduche, et al, "Extensions to RSVP for LSP Tunnels", RFC
   3209, December 2001.

   [RFC2702] Awduche, et al, "Requirements for Traffic Engineering Over
   MPLS", RFC2702, September 1999.

   [RSVP-UNNUM] Kompella K., Rekhter Y., "Signalling Unnumbered Links in
   RSVP-TE", RFC 3477, January 2003.

   [OSPF-TE] Katz, D., Yeung, D., Kompella, K., "Traffic Engineering
   Extensions to OSPF", RFC 3630 (Updates RFC 2370), September 2003.

   [ISIS-TE] Smit, H., Li, T., "IS-IS extensions for Traffic
   Engineering", (work in progress).

   [FACILITY-BACKUP] Vasseur et al, "MPLS Traffic Engineering Fast
   reroute: bypass tunnel path computation for bandwidth protection",
   (work in progress).

   [NODE-ID] Vasseur, Ali and Sivabalan, "Definition of an RRO node-id
   subobject", (work in progress).

   [RSVP-CONSTRAINTS] Kompella, K., "Carrying Constraints in RSVP",
   (work in progress).

   [EXCLUDE-ROUTES] Lee C.Y, Farrel A. et al, "Exclude Routes -
   Extension to RSVP-TE", (work in progress).

   [LSPING] Kompella, K., Pan, P., Sheth, N., Cooper, D.,Swallow, G.,
   Wadhwa, S., Bonica, R., " Detecting Data Plane Liveliness in MPLS",
   (work in progress).

   [MPLS-TTL], Agarwal, et al, "Time to Live (TTL) Processing in MPLS
   Networks", RFC 3443 (Updates RFC 3032) ", January 2003.












Ayyangar             Standards Track                           [Page 21]

Internet Draft    Inter-region MPLS Traffic Engineering     October 2003


13. Author Information


Arthi Ayyangar
Juniper Networks, Inc.
1194 N.Mathilda Ave
Sunnyvale, CA 94089
USA
e-mail: arthi@juniper.net



14. Full Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003).  All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE."












Ayyangar             Standards Track                           [Page 22]

Internet Draft    Inter-region MPLS Traffic Engineering     October 2003


15. Acknowledgement

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.















































Ayyangar             Standards Track                           [Page 23]
