


Geopriv                                                   H. Schulzrinne
Internet-Draft                                               Columbia U.
Expires: August 17, 2006                                   H. Tschofenig
                                                                 Siemens
                                                       February 13, 2006


                        Location Types Registry
           draft-ietf-geopriv-location-types-registry-04.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 17, 2006.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

Abstract

   This document creates a registry for describing the types of places a
   human or end system might be found.  The registry is then referenced
   by other protocols that need a common set of location terms as
   protocol constants.  Examples of location terms defined in this
   document include aircraft, office and train station.





Schulzrinne & Tschofenig  Expires August 17, 2006               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft           Location Types Registry           February 2006


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   3.  Location Types . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   4.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   5.  Internationalization Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   6.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   7.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   8.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
     8.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
     8.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 18





































Schulzrinne & Tschofenig  Expires August 17, 2006               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft           Location Types Registry           February 2006


1.  Introduction

   This document creates a registry for location type tokens.  We
   anticipate that the network, through configuration or management
   protocols, tells a mobile device what kind of location it finds
   itself in.  The device and associated software can then tailor its
   behavior to the environment.  For example, this document defines the
   terms "classroom", "place-of-worship" and "theater".  A considerate
   owner of a cell phone might program the device to switch from ringer
   to vibrate mode in such environments.  Just knowing the geographic
   location, be it as civic (street address) or geospatial coordinates
   would generally not allow the device to make a similar decision.

   Naturally, the number of descriptive terms for physical environments
   is almost unbounded.  This registry tries to identify common terms
   that are likely to be useful for communications devices and for
   controlling and guiding communication behavior.  The terms roughly
   correspond to the level of details of location descriptions and icons
   found on geographic maps, for example, and are meant to be in common
   use across a variety of cultures and countries.  The registration
   process described in the IANA Considerations section allows to extend
   this list as needed, while aiming to prevent an unnecessary explosion
   in the registry.

   The use of tokens, i.e., protocol constants, makes it easier to build
   systems across multiple languages.  A user interface can readily
   translate a finite set of tokens to user-appropriate textual or
   iconic representations.  Protocols using this registry are encouraged
   to provide additional mechanisms to accommodate location types not
   currently registered via free-text fields with appropriate language
   and character set labeling.

   The terms defined in this registry do not attempt to provide a
   hierarchy of location descriptions, except in certain special cases.
   For example, the term "restaurant" is defined to include the term
   "cafe" and the term "public" encompasses a range of descriptors, as
   noted below.  The registry makes these more generic terms available
   as often the more detailed distinctions may not be available, or
   privacy concerns suggest the use of less precise terms that are still
   sufficient to guide communications behavior or evaluate the source of
   a phone call or message, say.

   In many cases, a location might be described by multiple terms that
   apply at the same time.  For example, the combination of "restaurant"
   and "airport" is immediately recognizable.  This registry makes no
   attempt to limit the number of terms that can be used to describe a
   single place or to restrict what combinations are allowed, given that
   there are few combinations that are physically impossible.  Common



Schulzrinne & Tschofenig  Expires August 17, 2006               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft           Location Types Registry           February 2006


   sense is probably a better guide here; the authors would not want to
   rule out creative business models such as combinations of "parking"
   and "restaurant" or "bar" and "hospital".  The number of terms that
   can be used within the same protocol element is left to the protocol
   description.

   This document does not describe how the values of the registry are to
   be used, as this description is provided by other documents.  For
   example, [3], describes a options for carrying civic address
   information, including the place-type attributes listed in this
   document, using the Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCPv4 and
   DHCPv6).  A usage for RADIUS is described in [4], where this
   information is conveyed from the RADIUS client to the RADIUS server.
   Rich presence (RPID [5]) also utilizes the values of the location
   type registry.




































Schulzrinne & Tschofenig  Expires August 17, 2006               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft           Location Types Registry           February 2006


2.  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [1].














































Schulzrinne & Tschofenig  Expires August 17, 2006               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft           Location Types Registry           February 2006


3.  Location Types

   This section describes types of location where an entity is located.
   The entity is not further specified and can be a person or an object
   such as a network access point.


   aircraft:

      The entity is in a plane, helicopter or balloon.


   airport:

      The entity is located in an airport, heliport or similar location.


   arena:

      The entity is in an enclosed area used for sports events.


   automobile:

      The entity is in a self-propelled passenger vehicle.


   bank:

      The entity is in a business establishment in which money is kept
      for saving or commercial purposes or is invested, supplied for
      loans, or exchanged.


   bar:

      The entity is in a bar or saloon.


   bus:

      The entity is traveling in a public or charter bus.


   bus-station:

      The entity is in a terminal that serves bus passengers; bus depot
      or bus terminal.



Schulzrinne & Tschofenig  Expires August 17, 2006               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft           Location Types Registry           February 2006


   cafe:

      The entity is in a cafe or coffeeshop.


   classroom:

      The person is in an academic classroom or lecture hall.


   club:

      The person is in a dance club or discotheque.


   construction:

      The entity is on a construction site.


   convention-center:

      The entity is in a convention center.


   cycle:

      The entity is riding a bicycle, motorcycle or similar vehicle.


   government:

      The person is in a government building, such as those used by the
      legislative, executive, or judicial branches of governments,
      including court houses, police stations and military
      installations.


   hospital:

      The entity is in a hospital, hospice, medical clinic, mental
      institution, or doctor's office.


   hotel:

      The entity is in a hotel, motel, inn or other lodging
      establishment.



Schulzrinne & Tschofenig  Expires August 17, 2006               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft           Location Types Registry           February 2006


   industrial:

      The entity is in an industrial setting, such as a manufacturing
      floor or power plant.


   library:

      The entity is in a library or other public place in which literary
      and artistic materials, such as books, music, periodicals,
      newspapers, pamphlets, prints, records, and tapes, are kept for
      reading, reference, or lending.


   office:

      The entity is in a business setting, such as an office.


   other:

      The entity is in a place without a registered place type
      representation.


   outdoors:

      The entity is in a general outdoors area, such as a park or city
      streets.


   parking:

      The person is in a parking lot or parking garage.


   place-of-worship:

      The entity is at a religious rites where congregations gather for
      religious observances, such as a church, chapel, meetinghouse,
      mosque, shrine, synagogue, or temple.


   prison:

      The person is in a prison, penitentiary, jail, brig, or criminal
      mental institution.




Schulzrinne & Tschofenig  Expires August 17, 2006               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft           Location Types Registry           February 2006


   public:

      The entity is in a public area such as a shopping mall, street,
      park, public building, train station, airport or in public
      conveyance such as a bus, train, plane or ship.  This general
      description encompasses the more precise descriptors 'street',
      'public-transport', 'aircraft', 'bus', 'bus-station', 'train',
      'train-station', 'airport', 'shopping-area', 'outdoors', and
      'watercraft'.


   public-transport:

      The entity is using any form of public transport, including
      aircraft, bus, train or ship.


   residence:

      The entity is in a private or residential setting, not necessarily
      the personal residence of the entity, e.g., including a friend's
      home.


   restaurant:

      The entity is in a restaurant, coffee shop or other public dining
      establishment.


   school:

      The entity is in a school or university, but not necessarily in a
      classroom or library.


   shopping-area:

      The entity is frequenting a shopping mall or shopping area.  This
      area is a large, often enclosed shopping complex containing
      various stores, businesses, and restaurants usually accessible by
      common passageways.


   stadium:

      The person is in a large, usually open structure for sports
      events, including a racetrack.



Schulzrinne & Tschofenig  Expires August 17, 2006               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft           Location Types Registry           February 2006


   store:

      The person is located in a place where merchandise is offered for
      sale; a shop.


   street:

      The entity is walking in a street.


   theater:

      The entity is in a theater, lecture hall, auditorium, class room,
      movie theater or similar facility designed for presentations,
      talks, plays, music performances and other events involving an
      audience.


   train:

      The entity is traveling in a train, monorail, maglev, cable car or
      similar conveyance.


   train-station:

      The person is in a terminal where trains load or unload passengers
      or goods; railway station, railroad station, railroad terminal,
      train depot.


   truck:

      The entity is in a truck, used primarily to carry goods rather
      than people.


   underway:

      The person is in a land, water, or air craft which is underway (in
      motion).


   unknown:

      The type of place is unknown.




Schulzrinne & Tschofenig  Expires August 17, 2006              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft           Location Types Registry           February 2006


   warehouse:

      The person is in a place in which goods or merchandise are stored;
      a storehouse or self-storage facility.


   water:

      The person is on water, such as an ocean, lake, river, canal or
      other waterway.


   watercraft:

      The person is traveling in a boat or ship.




































Schulzrinne & Tschofenig  Expires August 17, 2006              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft           Location Types Registry           February 2006


4.  IANA Considerations

   This document creates new IANA registries for location types as
   listed in Section 3 starting with 'aircraft' and finishing with
   'watercraft'.

   Following the policies outline in RFC 2434 [2], new tokens are
   assigned after Expert Review by the IETF GEOPRIV working group or its
   designated successor.  The same procedure applies to updates of
   tokens within the registry and to deleting tokens from the registry.
   There are no restrictions regarding the update of location-type
   values in the registry.

   The expert review should be guided by a few common-sense
   considerations.  For example, tokens should not be specific to a
   country, region, organization or company, should be well-defined and
   should be widely recognized.

   To ensure widespread usability across protocols, tokens should follow
   the character set restrictions for XML Names.

   Each registration must include the name of the token and a brief
   description similar to the ones offered in for the initial
   registrations contained this document:

   Token Identifier:

      Identifier of the token


   Description:

      Brief description indicating the meaning of the token.


   Note that the usage of these tokens is not limited to XML and the
   'Token Identifier' is the XML element content and not the XML element
   name.













Schulzrinne & Tschofenig  Expires August 17, 2006              [Page 12]

Internet-Draft           Location Types Registry           February 2006


5.  Internationalization Considerations

   The location-type values listed in this document MUST NOT be
   presented to the user.  The values therefore have the characteristic
   of tokens/tags and no internationalization support is required.














































Schulzrinne & Tschofenig  Expires August 17, 2006              [Page 13]

Internet-Draft           Location Types Registry           February 2006


6.  Security Considerations

   This document defines a registry for location types and as such does
   not raise security issues.















































Schulzrinne & Tschofenig  Expires August 17, 2006              [Page 14]

Internet-Draft           Location Types Registry           February 2006


7.  Acknowledgements

   We would like to thank V. Gurbani, P. Kyzivat and J. Rosenberg for
   their work on RPID [5] which lead to the location types listed in
   this document.  Many thanks to Allison Mankin for her guidance.  Rick
   Jones pointed us to the Global Justice XML work (see
   http://it.ojp.gov/jxdm/) that helped us to add more values to the
   location registry.

   During the IETF last call, Harald Tveit Alvestrand, Frank Ellermann
   and Sam Hartman provided useful feedback.








































Schulzrinne & Tschofenig  Expires August 17, 2006              [Page 15]

Internet-Draft           Location Types Registry           February 2006


8.  References

8.1.  Normative References

   [1]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
        Levels", March 1997.

   [2]  Narten, T. and H. Alvestrand, "Guidelines for Writing an IANA
        Considerations Section in RFCs", BCP 26, RFC 2434, October 1998.

8.2.  Informative References

   [3]  Schulzrinne, H., "Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCPv4
        and DHCPv6) Option for Civic  Addresses Configuration
        Information", draft-ietf-geopriv-dhcp-civil-09 (work in
        progress), January 2006.

   [4]  Tschofenig, H., "Carrying Location Objects in RADIUS",
        draft-ietf-geopriv-radius-lo-04 (work in progress), July 2005.

   [5]  Schulzrinne, H., "RPID: Rich Presence Extensions to the Presence
        Information Data Format  (PIDF)", draft-ietf-simple-rpid-10
        (work in progress), December 2005.




























Schulzrinne & Tschofenig  Expires August 17, 2006              [Page 16]

Internet-Draft           Location Types Registry           February 2006


Authors' Addresses

   Henning Schulzrinne
   Columbia University
   Department of Computer Science
   450 Computer Science Building
   New York, NY  10027
   USA

   Phone: +1 212 939 7042
   Email: schulzrinne@cs.columbia.edu
   URI:   http://www.cs.columbia.edu/~hgs


   Hannes Tschofenig
   Siemens
   Otto-Hahn-Ring 6
   Munich, Bavaria  81739
   Germany

   Email: Hannes.Tschofenig@siemens.com
   URI:   http://www.tschofenig.com





























Schulzrinne & Tschofenig  Expires August 17, 2006              [Page 17]

Internet-Draft           Location Types Registry           February 2006


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Schulzrinne & Tschofenig  Expires August 17, 2006              [Page 18]


