


Network Working Group                                            X. Chen
Internet-Draft                                                 S. Zhuang
Intended status: Informational                                    Huawei
Expires: April 21, 2016                                 October 19, 2015


         Considerations on Layered Network Tunnel Service Model
           draft-chen-opswg-nettunnel-model-considerations-00

Abstract

   Tunnel is one typical service provided by carrier IP network.
   Network Tunnel service model can provide the northbound interface of
   network-level tunnel service of the controller to try to simplify the
   Tunnel provision without involving too much details of Tunnel
   implementation on the device.  This document gives exploratory
   description about the requirement of network-level Tunnel service and
   how to define the data model which will provide the guidance for the
   future definition of the concrete data model.

Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 21, 2016.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2015 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.




Chen & Zhuang            Expires April 21, 2016                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft   Considerations on Network Tunnel Model     October 2015


   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  Consideration of Tunnel Service Model . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   4.  Network Tunnel Service Model  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     4.1.  Overview  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     4.2.  Design of Data Model  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   5.  Network MPLS TE Tunnel Service Model  . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     5.1.  Overview  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     5.2.  Design of Data Model  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   6.  Network IP Tunnel Service Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   7.  Pre-configuration and Operational Data  . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   8.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   9.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   10. References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     10.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     10.2.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9

1.  Introduction

   Tunnel is one typical service provided by carrier IP network.  The
   network tunnel service model is defined to satisfy the common
   requirement of most tunnel services.  It's convenient for the
   operators to set up the tunnel which serves for the network
   applications without caring about the details of different types of
   tunnels which are eventually setup in the network device.  The
   generic properties of the different tunnels and the properties which
   the network-level tunnels need such as source address of the tunnel
   are defined and such service model is referred to as network tunnel
   service model.

   Some tunnels can support traffic engineering such as bandwidth
   assurance, setting up the tunnel according to the explicit path which
   is specified by the user.  The generic traffic engineering properties
   are defined for the network-level applications and such service model




Chen & Zhuang            Expires April 21, 2016                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft   Considerations on Network Tunnel Model     October 2015


   is referred to as network MPLS TE tunnel service model.  This service
   model is based on the network tunnel service model.

   This document introduces the description of northbound interface of
   network-level tunnel service and give the pseudo data model tree to
   explain the idea.

2.  Scope

   The network tunnel service model is defined to satisfy the common
   requirement of most tunnel services.  The network tunnel service
   defined here is only based on Layer 3 topology and called L3 tunnel.
   The tunnel will be used for carrying VPN service and the tunnel used
   for IPv6 transition is not within the scope.  Currently the
   northbound interface of network tunnel service only includes the
   point-to-point tunnel and in the future the model would include
   point-to-multipoint and multipoint-to-multipoint tunnel to support
   the multicast service.

   The controller will process the network tunnel service model and
   finally notify the network device to create the tunnel.  The
   configured network tunnels on the controller includes mainly IP
   tunnel and MPLS TE tunnel.  The LDP and SR-BE path which are able to
   be created on network device can carry VPN service too.  But such
   tunnels are automatically set up according to the route and are not
   necessary to set up by controller.

3.  Consideration of Tunnel Service Model

   The network tunnel service model is defined to satisfy the common
   requirement of most tunnel services.  It's convenient for the
   operators to set up the tunnel which serves for the network
   applications without caring about the details of different types of
   tunnels which are eventually setup in the network device.  Now there
   are several device-level data models about tunnel are proposed in
   IETF.  I-D.zheng-intarea-gre-yang [I-D.zheng-intarea-gre-yang]
   defines the data model of GRE tunnel.  I-D.liu-rtgwg-ipipv4-tunnel-
   yang [I-D.liu-rtgwg-ipipv4-tunnel-yang] defines the data model of IP
   in IP tunnel.  I-D.tran-ipecme-yang-ipsec
   [I-D.tran-ipecme-yang-ipsec] defines the data model of IPsec tunnel.
   I-D.ietf-teas-yang-te [I-D.ietf-teas-yang-te] defines the data model
   of MPLS RSVP-TE tunnel.  Different types of tunnels have specific
   tunnel attributes and there are some generic attributes all of these
   tunnels possess.  The operators are normally interested in these
   common attributes.  The generic network tunnel data model is made up
   of these common properties and the properties which the network-level
   tunnels need like source address of the tunnel.




Chen & Zhuang            Expires April 21, 2016                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft   Considerations on Network Tunnel Model     October 2015


   In case of MPLS TE tunnel service the services of traffic engineering
   include bandwidth assurance, setting up the tunnel according to the
   explicit path which is specified by the user etc.  The generic
   traffic engineering properties are configured for the network-level
   applications and the tunnel services which support traffic
   engineering can be provided, There is the requirement of global
   reoptimization of the network-level tunnels which means the network
   usability can be increased by computing the new path for all the
   tunnels and rebuilding the tunnels.  Therefore the data model should
   define the actions used by operator to trigger the progress of global
   reoptimization. such data model is referred to as network MPLS TE
   tunnel data model.  This data model is based on the network tunnel
   data model.

   In case of IP tunnel service the common attributes has been defined
   in network tunnel data model.  If there are other generic specific
   attributes for IP tunnel and how to define the generic network IP
   tunnel data model should be discussed.

   The relationship of the network tunnel data model, network MPLS TE
   tunnel data model, network IP tunnel data model is shown in the
   following figure:

                        +---------------------+
                        |    network tunnel   |    o: augment
                        +---------------------+
                         o                   o
                        /                     \
                       /                       \
          +------------------------+  +-------------------+
          | network MPLS TE tunnel |  | network IP tunnel |
          +------------------------+  +-------------------+
        Figure 1: Relationship of Network Tunnel Service Model,
         Network MPLS TE Tunnel Model, Network IP Tunnel Model

4.  Network Tunnel Service Model

4.1.  Overview

   When the operators use the tunnel service they normally only indicate
   the addresses of both network devices to set up the tunnel.  They
   don't care about the specific tunnel technology.  The controller has
   internal or preconfigured policy to choose the proper specific tunnel
   technology.  The users may consider the tunnel is unidirectional or
   bidirectional or the tunnel is IP tunnel or MPLS TE tunnel.  If they
   don't configure the controller creates unidirectional tunnel and the
   MPLS TE tunnel by default.  The default policy is implementation-
   specific.



Chen & Zhuang            Expires April 21, 2016                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft   Considerations on Network Tunnel Model     October 2015


   The network tunnel data model is provided to users to customize their
   requirement for tunnel services on the controller.

4.2.  Design of Data Model

   The configuration of network tunnel service model should include: the
   tunnel name, the source and destination addresses, the type of tunnel
   which indicates the tunnel is IP or MPLS TE, the direction indicator
   of the tunnel which defines the tunnel is unidirectional or
   bidirectional.  The user can control the state of the tunnel by
   manually to set the tunnel down . Different tunnel with the different
   tunnel name can have the same pair of source and destination
   addresses.

   Following is a simplified tree representation of the data model for
   generic network tunnel service configuration.

      +--rw network-tunnel
         +--rw p2p-network-tunnels
            +--rw tunnel* [tunnel-name]
               +--rw tunnel-name
               +--rw tunnel-type
               +--rw direction
               +--rw admin-status?
               +--rw source
               +--rw destination

5.  Network MPLS TE Tunnel Service Model

5.1.  Overview

   The operators often configure the following traffic engineering
   attributes: bandwidth, the explicit-path, priority, color, protection
   and different TE technology can support the common attributes.  The
   generic traffic engineering properties are configured for the
   network-level applications by the network MPLS TE tunnel data model
   on the controller.  The network-level tunnel services configured on
   the controller are supported by RSVP-TE tunnel, Segment-Routing TE
   tunnel, static TE tunnel created on network device.

   The requirement of global reoptimization of the network-level tunnels
   is the network usability can be increased by computing the new path
   for all the tunnels and rebuilding the tunnels.  Sometimes the
   operators require the reoptimization to specific tunnel.  Therefore
   the data model should define the actions used by operator to trigger
   the progress of reoptimization.





Chen & Zhuang            Expires April 21, 2016                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft   Considerations on Network Tunnel Model     October 2015


   The network MPLS TE tunnel data model is based on the network tunnel
   data model.

5.2.  Design of Data Model

   The configuration of network tunnel service model should include:
   bandwidth of the tunnel, the explicit path which is made up of one or
   more hops, priority where the tunnel the higher priority can be setup
   and hold than lower priority, color which is defined by affinity, if
   the end-to-end hotstandby protection is needed.

   The rpc defines the global reoptimization and the reoptimization of
   the specific tunnel.

   Following is a simplified graphical representation of the data model
   for generic MPLS TE tunnel service configuration.

   module: network-te-tunnel
   augment /network-tunnel/p2p-network-tunnels/tunnel:
      +--rw te-tunnel-constraints
         +--rw bandwidth?
         +--rw priority?
         +--rw affinities?
         +--rw path-constraint?
         |  +--rw hop list?
         |  +--rw hop-limit?
         +--rw hotstandby?
            +--rw affinities?
            +--rw path-constraint?
               +--rw hop list?
               +--rw hop-limit?

   Following is a simplified graphical representation of the data model
   for generic MPLS TE tunnel service rpc.

   module: network-te-tunnel
   augment /network-tunnel/p2p-network-tunnels/tunnel:
           +---x reoptimization
           |  +--ro input
           |    +--ro if-reoptimization
           +---x reoptimization-by-tunnel
           |  +--ro input
           |    +--ro tunnel-name








Chen & Zhuang            Expires April 21, 2016                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft   Considerations on Network Tunnel Model     October 2015


6.  Network IP Tunnel Service Model

   The common attributes for IP tunnel service have been defined in
   network tunnel data model.  After the controller processes and
   converts the network tunnel data model the controller can notify the
   network device to create one specific type of IP tunnel.  It's not
   necessary for the operator to care about the details of different
   types of IP tunnels which are eventually setup in the network device.
   But if the operator would like to specify the more attributes of IP
   tunnel by the northbound interface the network IP tunnel data model
   is needed to be defined through augment of Network Tunnel Service
   Model.

   The different IP tunnel technology can be applied in different
   application scenario such as MPLS in UDP used for load balance, GRE
   used for load balance or security, IPsec used for security.  Even for
   the same usage of load balance, MPLS in UDP and GRE will adopt
   different implementation parameters.  Thus the IP tunnel attributes
   to satisfy different uses are hard to be unified and maybe all IP
   tunnel specific attributes have to be defined in the service model
   which will deviate the rules of definition of service models.  There
   should be further discussion.

7.  Pre-configuration and Operational Data

   This document focuses on the design of the data model of the service
   configuration which the business users care about.  Actually system
   administrators have to configure the pre-configuration data to help
   the controller convert the network service configuration to the
   device-level configuration.  The typical of pre-configuration of
   network Tunnel service models may provide the policy of the models
   conversion and the resources used for conversion.  For example the
   network MPLS TE tunnel model can be implemented by RSVP-TE tunnel,
   SR-TE tunnel, static CR-LSP.  The pre-configuration can define the
   policy to select the implementation mode for specific Network TE
   Tunnel service model.  On the other hand, when implement the network
   TE Tunnel model with RSVP-TE tunnel, the tunnel ID of RSVP-TE tunnel
   needs to be allocated dynamically by the controller.  The pre-
   configuration can define the resource pool of tunnel ID for
   allocation.

   It's challenging to define the operational data of network service
   data model because the normal users and the system administrators
   have different perspective.  The business users maybe care only about
   the limited maintenance information but the system administrators
   need to know more details.  For network MPLS TE tunnel model the
   state and the path information of the tunnel maybe sufficient to the
   business users but system administrators maybe need to know the type,



Chen & Zhuang            Expires April 21, 2016                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft   Considerations on Network Tunnel Model     October 2015


   tunnel identifier and specific attributes of the tunnel.  There
   should be further discussion.

8.  IANA Considerations

   This document makes no request of IANA.

9.  Security Considerations

   This document does not introduce new security threat.

10.  References

10.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.

10.2.  References

   [I-D.ietf-teas-yang-te]
              Saad, T., Gandhi, R., Liu, X., Beeram, V., Shah, H., Chen,
              X., Jones, R., and B. Wen, "A YANG Data Model for Traffic
              Engineering Tunnels and Interfaces", draft-ietf-teas-yang-
              te-01 (work in progress), October 2015.

   [I-D.liu-rtgwg-ipipv4-tunnel-yang]
              Liu, Y. and A. Foldes, "Yang Data Model for IPIPv4
              Tunnel", draft-liu-rtgwg-ipipv4-tunnel-yang-01 (work in
              progress), July 2015.

   [I-D.tran-ipecme-yang-ipsec]
              Tran, K., "Yang Data Model for Internet Protocol Security
              (IPSec)", draft-tran-ipecme-yang-ipsec-00 (work in
              progress), May 2015.

   [I-D.zheng-intarea-gre-yang]
              Zheng, L., Pignataro, C., Penno, R., and Z. Wang, "Yang
              Data Model for Generic Routing Encapsulation (GRE)",
              draft-zheng-intarea-gre-yang-00 (work in progress), July
              2015.








Chen & Zhuang            Expires April 21, 2016                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft   Considerations on Network Tunnel Model     October 2015


Authors' Addresses

   Xia Chen
   Huawei
   Huawei Bld., No.156 Beiqing Rd.
   Beijing  100095
   China

   Email: jescia.chenxia@huawei.com


   Shunwan Zhuang
   Huawei
   Huawei Bld., No.156 Beiqing Rd.
   Beijing  100095
   China

   Email: zhuangshunwan@huawei.com

































Chen & Zhuang            Expires April 21, 2016                 [Page 9]

