





Network Working Group                                     RJ Atkinson, Editor
INTERNET DRAFT                                                  Not Organised
draft-rja-mail-lists-00.txt                                  6 September 2001





                     IETF Mailing List Conventions






STATUS OF THIS MEMO

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is subject to all provisions in
   Section 10 of RFC-2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering Task
   Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that other groups
   may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months and
   may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any time.  It
   is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference material or to cite
   them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at:
   http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html.

   The list of current Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

ABSTRACT

           This document  describes  proposed  conventions  for  use  on
   IETF-related   mailing   lists.   Subject  to  normal  processes  and
   procedures, this draft might some day be published  as  an  RFC  with
   status  of  Best  Current  Practice (BCP).  This document supplements
   both [RFC-2418] and [RFC-3005].

           Comments on this draft may be sent directly to the editor  or
   to the <ietf-process@lists.elistx.com> mailing list.  To subscribe to
   that   list,    send    an    email    request    to    ietf-process-
   request@lists.elistx.com




Atkinson                  Expires in 6 months                   [Page 1]

Internet Draft       IETF Mailing List Conventions      6 September 2001


1. Introduction

           The IETF  uses  mailing  lists  as  its  primary  method  for
   accomplishing  work.  In normal practice, each IETF Working Group has
   at least one mailing list that is used  principally  for  discussions
   within that Working Group's charter.

           In the 1970s  and  1980s,  there  was  broader  consensus  on
   appropriate   network   etiquette,   for  example  unsolicited  email
   solicitations  ("spam")  was  uncommon  and  was  widely  viewed   as
   inappropriate.   As  the  network  has  grown  and as the set of IETF
   participants has broadened, unsolicited email solicitations  ("spam")
   have become more common.  Also, the usual processes whereby newcomers
   get oriented to existing customs have  not  scaled  as  well  as  the
   community  might  have  liked.   Newcomers are strongly encouraged to
   read The Tao of the IETF. [RFC-1718]

           Originally, the  IETF  was  more  loosly  organised  than  at
   present.   So  in  the  early days, each IETF list was hosted at some
   non-IETF site, most usually  an  academic  or  research  site.   More
   recently,  commercial  sites  have  become a very common location for
   hosting an IETF mailing list.   In  the  past  few  years,  the  IETF
   Secretariat  has  developed  the capability to host and automatically
   archive an IETF mailing list.

           In the case of some particular lists, the  rate  of  incoming
   off-topic  postings  has  become so high that the IESG has authorised
   human moderation of the list.

           This document proposes a set of mailing list conventions that
   are  applicable  to  IETF-related mailing lists.  It is believed that
   these proposed conventions are already in wide, but  not  necessarily
   universal, use as of this writing.

2. Current Issues with IETF Mailing Lists

           A major issue on current IETF mailing lists is the  currently
   variable  signal/noise ratio.  A major source of noise is "spam", the
   sending of commercial advertisements or similar solicitations to IETF
   mailing  lists.   Another  flavour  of  the  same  basic issue is the
   posting of promotional/marketing material on IETF  mailing  lists  by
   list  participants.   Off-topic  discussions  on  lists can also be a
   significant source of noise.  It is important that  postings  to  any
   IETF list keep on-topic for that particular list so that participants
   do not have to wade through  other  postings  in  order  to  actively
   participate in the Working Group via email.

           It is important  to  retain  the  long-standing  practice  of



Atkinson                  Expires in 6 months                   [Page 2]

Internet Draft       IETF Mailing List Conventions      6 September 2001


   remote  folks  and  those otherwise unable to travel (e.g. university
   students and faculty) being able to participate in all Working  Group
   business  via  email  (i.e. attendance at meetings is not required to
   have an impact).

           It is also important that IETF list  archives  are  complete,
   are backed up regularly, are easily located, and are readily accessed
   by anyone who wishes to read them.  While this is true for most  IETF
   lists  today,  the  quality  of  the  archives, the quality of backup
   arrangements, and ease of location for IETF mailing lists vary widely
   today.

           Some current postings are larger than they need to be due  to
   use  of  fancy  formatting  (e.g.  MIME  RichText,  HTML)  or  binary
   attachments (e.g. proprietary  word  processor  formats,  proprietary
   viewgraph  formats).   This impedes the ability of folks behind lower
   bandwidth Internet connections (e.g. folks in less  fibre-rich  parts
   of   the   world  than  the  US)  to  actively  participate  in  IETF
   discussions.  Also, some folks don't have  a  mail  reader  that  can
   handle  anything  more  complex  than  the MIME text/plain attachment
   type.  Postings that can't be read by all readers often hinder rather
   than advance the Working Group's progress on its mailing list.

           Some  current  postings  use   non-standard   character   set
   encodings  or  otherwise  do  not conform with the IETF standards for
   email format.  Postings that do not strictly  comply  with  the  IETF
   standards  for  mail  format  cannot  be read by many folks who using
   standards-compliant  mail  tools.   Hence,  such  postings  generally
   impede  the  ability  of a Working Group to make progress rather than
   advancing the work.

           An increasing number of subscribers  to  IETF  mailing  lists
   have misconfigured mail software (e.g. "vacation" programs) that send
   "Out of Office" replies to everyone  who  posts  to  the  given  IETF
   mailing  list during the period that subscriber is out of the office.
   This can be highly annoying to other  participants  and  is  entirely
   gratuitous,  since a properly configured "vacation" program will know
   not to send such messages in response  to  a  received  mailing  list
   message.  While this problem can happen with several kinds of systems
   and many users, PC-based users appear to have more trouble with  this
   than non-PC-based users.

           A small number of current IETF  mailing  lists  automatically
   add  a  "Reply-to:"  mail  message  header  to each posting.  This is
   problematic because it forces replies to go only  back  to  that  one
   mailing  list.   It  is  desirable  that a reader of an IETF list can
   easily reply privately to the poster without the message  being  sent
   to  the entire list (to optimise the signal/noise ratio of the list).



Atkinson                  Expires in 6 months                   [Page 3]

Internet Draft       IETF Mailing List Conventions      6 September 2001


   It is equally desirable that a postings to multiple IETF WGs not have
   all  replies  forced  to  any  subset  of the original set of IETF WG
   lists.  Hence, the automatic addition of the "Reply-to:" header  with
   IETF mailing lists creates problems.

4. IETF Mailing List Conventions

           IETF  mailing  lists  are  open  to  anyone  who  wishes   to
   subscribe.   IETF  Working  Group chairs have broad discretion in how
   they manage their Working Group mailing list(s).  This note, while it
   provides  specific guidance to WG chairs and the IESG, does not alter
   the fundamental principle that IETF Working Group chairs  have  broad
   discretion in managing their Working Group mailing list(s).


4.1 Message Content

           Postings to IETF mailing  lists  MUST  be  on-topic  for  the
   list(s)  that  they are posted to.  Postings that clearly advance the
   WG's current work, as defined by the then-current charter  posted  at
   the  IETF  web  site,  are  considered  to  be on-topic.  The Working
   Group's charter SHOULD be used as an reference for what is  on  topic
   for  that  WG's  mailing list(s).  Any disputes SHOULD be resolved by
   the WG Chair(s).  The WG Chair(s)  has  (have)  broad  discretion  in
   determining  what  is  on-topic or off-topic for their WG list.  A WG
   Chair MAY temporarily suspend or defer  discussion  of  an  otherwise
   on-topic  item  (e.g.  in  order to focus WG attention on a different
   higher priority topic).

           Postings to IETF mailing lists MUST focus  on  architectural,
   standards,  or  technical  content  that advances the progress of the
   Working Group towards fulfilling  its  charter.   Postings  that  are
   primarily  of  a  political,  (non-technical) philosophical, or legal
   nature SHOULD NOT be made to IETF mailing lists.  Postings  that  use
   foul  language  or  attack  people  (as  different from criticising a
   particular idea on technical grounds) are  always  inappropriate  and
   SHOULD NOT be made to IETF lists.

           Postings to IETF lists MUST be made using  real  identifiable
   names   and   email   addresses,  rather  than  obfuscating  aliases.
   Participants ought not use their employer affiliation for  marketing,
   neither  should  they  disguise  their  employer  affiliation in IETF
   activities.  All postings to IETF lists are considered to be only the
   personal  views of the person originating the posting, neither as the
   opinion of their employer (even if  the  posting  asserts  it  is  an
   employer's  official  view)  nor  as  the opinion of the organisation
   hosting their email account.




Atkinson                  Expires in 6 months                   [Page 4]

Internet Draft       IETF Mailing List Conventions      6 September 2001


4.2 List Hosting

           The IETF Secretariat has good facilities in place for hosting
   IETF  mailing  lists.   Tools  in  place  include  not only the usual
   email-based  subscription  methods,  but  also  a   subscriber   web-
   interface.   IETF  WG  Lists  hosted  at IETF.ORG are administered by
   someone designated by the WG Chair, not by the IETF  Secretariat.   A
   password-protected  web-based  list  administration  interface  makes
   remote list administration straight-forward.   Hence,  newly  created
   IETF  mailing lists are encouraged to use the mail relay at IETF.ORG,
   rather than setting one a mail relay elsewhere.   Having  more  lists
   located  at  IETF.ORG  also makes it easier for newcomers to find and
   join the lists of interest.

           Existing lists MAY migrate to the mail relay operated by  the
   IETF  Secretariat  if they wish to do so.  Existing lists that aren't
   conforming with this specification might find that moving such  lists
   to  the IETF Secretariat is the simplest way of getting such lists in
   compliance with this document.

4.3 List Moderation

           There are two kinds of moderated lists that are discussed  in
   this  note.   There are some IETF lists that already have implemented
   one of these two kinds of moderation.  Self-moderated lists  are  not
   uncommon  as  of  this  writing.  A "Self-Moderated List" is one that
   accepts postings only from source email addresses that are members of
   the  list  of  subscribers  to  that  mailing  list.  The term "self-
   moderated list" dates back  to  USENET  of  the  late  1980s.   Self-
   moderation  is  primarily  used  to  reduce  SPAM and other off-topic
   postings.   A  "Full  Moderated  List"  is  different  in  that  each
   individual  submission  to  that  mailing  list is subjected to human
   review and filtering before being posted to the list.

4.3.1 Self-Moderation

           A "Self-Moderated Mailing List" is one that accepts an  email
   posting  only if the source ("From:") email address is in the list of
   addresses that subscribe to that mailing list or is in a side list of
   other approved source email addresses.  In this case, "moderation" is
   NOT some person making a  personal  judgement  call,  but  rather  is
   normally just an automated program that makes the single check above,
   then either accepts or rejects the attempted email posting.

           An IETF mailing list MAY be self-moderated  without  explicit
   approval  from the IESG if the WG Chair(s) approve(s).  Postings from
   a non-subscriber to a self-moderated IETF list MUST be  automatically
   routed  to  a  human  moderator.   That  moderator  SHOULD ignore any



Atkinson                  Expires in 6 months                   [Page 5]

Internet Draft       IETF Mailing List Conventions      6 September 2001


   message posting from a non-subscriber if the message posting  appears
   to  be  off-topic.  The moderator of a self-moderated list MAY post a
   non-subscriber message if it appears to be  within  charter  and  on-
   topic  for  the  list,  MAY  simply  grant the non-subscriber posting
   rights to the list without subscribing the poster, or MAY bounce  the
   message back to the author with subscription instructions.

           A self-moderated mailing list SHOULD have the concept  of  an
   authorised posting address that is not a list subscriber address.  If
   an IETF list has the concept of an authorised posting address that is
   not  a  subscriber  address, then postings from a non-subscriber to a
   self-moderated IETF list MAY simply  be  bounced  back  automatically
   along  with  instructions  on  how to join the non-subscriber posting
   address and instructions on how to  subscribe  to  the  list  itself,
   instead of being forwarded to a moderator.  A self-moderated list MAY
   automatically add the subscribers to one or more other IETF lists  to
   its own non-subscriber authorised posting address list.

           Because WG participants SHOULD be subscribed to the  WG  list
   (by  definition)  as  part  of  keeping abreast of that WG's efforts,
   there is NO hard requirement that the moderator of  a  self-moderated
   list  automatically  post  any messages from non-subscribers (who, by
   definition, are not WG participants).   The  moderator  MAY  directly
   post  on-topic notes from non-subscribers, but also MAY choose not to
   do so on high-volume lists because that manual intervention does  not
   scale  well.   Posters  who are not subscribers to the self-moderated
   list being  posted  to  SHOULD  NOT  expect  instantaneous  or  rapid
   handling  of  their  posting by the moderator.  An explicit goal with
   self-moderated lists is to keep the burden on human moderators  at  a
   very low level.

4.3.2 Full Moderation

           With explicit prior approval from the  applicable  IESG  Area
   Director(s),  an  IETF  Working  Group  mailing  list MAY use a human
   moderator to reduce and prevent off-topic postings to an IETF Working
   Group mailing list.  If this approval is granted, the applicable IESG
   Area Director(s) MUST promptly announce it to  the  affected  mailing
   list(s).   That  announcement,  a  brief statement from the AD on why
   full  moderation  was  approved,  and  also  the  name(s)  and  email
   address(es)  of  the  moderator(s)  MUST additionally be posted in an
   appropriate place on the official IETF web site.

           There SHOULD normally  be  some  specific  arrangement  (e.g.
   having  dual moderators or having both a primary moderator and backup
   moderator) that ensures that the list does not grind to a halt if the
   moderator  becomes  ill,  goes  on  travel,  takes  vacation,  or  is
   otherwise temporarily not able to perform the function.   Significant



Atkinson                  Expires in 6 months                   [Page 6]

Internet Draft       IETF Mailing List Conventions      6 September 2001


   changes  to  the  moderator  arrangements SHOULD be noted in an email
   announcement  from  the  applicable  IESG  Area  Director(s)  to  the
   affected  IETF  mailing lists and SHOULD cause updated information to
   appear an the appropriate place on the IETF web site.

           Procedurally, the standard IETF process rules  apply  to  any
   dispute  over  management  of  an IETF mailing list.  This means that
   complaints about mailing list management MUST initially be  discussed
   with  the Chair(s) of the applicable Working Group.  For this reason,
   WG Chair(s) normally SHOULD  NOT  moderate  their  own  WG's  mailing
   list(s),  although  they  MAY moderate their own WG's mailing list if
   the appropriate Area Directors do not object to this.

4.4 Languages & Character Sets

           To  ensure  maximum  interoperability,  users  MUST  NOT  use
   proprietary  or  uncommon  MIME  charsets in postings to IETF mailing
   lists [RFC-2130], whether or not those charsets have been  registered
   with  IANA.   In  particular,  local  or  national  character set and
   encoding standards are often not implemented globally, while the IETF
   does operate globally.

           In particular, the MIME charset of "US-ASCII" SHOULD be  used
   for all messages that only employ US-ASCII [ANSI-X3.4] characters.

           The UTF-8 MIME charset [RFC-2279] or any ISO-8859 series MIME
   charset  MUST  be  used  for  any  postings  that employ non-US-ASCII
   characters.  [RFC-2277] Postings not in the  US-ASCII  character  set
   MUST  contain  appropriate IETF standards-track (i.e. MIME-compliant)
   headers indicating the MIME  charset(s)  contained  in  the  message.
   [RFC-2231]

           Postings MUST NOT use any  form  of  ISO-2022  mechanism  for
   character  set  switching,  because  of repeated negative operational
   experience with this mechanism. [ISO-2022]

           Postings SHOULD NOT use header characters in any manner  that
   is not strictly compliant with IETF mail header standards, because it
   impedes both interoperability and the ability of all readers to reply
   to the sender.

           An IETF mailing list MAY automatically or manually filter out
   email  that  uses  any character set encodings that are not compliant
   with  IETF  standards.   In  particular,  any   postings   that   use
   proprietary  character  set  encodings MAY be filtered out.  Messages
   containing only the MIME charsets approved above, including US-ASCII,
   any  ISO-8859 series, and UTF-8 MUST NOT be filtered out on the basis
   of the charset.  Lists that employ MIME charset filters SHOULD  cause



Atkinson                  Expires in 6 months                   [Page 7]

Internet Draft       IETF Mailing List Conventions      6 September 2001


   the  filtered out messages to be sent to a human moderator for review
   before discarding.

           Subject to the above restrictions on  non-standard  character
   sets  in  email,  any human language MAY be used for IETF list email.
   Users SHOULD send postings in a human language that  is  readable  by
   ALL list members.  In practice, IETF meetings are held in English and
   current IETF lists overwhelmingly use English on their lists.

4.5 Mail Format Requirements

           Many users are behind low-bandwidth, long-delay links and  so
   suffer  undue  adverse impact by needlessly large mail messages.  The
   IETF intends to be accessible to all, even those in remote  locations
   with   limited   bandwidth,   so  plain-text  messages  are  strongly
   preferred.

           Also, IETF participants use an exceptionally  wide  range  of
   computing  systems  in their IETF activities, so no proprietary (e.g.
   PC word processor) file  format  exists  that  will  be  readable  by
   everyone on an IETF list.

4.5.1 Preferred Mail Format

           Users SHOULD send out all messages in the  MIME  "text/plain"
   format ONLY.

           Users  SHOULD  NOT  send  out  any   messages   with   either
   proprietary-format  attachments  (e.g.  some word processor format or
   some viewgraph format) or binary-format attachments (e.g.  compressed
   file,  various  proprietary  application  formats) to an IETF mailing
   list.

4.5.2 Mail Attachments (General)

           If an attachment is included in a posting to an IETF  mailing
   list,  the mail message containing attachment MUST be fully compliant
   with the IETF MIME specifications.   In  particular,  the  attachment
   MUST be properly marked with MIME headers, so that the readers have a
   good chance of being able to read the attachment.

           Usually the best approach to handling attachments is to place
   the  file  (which  would  otherwise  be sent as an attachment) onto a
   publically accessible ftp or http server and just include the URL for
   the file in one's email to the IETF mailing list.

           IETF mailing lists MAY automatically or  manually  strip  out
   HTML,  MIME  RichText,  and/or  proprietary-format attachments before



Atkinson                  Expires in 6 months                   [Page 8]

Internet Draft       IETF Mailing List Conventions      6 September 2001


   sending on the message.  IETF  mailing  lists  MAY  automatically  or
   manually  bounce  messages  that  contain  HTML,  MIME  RichText,  or
   proprietary-format attachments back to  the  sender  without  posting
   them  to  the list.  Bounce messages SHOULD also have some indication
   of the reason for the bounce  (e.g.  The  attached  message  contains
   HTML,  MIME RichText, or proprietary-format attachments and so is not
   being posted to the ietf-foo mailing list.").

4.5.3 Mail Attachments (Binary format)

           An IETF mailing list MAY automatically or manually filter out
   email  that  contains  any  form of binary attachment.  Lists that do
   this MAY cause the filtered out  messages  to  be  sent  to  a  human
   moderator  for review.  That moderator MAY then handle the message as
   deemed appropriate.

4.5.4 Mail Standards Compliance

           Any IETF mailing list MAY filter out  messages  that  do  not
   conform  and  comply  with  then-current  IETF  standards-track  mail
   message format RFCs.  Examples of IETF  mail  format  standards  that
   apply  and  are  current as of this writing include [RFC-2045], [RFC-
   2047], [RFC-2049], [RFC-2821], and [RFC-2822].  Lists that filter out
   such  non-compliant  postings  SHOULD  either  cause the filtered out
   messages to be sent to a human moderator or automatically bounce  the
   posting  back to the sender with basic information on why the message
   was bounced (e.g. "The attached message does  not  comply  with  IETF
   standards-track mail format specifications and so is not being posted
   to the foo list.")

4.6 Vacation Messages

           IETF list members MUST NOT misconfigure  their  mail  systems
   such   that   "Out   of  Office"  or  "Vacation"  type  messages  are
   automatically sent to  IETF  mailing  lists  or  to  folks  who  post
   messages  to  IETF mailing lists.  In some cases, mail software has a
   default  "vacation"  configuration  that  is   broken.    Users   are
   responsible    for   correct   configuration   of   their   software.
   Configuration hints  for  certain  widely  deployed  mail  tools  are
   provided in an accompanying informational document [MUA].

           IETF mailing  list  administrators  MAY  filter  out  (either
   manually  or  automatically)  from any IETF mailing list any messages
   that appear to be "Out of Office" or "Vacation" notifications.







Atkinson                  Expires in 6 months                   [Page 9]

Internet Draft       IETF Mailing List Conventions      6 September 2001


4.7 Other Conventions

           IETF mailing lists MUST NOT automatically  insert  a  "Reply-
   to:"  header in postings to the mailing list.  The automatic presence
   of  that  header  impedes  multi-list  conversations  when  such   is
   appropriate,  by  automatically cutting off one of the lists from the
   followup postings.   The  automatic  presence  of  that  header  also
   decreases  the  signal/noise  ratio  of  the list because it makes it
   unduly difficult for someone to send a private off-list reply to  the
   author of some note posted to the list.

           The "Precedence:" header in mail  messages  is  not  formally
   standardised   by   the   IETF.   Although  it  is  widely  deployed,
   implementations  vary  in  how  they  treat  that   header.    Hence,
   interoperability  of  that email header is not assured.  IETF Mailing
   List messages MAY or MAY NOT contain a "Precedence:"  header.   If  a
   "Precedence:"  header  is present for a given IETF mailing list, then
   the "Precedence:" value SHOULD be set to "bulk", indicating that  the
   message is not high priority for immediate delivery.

           New IETF WG mailing  lists  SHOULD  have  a  list  name  that
   clearly indicates both that it is an IETF list and also which precise
   IETF Working Group uses that list.  For example, if there were a  new
   IETF  WG  whose  official IETF WG acronym was "foo", then ideally its
   mailing list SHOULD be "ietf-foo".  For WG lists hosted at  ietf.org,
   then   the   new   mailing   list   MAY  alternately  be  named  just
   "foo@ietf.org".

           Each mailing list MUST have a separate address that  is  used
   for  subscription, unsubscription, or other administrivia.  This list
   address must be formed by taking the posting address  and  adding  "-
   request"  immediately  before  the "@" symbol.  For example, if there
   were a list using "ietf-foo@nowhere.none"  as  its  posting  address,
   then  its  subscription and administrivia address would be "ietf-foo-
   request@nowhere.none". [RFC-2142]

           A mailing list MAY prefix the subject line with  the  Working
   Group's IETF acronym.  For example, one MAY have "Subject: [ietf-foo]
   topic name" automatically appear when the original poster's email had
   "Subject: topic name".

           A mailing list relay MAY add a unique "Sender:"  mail  header
   for  each  separate  mailing  list to facilitate automated sorting of
   inbound email by subscribers.   For  example,  at  present  the  IETF
   SNMPv3   WG   list   automatically  adds  the  line  "Sender:  owner-
   snmpv3@lists.tislabs.com" to all postings relayed through  that  WG's
   mailing list.  This practice is already common.




Atkinson                  Expires in 6 months                  [Page 10]

Internet Draft       IETF Mailing List Conventions      6 September 2001


           An IETF mailing list SHOULD add a  unique  "List-Id:"  header
   compliant  with  RFC-2919,  so that mail client software can use that
   for sorting incoming email.  This practice is not  uncommon  now  and
   deployment appears to be growing over time. [RFC-2919]

           An IETF  mailing  list  MAY  add  the  optional  list-related
   headers  defined  in RFC-2369.  This practice is not widespread as of
   this writing, but the practice might  be  helpful  to  list  members.
   [RFC-2369]


5. Security Considerations

           This document discusses conventions for IETF  mailing  lists.
   The  goal  of IETF mailing lists is to disseminate information to the
   entire set of Working Group members (mailing  list  subscribers),  so
   mail  to  IETF  mailing lists does not require confidentiality.  Some
   mail to IETF mailing lists might benefit from authentication.   If  a
   mail  message is authenticated, an IETF standards-track email message
   authentication mechanism SHOULD be used.  S/MIME  is  an  example  of
   such  a standards-track email message authentication mechanism. [RFC-
   2633]

           Computing systems hosting IETF  mailing  lists  ought  to  be
   configured  using current best commercial practices to prevent break-
   ins or other security  issues  from  impairing  the  reliability  and
   availability  of  the  IETF  mailing  list  service.   In particular,
   operating systems and mailing list software SHOULD be kept at current
   patch levels and SHOULD be configured in a secure manner.

           Systems hosting official archives of IETF mailing lists ought
   to  be  configured using current best commercial practices to prevent
   break-ins or other security issues from  impairing  the  availability
   and  integrity  of  the  mailing  list  archives.  Additionally, such
   archives ought to be backed up on a regular basis  via  methods  that
   are  normally  considered  reliable enough in current best commercial
   practices (e.g. backed up to  magnetic  tape  or  onto  some  optical
   media).

           Mailing list software used with IETF mailing  lists  MUST  be
   configured in a manner that reduces SPAM by disallowing open relaying
   of email. [RFC-2635]

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

           The author would like to thank (in alphabetical order) Harald
   Alvestrand, Randy Bush, Brian Carpenter, Ned Freed, John Klensin, Tom
   Narten, Erik Nordmark, and Henning Schulzrinne for their comments and



Atkinson                  Expires in 6 months                  [Page 11]

Internet Draft       IETF Mailing List Conventions      6 September 2001


   suggestions  on  earlier  drafts  of  this document.  Vernon Schryver
   provided help in identifying common mailing list issues.

           Any grammatical or typographical errors  here  are  the  sole
   responsibility of the author.  Kindly note that this draft is written
   in the English, not American, language.

REFERENCES

   [ANSI86] ANSI, American Standard Code for Information Interchange,
           Standard X3.4, 1986.

   [ISO-2022] International Standards Organisation, title here,
           International Standard 2022, date, place.

   [RFC-1718] G. Malkin et alia, "The Tao of IETF - A Guide for New
           Attendees of the Internet Engineering Task Force", RFC-1718,
           November 1994.

   [RFC-2045] N. Freed, et alia, "Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions (MIME),
           Part 1, Internet Message Bodies", RFC-2045, November 1996.

   [RFC-2047] K. Moore, "Multipurpose Internet mail Extensions (MIME),
           Part 3, Message Header Extensions for non-ASCII Text",
           RFC-2047, November 1996.

   [RFC-2049] N. Freed, et alia, "Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions (MIME),
           Part 5, Conformance Criteria and Examples", RFC-2049,
           November 1996.

   [RFC-2130] C. Weider, et alia, "Report of IAB Character Set Workshop held
           29 February - 1 March 1996", RFC-2130, April 1997.

   [RFC-2142] D. Crocker, "Mailbox Names for Common Services, Roles, &
           Functions", RFC-2142, May 1997.

   [RFC-2231] N. Freed & K. Moore, "MIME Parameter Value and Encoded Word
           Extensions: Character Sets, Languages, & Continuations",
           RFC-2231, November 1997.

   [RFC-2277] H. Alvestrand, "IETF Policy on Character Sets & Languages",
           RFC-2277, January 1998.

   [RFC-2279] F. Yergeau, "UTF-8, A Transformation format of ISO-10646",
           RFC-2279, January 1998.

   [RFC-2369] G. Neufeld et alia, "Use of URLs as a Meta-Syntax for
           Core mail List Commands and their Transport through



Atkinson                  Expires in 6 months                  [Page 12]

Internet Draft       IETF Mailing List Conventions      6 September 2001


           Message Header Fields", RFC-2369, July 1998.

   [RFC-2418] S. Bradner, "IETF Working Group Guidelines & Procedures",
           RFC-2418, September 1996.

   [RFC-2505] G. Lindberg, "Anti-spam Recommendations for SMTP MTAs",
           RFC-2505, February 1999.

   [RFC-2633] B. Ramsdell (Editor), "S/MIME Version 3 Message Specification",
           RFC-2633, June 1999.

   [RFC-2635] S. Hambridge & A. Lunde, "Don't Spew: A Set of Guidelines
           for Mass Unsolicited Mailings and Postings (spam)",
           RFC-2635, June 1999.

   [RFC-2821] J. Klensin (Editor), "Simple Mail Transfer Protocol",
           RFC-2821, April 2001.

   [RFC-2822] P. Resnick (Editor), "Internet Message Format",
           RFC-2822, April 2001.

   [RFC-2919] R. Chandhok & G. Wenger, "List-Id: A Structured Field
           and Namespace for the Identification of Mailing Lists",
           RFC-2919, March 2001.

   [RFC-3005] S. Harris, "IETF Discussion List Charter",
           RFC-3005, November 2000.

   [MUA] R. Atkinson, "Configuration Hints for Common Mail User Agents",
           Internet-Draft, 31 August 2001.

Editor's Address

   RJ Atkinson
   Extreme Networks
   3585 Monroe Street
   Santa Clara, CA
   95051  USA

   Email: rja@extremenetworks.com
   Phone: +1 (408)579-2800










Atkinson                  Expires in 6 months                  [Page 13]

