


Internet Engineering Task Force                              Duncan Mills
Internet Draft                                                   Vodafone
draft-mills-sip-access-network-info-03.txt 
 
 
                                                          Date: June 2002
                                                   Expires: December 2002
 
 
 
 
 
    
     Private Session Initiation Protocol Extension for Access Network 
                                Information 
    
    
    
   Status of this Memo 
    
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 [1]. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of 
   six months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
   documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as 
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
    
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
   The distribution of this memo is unlimited. 
    
   1. Abstract 
    
   This mechanism is useful in SIP networks that provide layer 2/layer 
   3 connectivity through different access technologies.  
   This document defines the private SIP extension header P-Access-
   Network-Info. SIP User Agents may use this header to relay 
   information about the access technology to serving proxies in their 
   home network. The serving proxy may then use this information to 
   optimize services for the UA. For example, a 3GPP terminal uses this 
   header to pass information about the access network such as radio 
   access technology and cell ID to its home service provider. 
    
   2. Applicability Statement  
    


Mills                   Expiration 12/10/02                     1 
Internet-Draft       The SIP Access-Network-Info header   June 2002 

   This draft is appropriate in environments where SIP services are 
   dependent on SIP elements knowing details about the IP and lower 
   layer technologies used by a UA to connect to the SIP network.  
   Specifically, the extension requires that the UA know the access 
   technology it is using, and that a proxy desires such information to 
   provide services.  Generally, SIP is built on the "Everything over 
   IP and IP over everything" principle, where the access technology is 
   not relevant for the operation of SIP.  Since SIP systems generally 
   should not care or even know about the access technology, this draft 
   is not for general SIP usage. 
    
   The information revealed in the P-Access-Network-Info header is 
   potentially very sensitive.  Proper protection of this information 
   depends on the existence of specific business and security 
   relationships amongst the proxies that will see messages containing 
   this header.  It also depends on explicit knowledge of the UA of the 
   existence of those relationships.  Therefore, this mechanism is only 
   suitable in environments where the appropriate relationships are in 
   place, and the UA has explicit knowledge that they exist. 
    
    
   3. Conventions used in this document 
    
   In this document, the key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", 
   "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", 
   and "OPTIONAL" are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [1] 
   and indicate requirement levels for compliant implementations. 
    
   4. Table of Contents 
     
   Status of this Memo                                       1 
   1. Abstract                                               1 
   2. Applicability Statement                                1 
   3. Conventions used in this document                      2 
   4. Table of Contents                                      2 
   5. Introduction                                           2 
   6. Overview of Operation                                  3 
   7. The P-Access-Network-Info header                       3 
   8. Handling of the P-Access-Network-Info header           4 
   8.1 UAC behavior                                          5 
   8.2 Proxy behavior                                        5 
   9. Security considerations                                5 
   10. IANA Considerations                                   6 
   11. References                                            7 
   12. Author's Address                                      7 
   Full Copyright Statement                                  8 
    
    
   5. Introduction 
    
   There are many cases where a user is accessing their home network 
   services via a particular access network. An example is a 3GPP 
   wireless terminal that accesses a SIP server via the UMTS Radio 
   Access Network.  

Mills                     Expiration 12/10/02                        2 
Internet-Draft       The SIP Access-Network-Info header   June 2002 

    
   In this document we define an access network as the network 
   providing the layer 2/layer 3 IP connectivity which in turn provides 
   a user with access to the SIP capabilities or services provided by 
   the home network of that user. 
    
   In some cases, the home network may wish to know information about 
   the type of access network that the UA is currently using.  Some 
   services are more suitable or less suitable depending on the access 
   type, and some services are of more value to subscribers if the 
   access network details are known in the home network. 
    
   In other cases, the home network may simply wish to know crude 
   location information in order to provide certain services to the 
   user.  For example, many of the location based services available in 
   wireless networks today require the home network to know the 
   identity of the cell the user is being served by.  
    
   Some regulatory requirements exist mandating that for cellular radio 
   systems, the identity of the cell where an emergency call is 
   established is made available to the emergency authorities. 
    
   The home network may desire knowledge about the access network. This 
   is achieved by defining a new private SIP extension header as 
   defined in [3], P-Access-Network-Info. This header carries 
   information relating to the access network between the UAC and its 
   serving proxy in the home network. 
    
   6. Overview of Operation 
    
   When a user agent generates a SIP request or response which it knows 
   is going to be securely sent to its home network, it inserts a P-
   Access-Network-Info header into the message.  This header contains 
   information on the access network that the UA is using to get IP 
   connectivity.  The header is ignored by intermediate proxies between 
   the UA and the home proxy.  The home proxy can inspect the header 
   and make use of the information contained there to provide services.  
   Before proxying the request onwards, the home proxy strips the 
   header from the message. 
    
   7. The P-Access-Network-Info header 
    
   The P-Access-Network-Info header is used to transport a set of 
   parameters associated with the access characteristics of a 
   particular network. 
    
   The information in the P-Access-Network-Info is privacy sensitive. 
   It is intended for use between the UA and proxies in the home 
   network. 
    
   The P-Access-Network-Info header is described using ABNF syntax.  
   The following description of the ABNF syntax is based on the ABNF 
   used for SIP [3]: 
    

Mills                     Expiration 12/10/02                        3 
Internet-Draft       The SIP Access-Network-Info header   June 2002 

    
   P-Access-Network-Info                ="P-Access-Network-Info" HCOLON  
                                        access-network-information 
    
   access-network-information           = access-type 
                                        *(SEMI access-info] 
    
   access-type                          ="IEEE-802.11a" / 
                                        "IEEE-802.11b" / "3GPP-GERAN" / 
                                        "3GPP-UTRAN-FDD" / 
                                        "3GPP-UTRAN-TDD" / 
                                        "3GPP-CDMA2000" / token 
    
   access-info                          = cgi-3gpp / 
                                        utran-cell-id-3gpp / 
                                        extension-access-info 
    
   extension-access-info                = gen-value 
    
   cgi-3gpp                             = "cgi-3gpp" EQUAL (token / 
                                        quoted-string) 
    
   utran-cell-id-3gpp                   = "utran-cell-id-3gpp" EQUAL 
                                        (token / quoted string) 
    
    
   Access-info could contain additional information relating to the 
   access network.  The values for "cgi-3gpp" and "utran-cell-id-3gpp" 
   are defined in 3GPP TS 24.229 [5] 
    
   The following table expands on tables 2 and 3 in [3]. 
    
    
    
    
    
   Header field          where  proxy  ACK  BYE  CAN  INV  OPT  REG 
   ---------------------------------------------------------------- 
   P-Access-Network-Info         dr     -    o    -    o    o    o 
    
                                       PRA  UPD  SUB  NOT  INF  REF 
                                       ---------------------------- 
                                        o    o    o    o    o    o 
    
    
   Comparisons follow the case-sensitivity rules defined by SIP [3]. 
    
   8. Handling of the P-Access-Network-Info header 
    
   8.1 UAC behavior 
    
   A UAC that supports this extension and is willing to disclose the 
   related parameters MAY insert the P-Access-Network-Info header in 
   any SIP message request. 

Mills                     Expiration 12/10/02                        4 
Internet-Draft       The SIP Access-Network-Info header   June 2002 

    
   The UAC inserting this information MUST trust the home network proxy 
   to protect its privacy by deleting the header before forwarding the 
   message outside of the home proxy∆s domain. In order to do this it 
   must also have transitive trust in intermediate proxies between it 
   and the home network proxy. This trust is established by business 
   agreements between the home network and the access network, and 
   generally supported by the use of standard security mechanisms, e.g. 
   IPsec, AKA, and TLS. 
    
   This document does not define either the nature of the information 
   or the messages where the P-Access-Network-Info needs to be 
   inserted. 
    
   Some systems may require that the P-Access-Network-Info header is 
   only sent by the UAC when a secure connection to the proxy in the 
   home network is present.  For example, in 3GPP systems, the UAC MUST 
   NOT send this header in the initial unauthenticated REGISTER 
   request. 
    
   8.2 Proxy behavior 
    
   A proxy MUST NOT insert or modify the P-Access-Network-Info header.  
    
   The proxy in the home network may act upon any information in the P-
   Access-Network-Info header if it is present, to provide a different 
   service depending on the network through which the UA is accessing 
   the server. For example, for cellular radio access networks the home 
   network may use the cell ID to provide basic localised services. 
    
   A proxy, typically located in the home network, and therefore 
   trusted, MUST delete the header when the SIP signaling is forwarded 
   to a SIP server located in a non-trusted administrative network 
   domain. The access network information is used by a home network and 
   is of no interest to the destination network. 
    
   9. Security considerations 
    
   This extension assumes that the access network is trusted by the UA 
   (because the UA∆s home network has a trust relationship with the 
   access network), as described in section 7. 
    
   This extension assumes that the information added to the header by 
   the UAC should be sent only to trusted entities and should not be 
   used outside of the trusted administrative network domain. 
    
   The home network uses the information contained in this header to 
   provide additional services and UAs are expected to provide correct 
   information.  However, there are no security problems resulting from 
   a UAC inserting incorrect information.  Networks providing services 
   based on the information carried in the P-access-network-info header 
   will therefore need to trust the UAC sending the information.  A 
   rogue UAC sending false access network information will do no more 
   harm than to restrict the user from using certain services. 

Mills                     Expiration 12/10/02                        5 
Internet-Draft       The SIP Access-Network-Info header   June 2002 

    
   The mechanism provided in this document is designed primarily for 
   private systems like 3GPP.  Most security requirements are met by 
   way of private standardised solutions.   
    
   For instance, 3GPP will use the P-Access-Network-Info header to 
   carry relatively sensitive information like the cell ID.  Therefore 
   the information MUST NOT be sent outside of the 3GPP domain.  
   Section 8.2 of this document satisfies this requirement. 
    
   The UAC is aware - if it is a 3GPP UAC - that it is operating within 
   a trusted domain. 
    
   The 3GPP UAC is aware of whether or not a secure connection to the 
   home network domain for transporting SIP signalling, is currently 
   available, and as such the sensitive information carried in the P-
   Access-Network-Info header should not be sent in any initial 
   unauthenticated and unprotected requests (e.g. REGISTER).  This is 
   stated in section 8.1 of this document. 
    
   Any UAC that is using this extension and is not part of a private 
   trusted domain should not consider the mechanism as secure and as 
   such SHOULD NOT send sensitive information in the P-Access-Network-
   Info header. 
    
   Any proxy that is operating in a private trust domain where the P-
   Access-Network-Info header is supported is required to delete the 
   header, if it is present, from any message prior to forwarding it 
   outside of the trusted domain.  This is stated in section 8.2. 
    
   Therefore, a home network that requires its UACs to send information 
   in the P-access-network-info header must ensure that either that 
   information is not of a sensitive nature or that the information is 
   not sent outside of the trust domain. 
    
   A proxy receiving a message containing the P-Access-Network-Info 
   header from a non-trusted entity is not able to guarantee the 
   validity of the contents. 
    
   10. IANA Considerations 
    
   This document defines the SIP extension header field "P-Access-
   Network-Info" which should be included in the registry of SIP 
   headers defined in SIP RFC 3261 [3].  As required by the SIP change 
   process draft-tsvarea-sipchange [6] the SIP extension header name 
   "Access-Network-Info" should also be registered in association with 
   this extension.  However, "Access-Network-Info" MUST NOT be used 
   until documented by a standards-track RFC.  Expert reveiw as 
   required for this process is to be provided by the SIP Working 
   Group. 
    
   The following is the registration for the P-Access-Network-Info 
   header field: 
    

Mills                     Expiration 12/10/02                        6 
Internet-Draft       The SIP Access-Network-Info header   June 2002 

        RFC Number: RFCXXXX [Note to IANA: Fill in with the RFC number 
        of this specification.] 
    
        Header Field Name: P-Access-Network-Info 
    
        Compact Form: None 
    
   11. References 
    
   Normative References 
    
   1. Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3", BCP 
   9, RFC 2026, October 1996. 
    
   2. Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement 
   Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997. 
    
   3. Rosenberg, J. et al, "SIP, Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 
   3261, May 2002. 
    
   4. D. Crocker, Ed., and P. Overell, "Augmented BNF for syntax 
   specifications: ABNF," RFC 2234, November 1997. 
    
   5. 3rd Generation Partnership Project; Technical Specification Group 
   Core Network; "IP Multimedia Call Control Protocol based on SIP and 
   SDP;" Stage 3 (Release 5) 
    
   Non-Normative References 
    
   6. Mankin, A., "SIP Change Process draft-tsvarea-sipchange", March 
   2002. 
    
   7. Garcia M. et al: "3GPP requirements on SIP", 
   draft-garcia-sipping-3gpp-reqs-03.txt, September 2002, work in 
   progress. 
    
   12. Author's Address 
    
   Duncan Mills 
   The Courtyard, 2-4 London Road 
   Newbury 
   Berkshire RG14 1JX 
   Tel: +44 1635 676074 
   e-mail: duncan.mills@vf.vodafone.co.uk 
    
    
   Full Copyright Statement 
    
   "Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2000). All Rights Reserved. 
   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published 
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any 
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph 

Mills                     Expiration 12/10/02                        7 
Internet-Draft       The SIP Access-Network-Info header   June 2002 

   are included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this 
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for 
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be 
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than 
   English.  The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and 
   will not be revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or 
   assigns.  This document and the information contained herein is 
   provided on an "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE 
   INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR 
   IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF 
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED 
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE." 
    







































Mills                     Expiration 12/10/02                        8 