

Network Working Group                                       M. Pelletier
Internet-Draft                                                       ETS
Expires: November 30, 2003                                     June 2003


          SMTP Service Extension for Trust of Reliable Origin
                     draft-pelletier-smtp-trust-01

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at http://
   www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on November 30, 2003.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   This document defines an SMTP service extension [ESMTP] whereby an
   SMTP client may establish a trust relationship with the server
   attesting its confidence in the validity of the originator of a
   message.  This confidence, or its absence, can then be used to
   mitigate the cost of undesirable messages (primarily spam) without
   disrupting operations between, or with, SMTP implementations not
   supporting the extension.









Pelletier              Expires November 30, 2003                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft       SMTP Trust of Reliable Origin             June 2003


1. Introduction

   The problem of undesirable email messages, spam in particular, is
   already well-known and understood.  Several measures have been
   discussed at length in [5] to reduce the impact of spam, with some
   success.

   However, many mail administrators faced with the increasing problem
   of large volumes of undesirable messages have resorted to fairly
   broad measures, such as refusing mail delivery completely for large
   blocks of addresses or from dynamically allocated IP addresses in
   order to curtail the problem.

   In addition of being politically charged, those measures pose a
   difficult technical problem because they tend to generate a great
   deal of false positives.  I.e. they may reject large number of
   legitimate messages because they come from certain addresses which
   have, in the past, generated undesirable messages.

   It would seem the greatest problem in separating legitimate messages
   from spam is the inherent difficulty in attributing the messages to a
   specific originator.

   This memo describes an extension to SMTP that allows increased
   confidence and accuracy in determining who the originator of a
   message is, thus facilitating that separation.

   The primary usefulness of this extension is to supplement other
   countermeasures in place against undesirable messages.  For instance,
   a server that has been configured to, by default, reject mail coming
   from certain ranges of addresses may allow messages when they come
   from a trusted server.

   Additionally, the increased confidence in the identity of the
   originator of a message makes filtering more reliable by reducing the
   impact of forged headers.

   It may be reasonable for a server implementing this extension to
   severely restrict the resources devoted to storing and forwarding
   messages coming from untrusted sources, so that while best-effort can
   still be made to deliver messages from uncertain origins, they can be
   prevented from overloading the server or denying service to
   legitimate messages coming from trusted sources.

   Note, however, that limiting of the volume or rate of messages coming
   from uncertain origins should not be overly restrictive until such
   time as most messages do come from trusted origins.




Pelletier              Expires November 30, 2003                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft       SMTP Trust of Reliable Origin             June 2003


   It is also important to note that it is not appropriate to reject
   messages outright based on the lack of a certain origin.  The
   appropriate way to limit the rate at which such messages are accepted
   is to return temporary failures, so that the sender may retry later.

   The provision for automated marking of originators as undesirable has
   several uses: one could block origins that generate too many messages
   too quickly (more than some configurable ratio over time, say).
   Origins that generate too many erroneous addresses could also be
   blocked automatically since typically, mass mailing lists contain a
   great deal of outdated or inexistent addresses and a legitimate
   sender is unlikely to send very many messages to mailboxes that never
   existed.

   It might also be conceivable to willingly disseminate poisoned
   addresses, so that an origin which attempts to send a message to that
   address can be immediately blocked.

   Widespread adoption of this extension would increase its general
   usefulness, especially for attributing misbehavior to specific
   originators.  While no mechanism can possibly eliminate all cases of
   undesirable messages, the ability to find with greater confidence the
   actual originator of such messages allow for easier and more reliable
   enforcement of policies against them.



























Pelletier              Expires November 30, 2003                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft       SMTP Trust of Reliable Origin             June 2003


2. Conventions Used in this Document

   In examples, "C:" and "S:" indicate lines sent by the client and
   server respectively.

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT" and "MAY" in
   this document are to be interpreted as defined in [1]












































Pelletier              Expires November 30, 2003                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft       SMTP Trust of Reliable Origin             June 2003


3. The Trust of Reliable Origin Service Extension

   1.  the name of the SMTP service extension is "Trust of Reliable
       Origin"

   2.  the EHLO keyword value associated with this extension is "TORO"

   3.  the TORO EHLO keyword contains as a parameter a challenge-string
       used during negotiation.

       To prevent spoofing of the source IP address of the client in
       order to fraudulently establish a trust relationship, the
       challenge-string should be generated randomly for each session in
       a manner that makes it impossible to guess without having
       actually received it.

   4.  a new SMTP verb "TORO" is defined

   5.  an new parameter using the keyword "ORIGIN" is added to the MAIL
       FROM command, and extends the maximum line length of the MAIL
       FROM command by 350 characters.

   6.  this extension is not appropriate for the submission protocol [3]

       That is, it is not appropriate for a client using the submission
       protocol to request establishment of trust, and the TORO EHLO
       keyword must not be presented to such a client.  However, a
       server implementing this extension when forwarding a message
       received with the submission protocol MUST apply the procedure of
       Section 6 to those messages.


3.1 Interaction with the Authentication Service Extension

   While SMTP Authentication [4] is orthogonal with SMTP Trust of
   Reliable Origin, it can be used collaboratively during the process of
   establishing the trust relationship.

   Specifically, if the client has been authenticated, the server MAY
   accept the TORO command regardless of the actual IP address of the
   client or the domain of authority it claims.

   Indeed, the server MAY require authentication before it accepts to
   establish a trust relationship with any or all clients.







Pelletier              Expires November 30, 2003                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft       SMTP Trust of Reliable Origin             June 2003


4. The TORO command

   TORO domain-spec challenge-string

   Arguments:
      a domain-spec identifying the scope of authority claimed by the
      client.
      a challenge-string response identical to the challenge-string
      provided by the server with the TORO EHLO keyword.

   Restrictions:
      No TORO commands may be issued in a session after a TORO command
      has successfully completed, or after a mail transaction has begun
      or has been completed.  A server MUST reject a TORO command with a
      503 reply in those cases.

   Discussion:
      The TORO command indicates that the client claims authority over a
      domain, and wishes to establish a trust relationship with the
      server about the reliability of the origin of messages it wants to
      transmit.

      The server MUST reject the TORO command with a 535 reply if the
      challenge-string argument is not equal to the challenge-string
      provided with the TORO EHLO keyword.

      Unless the client has been previously authenticated by another
      method, (such as in Section 3.1), the server MUST verify the
      domain of authority claimed by the client by matching the source
      IP address of the client with one of the address returned by
      looking up through the DNS for an MX record corresponding to the
      domain-spec argument.  If the lookup fails with no positive or
      negative result, the server MUST reject the TORO command with a
      433 reply. If the lookup returns no result, or the results do not
      match the source IP address of the client, the server MUST reject
      the TORO command with a 535 reply.

      The server MUST NOT accept the TORO command based on looking up A
      or AAAA records through the DNS.

      The server MAY reject the TORO command with a 534 reply if it the
      client is not authenticated and the server has been configured to
      reject trust relationship with this or all clients without
      authentication.

      The server MAY reject the TORO command for any domain of authority
      it has been configured to refuse.  The server MAY be configured to
      reject the command with a 534 reply to avoid disclosing the



Pelletier              Expires November 30, 2003                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft       SMTP Trust of Reliable Origin             June 2003


      explicit refusal, but otherwise MUST reject the command with a 535
      reply.

      The server SHOULD accept a request for establishing a trust
      relationship from a client whose domain of authority is not
      previously known, but has been verified through a DNS lookup.

   Examples:
      S: 220 smtp.example.org ESMTP server ready
      C: EHLO smtp.trusted.org
      S: 250-smtp.example.org
      S: 250 TORO challenge1234567
      C: TORO random.org challenge1234567
      S: 535 You are not authoritative for random.org.
      C: TORO trusted.org challenge1234567
      S: 230 We trust you, trusted.org.

   Commentary:
      By specifying its domain-spec, the client is basically stating "I
      am an official mail exchange for this (sub)domain".  The lookup
      performed by the server for the MX record of that domain simply
      verifies that claim.

      In the case where the address of the MTA for outgoing mail for a
      domain is not also a valid MX for incoming mail, as some
      organizations might configure their mail system, validation can
      still be provided for with an MX for a specific sub-domain.

      For instance, the outgoing MTA of 'foo.net' may claim authority
      over 'outgoing.foo.net' and provide MX records that point back to
      those clients without disrupting the flow of mail to the incoming
      MTA.

      It might be worthwhile to look into using a DNS record type
      distinct from MX for verification of outgoing authority; or indeed
      using a service other than DNS altogether rather than overload it
      with additional semantics.

      There is, for instance, a work-in-progress [6] where such a DNS RR
      is discussed at length; its applicability to this extension is
      clear.  A server MAY use information gathered from alternate
      channels to accept a TORO command, but MUST verify through the MX
      records if no other method yielded positive verification.

      The issue of whether a client's ORIGIN information can be trusted
      or not is distinct, and not addressed by this memo.  Presumably, a
      MTA administrator will maintain a list of untrustworthy clients or
      refer to such a list maintained by other administrators.



Pelletier              Expires November 30, 2003                [Page 7]


      The obvious solution may be to combine verification of authority
      over a domain with relative trust in some globally accessible
      database other than DNS, but this opens up questions about who has
      authority over, and responsibility of, that database as well as
      defining a protocol to make such queries.  This memo does not look
      into those issues.















































Pelletier              Expires November 30, 2003                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft       SMTP Trust of Reliable Origin             June 2003


5. The ORIGIN parameter to the MAIL FROM command

   ORIGIN=identity@domain-spec

   Arguments:
      An identity and domain-spec pair corresponding to the believed
      origin of the message.

   Restrictions:
      The optional ORIGIN parameter to the MAIL FROM command may only be
      issued in a session that has successfully negotiated trust with
      the TORO command. A server MUST reject a MAIL FROM command
      including the ORIGIN parameter with a 503 reply otherwise.

   Discussion:
      The ORIGIN parameter to the MAIL FROM command allows early
      classification (and possible rejection) of the individual
      messages.  It adds to the envelope information, and is retained
      along with the message.

      The server MAY refuse the message immediately at the MAIL FROM
      command based on the value of the ORIGIN parameter if it is
      specified.

      The server MUST NOT refuse the message outright because no ORIGIN
      parameter is specified, but MAY reject it temporarily with a 452
      reply to reduce the number or rate at which such messages may be
      accepted.

      The server MAY reject a message permanently based on other
      criterion, such as other parts of the envelope, or contents
      analysis.  The server MAY then block any message having the same
      origin, but SHOULD NOT do so permanently without human
      intervention.

      The client MUST supply an ORIGIN parameter if it has generated one
      at the original submission.  See Section 6 for details on how and
      when to generate an origin.

      The server SHOULD add the value of a received or generated origin,
      as well as the domain of authority claimed during TORO negotiation
      as comments to trace headers.

      If the client has accepted a message with an ORIGIN parameter
      specified, then the client MUST supply an ORIGIN parameter whose
      value is identical to that received when relaying the message.

      The client MUST NOT supply an ORIGIN parameter if the message



Pelletier              Expires November 30, 2003                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft       SMTP Trust of Reliable Origin             June 2003


      originates outside the domain over which it claims authority and
      has not been received with an ORIGIN parameter.

      The format of the ORIGIN parameter is defined in Section 7.
      Provided that it has been received from a trusted client or has
      been generated by the server itself, it has unambiguous semantics:

      1.  the domain-spec part is the domain who has created the header.
          I.e.: looking up the MX DNS record for the domain-spec will
          return a list of addresses of which one corresponds to the
          server that created the header

      2.  the identity part is opaque, and needs have meaning only to
          the server that created it

      3.  two messages whose "Origin:" header have identical domain-spec
          and identity parts are considered to have the same origin

      4.  conversely, two message who have differing domain-spec or
          identity parts MUST be presumed to have different origins

   Examples:
      C: MAIL FROM:<foo@example.com> ORIGIN=opaquetoken@example.com
      S: 536 We decline to accept that message
      C: MAIL FROM:<bar@other.domain.com>
      S: 452 Quota exceeded for this class of mail; try again later
      C: MAIL FROM:<baz@example.com> ORIGIN=othertoken@example.com
      S: 250 2.1.0 <baz@example.com> sender OK























Pelletier              Expires November 30, 2003               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft       SMTP Trust of Reliable Origin             June 2003


6. Message submission

   Conceptually, an origin is part of the envelope of a message.  It is
   generated when a message is originally submitted to the mail system
   and remains attached to it until it is relayed or delivered.

   If the server can positively identify the client that initially
   submitted the message, then the server MUST attach an origin to the
   message.  The domain-spec part of the origin MUST correspond to the
   domain-spec that server uses when establishing trust with other
   servers.

   If the message is then relayed, then the server SHOULD attempt to
   establish TORO with its peer.  If TORO has been established, then the
   server MUST transmit that origin with an ORIGIN parameter to the MAIL
   FROM command.

   While the identity part of the origin is defined as opaque and having
   meaning only to the server that created it, a server SHOULD attempt
   to insure that a specific user, or identifiable client be given the
   same identity over time and that no two distinct users or clients be
   given the same identity.

   For instance, the server of an Internet Service Provider might
   statically assign a specific identity to the IP addresses associated
   with a dedicated connection, and match dynamically assigned addresses
   with login information of the user it was assigned to in order to
   generate user-specific identity.

   This may prove prohibitive for very large installations where login
   information is unaccessible or expensive to retrieve by the server,
   in which case it is quite permissible for the server to generate an
   identity based on the IP address of the client alone.  While the
   usefulness of such an identity is somewhat diminished for filtering
   purposes, they remain useful at least for post-incident
   identification of the originator.

   The server MUST NOT generate an origin at all unless the client has
   been identified positively either through authentication or by the IP
   address of the client.  An identity based on IP addresses is
   considered positive if and only if it falls within the ranges of
   addresses over which the server claims authority and for which it
   would normally allow relaying.








Pelletier              Expires November 30, 2003               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft       SMTP Trust of Reliable Origin             June 2003


7. Formal Grammar

   The following syntax specification uses the augmented Backus-Naur
   Form (BNF) notation as specified in [2].

   All alphabetic characters are case-insensitive.  The use of upper or
   lower case characters to define token strings is for editorial
   clarity only. Implementations MUST accept these strings in a
   case-insensitive fashion.

   UPALPHA          = %x41-5A

   LOALPHA          = %x61-7A

   ALPHA            = UPALPHA / LOALPHA

   DIGIT            = %x30-39

   PRINTABLE        = %x21-7E

   domain-char      = DIGIT / ALPHA / %x2D

   sub-domain       = 1#(domain-char)

   domain-spec      = sub-domain *("." sub-domain)

   identity-char    = DIGIT / ALPHA / %x21-%2f

   identity         = 1#(identity-char)

   challenge-string = 1#(PRINTABLE)

   toro-command     = "TORO" SPACE domain-spec SPACE challenge-string
   CRLF

   origin-param     = "ORIGIN=" identity "@" domain-spec















Pelletier              Expires November 30, 2003               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft       SMTP Trust of Reliable Origin             June 2003


8. Error Codes

   433 Temporary verification failure

   This response to the TORO command indicates that the attempt to
   establish trust failed due to a temporary server failure, and may be
   retried.

   534 Authentication mechanism is too weak

   This response to the TORO command indicates that trust cannot be
   established under the current authentication.  Either the claimed
   authority domain cannot be verified or the server has been configured
   to require authentication for this or all authority domain.

   535 Authority domain rejected

   This response to the TORO command indicates that the server does not
   recognize the client's claim of authority and refuses to establish a
   trust relationship.

   536 Messages from that origin refused

   This response to the MAIL FROM command indicates that the server has
   been configured to refuse messages from the specified origin.


























Pelletier              Expires November 30, 2003               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft       SMTP Trust of Reliable Origin             June 2003


9. Security Considerations

   Security issues are discussed throughout this memo.

   It is important to note that the concept of trust that this extension
   provides is, by nature, limited.

   Essentially, the extension provides an SMTP client with the
   opportunity to claim that it is authoritative over a certain domain,
   and that messages it will transmit that specify an origin are either
   generated by it, or received from systems it, in turn, believes were
   authoritative.  All it can achieve is increase the confidence in the
   accuracy of the identification of the originator of a message, but
   cannot perform authentication over that identity.

   In order to be truly useful, this system should be supplemented with
   a list of systems that have proven untrustworthy despite their claim.
   This list can be local to the server, maintained by its administrator
   or might be a central directory of untrustworthy systems (possibly
   one of many).

   It is also important to note that the default verification of
   authority through the DNS, combined with the challenge to prevent IP
   spoofing makes it hard, but not impossible, to falsely claim
   authority.

   An open proxy running on an outgoing mail server might also be used
   to establish an SMTP connection, and claim authority.  This is
   obviously a very dangerous practice in general; presumably servers
   who are so configured and abused would quickly find themselves on
   lists of untrustworthy servers and become unable to establish trust.

   Therefore, the information provided by using this extension can be
   used to prioritize allocation of resources to mail distribution, or
   to supplement other methods of detecting and dealing with undesirable
   messages, but must not be used as an authentication or authorization
   mechanism.














Pelletier              Expires November 30, 2003               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft       SMTP Trust of Reliable Origin             June 2003


Normative References

   [1]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
        Levels", RFC 2119, BCP 14, March 1997.

   [2]  Crocker, D. and P. Overell, "Augmented BNF for Syntax
        Specifications: ABNF", RFC 2234, November 1997.

   [3]  Gellens, R. and J. Klensin, "Message Submission", RFC 2476,
        December 1998.

   [4]  Meyers, J., "SMTP Service Extension for Authentication", RFC
        2554, March 1999.






































Pelletier              Expires November 30, 2003               [Page 15]

Internet-Draft       SMTP Trust of Reliable Origin             June 2003


Informative References

   [5]  Lindberg, G., "Anti-Spam Recommendations for SMTP MTAs", RFC
        2505, BCP 30, Febuary 1999.

   [6]  Danish, H., "A DNS RR for simple SMTP sender authentication",
        June 2003, <http://www.ietf.org/internet-drafts/
        draft-danisch-dns-rr-smtp-02.txt>.


Author's Address

   Marc-Andre Pelletier
   Ecole de Technologie Superieure
   40 de l'Anse Bleue
   Montreal, Quebec  H7N 4B1
   CA

   Phone: +1 450 668 2677
   Fax:   +1 450 668 2677
   EMail: marc@ctrl-alt-del.ca






























Pelletier              Expires November 30, 2003               [Page 16]

Internet-Draft       SMTP Trust of Reliable Origin             June 2003


Appendix A. Revision History

   Aug 12, 2003 (01)

   o  Moved the origin information from the message headers to the
      envelope.

   June 30, 2003 (01)

   o  Changed the name of the extension to the more accurate "Trust of
      Reliable Origin"

   o  Added discussion of possible uses of automatic blocking (Section
      1).

   o  Added requirement that the ORIGIN parameter to MAIL FROM be used
      only in a trusted session.

   June 29, 2003 (01)

   o  Clarified methods for checking authority, added a reference to
      possible use of RMX RRs.

   o  Added a caveat about open proxies being used to usurp authority.



























Pelletier              Expires November 30, 2003               [Page 17]

Internet-Draft       SMTP Trust of Reliable Origin             June 2003


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it
   has made any effort to identify any such rights. Information on the
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11. Copies of
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of
   licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to
   obtain a general license or permission for the use of such
   proprietary rights by implementors or users of this specification can
   be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice
   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF Executive
   Director.


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assignees.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION



Pelletier              Expires November 30, 2003               [Page 18]

Internet-Draft       SMTP Trust of Reliable Origin             June 2003


   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Acknowledgement

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.











































Pelletier              Expires November 30, 2003               [Page 19]

