





INTERNET-DRAFT                                           SPIRITS WG
May 2002                                           Vijay K. Gurbani
Expires: November 2002                    Lucent Technologies, Inc.
                                                      Daniel Moreno
                                                     Vodafone Spain
                                                       John Voelker
                                          Lucent Technologies, Inc.


Document: draft-gurbani-spirits-location-00.txt

                       SPIRITS Location Services

STATUS OF THIS MEMO
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

Abstract
   This document describes location- and mobility-related services as
   they are enabled by SPIRITS.  SPIRITS services originate from certain
   actions occurring in the PSTN (wireline and wireless) and involve
   interactions with Internet hosts.  The services described in this
   document pertain to location- and mobility-related events detected by
   the PSTN and reported to an Internet host which requested them for
   subsequent service execution.

1.0 Introduction

   The IETF SPIRITS WG is chartered with investigating how services
   supported by Internet hosts can be started from the Public Switched
   Telephone Network (PSTN).  To that extent, the WG has produced an
   informational RFC [1] which details the SPIRITS architecture.  Other



draft-gurbani-spirits-location-00.txt                          [Page 1]

SPIRITS Location Services.                                      May 2002


   relevant I-Ds to this I-D include the requirements of the SPIRITS
   protocol [2], the SPIRITS protocol itself [3], and mobility event
   management in SPIRITS [4] are under development.

   This document describes location-related services which are made
   possible by SPIRITS.  For the remaining of the discussion in this I-
   D, we will assume that the term "PSTN" encompasses the wireless
   aspects of the circuit-switched network.  Since the currently
   deployed worldwide wireless networks are based on circuit switching,
   they are considered PSTN networks for the SPIRITS purposes. Adding
   SPIRITS type of services to wireless networks can allow novel
   services to be developed.

   In the next section we define location-related events and discuss
   mobility- related events for Internet services.  We note that
   mobility-related events can be considered as a subclass of location-
   related events.  Section 3 provides some examples of services in the
   Internet domain which can be executed based on these events.
   Finally, section 4 identifies security and privacy concerns inherent
   in location services.

2.0 Location services

   Location services report or utilize the geographic location of the
   mobile station (MS).  In typical wireless PSTN networks, a MS is
   associated with several PSTN entities.  The cell site serving the MS
   contains a Mobile Switching Center (MSC), the wireless equivalent of
   a wireline Service Switching Point (SSP).  The MSC is responsible for
   call processing and feature application.  Associated with the MSC is
   a Home Location Register (HLR) and a Visitor Location Register (VLR).
   The HLR contains pertinent information about the user, including
   address, account status and feature preference.  The VLR maintains
   temporary subscriber information (such as current location) to manage
   requests from subscribers who are visiting a foreign cellular
   network.

   Location of a MS can be obtained using Cell of Origin (COO) mobile
   positioning technique to identify a particular cell site that the MS
   is located in. However, since COO is not as precise, it can be
   augmented by other positioning technologies like Global Positioning
   System (GPS), Angle of Arrival (AOA) method, Time of Arrival Method
   (TOA), or a hybrid of any of these technolgies.

   Mobility-management events allow for an Internet host to be notified
   of changes in the location of a MS.  Thus, we will consider these as
   a subset of location-related events.  A mobility-management event
   occurs when a MS enters (or exits) a cell area being served by a
   particular MSC/VLR, or when an International Mobile Subscriber



draft-gurbani-spirits-location-00.txt                          [Page 2]

SPIRITS Location Services.                                      May 2002


   Identity (IMSI) attachment (or detachment) is detected.

3.0 Service examples

   This section contains SPIRITS service examples based on location and
   mobility- related events.  This list is by no means exhaustive, but
   it is representative of such services and serves to catalog the ways
   in which such services are used.  This I-D, in conjunction with [4]
   can be used as input to the SPIRITS protocol [3] for location- and
   mobility-based services.  Readers are assumed to be familiar with
   [1,2,3] since the terms and concepts used in the examples are defined
   therein.

     (1) Short Message Service (SMS) and Instant Messaging: To use SMS
     as a SPIRITS service, an Internet host will subscribe to the
     appropriate DP in the PSTN that gets fired when an SMS event
     occurs.  When the DP does get fired, an Instant Message will be
     sent out to the Internet host using the SIP MESSAGE extension [5].

     (2) Mobility and Presence: A presence based system keeps track of
     presence- related attributes of a set of entities and disseminates
     this information to interested parties.  The presence-related
     attributes may be quite coarse, as in "present", "not present"; or
     they may be fine grained, as in "away for 5 minutes", "away for the
     day", "present, but busy elsewhere", "invisible", etc.  For a
     detailed treatment of presence, the interested reader is referred
     to [7, 8].

     To use presence as a SPIRITS service, an Internet host will
     subscribe to a wireless registration event of a tel URL [9].
     Whenever the wireless phone registers with the PSTN, the Internet
     host will be notified of this event.  The presence system on the
     Internet host can update the presence status of the tel URL in a
     granularity defined by the application service provider.

     (3) Presence/3PCC services: Mobility and presence can be combined
     to provide a "callback" service to a mobile user from an Internet
     host in the following manner: Alice subscribes to the presence
     event of Bob with the intention of establishing a voice
     communication session with B.  When the Internet host associated
     with Alice gets Bob's presence status, it uses SIP 3PCC [6] to
     establish a voice communication session with Bob.

     (4) Location-notification services: Many SPIRITS services can be
     triggered based on the location of a mobile station.  For instance,
     a mobility event can be generated under all of the following
     conditions:




draft-gurbani-spirits-location-00.txt                          [Page 3]

SPIRITS Location Services.                                      May 2002


             (a) Location update in the same VLR service area
             (b) Location update in another VLR service area
             (c) IMSI attach
             (d) MS-initiated IMSI detach
             (e) Network-initiated IMSI detach

     Every time such a mobility event occurs, an Internet host can be
     notified.  Some examples of SPIRITS services based on these events
     include:

          (a) Sending an Instant Message to an Internet host informing
          it of the location of the MS.  This is extremely useful for
          tracking services, such as tracking the location of a delivery
          truck.

          (b) Updating geo-location presence status; for example, Alice
          is expecting Bob to arrive at her office for a conference.  To
          that extent, she has subscribed to events in the wireless
          network that track Bob's MS as he travels towards Alice's
          office.  When Alice notices that Bob is a short distance away
          from her office, she prepares to meet him at the front door.

          (c) Reporting the identity of every MS entering and leaving a
          service area.

          (d) Periodically receiving a count of MS entering and leaving
          a particular specified geographic area.

4.0 Security considerations

   Security and privacy concerns for SPIRITS related services are
   provided in [2,4].  This I-D does not present any other security
   threats besides those enumerated in [2,4].

AUTHORS' ADDRESSES

   Vijay K. Gurbani                           John Voelker
   Lucent Technologies, Inc.                  Lucent Technologies, Inc.
   2000 Lucent Lane, Rm 6G-440                2000 Lucent Lane, Rm 2A-318
   Naperville, Illinois 60566                 Naperville, Illinois 60566
   vkg@lucent.com                             jvoelker@lucent.com

   Daniel Moreno Buendia
   Vodafone Spain
   C/ Trespaderne, 29
   Barajas-1 Building, 1st Floor
   28042 MADRID
   SPAIN



draft-gurbani-spirits-location-00.txt                          [Page 4]

SPIRITS Location Services.                                      May 2002


   dmoreno@airtel.es


ACRONYMS

      AOA           Angle of Arrival
      COO           Cell of Origin
      GPS           Global Positioning System
      HLR           Home Location Register
      IMSI          International Mobile Subscriber Identity
      MS            Mobile Station
      MSC           Mobile Switching Center
      SMS           Short Message Service
      SPIRITS       Services in the PSTN/IN Requesting InTernet Services
      SSP           Service Switching Point
      TOA           Time of Arrival
      VLR           Visitor Location Register

Normative References:
   [1]  L. Slutsman (Ed.), I. Faynberg, H-L. Lu, and M. Weissman, "The
        SPIRITS Architecture", IETF RFC 3136, June 2001,
        <http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc3136.txt>

   [2]  I. Faynberg (Ed.), J. Gato, H-L. Lu, L. Slutsman, "SPIRITS
        Protocol Requirements", IETF Internet-Draft, Expires August
        2002, Work in Progress,
        <http://www.ietf.org/internet-drafts/draft-ietf-spirits-reqs-
        04.txt>

   [3]  V. Gurbani (Ed.), A. Brusilovsky, I. Faynberg, H-L. Lu, M.
        Unmehopa, K. Vemuri, and J. Gato, "The SPIRITS Protocol",
        IETF Internet-Draft, Expires October 2002, Work in Progress,
        <http://www.ietf.org/internet-drafts/draft-ietf-spirits-
        protocol-01.txt>

   [4]  D. Moreno, "Mobility Event Management in SPIRITS", IETF
        Internet-Draft, Expires October 2002, Work in Progress,
        <http://www.ietf.org/internet-drafts/draft-ietf-spirits-
        mobility-00.txt>

   [5]  B. Campbell, J. Rosenberg, H. Schulzrinne, C. Huitema, and D.
        Gurle, "Session Initiation Protocol Extension for Instant
        Messaging", IETF Internet-Draft, Expires November 2002,
        Work in Progress. <http://www.ietf.org/internet-drafts/draft-
        ietf-sip-message-04.txt>

   [6]  J. Rosenberg, J. Peterson, H. Schulzrinne, and G. Camarillo,
        "Best Current Practices for Third Party Call Control in the



draft-gurbani-spirits-location-00.txt                          [Page 5]

SPIRITS Location Services.                                      May 2002


        Session Initiation Protocol", IETF Internet-Draft, Expires
        November 2002, Work in Progress.
        <http://www.ietf.org/internet-drafts/draft-ietf-sipping-
        3pcc-00.txt>

Informative References

   [7]  M. Day, J. Rosenberg, and H. Sugano, "A Model for Presence
        and Instant Messaging", IETF RFC 2778, February 2000.
        <http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2778.txt>

   [8]  J. Rosenberg, D. Willis, R. Sparks, B. Campbell, H. Schulzrinne,
        J. Lennox, C. Huitema, B. Aboba, D. Gurle, and D. Oran,
        "Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) Extensions for Presence",
        IETF Internet-Draft, Expires October 2002, Work in Progress.
        <http://www.ietf.org/internet-drafts/draft-ietf-simple-
        presence-06.txt>

   [9]  A. Vaha-Sipila, "URLs for Telephone Calls", IETF RFC 2806,
        April 2000, <http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2806.txt>

FULL COPYRIGHT STATEMENT

   "Copyright (C) The Internet Society (date). All Rights Reserved. This
   document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into followed, or as
   required to translate it into languages other than English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.




draft-gurbani-spirits-location-00.txt                          [Page 6]
