

dna                                                          S. Yamamoto
Internet-Draft                                               C. Williams
Expires: August 9, 2004                                    KDDI Labs USA
                                                                G. Daley
                                                  Monash University CTIE
                                                        M. Parthasarathy
                                                        February 9, 2004


                Detecting Network Attachment Terminology
                     draft-yamamoto-dna-term-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at http://
   www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 9, 2004.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004). All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   The DNA working group is working on solutions for hosts to detect
   their IP layer connectivity and configuration status quickly which in
   turn would allow it to reconfigure the IP link faster than today.
   This document aims at providing definitions for key terms used by the
   group.







Yamamoto, et al.         Expires August 9, 2004                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft    Detecting Network Attachment Terminology February 2004


Table of Contents

   1. Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2. Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   3. Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   4. Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
      Normative references . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
      Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
      Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
      Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . 6









































Yamamoto, et al.         Expires August 9, 2004                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft    Detecting Network Attachment Terminology February 2004


1. Introduction

   Hosts need link-layer connectivity and correct IP layer configuration
   for sending and receiving packets.  When a node suspects that
   link-layer connectivity has undergone change, it needs to check
   whether its IP layer connectivity or configuration are still valid.
   The DNA working group is working on solutions to detect IP layer
   connectivity changes and re-configures the IP configuration quickly.
   This document defines the key terms used by the group.

2. Terminology

   The following terminology is presented to describe components that
   are required for reliable detection of network attachment.

   Link Instance: A domain where all connected hosts may be reached
      through local broadcast or all-nodes multicast transmission.

   Neighbor: A host or router on the same link-instance as the node.

   Internet Connectivity: A state where a host can maintain
      communications with arbitrary destinations on the Internet.

   Network Attachment: An event subsequent to link-layer connection
      occurs when a host is able to send and receive some IP datagrams
      (particularly for configuration purposes) within a link-instance.

   IP Subnet: A range of addresses that share a common global prefix.

   Full Reachability: Also called Bi-directional Reachability. A
      neighbor is supposed to be fully reachable if one can both send
      and receive packets.

   IP link: A communication facility or medium over which nodes can
      communicate at the link layer.

   Partial Reachability Evidence that a host is within transmission or
      reception range of a neighbor.  Reachability state is assumed to
      be available if a host receives advertisements from or data
      through the neighbor in question.

   Link Hint: f An indication from the link-layer to the IP layer that a
      change in link state may have occurred.  These hints, while not
      considered authoritative for IP configuration, but can be used to
      initiate reachability checks or start to inquire about network
      information.





Yamamoto, et al.         Expires August 9, 2004                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft    Detecting Network Attachment Terminology February 2004



   Eager Configuration Switching: An algorithm by which systems eagerly
      perform configuration signaling, without checking reachability of
      their neighbors or routers.  Note that these systems may cause
      excessive configuration and signaling in some network topologies.

   Lazy Configuration Switching: An algorithm by which systems check
      reachability with its currently configured routers before
      undertaking configuration signaling.  Most reachability checks
      take some time to determine a neighbor's absence, which will cause
      delays to configuration in lazy systems.

   Change Detection Evidence that the IP configuration on a link has
      changed, and that the host's IP address, routes, MLD groups or
      other data that may require updating.

   Link Information Parameters: Link Information Parameters are defined
      in the context of DNA as signal strength, signal quality and
      throughput.

3. Security Considerations

   This document presents only terminology.  There are no security
   issues in this document.

4. Acknowledgments

   Thanks to participants within the DNA BOF whose emails and input help
   craft the terminology in this document.

Normative references

   [1]  Johnson, D., Perkins, C. and J. Arkko, "Mobility Support in
        IPv6", draft-ietf-mobileip-ipv6-24.txt Work In Progress, June
        2003.

Informative References

   [2]  Manner, J. and M. Kojo, "Mobility Related Terminology",
        draft-ietf-seamoby-mobility-terminology-05.txt Work In Progress,
        , November 2003.










Yamamoto, et al.         Expires August 9, 2004                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft    Detecting Network Attachment Terminology February 2004


Authors' Addresses

   Shu Yamamoto
   KDDI Labs USA
   Palo Alto  94301
   United States

   Phone: +650.566.8165
   EMail: shu@kddilabs.com


   Carl Williams
   KDDI Labs USA
   Palo Alto, CA 94301
   USA

   Phone: +1.650.279.5903
   EMail: carlw@kddilabs.com


   Greg Daley
   Monash University CTIE
   Department of Electrical and Computer Systems Engineering


   Phone:
   EMail: greg.daley@eng.monash.edu.au


   Mohan Parthasarathy
   Palo Alto, CA  95015
   United States

   EMail: mohanp@sbcglobal.net

















Yamamoto, et al.         Expires August 9, 2004                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft    Detecting Network Attachment Terminology February 2004


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it
   has made any effort to identify any such rights. Information on the
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11. Copies of
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of
   licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to
   obtain a general license or permission for the use of such
   proprietary rights by implementors or users of this specification can
   be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice
   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF Executive
   Director.


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004). All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assignees.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION



Yamamoto, et al.         Expires August 9, 2004                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft    Detecting Network Attachment Terminology February 2004


   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.











































Yamamoto, et al.         Expires August 9, 2004                 [Page 7]


