



Network Working Group                                         R. Housley
Internet-Draft                                            Vigil Security
Intended status: Standards Track                                R. Droms
Expires: April 2, 2018                              Interisle Consulting
                                                      September 29, 2017


     TLS 1.3 Option for Negotiation of Visibility in the Datacenter
                   draft-rhrd-tls-tls13-visibility-00

Abstract

   Current drafts of TLS 1.3 do not include the use of the RSA
   handshake.  While (EC) Diffie-Hellman is in nearly all ways an
   improvement over the TLS RSA handshake, the use of (EC)DH has impacts
   certain enterprise network operational requirements.  The TLS
   Visibility Extension addresses one of the impacts of (EC)DH through
   an opt-in mechanism that allows a TLS client and server to explicitly
   grant access to the TLS session plaintext.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 2, 2018.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2017 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must



Housley & Droms           Expires April 2, 2018                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft      Option for TLS 1.3 in Datacenter      September 2017


   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

1.  Introduction

   Unlike earlier versions of TLS, current drafts of TLS 1.3
   [I-D.ietf-tls-tls13] do not provide support for the RSA handshake --
   and have instead adopted ephemeral-mode Diffie-Hellman (DHE) and
   elliptic-curve Diffie-Hellman (ECDHE) as the primary cryptographic
   key exchange mechanism used in TLS.

   While ephemeral (EC) Diffie-Hellman is in nearly all ways an
   improvement over the TLS RSA handshake, the use of these mechanisms
   has impacts on certain enterprise operational requirements.
   Specifically, the use of ephemeral ciphersuites prevents the use of
   current enterprise network monitoring tools such as Intrusion
   Detection Systems (IDS) and application monitoring systems, which
   leverage the current TLS RSA handshake to passively decrypt and
   monitor intranet TLS connections made between endpoints under the
   enterprise's control.  This traffic includes TLS connections made
   from enterprise network security devices (firewalls) and load
   balancers at the edge of the enterprise network to internal
   enterprise TLS servers.  It does not include TLS connections
   traveling over the external Internet.

   Such monitoring of the enterprise network is ubiquitous and
   indispensable in some industries, and is required for effective and
   safe operation of their enterprise networks.  Loss of this capability
   may slow adoption of TLS 1.3 or force enterprises to continue to use
   outdated and potentially vulnerable technology.

   The TLS Visibility Extension provides an option to enable visibility
   into a TLS 1.3 session by an authorized third party.  Use of the
   extension requires opt-in by the TLS client when it initiates a TLS
   1.3 session.  The TLS server then opts-in by including keying
   material that will enable decryption in the TLS Visibility Extension.
   The presence of the TLS Visibility Extension provides a clear
   indication that other parties have been granted access to the TLS
   session plaintext.  The keying material in the TLS Visibility
   Extension is encrypted and can only be decrypted by authorized
   parties that have been given the private key from a managed Diffie-
   Hellman key pair.








Housley & Droms           Expires April 2, 2018                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft      Option for TLS 1.3 in Datacenter      September 2017


2.  Terminology

   Two key pairs are used with the TLS Visibility Extension for
   encryption of the session secrets:

   SSWrapDH1:  generated externally and the public key is provided to
      the TLS 1.3 server prior to use of the TLS Visibility Extension;
      the corresponding private key is provided to the parties that are
      authorized to access the TLS session plaintext.

   SSWrapDH2:  an ephemeral key pair that is generated by the TLS 1.3
      server for each TLS 1.3 session that uses the TLS Visibility
      Extension; the server keeps the private key confidential, and
      passes the public key to the other parties in the TLS Visibility
      session.

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].

3.  Extension Overview

   Prior to the use of the TLS Visibility Extension, the SSWrapDH1 key
   pair is generated, possibly by an enterprise key manager.  The
   private key is passed to the parties that are authorized to access
   the TLS session plaintext.  The server is provisioned with the public
   key.  When a new TLS 1.3 session is initiated, the client includes an
   empty TLS Visibility Extension in the ClientHello.  The server then
   generates a SSWrapDH2 ephemeral key pair.  The server will then:

   o  Generate a key, Ke, from the SSWrapDH1 public key and the
      SSWrapDH2 private key.

   o  Encrypt the TLS 1.3 session Early Secret (if one exists) and
      Handshake Secret (session secret) using Ke.

   o  Send an identifier for the SSWrapDH1 public key (called the
      fingerprint), the SSWrapDH2 public key, and the encrypted session
      secrets in the TLS Visibility Extension in the ServerHello
      message.

   To decrypt the TLS 1.3 session, a party that is authorized to access
   the TLS session plaintext must be given the SSWrapDH1 private key.
   The party then:

   o  Obtains the SSWrapDH1 public key from the TLS Visibility extension





Housley & Droms           Expires April 2, 2018                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft      Option for TLS 1.3 in Datacenter      September 2017


   o  Uses the SSHWrapDH1 private key and the SSWrapDH2 public key to
      generate Ke

   o  Uses Ke to decrypt the session secrets carried in the TLS
      Visibility extension

   o  Uses the session secrets to derive the keying material needed
      decrypt the TLS 1.3 session

4.  TLS Visibility Extension

   This section specifies the "tls_visibility" extension, which is
   carried in the ClientHello message and the ServerHello message.

   The general extension mechanisms enable clients and servers to
   negotiate the use of specific extensions.  As specified in
   [I-D.ietf-tls-tls13], clients request extended functionality from
   servers with the extensions field in the ClientHello message.  If the
   server responds HelloRetryRequest, then the client sends another
   ClientHello message that includes the same extensions field as the
   original ClientHello message.

   Most server extensions are carried in the EncryptedExtensions
   message; however, the "tls_visibility" extension is carried in the
   ServerHello message in a manner similar to the "key_share" and
   "pre_shared_key" extensions.  It is only present in the ServerHello
   message if the server wants to enable TLS Visibility for some other
   parties and the client has offered the "tls_visibility" extension in
   the ClientHello message.

   The "tls_visibility" extension MAY appear in the CH (ClientHello
   message) and SH (ServerHello message).  It MUST NOT appear in any
   other messages.  The "tls_visibility" extension MUST NOT appear in
   the ServerHello message unless "tls_visibility" extension appeared in
   the preceding ClientHello message.  If an implementation recognizes
   the "tls_visibility" extension and receives it in any other message,
   then the implementation MUST abort the handshake with an
   "illegal_parameter" alert.

   The Extension structure is defined in [I-D.ietf-tls-tls13]; it is
   repeated here for convenience.

     struct {
         ExtensionType extension_type;
         opaque extension_data<0..2^16-1>;
     } Extension;





Housley & Droms           Expires April 2, 2018                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft      Option for TLS 1.3 in Datacenter      September 2017


   The "extension_type" identifies the particular extension type, and
   the "extension_data" contains information specific to the particular
   extension type.

   This document specifies the "tls_visibility" extension type, adding
   one new type to ExtensionType:


     enum {
         tls_visibility(TBD), (65535)
     } ExtensionType;


   The "tls_visibility" extension is relevant when the client and server
   choose to enable one or more other parties to decrypt the TLS
   session.

   Clients MUST include the "tls_visibility" extension in the
   ClientHello message to indicate their willingness for other parties
   to decrypt the TLS session.  The server responds with data that
   enables the other parties to derive the keying material needed to
   decrypt the session if they are in possession of the indicated ECDH
   private key.


     struct {
         select (Handshake.msg_type) {
             case client_hello:  Empty;
             case server_hello:  WrappedSessionSecrets visibility_data;
         };
     } TLSVisibilityExtension;

     struct {
         opaque early_secret<1..255>;
         opaque hs_secret<1..255>;
     } SessionSecrets;

     struct {
         opaque fingerprint<20>;
         opaque key_exchange<1..2^16-1>;
         opaque wrapped_secrets<1..2^16-1>;
     } WrappedSessionSecrets;


   The fields in WrappedSessionSecrets are used as follows:

   o  "fingerprint" contains the leftmost 20 octets of the SHA-256 hash
      of SSWrapDH1 public key that was used by the server to compute the



Housley & Droms           Expires April 2, 2018                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft      Option for TLS 1.3 in Datacenter      September 2017


      session secret wrapping key.  The public key is DER-encoded in the
      SubjectPublicKeyInfo [RFC5280] for the SHA-256 hash computation.
      The key manager tells the server which AEAD algorithm to use with
      this SSWrapDH1 public key at the time it is distributed.

   o  "key_exchange" contains the SSWrapDH2 ephemeral public key
      generated by the server on the same elliptic curve as the
      SSWrapDH1 public key identified by the "fingerprint".  The server
      uses the SSWrapDH2 ephemeral private key and the SSWrapDH1 public
      key identified by the "fingerprint" to compute a shared secret
      value, called Z, and then uses HKDF [RFC5869] to produce the
      session secret wrapping key, called Ke, and an AEAD nonce, if one
      is needed buy the AEAD algorithm.  For example, AES-KEY-WRAP-256
      [RFC5649] does not require a nonce, but AES-GCM-128 [GCM] does
      require a nonce.  Ke is computed as follows:


         PRK = HKDF-Extract(0x00, Z)
         Ke = HKDF-Expand(PRK, "tls_vis_key", AEAD_key_size)
         nonce = HKDF-Expand(PRK, "tls_vis_nonce", AEAD_nonce_size)


   o  "wrapped_secrets" contains the SessionSecrets structure encrypted
      with the AEAD algorithm under Ke.

   The fields in SessionSecrets are used as follows:

   o  "early_secret" contains the Early Secret that was derived from the
      pre-shared key.  If this session did not use a pre-shared key,
      then the Early Secret is HKDF-Extract(0, 0).

   o  "hs_secret" contains the handshake key that was computed using
      (EC)DHE.

5.  Alternative Approaches

   This section captures the rationale for pursuing this approach to TLS
   visibility instead of the various alternative approaches.

   Server uses a static Diffie-Hellman key pair:  Instead of generating
      ephemeral Diffie-Hellman key pairs, the server reuses a static
      Diffie-Hellman key pair.  The static private Diffie-Hellman key
      gets shared with the points that need visibility.  While this
      approach scales, the TLS client is unaware of the sharing.  In
      addition, this enables visibility of data of all clients
      communicating with the server, versus only those that opt-in to
      visibility.




Housley & Droms           Expires April 2, 2018                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft      Option for TLS 1.3 in Datacenter      September 2017


   Export of ephemeral keys:  In large enterprises there will be
      billions of ephemeral keys to export and distribute.  Transporting
      these keys to tools for decryption of packets in real time will be
      difficult, adding greatly to the complexity of the solution.

   Export of decrypted traffic from TLS proxy devices:  Decrypting
      traffic only at the edge of the enterprise datacenter does not
      meet all of the enterprise requirements, which include
      troubleshooting, fraud detection, and network security monitoring.
      Further, the number of TLS proxies needed are quite costly, add
      latency, and increase production risk.

   Continue to use TLS 1.2 within the enterprise network:  TLS 1.2 could
      be used within the enterprise network (with TLS 1.3 outside) to
      enable TLS visibility via RSA key transport.  However, TLS 1.3 has
      security improvements over TLS 1.2.  At some point in the future,
      TLS 1.2 will not longer be supported and available in enterprise
      applications and protocol implementations.  In addition, based on
      experience, standards bodies will deprecate the use of TLS 1.2 and
      require enterprise networks to move to TLS 1.3.

   Reliance on TCP/IP headers:  TCP and IP headers are not adequate for
      enterprise requirements.  Troubleshooting, fraud detection, and
      network security monitoring need access to the plaintext payload.
      For example, troubleshooters must be able to find specific
      transactions, user identifiers, session identifiers, URLs, and
      time stamps.

   Reliance on application and server logs:  Logging is not adequate for
      enterprise requirements.  Code developers cannot anticipate every
      possible problem for logging, and system administrators turn much
      of the logging off to conserve system resources.

   Troubleshooting and malware analysis at the endpoint:  Endpoints are
      focused on providing a service, and they cannot handle the
      additional burden of the various enterprise monitoring
      requirements.

   Adding TCP/UDP extensions:  An important part of troubleshooting,
      network security monitoring, etc. is analysis of the application-
      specific payload of the packet.  It is not possible to anticipate
      ahead of time, among thousands of unique applications, which
      fields in the application payload will be important.








Housley & Droms           Expires April 2, 2018                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft      Option for TLS 1.3 in Datacenter      September 2017


6.  IANA Considerations

   IANA is requested to update the TLS ExtensionType Registry to include
   "tls_visibility" with a value of [TBD] and the list of messages "CH,
   SH" in which the "tls_visibility" extension may appear.

7.  Security Considerations

   The use of a TLS protocol extension ensures that both the TLS client
   and the TLS server are aware that other parties have visibility into
   the TLS session plaintext.  However, the approach used here does not
   allow those parties to masquerade since they do not have the ability
   to sign the Finished message in the TLS handshake.

   Use of the TLS Visibility extension represents a deliberate
   introduction by the client and server of other parties that can
   access the TLS session plaintext.  Deployments that choose to make
   use of this extension should carefully consider the risks associated
   with the change to the Forward Secrecy.  In particular, Forward
   Secrecy will not begin for sessions where the TLS Visibility
   Extension is used until all of these events take place:

   (1)  The server has securely discarded the session secrets.

   (2)  The server has securely discarded the session secret wrapping
        key.

   (3)  The client has securely discarded the session secrets.

   (4)  The other parties have securely discarded the session secrets.

   (5)  The other parties have securely discarded the session secret
        wrapping key.

   (6)  The other parties have securely discarded the ECDHE private key
        that was used to derive the session secret wrapping key.

   The SSWrapDH1 and SSWrapDH2 key size and parameters MUST be selected
   to provide the same level (or more) of security as the (EC)DHE key
   used in the TLS Handshake.  Similarly, the Sessions Secret Wrapping
   key size and algorithm MUST be selected to provide the same level (or
   more) of security as the AEAD cipher used with the TLS Record
   protocol.  If weaker key sizes, parameters or algorithms are used,
   the attacker will find it easier to obtain the session secrets from
   the TLS Visibility extension.






Housley & Droms           Expires April 2, 2018                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft      Option for TLS 1.3 in Datacenter      September 2017


8.  Acknowledgments

   Matthew Green was the primary author of
   [I-D.green-tls-static-dh-in-tls13], which describes an earlier
   solution to the TLS 1.3 session visibility problem.  Nick Sullivan
   and Richard Barnes suggested the use of client and server opt-in.
   Peter Wu suggested the use of HKDF-Expand to get a nonce.  Nalini
   Elkins, Steven Fenter, Sinok Lao, Andrew Kennedy, Darin Pettis, Tim
   Polk, Andrew Regenscheid, Murugiah Souppaya, and Paul Turner
   contributed through discussion to the development of this document.

9.  References

9.1.  Normative References

   [I-D.ietf-tls-tls13]
              Rescorla, E., "The Transport Layer Security (TLS) Protocol
              Version 1.3", draft-ietf-tls-tls13-21 (work in progress),
              July 2017.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.

   [RFC5280]  Cooper, D., Santesson, S., Farrell, S., Boeyen, S.,
              Housley, R., and W. Polk, "Internet X.509 Public Key
              Infrastructure Certificate and Certificate Revocation List
              (CRL) Profile", RFC 5280, DOI 10.17487/RFC5280, May 2008,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5280>.

   [RFC5869]  Krawczyk, H. and P. Eronen, "HMAC-based Extract-and-Expand
              Key Derivation Function (HKDF)", RFC 5869,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC5869, May 2010,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5869>.

9.2.  Informative References

   [GCM]      McGrew, D. and J. Viega, "The Galois/Counter Mode of
              Operation (GCM)", January 2004.

              Submission to NIST.
              <http://csrc.nist.gov/CryptoToolkit/modes/proposedmodes/
              gcm/gcm-spec.pdf>







Housley & Droms           Expires April 2, 2018                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft      Option for TLS 1.3 in Datacenter      September 2017


   [I-D.green-tls-static-dh-in-tls13]
              Green, M., Droms, R., Housley, R., Turner, P., and S.
              Fenter, "Data Center use of Static Diffie-Hellman in TLS
              1.3", draft-green-tls-static-dh-in-tls13-01 (work in
              progress), July 2017.

   [RFC5649]  Housley, R. and M. Dworkin, "Advanced Encryption Standard
              (AES) Key Wrap with Padding Algorithm", RFC 5649,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC5649, September 2009,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5649>.

Authors' Addresses

   Russ Housley
   Vigil Security
   918 Spring Knoll Drive
   Herndon, VA  20170
   USA

   Email: housley@vigilsec.com


   Ralph Droms
   Interisle Consulting

   Email: rdroms.ietf@gmail.com

























Housley & Droms           Expires April 2, 2018                [Page 10]
