



Network Working Group                                      M. Nottingham
Internet-Draft                                           9 February 2022
Intended status: Informational                                          
Expires: 13 August 2022


                 Centralization and Internet Standards
          draft-nottingham-avoiding-internet-centralization-02

Abstract

   Despite being designed and operated as a decentralized network-of-
   networks, the Internet is continuously subjected to forces that
   encourage centralization.

   This document offers a definition of centralization, explains why it
   is undesirable, identifies different types of centralization,
   catalogues limitations of common approaches to controlling it, and
   explores what Internet standards efforts can do to address it.

About This Document

   This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.

   Status information for this document may be found at
   https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-nottingham-avoiding-internet-
   centralization/.

   Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
   https://github.com/mnot/avoiding-internet-centralization.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 13 August 2022.




Nottingham               Expires 13 August 2022                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft    Centralization and Internet Standards    February 2022


Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2022 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  What is Centralization  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  Why Avoid Centralization  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   4.  Kinds of Centralization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     4.1.  Direct Centralization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     4.2.  Necessary Centralization  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     4.3.  Indirect Centralization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     4.4.  Inherited Centralization  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     4.5.  Platform Centralization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   5.  The Limits of Decentralization  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
     5.1.  Federation isn't Enough . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
     5.2.  Multi-Stakeholder Administration is Hard  . . . . . . . .  11
     5.3.  Blockchains Are Not Magical . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   6.  What Should Internet Standards Do?  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
     6.1.  Be Realistic  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
     6.2.  Decentralize Proprietary Functions  . . . . . . . . . . .  15
     6.3.  Build Well-Balanced Standards . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
     6.4.  Limit Intermediary Power  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
     6.5.  Avoid Over-Extensibility  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  18
   7.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  18
   8.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  18
   Appendix A.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  21
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  21

1.  Introduction

   The Internet has succeeded in no small part because of its purposeful
   avoidance of any single controlling entity.  While this approach may
   reflect a desire to prevent a single technical failure from having
   wide impact [RAND]. it has also enabled the Internet's rapid adoption
   and broad spread, because internetworking did not require networks to
   get permission from or cede control to another entity -- thereby



Nottingham               Expires 13 August 2022                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft    Centralization and Internet Standards    February 2022


   accommodating a spectrum of requirements and positioning the Internet
   as a public good.

   While avoiding centralization is a widely shared goal for the
   Internet, achieving it has proven difficult.  Many successful
   protocols and applications on the Internet today work in a
   centralized fashion -- to the point where some proprietary,
   centralized services have become so well-known that they are commonly
   mistaken for the Internet itself.  Even when protocols incorporate
   techniques intended to prevent centralization, economic and social
   factors can drive users to prefer centralized solutions built with or
   on top of supposedly decentralized technology.

   These difficulties call into question what role architectural
   regulation -- in particular, open standards bodies such as the IETF
   -- should play in preventing, mitigating, and controlling Internet
   centralization.

   This document discusses aspects of centralization that relate to
   Internet standards efforts.  Section 2 provides a definition of
   centralization.  Section 3 explains why centralization of the
   Internet's functions is undesirable.  Section 4 surveys the different
   kinds of centralization that might surface on the Internet.
   Section 5 then catalogues high-level approaches to mitigating
   centralization and discusses their limitations.  Finally, Section 6
   considers the role that Internet standards play in avoiding
   centralization and mitigating its effects.

   Engineers who design and standardize Internet protocols are the
   primary audience for this document.  However, designers of
   proprietary protocols can benefit from considering aspects of
   centralization, especially if they intend their protocol to be
   considered for eventual standardisation.  Likewise, policymakers can
   use this document to help identify and remedy inappropriately
   centralized protocols and applications.

2.  What is Centralization

   This document defines "centralization" as the ability of a single
   entity (e.g., a person, company, or government) -- or a small group
   of them -- to exclusively observe, capture, control, or extract rent
   from the operation or use of a Internet function.

   Here, "Internet function" is defined broadly.  It might be an
   enabling protocol already defined by standards, such as IP [RFC791],
   BGP [RFC4271], TCP [RFC793], or HTTP [HTTP].  It might also be a
   proposal for a new enabling protocol, or an extension to an existing
   one.



Nottingham               Expires 13 August 2022                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft    Centralization and Internet Standards    February 2022


   However, the Internet's functions are not limited to standards-
   defined protocols.  User-visible applications built on top of
   standard protocols are also vulnerable to centralization -- for
   example, social networking, file sharing, financial services, and
   news dissemination.  Likewise, the supply of underlying networking
   equipment, hardware, operating systems, and software can exhibit
   centralization that affects the Internet.

   Centralization risk is strongest when it affects the entire Internet.
   However, it can also be present when a substantial portion of the
   Internet's users lack options for a function.  For example, if there
   is only one provider for a function in a region or legal
   jurisdiction, that function is effectively centralized for those
   users.

   "Decentralization" is the process of identifying centralization risk
   in the functions of a protocol or application, followed by the
   application of techniques used to prevent or mitigate centralization.

   Decentralization does not require that a function need be so widely
   distributed that other important factors are sacrificed.  Because the
   same network effects that cause centralization can also deliver
   benefits (such as improvements in efficiency, resiliency, latency,
   and availability; see Section 6.4 for further discussion), the
   appropriate amount of decentralization for a function might vary,
   with the optimal balance being determined by many factors.  A
   function that is only available through a relatively small number of
   providers can still be effectively decentralized (see, for example,
   the Domain Name System [RFC1035]).

   Therefore, discussions of centralization and architectural efforts at
   decentralization need to be made on a case-by-base basis, depending
   on the function in question, surrounding circumstances, and other
   regulatory mechanisms.

   Note that it is important to distinguish centralization from anti-
   competitive concerns (also known as "anti-trust").  While there are
   many interactions between them and making the Internet more
   competitive may be a motivation for avoiding centralization, only
   courts are authoritative in determining what is and is not anti-
   competitive in a defined market, not standards bodies and other
   technical fora.









Nottingham               Expires 13 August 2022                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft    Centralization and Internet Standards    February 2022


3.  Why Avoid Centralization

   Centralization is undesirable because it is counter to the Internet's
   nature, because it violates the end users' expectations, and because
   of the many negative effects it can have on the network's operation
   and evolution.

   First, the Internet's very nature is incompatible with centralization
   of its functions.  As a "large, heterogeneous collection of
   interconnected systems" [BCP95] the Internet is often characterised
   as a "network of networks".  These networks relate as peers who agree
   to facilitate communication, rather than having a relationship of
   subservience to others' requirements or coercion by them.  This focus
   on independence of action carries through the way the network is
   architected -- for example, in the concept of an "autonomous system".

   Second, as the Internet's first duty is to the end user [RFC8890],
   allowing such power to be concentrated into few hands is counter to
   the IETF's mission of creating an Internet that "will help us to
   build a better human society."  [BCP95] When a third party has
   unavoidable access to communications, the "informational and
   positional advantages" [INTERMEDIARY-INFLUENCE] gained can be used to
   observe behavior (the "panopticon effect") and shape or even deny
   behaviour (the "chokepoint effect") -- which can be used by those
   parties (or the states that have authority over them) for coercive
   ends.  [WEAPONIZED-INTERDEPENDENCE]

   Finally, concentration of power has deleterious effects on the
   Internet itself, including:

   *  _Limiting Innovation_: Centralization can preclude the possibility
      of "permissionless innovation" -- the ability to deploy new,
      unforeseen applications without requiring coordination with
      parties other than those you are communicating with.

   *  _Constraining Competition_: The Internet and its users benefit
      from robust competition when applications and services are
      available from many providers -- especially when those users can
      build their own applications and services based upon interoperable
      standards.  When functions form dependencies on a centralized
      service or platform because no substitutes are suitable, it
      effectively becomes an essential facility, which encourages abuse
      of power.








Nottingham               Expires 13 August 2022                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft    Centralization and Internet Standards    February 2022


   *  _Reducing Availability_: The Internet's availability (as well as
      applications and services built upon it) improves when there are
      many ways to obtain access to it.  While centralized services
      typically benefit from the focused attention that their elevated
      role requires, when they fail, the resulting loss of availability
      can have a disproportionate impact.

   *  _Creating Monoculture_: The scale available to a centralized
      service or application can magnify minor flaws in features such as
      recommendation algorithms to a degree that can have broad (even
      societal) consequences.  Diversity in these functions'
      implementation is significantly more robust when viewed
      systemically.  [POLYCENTRIC]

   *  _Self-Reinforcement_: As widely noted (see, e.g., [ACCESS]), a
      centralized service's access to data allows it the opportunity to
      make improvements to its offerings, while denying such access to
      others.

   See also [TECH-SUCCESS-FACTORS] for further exploration of how
   centralization can affect the Internet.

   To summarize, centralization would allow the Internet (or some part
   of it) to be captured, effectively turning it into a "walled garden"
   that cannot meet both architectural design goals and users'
   expectations, and endangering its ongoing viability at the same time.

4.  Kinds of Centralization

   Centralization of the Internet is not uniform; it presents in a
   variety of ways, depending on its relationship to the function in
   question and underlying causes.  The subsections below suggest a
   classification system for Internet centralization.

4.1.  Direct Centralization

   Creation of a fixed role for a specific party is the most
   straightforward kind of centralization.  For example, most
   proprietary messaging, videoconferencing, chat, and similar protocols
   operate in this fashion.

   While some argue that such protocols are simpler to design, more
   amenable to evolution, and more likely to meet user needs [MOXIE],
   this approach most often reflects commercial goals -- in particular,
   a strong desire to capture the protocols' financial benefits by
   "locking in" users to a proprietary service.





Nottingham               Expires 13 August 2022                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft    Centralization and Internet Standards    February 2022


   Directly centralised protocols and applications are not considered to
   be part of the Internet per se; instead, they are more properly
   characterized as proprietary protocols that are built on top of the
   Internet.  As such, the Internet architecture and associated
   standards do not regulate them, beyond the constraints that the
   underlying protocols (e.g., TCP, IP, HTTP) impose.

4.2.  Necessary Centralization

   Some protocols introduce centralization risk that is unavoidable by
   nature.

   For example, when there is a need for a single, globally coordinated
   "source of truth", that function is by nature centralized -- such as
   in the Domain Name System (DNS), which allows human-friendly naming
   to be converted into network addresses in a globally consistent
   fashion.

   IP addresses allocation is another example of a necessary function
   having centralization risk.  Internet routing requires addresses to
   be allocated uniquely, but if a single government or company captured
   the addressing function, the entire Internet would be at risk of
   abuse by that entity.

   Similarly, the need for coordination in the Web's trust model brings
   centralization risk, because of the Certificate Authority's role in
   communication between clients and servers.

   Protocols that need to solve the "rendezvous problem" to coordinate
   communication between two parties that are not in direct contact also
   suffer from this kind of centralization risk.  For example, chat
   protocols need to coordinate communication between two parties that
   wish to talk; while the actual communication can be direct between
   them (so long as the protocol facilitates that), the endpoints'
   mutual discovery typically requires a third party.

   Internet protocols often attempt to mitigate necessary centralization
   risk using measures such as federation (see Section 5.1) and multi-
   stakeholder administration (see Section 5.2).

   Protocols that successfully mitigate necessary centralization are
   often reused, to avoid the considerable cost and risk of re-
   implementing those mitigations.  For example, if a protocol requires
   a coordinated, global naming function, reusing the Domain Name System
   is usually preferable to establishing a new system.






Nottingham               Expires 13 August 2022                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft    Centralization and Internet Standards    February 2022


4.3.  Indirect Centralization

   Even when a protocol avoids direct centralization and does not
   exhibit any necessary centralization, it might become centralized in
   practice when external factors influence its deployment.  Factors
   that encourage use of a central function, despite the absence of such
   a requirement in the protocol itself, can cause indirect
   centralization.  Such factors might be economic, social, or legal.

   Often, the factors driving indirect centralization are related to the
   network effects that are so often seen on the Internet.  While in
   theory every node on the Internet is equal, in practice some nodes
   are much more connected than others: for example, just a few sites
   drive much of the traffic on the Web. While expected and observed in
   many kinds of networks,[SCALE-FREE] network effects award asymmetric
   power to nodes that act as intermediaries to communication.

   Left unchecked, these factors can cause a potentially decentralized
   application to become directly centralised, because the central
   function has leverage to "lock in" users.  For example, social
   networking is an application that is currently supplied by a few
   directly centralized, proprietary platforms despite standardization
   efforts (see, e.g., [W3C.CR-activitystreams-core-20161215]), because
   of the powerful network effects associated.

   By its nature, indirect centralization is difficult to avoid in
   protocol design, and federated protocols are particularly vulnerable
   to it (see Section 5.1).

4.4.  Inherited Centralization

   Most Internet protocols and applications depend on other, "lower-
   layer" protocols.  The features, deployment, and operation of these
   dependencies can surface centralization risk into functions and
   applications build "on top" of them.

   For example, the network between endpoints can introduce
   centralization risk to application-layer protocols, because it is
   necessary for communication and therefore has power over it.  A
   network might block access to, slow down, or change the content of
   various application protocols or specific services for financial,
   political, operational, or criminal reasons, thereby creating
   pressure to use other services, which can result in centralization of
   them.

   Inherited centralization risk is only present when users cannot use
   an alternative means of accessing the desired service.  For example,
   users often have flexibility in choice of Internet access, so they



Nottingham               Expires 13 August 2022                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft    Centralization and Internet Standards    February 2022


   could just "route around" a network that affects their chosen
   service.  However, such choices are often not available at the
   moment, and the Internet's topology means that a choke point upstream
   could still affect their Internet access.

   When deployed at scale, encryption can be an effective technique to
   control many inherited centralization risks.  By reducing the number
   of parties who have access to content of communication, the ability
   of lower-layer protocols and intermediaries at those layers to
   interfere with or observe is prevented.  Even while they may still
   prevent communication, encryption makes it more difficult to
   discriminate the target from other traffic.

   Note that the prohibitive effect on inherited centralization is most
   pronounced when most (if not all) traffic is encrypted -- providing
   yet more motivation for that goal (see also [RFC7258]).

4.5.  Platform Centralization

   The complement to inherited centralization is platform centralization
   -- where a function does not directly define a central role, but
   could facilitate centralization in the applications it supports.

   For example, HTTP [HTTP] is not considered a centralized protocol;
   interoperable servers are relatively easy to instantiate, and
   multiple clients are available.  It can be used without central
   coordination beyond that provided by DNS, as discussed above.

   However, applications built on top of HTTP (as well as the rest of
   the "Web Platform") often exhibit centralization.  As such, HTTP is
   an example of a platform for centralization -- while the protocol
   itself is not centralized, it facilitates the creation of centralized
   services and applications.

   Like indirect centralization, platform centralization is difficult to
   prevent with protocol design.  Because of the layered nature of the
   Internet, most protocols allow considerable flexibility in how they
   are used, often in a way that it becomes attractive to form a
   dependency on one party's operation.  Notably, this can happen even
   if the protocol does not accommodate intermediation explicitly.











Nottingham               Expires 13 August 2022                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft    Centralization and Internet Standards    February 2022


5.  The Limits of Decentralization

   Over time, various techniques have been developed to decentralize
   protocols and applications.  While use of these approaches can result
   in a function which is less centralized or less amenable to some
   kinds of centralization, they are not adequate to avoid
   centralization completely.  They are also not indicators of whether a
   protocol is centralized without further analysis.

5.1.  Federation isn't Enough

   A widely known technique for managing centralization in Internet
   protocols is federation -- designing them in such a way that new
   instances of any intermediary or otherwise centralized function are
   relatively easy to create, and they can maintain interoperability and
   connectivity with other instances.

   For example, SMTP [RFC5321] is the basis of the e-mail suite of
   protocols, which has two functions that are necessarily centralized:

   1.  Giving each user a globally unique address, and

   2.  Routing messages to the user, even when they change network
       locations or are disconnected for long periods of time.

   E-mail reuses DNS to help mitigate the first risk.  To mitigate the
   second, it defines an intermediary role for routing users' messages,
   the Message Transfer Agent (MTA).  By allowing anyone to deploy an
   MTA and defining rules for interconnecting them, the protocol's users
   avoid a requirement for a single central router.

   Users can (and often do) choose to delegate that role to someone
   else, or run their own MTA.  However, running your own mail server
   has become difficult, because of the likelihood of a small MTA being
   classified as a spam source.  Because large MTA operators are widely
   known and have greater impact if their operation is affected, they
   are less likely to be classified as such, indirectly centralizing the
   protocol's operation (see Section 4.3).

   Another example of a federated Internet protocol is XMPP [RFC6120],
   supporting "instant messaging" and similar functionality.  Like
   e-mail, it reuses DNS for naming and requires federation to
   facilitate rendezvous of users from different systems.








Nottingham               Expires 13 August 2022                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft    Centralization and Internet Standards    February 2022


   While some deployments of XMPP do support truly federated messaging
   (i.e., a person using service A can interoperably chat with someone
   using service B), many of the largest do not.  Because federation is
   voluntary, some operators captured their users into a single service,
   rather than provide the benefits of global interoperability.

   The examples above illustrate that federation can be a useful
   technique to avoid direct centralization and manage necessary
   centralization, but on its own does not avoid indirect and platform
   centralization.  If a single entity can capture the value provided by
   a protocol, they may use the protocol as a platform to get a "winner
   take all" outcome -- a significant risk with many Internet protocols,
   since network effects often promote such outcomes.  Likewise,
   external factors (such as spam control) might naturally "tilt the
   table" towards a few operators.

5.2.  Multi-Stakeholder Administration is Hard

   The risks associated with a necessarily centralized function (see
   Section 4.2) are sometimes mitigated by delegating that function's
   administration to a multi-stakeholder body.

   A multi-stakeholder body is an institution that includes
   representatives of the different kinds of parties that are affected
   by the system's operation ("stakeholders") in an attempt to make
   well-reasoned, broadly agreed-to, and authoritative decisions.

   The most relevant example of this technique is the administration of
   the DNS, which as a "single source of truth" exhibits necessary
   centralization in its naming function, as well as the operation of
   the system overall.  To mitigate operational centralization, multiple
   root servers that are administered by separate operators (themselves
   diverse in geography) and a selection of corporate entities, non-
   profits, and government bodies from many jurisdictions and
   affiliations carry this task out.  The name space itself is regulated
   by the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN)
   (https://www.icann.org/resources/pages/governance/governance-en),
   which is defined as a globally multi-stakeholder body with
   representation from end users, governments, operators, and others.

   Another example of multi-stakeholderism is the standardization of
   Internet protocols themselves.  Because a specification effectively
   controls implementation behavior, the standardization process can be
   seen as a single point of control.  As a result, Internet standards
   bodies like the IETF allow open participation and contribution, make
   decisions in an open and accountable way, have a well-defined process
   for making (and when necessary, appealing) decisions, considering the
   views of different stakeholder groups [RFC8890].



Nottingham               Expires 13 August 2022                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft    Centralization and Internet Standards    February 2022


   Yet another example is the administration of the Web's trust model,
   implemented by Web browsers as relying parties and Certificate
   Authorities as trust anchors.  To assure that all parties meet the
   operational and security requirements necessary to provide the
   desired properties, the CA/Browser Forum (https://cabforum.org) was
   established as an oversight body that involves both of those parties
   as stakeholders.

   A major downside of this approach is that setup and ongoing operation
   of multi-stakeholder bodies is not trivial.  Additionally, their
   legitimacy cannot be assumed, and may be difficult to establish and
   maintain (see, e.g., [LEGITIMACY-MULTI]).  This concern is especially
   relevant if the function being coordinated is broad, complex, and/or
   contentious.

5.3.  Blockchains Are Not Magical

   Increasingly, distributed consensus technologies, such as the
   blockchain, are touted as a solution to centralization issues.  A
   complete survey of this rapidly changing area is beyond the scope of
   this document, but at a high level, we can generalise about their
   properties.

   These techniques attempt to avoid centralization risk by distributing
   intermediary or otherwise potentially centralized functions to
   members of a large pool of protocol participants.  Proper performance
   of a function is typically guaranteed using cryptographic techniques
   (often, an append-only transaction ledger).  A particular task's
   assignment to a node for handling usually cannot be predicted or
   controlled.

   Sybil attacks (where enough participants coordinate their activity to
   affect the protocol's operation) are a major concern for these
   protocols.  Diversity in the pool of participants is encouraged using
   indirect techniques such as proof-of-work (where each participant has
   to demonstrate significant consumption of resources) or proof-of-
   stake (where each participant has some other incentive to execute
   correctly).

   Use of these techniques can create barriers to direct and inherited
   centralization.  However, depending upon the application in question,
   indirect and platform centralization can still be possible.

   Furthermore, distributed consensus technologies have several
   potential shortcomings that may make them inappropriate -- or at
   least difficult to use -- for many Internet applications, because
   their use conflicts with other important goals:




Nottingham               Expires 13 August 2022                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft    Centralization and Internet Standards    February 2022


   1.  Distributed consensus has significant implications for privacy.
       Because activity (such as queries or transactions) are shared
       with many unknown parties (and often publicly visible due to the
       nature of the blockchain) they have very different privacy
       properties than traditional client/server protocols.  Potential
       mitigations (e.g., Private Information Retrieval; see, e.g.,
       [PIR]) are still not suitable for broad deployment.

   2.  Their complexity and "chattiness" typically result in
       significantly less efficient use of the network (often, to
       several orders of magnitude).  When distributed consensus
       protocols use proof-of-work, energy consumption can become
       significant (to the point where some jurisdictions have banned
       its use).

   3.  Distributed consensus protocols are still not proven to scale to
       the degree expected of successful Internet protocols.  In
       particular, relying on unknown third parties to deliver
       functionality can introduce variability in latency, availability,
       and throughput.  This is a marked change for applications with
       high expectations for these properties (e.g., commercial Web
       services).

   4.  By design, distributed consensus protocols diffuse responsibility
       for a function among several difficult-to-identify parties.
       While this may be an effective way to prevent some kinds of
       centralization, it also means that making someone accountable for
       how the function is performed is impossible, beyond the bounds of
       the protocol's design.

   It is also important to recognise that a protocol or an application
   can use distributed consensus for some functions, but still have
   centralization risk elsewhere.  Even when distributed consensus is
   used exclusively for all functions (which is uncommon, because of the
   associated costs), some coordination is still necessary -- whether
   that be through governance of the function itself, creation of shared
   implementations, or documentation of shared wire protocols.  That
   represents centralization risk, just at a different layer (inherited
   or platform).

   These potential shortcomings do not rule out the use of distributed
   consensus technologies for every use case.  They do, however, caution
   against relying upon these technologies to avoid centralization
   uncritically.







Nottingham               Expires 13 August 2022                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft    Centralization and Internet Standards    February 2022


6.  What Should Internet Standards Do?

   Centralization is driven by powerful forces -- both economic and
   social -- as well as the network effects that come with Internet
   scale.  Because permissionless innovation is a core value for the
   Internet, and yet much of the centralization seen on the Internet is
   performed by proprietary platforms that take advantage of this
   nature, the controls available to standards efforts on their own are
   very limited.

   While standards bodies on their own cannot prevent centralization,
   there are meaningful steps that can be taken to prevent some
   functions from exhibiting some forms of centralization.  There are
   also valuable contributions that standards efforts can make to other
   relevant forms of regulation.

6.1.  Be Realistic

   Some types of centralization risk are relatively easy to manage in
   standards efforts.  For example, a directly centralized protocol,
   were it to be proposed, would be rejected out of hand by the IETF.
   There is a growing body of knowledge and experience with necessary
   centralization, and a strong inclination to reuse existing
   infrastructure where possible.  As discussed above, encryption is
   often a way to manage inherited centralization.  These responses are
   appropriate ways for Internet standards to manage centralization
   risk.

   However, preventing indirect and platform centralization is much more
   difficult in standards efforts.  Because we have no "protocol
   police", it's not possible to demand that someone stop building a
   proprietary service using a purportedly federated protocol.  We also
   cannot stop someone from building centralized services "on top" of
   standard protocols without abandoning architectural goals like
   permissionless innovation.

   Therefore, committing significant resources to scrutinizing protocols
   for latent centralization risk -- especially for indirect and
   platform risks -- is unlikely to be effective in preventing Internet
   centralization.  Almost all existing Internet protocols -- including
   IP, TCP, HTTP, and DNS -- suffer some form of indirect or platform
   centralization.  Refusing to standardize a newer protocol because it
   faces similar risks would not be equitable, proportionate, or
   effective.

   When we find centralization risk, we should consider its relationship
   with other goals, such as privacy.  While there is rarely a pure
   tradeoff between two abstract goals such as these, when it surfaces



Nottingham               Expires 13 August 2022                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft    Centralization and Internet Standards    February 2022


   attention should be paid to how effective architectural regulation
   (such as a standards effort) is in achieving each goal.  In this
   example, a technical mechanism might be much more effective at
   improving privacy, whereas centralization might be better controlled
   by other regulators -- leading to the conclusion that the standards
   effort should focus on privacy.

6.2.  Decentralize Proprietary Functions

   Standards efforts should particularly focus on creating
   specifications for functions that are currently only satisfied by
   proprietary, centralized applications and protocols.  For example, if
   social networking is thought to be a centralized function, this might
   mean creating specifications that enable decentralized social
   networking, perhaps using some or all of the techniques described in
   Section 5.

   Keen readers will point out that social networking is effectively
   centralized despite the existence of such standards (see, e.g.,
   [W3C.CR-activitystreams-core-20161215]), because the IETF and W3C
   create voluntary standards, not mandatory regulations.

   However, architecture is not the only form of regulation; legal
   mechanisms combined with changing norms and the resulting market
   forces have their own regulatory effects [NEW-CHICAGO].  While for
   much of its lifetime the Internet has only been subject to limited
   legal regulation, that period appears to be ending.

   It is far from certain that a legal mandate for interoperability
   based upon Internet standards will eventuate, but it is increasingly
   discussed as a remedy for competition issues (see, e.g., [OECD]).  It
   is also uncertain that legally mandated interoperability will fully
   address centralization risks.  However, if such specifications are
   not available from the Internet community, they may be created
   elsewhere without reference to the Internet's architectural goals.

   Even absent a legal mandate, changes in norms and the market --
   because of increasing knowledge and distrust of centralized functions
   -- can create demand for such specifications and the corresponding
   implementations.

6.3.  Build Well-Balanced Standards

   To minimize centralization risk, standards-defined functions should
   have an explicit goal of broad, diverse implementation and
   deployment, so that users have as many choices as possible.





Nottingham               Expires 13 August 2022                [Page 15]

Internet-Draft    Centralization and Internet Standards    February 2022


   Section 2.1 of [RFC5218] explores some factors in protocol design
   that encourage this outcome.

   This goal can also be furthered by ensuring that the cost of
   switching to a different implementation or deployment is as low as
   possible to facilitate subsequent substitution.  This implies that
   the standard is functionally complete and specified precisely enough
   to result in meaningful interoperability.

   These goals are sometimes in tension.  For example, if a standard is
   extremely complex, it may discourage implementation diversity because
   the cost of a complete implementation is too high (consider: Web
   browsers).  On the other hand, if the specification is too simple, it
   may not offer enough functionality to be complete, and the resulting
   proprietary extensions may make switching difficult (see
   Section 6.5).

   Furthermore, if a new protocol is perceived as completely
   commoditized (so that no implementation can differentiate itself, and
   there is no barrier to switching), it may have difficulty achieving
   broad implementation -- at least by commercial entities.

   Balancing these factors is difficult, but is often helped by
   community building and good design -- in particular, appropriate use
   of layering.

6.4.  Limit Intermediary Power

   Some functions might see substantial benefits if intermediation --
   i.e., adding a new party to communication to perform a function -- is
   introduced.  When used well, intermediation can help improve:

   *  _Efficiency_: Many functions on the Internet are significantly
      more efficient when performed at a higher scale.  For example, a
      Content Delivery Network can offer services at a fraction of the
      financial and environmental cost that would otherwise be paid by
      someone serving content themselves, because of the scale they
      operate at.

   *  _Complexity_: Completely disintermediating communication can shift
      the burden of functions onto endpoints.  This can cause increased
      cognitive load for users; for example, compare commercial social
      networking platforms with self-hosted efforts.








Nottingham               Expires 13 August 2022                [Page 16]

Internet-Draft    Centralization and Internet Standards    February 2022


   *  _Specialization_: Having a function concentrated into relatively
      few hands can improve outcomes because of the resulting
      specialization.  For example, services overseen by professional
      administrators are often seen to have a better security posture
      and improved availability.

   *  _Privacy_: For some functions, user privacy can be improved by
      concentrating their activity to prevent individual behaviors from
      being discriminated from each other.[MIX] Intermediation can also
      enforce functional boundaries -- for example, to reduce the need
      for users to trust potentially malicious endpoints, as seen in the
      so-called "oblivious" protocols (e.g.,
      [I-D.pauly-dprive-oblivious-doh]) that allow end users to hide
      their identity from services, while still accessing them.

   However, introducing an intermediary role adds indirect and platform
   centralization risk to Internet protocols, because it brings
   opportunities for control and observation.  While (as discussed
   above) standards efforts have a very limited capability to prevent or
   control these types of centralization, constraints on intermediary
   functions can prevent at least the most egregious outcomes.

   As a result, intermediaries should only be interposed as a result of
   the positive action of at least one endpoint, and should have their
   ability to observe or control communication limited to what is
   necessary to perform their intended function.

   For example, early deployments of HTTP allowed intermediaries to be
   interposed by the network without knowledge of the endpoints, and
   those intermediaries could see and change the full content of traffic
   by default -- even when they are only intended to perform basic
   functions such as caching.  Because of the introduction of HTTPS and
   the CONNECT method (see Section 9.3.6 of [HTTP]), combined with
   efforts to encourage its adoption, those intermediaries are now
   required to be explicitly interposed by one endpoint.

   See [I-D.thomson-tmi] for more guidance on protocol intermediation.

   The term "intermediary" is also used (often in legal and regulatory
   contexts) more broadly than it has been in protocol design; for
   example, an auction Web site intermediates between buyers and sellers
   is considered an intermediary, even though it is not formally an
   intermediary in HTTP (see Section 3.7 of [HTTP]).  Protocol designers
   can address the centralization risk associated with this kind of
   intermediation by standardising the function, rather than restricting
   the capabilities of the underlying protocols; see Section 6.2.





Nottingham               Expires 13 August 2022                [Page 17]

Internet-Draft    Centralization and Internet Standards    February 2022


6.5.  Avoid Over-Extensibility

   An important feature of Internet protocols is their ability to
   evolve, so that they can meet new requirements and adapt to new
   conditions without requiring a "flag day" to upgrade implementations.
   Typically, protocols accommodate evolution through extension
   mechanisms, which allow optional features to be added over time in an
   interoperable fashion.

   However, protocol extensions can also increase the risk of platform
   centralization if a powerful entity can change the target for
   meaningful interoperability by adding proprietary extensions to a
   standard protocol.  This is especially true when the core standard
   does not itself provide sufficient utility on its own.

   For example, the SOAP protocol's [SOAP] extreme flexibility and
   failure to provide significant standalone value allowed vendors to
   require use of their preferred extensions, favouring those who had
   more market power.

   Therefore, standards efforts should focus on providing concrete
   utility to the majority of their users as published, rather than
   being a "framework" where interoperability is not immediately
   available.  Internet protocols should not make every aspect of their
   operation extensible; extension points should be reasoned,
   appropriate boundaries for flexibility and control.  When a protocol
   defines extension points, they should not allow an extension to
   declare itself to be mandatory-to-interoperate, as that pattern
   invites abuse.

7.  Security Considerations

   This document does not have direct security impact on Internet
   protocols.  However, failure to consider centralization risks might
   cause a myriad of security issues.

8.  Informative References

   [ACCESS]   Vestager, M., "Defending Competition in a Digitised World,
              Address at the European Consumer and Competition Day",
              April 2019, <https://wayback.archive-
              it.org/12090/20191129202059/https://ec.europa.eu/
              commission/commissioners/2014-2019/vestager/announcements/
              defending-competition-digitised-world_en>.

   [BCP95]    Alvestrand, H., "A Mission Statement for the IETF",
              BCP 95, RFC 3935, October 2004.




Nottingham               Expires 13 August 2022                [Page 18]

Internet-Draft    Centralization and Internet Standards    February 2022


              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/bcp95>

   [HTTP]     Fielding, R. T., Nottingham, M., and J. Reschke, "HTTP
              Semantics", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-ietf-
              httpbis-semantics-19, 12 September 2021,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-httpbis-
              semantics-19>.

   [I-D.pauly-dprive-oblivious-doh]
              Kinnear, E., McManus, P., Pauly, T., Verma, T., and C. A.
              Wood, "Oblivious DNS Over HTTPS", Work in Progress,
              Internet-Draft, draft-pauly-dprive-oblivious-doh-10, 31
              January 2022, <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/
              draft-pauly-dprive-oblivious-doh-10>.

   [I-D.thomson-tmi]
              Thomson, M., "Principles for the Involvement of
              Intermediaries in Internet Protocols", Work in Progress,
              Internet-Draft, draft-thomson-tmi-02, 6 July 2021,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-thomson-tmi-
              02>.

   [INTERMEDIARY-INFLUENCE]
              Judge, K., "Intermediary Influence", 2014,
              <https://scholarship.law.columbia.edu/
              faculty_scholarship/1856>.

   [LEGITIMACY-MULTI]
              Palladino, N. and N. Santaniello, "Legitimacy, Power, and
              Inequalities in the Multistakeholder Internet Governance",
              2020.

   [MIX]      Chaum, D.L., "Untraceable Electronic Mail, Return
              Addresses, and Digital Pseudonyms", February 1981,
              <https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/358549.358563>.

   [MOXIE]    Marlinspike, M., "Reflections: The ecosystem is moving",
              May 2016,
              <https://signal.org/blog/the-ecosystem-is-moving/>.

   [NEW-CHICAGO]
              Lessig, L., "The New Chicago School", June 1998.

   [OECD]     OECD, "Data portability, interoperability and digital
              platform competition", June 2021,
              <https://www.oecd.org/daf/competition/data-portability-
              interoperability-and-digital-platform-competition-
              2021.pdf>.



Nottingham               Expires 13 August 2022                [Page 19]

Internet-Draft    Centralization and Internet Standards    February 2022


   [PIR]      Olumofin, F. and I. Goldberg, "Revisiting the
              Computational Practicality of Private Information
              Retrieval", 2010.

   [POLYCENTRIC]
              Aligia, P.D. and V. Tarko, "Polycentricity: From Polanyi
              to Ostrom, and Beyond", April 2012.

   [RAND]     Baran, P., "On Distributed Communications: Introduction to
              Distributed Communications Networks", 1964,
              <https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_memoranda/
              RM3420.html>.

   [RFC1035]  Mockapetris, P., "Domain names - implementation and
              specification", STD 13, RFC 1035, DOI 10.17487/RFC1035,
              November 1987, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc1035>.

   [RFC4271]  Rekhter, Y., Ed., Li, T., Ed., and S. Hares, Ed., "A
              Border Gateway Protocol 4 (BGP-4)", RFC 4271,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC4271, January 2006,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc4271>.

   [RFC5218]  Thaler, D. and B. Aboba, "What Makes for a Successful
              Protocol?", RFC 5218, DOI 10.17487/RFC5218, July 2008,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc5218>.

   [RFC5321]  Klensin, J., "Simple Mail Transfer Protocol", RFC 5321,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC5321, October 2008,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc5321>.

   [RFC6120]  Saint-Andre, P., "Extensible Messaging and Presence
              Protocol (XMPP): Core", RFC 6120, DOI 10.17487/RFC6120,
              March 2011, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc6120>.

   [RFC7258]  Farrell, S. and H. Tschofenig, "Pervasive Monitoring Is an
              Attack", BCP 188, RFC 7258, DOI 10.17487/RFC7258, May
              2014, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7258>.

   [RFC791]   Postel, J., "Internet Protocol", STD 5, RFC 791,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC0791, September 1981,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc791>.

   [RFC793]   Postel, J., "Transmission Control Protocol", STD 7,
              RFC 793, DOI 10.17487/RFC0793, September 1981,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc793>.






Nottingham               Expires 13 August 2022                [Page 20]

Internet-Draft    Centralization and Internet Standards    February 2022


   [RFC8890]  Nottingham, M., "The Internet is for End Users", RFC 8890,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC8890, August 2020,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8890>.

   [SCALE-FREE]
              Albert, R., "Emergence of Scaling in Random Networks",
              October 1999, <https://barabasi.com/f/67.pdf>.

   [SOAP]     Mitra, N. and Y. Lafon, "SOAP Version 1.2 Part 0: Primer
              (Second Edition)", World Wide Web Consortium
              Recommendation REC-soap12-part0-20070427, 27 April 2007,
              <https://www.w3.org/TR/2007/REC-soap12-part0-20070427>.

   [TECH-SUCCESS-FACTORS]
              Kende, M., Kvalbein, A., Allford, J., and D. Abecassis,
              "Study on the Internet's Technical Success Factors",
              December 2021, <https://blog.apnic.net/wp-
              content/uploads/2021/12/MKGRA669-Report-for-APNIC-LACNIC-
              V3.pdf>.

   [W3C.CR-activitystreams-core-20161215]
              Snell, J. and E. Prodromou, "Activity Streams 2.0", World
              Wide Web Consortium CR CR-activitystreams-core-20161215,
              15 December 2016, <https://www.w3.org/TR/2016/CR-
              activitystreams-core-20161215>.

   [WEAPONIZED-INTERDEPENDENCE]
              Farrell, H. and A.L. Newman, "Weaponized Interdependence:
              How Global Economic Networks Shape State Coercion", 2019,
              <https://doi.org/10.1162/ISEC_a_00351>.

Appendix A.  Acknowledgements

   This document benefits from discussions with Brian Trammell during
   our shared time on the Internet Architecture Board.

Author's Address

   Mark Nottingham
   Prahran
   Australia

   Email: mnot@mnot.net
   URI:   https://www.mnot.net/







Nottingham               Expires 13 August 2022                [Page 21]
