



BIER                                                            Z. Zhang
Internet-Draft                                             A. Przygienda
Intended status: Standards Track                        Juniper Networks
Expires: February 16, 2018                                    A. Sajassi
                                                           Cisco Systems
                                                              J. Rabadan
                                                                   Nokia
                                                         August 15, 2017


                          EVPN BUM Using BIER
                        draft-ietf-bier-evpn-00

Abstract

   This document specifies protocols and procedures for forwarding
   broadcast, unknown unicast and multicast (BUM) traffic of Ethernet
   VPNs (EVPN) using Bit Index Explicit Replication (BIER).

Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC2119.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on February 16, 2018.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2017 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.





Zhang, et al.           Expires February 16, 2018               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                  bier-evpn                    August 2017


   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
     1.1.  Terminologies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   2.  Use of the PMSI Tunnel Attribute  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     2.1.  Explicit Tracking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
       2.1.1.  Using IMET/SMET routes  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
       2.1.2.  Using S-PMSI/Leaf A-D Routes  . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     2.2.  MPLS Label in PTA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   3.  Multihoming Split Horizon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   4.  Data Plane  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     4.1.  Encapsulation and Transmission  . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     4.2.  Disposition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
       4.2.1.  At a BFER that is an Egress PE  . . . . . . . . . . .   9
       4.2.2.  At a BFER that is a P-tunnel Segmentation Boundary  .  10
   5.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   6.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   7.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   8.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
     8.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
     8.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11

1.  Introduction

   [RFC7432] and [I-D.ietf-bess-evpn-overlay] specify the protocols and
   procedures for Ethernet VPNs (EVPNs).  For broadcast, unknown unicast
   and multicast (BUM) traffic, provider/underlay tunnels (referred to
   as P-tunnels) are used to carry the BUM traffic.  Several kinds of
   tunnel technologies can be used, as specified in [RFC7432].

   Bit Index Explicit Replication (BIER) ([I-D.ietf-bier-architecture])
   is an architecture that provides optimal multicast forwarding through
   a "multicast domain", without requiring intermediate routers to
   maintain any per-flow state or to engage in an explicit tree-building
   protocol.  The purpose of this document is to specify the protocols
   and procedures to transport EVPN BUM traffic using BIER.




Zhang, et al.           Expires February 16, 2018               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                  bier-evpn                    August 2017


   The EVPN BUM procedures specified in [RFC7432] and extended in
   [I-D.ietf-bess-evpn-bum-procedure-updates],
   [I-D.ietf-bess-evpn-igmp-mld-proxy], and
   [I-D.zzhang-bess-mvpn-evpn-cmcast-enhancements] are much aligned with
   MVPN procedures.  As such, this document is also very much aligned
   with [I-D.ietf-bier-mvpn].  For terseness, some background, terms and
   concepts are not repeated here.  Additionally, some text is borrowed
   verbatim from [I-D.ietf-bier-mvpn].

1.1.  Terminologies

   o  BFR: Bit-Forwarding Router.

   o  BFIR: Bit-Forwarding Ingress Router.

   o  BFER: Bit-Forwarding Egress Router.

   o  BFR-Prefix: An IP address that uniquely identifies a BFR and is
      routeable in a BIER domain.

   o  C-S: A multicast source address, identifying a multicast source
      located at a VPN customer site.

   o  C-G: A multicast group address used by a VPN customer.

   o  C-flow: A customer multicast flow.  Each C-flow is identified by
      the ordered pair (source address, group address), where each
      address is in the customer's address space.  The identifier of a
      particular C-flow is usually written as (C-S,C-G).  Sets of
      C-flows can be identified by the use of the "C-*" wildcard (see
      [RFC6625]), e.g., (C-*,C-G).

   o  P-tunnel.  A multicast tunnel through the network of one or more
      SPs.  P-tunnels are used to transport MVPN multicast data

   o  IMET Route: Inclusive Multicast Ethernet Tag Auto-Discovery route.
      Carried in BGP Update messages, these routes are used to advertise
      the "default" P-tunnel for a particular broadcast domain.

   o  SMET Route: Selective Multicast Ethernet Tag Auto-Discovery route.
      Carried in BGP Update messages, these routes are used to advertise
      the C-flows that the advertising PE is interested in.

   o  S-PMSI A-D route: Selective Provider Multicast Service Interface
      Auto-Discovery route.  Carried in BGP Update messages, these
      routes are used to advertise the fact that particular C-flows are
      bound to (i.e., are traveling through) particular P-tunnels.




Zhang, et al.           Expires February 16, 2018               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                  bier-evpn                    August 2017


   o  PMSI Tunnel attribute (PTA).  This BGP attribute carried is used
      to identify a particular P-tunnel.  When C-flows of multiple VPNs
      are carried in a single P-tunnel, this attribute also carries the
      information needed to multiplex and demultiplex the C-flows.

2.  Use of the PMSI Tunnel Attribute

   [RFC7432] specifies that Inclusive Multicast Ethernet Tag (IMET)
   routes carry a PMSI Tunnel Attribute (PTA) to identify the particular
   P-tunnel to which one or more BUM flows are being assigned, the same
   as specified in [RFC6514] for MVPN.  [I-D.ietf-bier-mvpn] specifies
   the encoding of PTA for use of BIER with MVPN.  Much of that
   specification is reused for use of BIER with EVPN and much of the
   text below is borrowed verbatim from [I-D.ietf-bier-mvpn].

   The PMSI Tunnel Attribute (PTA) contains the following fields:

   o  "Tunnel Type".  The same codepoint that [I-D.ietf-bier-mvpn]
      requests IANA to assign for the new tunnel type "BIER" is used for
      EVPN as well.

   o  "Tunnel Identifier".  When the "tunnel type" field is "BIER", this
      field contains two subfields.  The text below is exactly as in
      [I-D.ietf-bier-mvpn].

      1  The first subfield is a single octet, containing the sub-
         domain-id of the sub-domain to which the BFIR will assign the
         packets that it transmits on the PMSI identified by the NLRI of
         the IMET, S-PMSI A-D, or per-region I-PMSI A-D route that
         contains this PTA.  How that sub-domain is chosen is outside
         the scope of this document.

      2  The second subfield is the BFR-Prefix (see
         [I-D.ietf-bier-architecture]) of the originator of the route
         that is carrying this PTA.  This will either be a /32 IPv4
         address or a /128 IPv6 address.  Whether the address is IPv4 or
         IPv6 can be inferred from the total length of the PMSI Tunnel
         attribute.

   o  "MPLS label".  For EVPN-MPLS [RFC7432], this field contains an
      upstream-assigned MPLS label.  It is assigned by the BFIR.
      Constraints on the way in which the originating router selects
      this label are discussed in Section 2.2.  For EVPN-VXLAN/NVGRE
      [I-D.ietf-bess-evpn-overlay], this field is a 24-bit VNI/VSID of
      global significance.






Zhang, et al.           Expires February 16, 2018               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                  bier-evpn                    August 2017


   o  "Flags".  When the tunnel type is BIER, two of the flags in the
      PTA Flags field are meaningful.  Details about the use of these
      flags can be found in Section 2.1.

      *  "Leaf Info Required per Flow (LIR-pF)"
         [I-D.ietf-bess-mvpn-expl-track]

      *  "Leaf Info Required Bit (LIR)"

   Note that if a PTA specifying "BIER" is attached to an IMET, S-PMSI
   A-D, or per-region I-PMSI A-D route, the route MUST NOT be
   distributed beyond the boundaries of a BIER domain.  That is, any
   routers that receive the route must be in the same BIER domain as the
   originator of the route.  If the originator is in more than one BIER
   domain, the route must be distributed only within the BIER domain in
   which the BFR-Prefix in the PTA uniquely identifies the originator.
   As with all MVPN routes, distribution of these routes is controlled
   by the provisioning of Route Targets.

2.1.  Explicit Tracking

   When using BIER to transport an EVPN BUM data packet through a BIER
   domain, an ingress PE functions as a BFIR (see
   [I-D.ietf-bier-architecture]).  The BFIR must determine the set of
   BFERs to which the packet needs to be delivered.  This can be done in
   either of two ways in the following two sections.

2.1.1.  Using IMET/SMET routes

   Both IMET and SMET (Selective Multicast Ethernet Tag
   [I-D.ietf-bess-evpn-igmp-mld-proxy]) routes provide explicit tracking
   functionality.

   For an inclusive PMSI, the set of BFERs to deliver traffic to
   includes the originators of all IMET routes for a broadcast domain.
   For a selective PMSI, the set of BFERs to deliver traffic to includes
   the originators of corresponding SMET routes.

   The SMET routes do not carry a PTA.  When an ingress PE sends traffic
   on a selective tunnel using BIER, it uses the upstream assigned label
   that is advertised in its IMET route.

   Only when selectively forwarding is for all flows without tunnel
   segmentation, SMET routes are used without S-PMSI A-D routes.
   Otherwise, the procedures in the following section apply.






Zhang, et al.           Expires February 16, 2018               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                  bier-evpn                    August 2017


2.1.2.  Using S-PMSI/Leaf A-D Routes

   There are two cases where S-PMSI/Leaf A-D routes are used as
   discussed in the following two sections.

2.1.2.1.  Selective Forwarding Only for Some Flows

   With the SMET procedure, a PE advertises an SMET route for each
   (C-S,C-G) or (C-*,C-G) state that it learns on its ACs, and each SMET
   route is tracked by every PE in the same broadcast domain.  It may be
   desired that SMET routes are not used to reduce the burden of
   explicit tracking.

   In this case, most multicast traffic will follow the I-PMSI
   (advertised via IMET route) and only some flows follow S-PMSIs.  To
   achieve that, S-PMSI/Leaf A-D routes can be used, as specified in
   [I-D.ietf-bess-evpn-bum-procedure-updates].  The LIR bit may be set
   in the S-PMSI A-D routes, and the PEs that need to receive
   corresponding traffic will respond with a Leaf A-D route.  The
   ingress PE identifies the set of BFERs to deliver traffic to
   according to the set of corresponding Leaf A-D routes received.

   The S-PMSI A-D route carries the same PTA as in the IMET route,
   except that similar to MVPN, the LIR-pF flag may be set for an
   ingress PE to request individual (C-S,C-G) or (C-*,C-G) Leaf A-D
   routes.

2.1.2.2.  Tunnel Segmentation

   Another case where S-PMSI/Leaf A-D routes are necessary is tunnel
   segmentation, which is also specified in
   [I-D.ietf-bess-evpn-bum-procedure-updates], and further clarified in
   [I-D.zzhang-bess-mvpn-evpn-cmcast-enhancements] for segmentation with
   SMET routes.  This is only applicable to EVPN-MPLS.

   Similar to MVPN, the LIR-pF flag cannot be used with segmentation,
   and the S-PMSI A-D routes' PTA MUST carry an upstream assigned label
   to allow tunnel segmentation points to do label switching.  The
   S-PMSI A-D routes could be proactively (re-)advertised by the ingress
   PEs or segmentation points, or could be triggered by the unsolicited
   Leaf A-D routes received from downstream.

2.2.  MPLS Label in PTA

   Similar to the MVPN case in [I-D.ietf-bier-mvpn], the label
   allocation for the upstream assigned label in the PTA MUST follow the
   following rules (text borrowed verbatim from [I-D.ietf-bier-mvpn]).




Zhang, et al.           Expires February 16, 2018               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                  bier-evpn                    August 2017


   Suppose an ingress PE originates two x-PMSI A-D routes, where we use
   the term "x-PMSI" to mean "I-PMSI or S-PMSI or IMET".  Suppose both
   routes carry a PTA, and the PTA of each route specifies"BIER".

   o  If the two routes do not carry the same set of Route Targets
      (RTs), then their respective PTAs MUST contain different MPLS
      label values.

   o  If segmented P-tunnels are being used, then the respective PTAs of
      the two routes MUST contain different MPLS label values, as long
      as the NLRIs are not identical.  In this case, the MPLS label can
      be used by the BFER to identify the particular C-flow to which a
      data packet belongs, and this greatly simplifies the process of
      forwarding a received packet to its next P-tunnel segment.  This
      is explained further below.

   When segmented P-tunnels are being used, an ABR or ASBR may receive,
   from a BIER domain, an x-PMSI A-D route whose PTA specifies "BIER".
   This means that BIER is being used for one segment of a segmented
   P-tunnel.  The ABR/ASBR may in turn need to originate an x-PMSI A-D
   route whose PTA identifies the next segment of the P-tunnel.  The
   next segment may also be "BIER".  Suppose an ABR/ASBR receives x-PMSI
   A-D routes R1 and R2, and as a result originates x-PMSI A-D routes R3
   and R4 respectively, where the PTAs of each of the four routes
   specify BIER.  Then the PTAs of R3 and R4 MUST NOT specify the same
   MPLS label.

   The ABR/ASBR MUST then program its dataplane such that a packet
   arriving with the upstream-assigned label specified in route R1 is
   transmitted with the upstream-assigned label specified in route R3,
   and a packet arriving with the upstream-assigned label specified in
   route R2 is transmitted with the label specified in route R4.  Of
   course, the data plane must also be programmed to encapsulate the
   transmitted packets with an appropriate BIER header, whose BitString
   is determined by the multicast flow overlay.

3.  Multihoming Split Horizon

   For EVPN-MPLS, [RFC7432] specifies the use of ESI labels to identify
   the ES from which a BUM packet originates.  A PE receiving that
   packet from the core side will not forward it to the same ES.  The
   procedure works for both Ingress Replication (IR) and RSVP-TE/mLDP
   P2MP tunnels, using downstream- and upstream-assigned ESI labels
   respectively.  For EVPN-VXLAN/NVGRE, [I-D.ietf-bess-evpn-overlay]
   specifies local-bias procedures, where a PE receiving a BUM packet
   from the core side knows from encapsulation the ingress PE so it does
   not forward the packet to any multihoming ESes that the ingress PE is




Zhang, et al.           Expires February 16, 2018               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                  bier-evpn                    August 2017


   on, because the ingress PE already forwarded the packet to those
   ESes, regardless of whether the ingress PE is a DF for those ESes.

   With BIER, the local-bias procedure still applies for EVPN-VXLAN/
   NVGRE as the BFIR-id in the BIER header identifies the ingress PE.
   For EVPN-MPLS, ESI label procedures also still apply though two
   upstream assigned labels will be used (one for identifying the
   broadcast domain and one for identifying the ES) - the same as in the
   case of using a single P2MP tunnel for multiple broadcast domains.
   The BFIR-id in the BIER header identifies the ingress PE that
   assigned those two labels.

   Details for split-horizon in case of segmentation will be provided in
   future revisions.

4.  Data Plane

   Similar to MVPN, the EVPN application plays the role of the
   "multicast flow overlay" as described in
   [I-D.ietf-bier-architecture].

4.1.  Encapsulation and Transmission

   To transmit a BUM data packet, an ingress PE first pushes the ESI
   label per [RFC7432] if the following conditions are all met:

   o  The packet is received on a multihomed ES.

   o  It's EVPN-MPLS.

   o  ESI label procedure is used for split-horizon.

   It then finds the S-PMSI A-D route, or the SMET/IMET route that
   matches that packet.  Any S-PMSI A-D route with a PTA specifying "no
   tunnel information" is ignored.  If one ore more SMET routes are
   matched, the IMET route originated by the ingress PE for the
   broadcast domain is then located to obtain the PTA.

   If the found S-PMSI A-D or the IMET route has a PTA specifying
   "BIER", and the ingress PE determines that BIER should be used (e.g.,
   per procedures in [I-D.ietf-bess-evpn-igmp-mld-proxy] about
   interworking with PEs that do not support certain tunnel types), the
   (upstream-assigned) MPLS label from that PTA is pushed on the
   packet's label stack in case of EVPN-MPLS.  In case of EVPN-VXLAN/
   NVGRE, a VXLAN/NVGRE header is prepended to the packet with the VNI/
   VSID set to the value in the PTA's label field and no IP/UDP header
   is used.




Zhang, et al.           Expires February 16, 2018               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                  bier-evpn                    August 2017


   Then the packet is encapsulated in a BIER header and forwarded,
   according to the procedures of [I-D.ietf-bier-architecture] and
   [I-D.ietf-bier-mpls-encapsulation].  See especially Section 4,
   "Imposing and Processing the BIER Encapsulation", of
   [I-D.ietf-bier-mpls-encapsulation].  The "Proto" field in the BIER
   header is set to 2 in case of EVPN-MPLS or a value to be assigned in
   case of EVPN-VXLAN/NVGRE (Section 5).

   In order to create the proper BIER header for a given packet, the
   BFIR must know all the BFERs that need to receive that packet.  If
   SMET routes are matched, it determines all the BFERs from all the
   matching SMET routes in the broadcast domain.

   If an S-PMSI route is matched, it determines all the BFERs by finding
   all the Leaf A-D routes that correspond to the S-PMSI A-D route that
   is the packet's match for transmission.  There are two different
   cases to consider:

   1  The S-PMSI A-D route that is the match for transmission carries a
      PTA that has the LIR flag set but does not have the LIR-pF flag
      set.  In this case, the corresponding Leaf A-D routes are those
      whose "route key" field is identical to the NLRI of the S-PMSI A-D
      route.

   2  The S-PMSI A-D route that is the match for transmission carries a
      PTA that has the LIR-pF flag.  In this case, the corresponding
      Leaf A-D routes are those whose "route key" field is derived from
      the NLRI of the S-PMSI A-D route according to the procedures
      described in Section 5.2 of [EXPLICIT_TRACKING].

4.2.  Disposition

   The same procedures in section 3.2 of [I-D.ietf-bier-mvpn] are
   followed for EVPN-MPLS (text could be copied here).  For EVPN-VXLAN/
   NVGRE, the only difference is that the payload is VXLAN/NVGRE and the
   VNI/VSID field in the VXLAN/NVGRE header is used to determine the
   corresponding mac VRF or broadcast domain.

4.2.1.  At a BFER that is an Egress PE

   Once the corresponding mac VRF or broadcast domain is determined from
   the upstream assigned label or VNI/VSID, EVPN forwarding procedures
   per [RFC7432] or [I-D.ietf-bess-evpn-overlay] are followed.  In case
   of EVPN-MPLS, if there is an inner label in the label stack following
   the BIER header, that inner label is considered as the upstream
   assigned ESI label for split horizon purpose.





Zhang, et al.           Expires February 16, 2018               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                  bier-evpn                    August 2017


4.2.2.  At a BFER that is a P-tunnel Segmentation Boundary

   This is only applicable to EVPN-MPLS.  The same procedures in
   Section 3.2.2 of [I-D.ietf-bier-mvpn] are followed, subject to
   multihoming considerations described in Section 3 of this document.

5.  IANA Considerations

   This document requests two assignments in "BIER Next Protocol
   Identifiers" registry, with the following two recommended values:

   o  7: Payload is VXLAN encapsulated (no IP/UDP header)

   o  8: Payload is NVGRE encapsulated (no IP header)

6.  Security Considerations

   To be updated.

7.  Acknowledgements

   The authors thank Eric Rosen for his review and suggestions.
   Additionally, much of the text is borrowed verbatim from
   [I-D.ietf-bier-mvpn].

8.  References

8.1.  Normative References

   [I-D.ietf-bess-evpn-bum-procedure-updates]
              Zhang, Z., Lin, W., Rabadan, J., and K. Patel, "Updates on
              EVPN BUM Procedures", draft-ietf-bess-evpn-bum-procedure-
              updates-01 (work in progress), December 2016.

   [I-D.ietf-bess-evpn-igmp-mld-proxy]
              Sajassi, A., Thoria, S., Patel, K., Yeung, D., Drake, J.,
              and W. Lin, "IGMP and MLD Proxy for EVPN", draft-ietf-
              bess-evpn-igmp-mld-proxy-00 (work in progress), March
              2017.

   [I-D.ietf-bess-mvpn-expl-track]
              Dolganow, A., Kotalwar, J., Rosen, E., and Z. Zhang,
              "Explicit Tracking with Wild Card Routes in Multicast
              VPN", draft-ietf-bess-mvpn-expl-track-02 (work in
              progress), June 2017.






Zhang, et al.           Expires February 16, 2018              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft                  bier-evpn                    August 2017


   [I-D.ietf-bier-architecture]
              Wijnands, I., Rosen, E., Dolganow, A., Przygienda, T., and
              S. Aldrin, "Multicast using Bit Index Explicit
              Replication", draft-ietf-bier-architecture-07 (work in
              progress), June 2017.

   [I-D.ietf-bier-mpls-encapsulation]
              Wijnands, I., Rosen, E., Dolganow, A., Tantsura, J.,
              Aldrin, S., and I. Meilik, "Encapsulation for Bit Index
              Explicit Replication in MPLS and non-MPLS Networks",
              draft-ietf-bier-mpls-encapsulation-07 (work in progress),
              June 2017.

   [I-D.ietf-bier-mvpn]
              Rosen, E., Sivakumar, M., Aldrin, S., Dolganow, A., and T.
              Przygienda, "Multicast VPN Using BIER", draft-ietf-bier-
              mvpn-07 (work in progress), July 2017.

   [I-D.zzhang-bess-mvpn-evpn-cmcast-enhancements]
              Zhang, Z., Kebler, R., Lin, W., and E. Rosen, "MVPN/EVPN
              C-Multicast Routes Enhancements", draft-zzhang-bess-mvpn-
              evpn-cmcast-enhancements-00 (work in progress), July 2016.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.

   [RFC7432]  Sajassi, A., Ed., Aggarwal, R., Bitar, N., Isaac, A.,
              Uttaro, J., Drake, J., and W. Henderickx, "BGP MPLS-Based
              Ethernet VPN", RFC 7432, DOI 10.17487/RFC7432, February
              2015, <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7432>.

8.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.ietf-bess-evpn-overlay]
              Sajassi, A., Drake, J., Bitar, N., Shekhar, R., Uttaro,
              J., and W. Henderickx, "A Network Virtualization Overlay
              Solution using EVPN", draft-ietf-bess-evpn-overlay-08
              (work in progress), March 2017.

Authors' Addresses

   Zhaohui Zhang
   Juniper Networks

   EMail: zzhang@juniper.net




Zhang, et al.           Expires February 16, 2018              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft                  bier-evpn                    August 2017


   Antoni Przygienda
   Juniper Networks

   EMail: prz@juniper.net


   Ali Sajassi
   Cisco Systems

   EMail: sajassi@cisco.com


   Jorge Rabadan
   Nokia

   EMail: jorge.rabadan@nokia.com



































Zhang, et al.           Expires February 16, 2018              [Page 12]
