


Network Working Group                                         M. Andrews
Internet-Draft                               Internet Systems Consortium
Expires: December 25, 2005                                     S. Weiler
                                                            SPARTA, Inc.
                                                           June 23, 2005


       The DNSSEC Lookaside Validation (DLV) DNS Resource Record
                      draft-andrews-dlv-dns-rr-00

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 25, 2005.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).

Abstract

   This document defines a new DNS Resource Record, called the DNSSEC
   Lookaside Validation (DLV) RR, for publishing DNSSEC trust anchors
   outside of the DNS delegation chain.  These records allow resolvers
   to validate DNSSEC-signed data from zones whose ancestors either
   aren't signed or refuse to publish DS records for their children.





Andrews & Weiler        Expires December 25, 2005               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft             DLV Resource Record                 June 2005


1.  Introduction

   DNSSEC [1] [2] [3] authenticates DNS data by building public-key
   signature chains along the DNS delegation chain from a trust anchor,
   ideally a trust anchor for the DNS root.  Due to a myriad of
   technical and political concerns, it appears unlikely that many
   delegation-heavy zones, including the root and most generic top level
   domains (gTLDs), will sign their zones in the near future, which
   leaves DNS resolvers with no means to validate data from the children
   of those zones without maintaining a large number of preconfigured
   keys.

   This document defines a new resource record for publishing trust
   anchors outside of the DNS's normal delegation chain.  Use of these
   records by validators is outside the scope of this document.

2.  DLV Resource Record

   The DLV resource record has exactly the same wire and presentation
   formats as the DS resource record, defined in RFC4034 Section 5.  It
   uses the same IANA-assigned values in the algorithm and digest type
   fields as the DS record.  (Those IANA registries are known as the
   "DNS Security Algorithm Numbers" and "DS RR Type Algorithm Numbers"
   registries.)

   Unlike the DS record, the DLV record may not appear on the parent's
   side of a zone cut.  Consequently, DLV records do not require the
   special processing described in section 3.1.4.1 of RFC4035.  DLV
   records may appear at the apex of a zone.

3.  Security Considerations

   Publishing DLV records introduces no security problems -- they're
   just DNS data.

   Users of DLV records will almost certainly want to impose constraints
   on their use, but those constraints are best left to be described by
   the users of the records.  At a minimum, it would be wise to not use
   the records without some sort of cryptographic authentication.

   RFC4034 Section 8 describes security considerations specific to the
   DS resource record.  Those considerations are equally applicable to
   DLV records.  Of particular note, the key tag field is used to help
   select DNSKEY resource records efficiently, but it does not uniquely
   identify a single DNSKEY resource record.  It is possible for two
   distinct DNSKEY RRs to have the same owner name, the same algorithm
   type, and the same key tag.  An implementation that uses only the key
   tag to select a DNSKEY RR might select the wrong public key in some



Andrews & Weiler        Expires December 25, 2005               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft             DLV Resource Record                 June 2005


   circumstances.

   For discussion of the security implications of DNSSEC see RFC4033,
   RFC4034, and RFC4035.

4.  IANA Considerations

   IANA has assigned DNS type code X to the DLV resource record from the
   Specification Required portion of the DNS Resource Record Type
   registry, as defined in [4].

   The DLV resource record reuses the same algorithm and digest type
   registries already used for the DS resource record, currently known
   as the "DNS Security Algorithm Numbers" and "DS RR Type Algorithm
   Numbers" registries.

5.  Normative References

   [1]  Arends, R., Austein, R., Larson, M., Massey, D., and S. Rose,
        "DNS Security Introduction and Requirements", RFC 4033,
        March 2005.

   [2]  Arends, R., Austein, R., Larson, M., Massey, D., and S. Rose,
        "Resource Records for the DNS Security Extensions", RFC 4034,
        March 2005.

   [3]  Arends, R., Austein, R., Larson, M., Massey, D., and S. Rose,
        "Protocol Modifications for the DNS Security Extensions",
        RFC 4035, March 2005.

   [4]  Eastlake, D., Brunner-Williams, E., and B. Manning, "Domain Name
        System (DNS) IANA Considerations", BCP 42, RFC 2929,
        September 2000.


Authors' Addresses

   Mark Andrews
   Internet Systems Consortium
   950 Charter St.
   Redwood City, CA  94063
   US

   Email: Mark_Andrews@isc.org







Andrews & Weiler        Expires December 25, 2005               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft             DLV Resource Record                 June 2005


   Samuel Weiler
   SPARTA, Inc.
   7075 Samuel Morse Drive
   Columbia, Maryland  21046
   US

   Email: weiler@tislabs.com












































Andrews & Weiler        Expires December 25, 2005               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft             DLV Resource Record                 June 2005


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Andrews & Weiler        Expires December 25, 2005               [Page 5]

