





PKIX Working Group                               S. Santesson (AddTrust)
INTERNET-DRAFT                             R. Housley (RSA Laboratories)
Expires August 2002                               T. Freeman (Microsoft)
                                                              April 2002

                Internet X.509 Public Key Infrastructure

                    Logotypes in X.509 certificates

                   <draft-ietf-pkix-logotypes-02.txt>

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002). All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   This document specifies a certificate extension for including
   logotypes in public key certificates and attribute certificates.

   Please send comments on this document to the ietf-pkix@imc.org
   mailing list.











Santesson, Housley, & Freeman    Expires: August 2002           [Page 1]

INTERNET DRAFT       Logotypes in X.509 Certificates          April 2002


                             Table of Contents

   1 Introduction .................................................    3
    1.1 Certificate-based Identification ..........................    4
    1.2 Selection of Certificates .................................    4
    1.3 Combination of Verification Techniques ....................    5
    1.4 Terminology ...............................................    6
   2 Different types of logotypes in Certificates .................    6
   3 Image formats ................................................    6
   4 Logotype extension ...........................................    7
   5 Type of certificates .........................................    9
   6 Use in Clients ...............................................    9
   7 Security considerations ......................................   10
   8 References ...................................................   11
   9 Intellectual Property Rights .................................   12

   Appendices

   A. ASN.1 definitions ...........................................   13
   B. Logotype placement ..........................................   13
    B.1 Qualifier .................................................   13
    B.2 Issuer and Subject Alt Names ..............................   13
    B.3 New extension .............................................   14
    B.4 Conclusion ................................................   14
   C. Author Addresses ............................................   15
   D. Full Copyright Statement ....................................   16

























Santesson, Housley, & Freeman    Expires: August 2002           [Page 2]

INTERNET DRAFT       Logotypes in X.509 Certificates          April 2002


1. Introduction

   The basic function of a certificate is to bind a public key to the
   identity of an entity (the subject). From a strictly technical
   viewpoint, this goal could be achieved by signing the identity of the
   subject together with its public key. However, the art of PKI has
   developed certificates far beyond this functionality in order to meet
   the needs of modern global networks and heterogeneous IT structures.

   Certificate users must be able to determine certificate policies,
   appropriate key usage, assurance level, and name form constraints.
   Before a relying party can make an informed decision whether a
   particular certificate is trustworthy and relevant for its intended
   usage, a certificate may be examined from several different
   perspectives.

   Systematic processing is necessary to determine whether a particular
   certificate meets the predefined prerequisites for an intended usage.
   Much of the information contained in certificates is appropriate and
   effective for machine processing; however, this information is not
   suitable for a corresponding human trust and recognition process.

   Humans prefer to structure information into categories and symbols.
   Most humans associate complex structures of reality with easy
   recognizable logotypes and marks. Humans tend to trust things that
   they recognize from previous experiences. Humans may examine
   information to confirm their initial reaction. Very few consumers
   actually read all terms and conditions they accept when accepting a
   service, rather they commonly act on trust derived from previous
   experience and recognition.

   A big part of this process is branding. Service providers and product
   vendors invest a lot of money and resources into creating a strong
   relation between positive user experiences and easily recognizable
   trademarks, servicemarks, and logotypes.

   Branding is also pervasive in identification instruments, including
   identification cards, passports, driver's licenses, credit cards,
   gasoline cards, and loyalty cards. Identification instruments are
   intended to identify the holder as a particular person or as member
   of community. The community may represent the subscribers of a
   service or any other group. Identification instruments, in physical
   form, commonly use logotypes and symbols, solely to enhance human
   recognition and trust in the identification instrument itself. They
   may also include a registered trademark to allow legal recourse for
   unauthorized duplication.

   Since certificates play an equivalent role in electronic exchanges,



Santesson, Housley, & Freeman    Expires: August 2002           [Page 3]

INTERNET DRAFT       Logotypes in X.509 Certificates          April 2002


   we examine the inclusion of logotypes in certificates. We consider
   certificate-based identification and certificate selection.

 1.1. Certificate-based Identification

   The need for human recognition depends on the manner in which
   certificates are used and whether certificates need to be visible to
   human users. If certificates are to be used in open environments and
   in applications that bring the user in conscious contact with the
   result of a certificate-based identification process, then human
   recognition is highly relevant, and it may be a necessity.

   Examples of such applications include:

     - Web server identification where a user identifies the owner
       of the web site.
     - Peer e-mail exchange in B2B, B2C, and private communications.
     - Exchange of medical records, and system for medical
       prescriptions.
     - Unstructured e-business applications (i.e., non-EDI
       applications).
     - Wireless client authenticating to a service provider.

   Most applications provide the human user with an opportunity to view
   the results of a successful certificate-based identification process.
   When the user takes the steps necessary to view these results, the
   user is presented with a view of a certificate. This solution has two
   major problems.  First, the function to view a certificate is often
   rather hard to find for a non-technical user. Second, the
   presentation of the certificate is too technical and, it is not user
   friendly. It contains no graphic symbols or logotypes to enhance
   human recognition.

   Many investigations have shown that users of today's applications do
   not take the steps necessary to view certificates. This could be due
   to poor user interfaces. Further, many applications are structured to
   hide certificates from users.  The application designers do not want
   to expose certificates to users at all.

 1.2. Selection of Certificates

   One situation where software applications must expose human users to
   certificates is when the user must select a single certificate from a
   portfolio of certificates. In some cases, the software application
   can use information within the certificates to filter the list for
   suitability; however, the user must be queried if more than one
   certificate is suitable. The human user must select one of them.




Santesson, Housley, & Freeman    Expires: August 2002           [Page 4]

INTERNET DRAFT       Logotypes in X.509 Certificates          April 2002


   This situation is comparable to a person selecting a suitable plastic
   card from his wallet. In this situation, substantial assistance is
   provided by card color, location, and branding.

   In order to provide similar support for certificate selection, the
   users need tools to easily recognize and distinguish certificates.
   Introduction of logotypes into certificates provides the necessary
   graphic.

 1.3. Combination of Verification Techniques

   The use of logotypes will in many cases affect the users decision to
   trust and use a certificate. It is therefore important that there is
   a distinct and clear architectural and functional distinction between
   the processes and objectives of the systematic certificate
   verification and human recognition.

   Systematic certification path verification determines whether the
   end-entity certificate can be verified according to defined policy.
   The algorithm for this verification is specified in RFC <TBD>
   [PKIX-1].

   The systematic processing provides assurance that the certificate is
   valid. It does not indicate whether the subject is entitled to any
   particular information or whether the subject ought to be trusted to
   perform a particular service. These are access control decisions.
   Automatic processing will make some access control decisions, but
   others, depending on the application context, involve the human user.

   In some situations, where automated procedures have failed to
   establish the suitability of the certificate to the task, the human
   user is the final arbitrator of the post certificate verification
   access control decisions. In the end, the human will decide whether
   or not to accept an executable email attachment, to release personal
   information, or follow the instructions displayed by a web browser.
   This decision will often be based on recognition and previous
   experience.

   The distinction between systematic processing and human processing is
   rather straightforward. They can be complementary. While the
   systematic process is focused on certification path construction and
   verification, the human acceptance process is focused on recognition
   and related previous experience.

   There are some situations where systematic processing and human
   processing interfere with each other.  These issues are discussed in
   the Security Considerations section.




Santesson, Housley, & Freeman    Expires: August 2002           [Page 5]

INTERNET DRAFT       Logotypes in X.509 Certificates          April 2002


 1.4. Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [STDWORDS].

2. Different Types of Logotypes in Certificates

   This specification defines the inclusion of three predefined logotype
   types.

     1) Community logotype
     2) Issuer organization logotype
     3) Subject organization logotype

   The community logotype - is the general mark for a community. It
   identifies a service concept for entity identification and
   certificate issuance. Many issuers may use a community logotype to
   co-brand with a global community in order to gain global recognition
   of its local service provision. This type of community branding is
   very common in the credit card business where local independent card
   issuers include a globally recognized brand (such as VISA and
   MasterCard).

   Issuer organization logotype - is a logotype representing the
   organization identified as part of the issuer name in the
   certificate.

   Subject organization logotype - is a logotype representing the
   organization identified in the subject name in the certificate.

3. Image formats

   This specification defines two image format types:

     - High Resolution (included by reference)
     - Low Resolution (icon-sized image embedded in the extension)

     Format restrictions:
                           High Resolution       Low Resolution
     +-----------------+---------------------+--------------------+
     | Image format    | JPEG or GIF         | JPEG or GIF        |
     +-----------------+---------------------+--------------------+
     | Size            | Max 150 x 50 pixels | 20 x 20 pixels     |
     +-----------------+---------------------+--------------------+
     | Color palette   | Unlimited           | 256 colors (8-bit) |
     +-----------------+---------------------+--------------------+




Santesson, Housley, & Freeman    Expires: August 2002           [Page 6]

INTERNET DRAFT       Logotypes in X.509 Certificates          April 2002


   A high resolution image SHOULD include a black border. Exceptions are
   such things as arrows or X's. These images SHOULD be fairly flat in
   appearance with little dimensioning or shading.

   There is no need to significantly increase the size of the
   certificate by including image data of logotypes in high quality
   format. Rather, a URI identifying the location to the logotype image
   and a one-way hash of the referenced data is included in the
   certificate.

   To enhance functionality for off-line and low bandwidth situations
   where reasonable access to high quality logotypes are not available,
   the icon-sized version of the logotype may optionally be stored
   directly in the certificate extension.

   Applications may also enhance processing and off-line functionality
   by cashing the higher quality logotype data.

4. Logotype extension

   The logotype extension MAY be included in public key certificates
   [PKIX-1] or attribute certificates [PKIX-AC]. The logotype extension
   MUST be identified by the following object identifier:

      id-pe-logotypeInfo OBJECT IDENTIFIER  ::= {id-pe XX}

   The logotype extension MUST have the following syntax:

      LogotypeInfo ::= SEQUENCE {
         communityLogo     [0] LogotypeData OPTIONAL,
         issuerLogo        [1] LogotypeData OPTIONAL,
         subjectLogo       [2] LogotypeData OPTIONAL,
         otherLogos        [3] SEQUENCE OF OtherLogotypeData OPTIONAL }

      OtherLogotypeData ::= SEQUENCE {
         logotypeTypeID    OBJECT IDENTIFIER,
         logotypeData      LogotypeData }

      LogotypeData ::= SEQUENCE {
         highRes           LogotypeReference OPTIONAL,
         lowRes            EmbeddedLogotype OPTIONAL }

      LogotypeReference ::= SEQUENCE {
         hashAlgorithm     AlgorithmIdentifier,
         logotypeHash      OCTET STRING,
         logotypeUri       IA5String }

      EmbeddedLogotype ::= SEQUENCE {



Santesson, Housley, & Freeman    Expires: August 2002           [Page 7]

INTERNET DRAFT       Logotypes in X.509 Certificates          April 2002


         imageFileExtn     IA5String, -- MUST be "JPEG" or "JPG" or "GIF"
         image             OCTET STRING }

   This extension MUST NOT be marked critical.

   At least one of the optional elements in the LogotypeInfo structure
   MUST be present. Whenever possible, the use of otherLogos should be
   avoided.

   The LogotypeReference structure explicitly identifies the one-way
   hash function employed. Implementations MUST support the SHA-1 [FIPS
   180-1] algorithm, and implementations MAY support other one-way hash
   functions.

   The predefined logotype types are:

      Community Logotype. If communityLogo is present, the logotype MUST
      represent the community to which the certificate issuer is a
      member. The communityLogo MAY be present in an end entity
      certificate or an attribute certificate. The communityLogo MUST
      NOT be present in a CA certificate.

      Issuer Organization Logotype.  If issuerLogo is present, the
      logotype MUST represent the issuer's organization. The logotype
      MUST be consistent with, and require the presence of, an
      organization name stored in the organization attribute in the
      issuer field (for either a public key certificate or attribute
      certificate). The issuerLogo MAY be present in an end entity
      certificate, a CA certificate, or an attribute certificate.

      Subject Organization Logotype. If subjectLogo is present, the
      logotype MUST represent the subject's organization. The logotype
      MUST be consistent with, and require the presence of, an
      organization name stored in the organization attribute in the
      subject field (for either a public key certificate or attribute
      certificate). The subjectLogo MAY be present in an end entity
      certificate, a CA certificate, or an attribute certificate.

   The relationship between the subject organization and the subject
   organization logotype and the relationship between the issuer and
   either the issuer organization logotype or the community logotype,
   are relationships claimed by the issuer. The policy under which the
   issuer checks these logotypes is outside the scope of this standard.

   Any URI pointing to a file containing the logotype data MUST include
   a file extension defining the image file format. The file extension
   is the last three or four letters of the file name, immediately
   following a period.  Implementations MUST support both the JPEG and



Santesson, Housley, & Freeman    Expires: August 2002           [Page 8]

INTERNET DRAFT       Logotypes in X.509 Certificates          April 2002


   GIF image formats. The JPEG image format MUST be identifier using a
   file extension of "JPG" or "JPEG". The GIF image format MUST be
   identified using the "GIF" file extension.

   The same three file extension strings ("JPG," "JPEG," and "GIF") are
   used to identify the format of embedded images.

   To ensure that certificates are not greatly enlarged by including
   embedded logotypes, restrictions are imposed on image size and color
   definition. Embedded images MUST NOT exceed 20 pixels by 20 pixels.
   Embedded images MUST use a 256-color (8-bit) palette. The size of an
   image conforming to these restrictions is about 750 octets.

5. Type of certificates

   Logotypes MAY be present in three types of certificates:

     - CA certificates
     - End-entity certificates
     - Attribute certificates

   CA certificates include self-signed certificates (often used to
   represent trust anchors) or Intermediate CA certificates.

   Some types of logotypes are not permitted in CA certificates. This
   ensures that logotypes are excludes from all aspects of certification
   path processing. As discussed above, logotypes are not intended to be
   part of certification path validation or any type of systematic
   processing. The sole purpose of logotypes is to enhance display of a
   particular certificate, regardless of its position in a certification
   path.

   Logotypes MUST NOT be an active component in certification path
   processing, and they are included in public key certificates and
   attribute certificates at the discretion of the certificate issuer.

6. Use in Clients

   All PKI implementations require relying party software to have some
   mechanism to determine whether a trusted CA issues a particular
   certificate. This is an issue for certification path validation,
   including consistent policy and name checking.

   After a certification path is successfully validated, the replying
   party must trust the information that the CA includes in the
   certificate, including any certificate extensions. The client
   software can choose to make use of such information, or the client
   software can ignore it. Current standards do not provide any



Santesson, Housley, & Freeman    Expires: August 2002           [Page 9]

INTERNET DRAFT       Logotypes in X.509 Certificates          April 2002


   mechanism for cross-certifying CAs to constrain subordinate CAs from
   including private extensions (see the security considerations
   section).

   Consequently, if relying party software accepts a CA, then it should
   be prepared to (unquestioningly) display the associated logotypes to
   its human user, given that it is configured to do so.

   However, if the relying party software is unable to successfully
   validate a particular certificate, then it MUST NOT display any
   associated logotype graphics.

7. Security considerations

   Logotypes are very difficult to securely and accurately define. Names
   are also difficult in this regard, but logotypes are even worse. It
   is quite difficult to specify what is, and what is not, a legitimate
   logotype of an organization. There is a whole legal structure around
   this issue, and it will not be repeated here. However, issuers should
   be aware of the implications of including images associated with a
   trademark or servicemark before doing so.

   As logotypes can be difficult (and sometimes expensive) to verify,
   this increases the possibility of errors related to assigning wrong
   logotypes to organizations.

   This is not a new issue for electronic identification instruments.
   It is already dealt with in numerous of similar situations in the
   physical world, including physical employee identification cards.
   Secondly, there are situations where identification of logotypes is
   rather simple and straightforward, such as logotypes for well-known
   industries and institutes. These issues should not stop those service
   providers who want to issue logotypes from doing so, where relevant.

   The premise used for the logotype work is that logotype graphics in a
   certificate are trusted only if the certificate is successfully
   validated within a valid path. It is however impossible to prevent
   fraudulent creation of certificates by non-validated issuers,
   containing names and logotypes that the issuer has no claim to. Such
   certificates could be created in an attempt to socially engineer a
   user into accepting a certificate. It is thus imperative that the
   representation of any certificate that fails to validate is not
   enhanced in any way by using the logotype graphic.

   Certification paths may also impose name constraints that are
   systematically checked during certification path processing, which,
   in theory, may be circumvented by logotypes.




Santesson, Housley, & Freeman    Expires: August 2002          [Page 10]

INTERNET DRAFT       Logotypes in X.509 Certificates          April 2002


   Certificate path processing does not constrain the inclusion of
   logotype data in certificates. A parent CA can constrain
   certification path validation such that subordinate CAs cannot issue
   valid certificates to end-entities outside a limited name space or
   outside specific certificate polices. A malicious CA can comply with
   these name and policy requirements and still include inappropriate
   logotypes in the certificates that it issues. These certificates will
   pass the certification path validation algorithm, which means the
   client will trust the logotypes in the certificates. Since there is
   no technical mechanism to prevent or control subordinate CAs from
   including the logotype extension or its contents, where appropriate,
   a parent CA could employ a legal agreement to impose a suitable
   restriction on the subordinate CA. This situation is not unique to
   the logotype extension.

   The controls available to a parent CA to protect itself from rogue
   subordinate CAs are non-technical. They include:

     - Contractual agreements of suitable behavior, including
       terms of liability and severance pay in case of material
       breach.

     - Control mechanisms and procedures to monitor and
       follow-up behavior of subordinate CAs.

     - Use of certificate policies to declare assurance level
       of logotype data as well as to guide applications on how
       to treat and display logotypes.

     - Use of revocation functions to revoke any misbehaving CA.

   There is not a simple, straightforward, and absolute technical
   solution. Rather, involved parties must settle some aspects of PKI
   outside the scope of technical controls. As such, issuers need to
   clearly identify and communicate the associated risks.

8. References

   [FIPS 180-1]  Federal Information Processing Standards Publication
                (FIPS PUB) 180-1, Secure Hash Standard, 17 April 1995.
                [Supersedes FIPS PUB 180 dated 11 May 1993.]

   [OLD-PKIX-1]  R. Housley, W. Ford, W. Polk, and D. Solo, "Internet
                 X.509 Public Key Infrastructure: Certificate and
                 CRL Profile", January 1999.

   [PKIX-1]      R. Housley, W. Ford, W. Polk, and D. Solo, "Internet
                 X.509 Public Key Infrastructure: Certificate and



Santesson, Housley, & Freeman    Expires: August 2002          [Page 11]

INTERNET DRAFT       Logotypes in X.509 Certificates          April 2002


                 CRL Profile", January 1999.
   {Replace with Son-of-2459 as soon as it is published.}

   [STDWORDS]    S. Bradner, "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
                 Requirement Levels", March 1997.

9. Intellectual Property Rights

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it
   has made any effort to identify any such rights.  Information on the
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and
   standards related documentation can be found in BCP-11.  Copies of
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of
   licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to
   obtain a general license or permission for the use of such
   proprietary rights by implementers or users of this specification can
   be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF Executive
   Director.
























Santesson, Housley, & Freeman    Expires: August 2002          [Page 12]

INTERNET DRAFT       Logotypes in X.509 Certificates          April 2002


APPENDICES

A. ASN.1 definitions

   TBD

B. Logotype Placement

   This Appendix documents reasons and rationales behind the technical
   solution selected in this standard.

   Three alternatives for the placement of the logotypes in a
   certificate have been considered.  They are:

     1. Inclusion in a policy qualifier;
     2. Inclusion in Issuer and Subject Alternative names extensions; and
     3. Inclusion in a separate certificate extension.

 B.1 Qualifier

   This alternative would include logotype data as a newly defined
   policy qualifier.

   Pros:

   - This solution provides a mechanism to directly control the use and
     display of logotypes under a particular policy.

   Cons:

   - RFC <TBD> [PKIX-1] recommends against use of qualifiers.

   - This is generally considered to be a major hack and stretch of
     semantics, since this type of data doesn't qualify a policy in any
     way.

 B.2 Issuer and Subject Alt Names

   This solution would use the other name form to include the issuer and
   community logotypes in the issuer alt name extension, and subject
   organization logo in the subject alt name extension.

   Pros:

   - This mechanism could possibly enable cross-certifying CAs to deny
     any subordinate CA the right to include logotypes in descending end
     entity certificates by listing the logotypes name form in
     excludedSubtrees.



Santesson, Housley, & Freeman    Expires: August 2002          [Page 13]

INTERNET DRAFT       Logotypes in X.509 Certificates          April 2002


   Cons:

   - Logotypes are not a name form and should not be treated as a
     displayable name.

   - It is generally understood that it should be possible to apply
     general name constraint mechanisms (as described in RFC 2459 as
     well as RFC <TBD> [PKIX-1]) to names in the subject and issuer
     alt name extension. This is not possible to do with logotypes
     since it is not a name form.

   - This split storage of logotype data into 2 different locations,
     which may make life worse for applications with no interest in
     logotypes.

   - It is generally agreed that inclusion of logotype data by no means
     should be regarded as critical data. This may interfere with the
     criticality policy of the alt name extensions, especially if the
     certificate has no attributes in the subject field, forcing the
     subject alt name to be set to critical.

   - This usage would possibly interfere with the resolution between
     IETF and ITU-T regarding use of permitted subtrees.

   - Since this solution may break current implementations it would
     possibly block adoption of logotypes.

 B.3 New extension

   This solution places logotype data in a new extension.

   Pros:

   - This is the cleanest solution.

   - This does not impact on legacy implementations.

   Cons:

   - This solution activates the issue whether this extension may be
     abused by a CA who include logotypes (in EE certificates) that
     violates the intention of a name constraints set by a chaining CA.
     This issue is addressed in the security consideration section
     below.

 B.4 Conclusion

   We must not destroy current structures. We must not create problems



Santesson, Housley, & Freeman    Expires: August 2002          [Page 14]

INTERNET DRAFT       Logotypes in X.509 Certificates          April 2002


   or confusion.

   Only the private extension solution satisfies both of these criteria.
   Therefore, the private extension was selected to carry logotype
   information.

   While the syntax and semantics of the X.509 public key certificate
   were used in this analysis, the logotype private extension can also
   be included in an X.509 attribute certificate.

C. Author Addresses

   Stefan Santesson
   AddTrust AB
   P.O. Box 465
   S-201 24 Malmoe
   Sweden
   stefan@addtrust.com


   Russell Housley
   RSA Laboratories
   918 Spring Knoll Drive
   Herndon, VA 20170
   USA
   rhousley@rsasecurity.com

   Trevor Freeman
   Microsoft Corporation
   One Microsoft Way
   Redmond WA 98052
   USA
   trevorf@microsoft.com


















Santesson, Housley, & Freeman    Expires: August 2002          [Page 15]

INTERNET DRAFT       Logotypes in X.509 Certificates          April 2002


D.  Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002). All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  In addition, the
   ASN.1 modules presented in Appendices A and B may be used in whole or
   in part without inclusion of the copyright notice.  However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process shall be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns. This
   document and the information contained herein is provided on an "AS
   IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK
   FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
   LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL
   NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY
   OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.























Santesson, Housley, & Freeman    Expires: August 2002          [Page 16]

