

Network Working Group
Internet Draft
Expiration Date: September 2001

                           Hirokazu Ishimatsu        Zhi-Wei Lin
                           Shinya Tanaka             Yangguang Xu
                           Japan Telecom             Lucent Technologies

                           Juergen Heiles            Yang Cao
                           Siemens AG                Sycamore Networks

                                                            March 2001


              Security Requirements for Lightpath Services

                draft-ishimatsu-ipo-lightpath-scrty-00.txt




Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.


Abstract

   Many efforts have been introduced to achieve lightpath services
   using optical cross-connects (OXCs). This document surveys security
   prerequisites to be considered when lightpath services are offered
   to users.

   Section 5 discussed prerequisites for lightpath services. Section 6
   discussed required actions for the prerequisites that are described
   in section 5. Section 7 discussed security requirements for possible
   business models of lightpath services.

H. Ishimatsu et al.                                             [Page 1]
Internet Draft  Security Requirements for Lightpath Services  March 2001

Table of Contents

    1    Specification   ............................................. 2
    2    Acronyms   .................................................. 2
    3    Introduction   .............................................. 2
    4    Lightpath services   ........................................ 3
    5    Prerequisites for lightpath services   ...................... 3
    6    Required actions for prerequisites   ........................ 4
    7    Security requirements for business models of lightpath
         services   .................................................. 6
    8    Acknowledgement   ........................................... 7
    9    References   ................................................ 7
    10   Security Considerations   ................................... 7
    11   Authors' Addresses   ........................................ 7


1. Specification

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119.


2. Acronyms
   
   ASTN         Automatic switched Transport Network
   BIP          Bit Interleaved Parity
   CPE          Customer Premises Equipment
   CRC          Cyclic Redundancy Check
   DoS          Denial of Service
   FEC          Forward Error Correction
   ISP          Internet Service Provider
   NMS          Network Management System
   OTN          Optical Transport Network
   OXC          Optical Cross-connect
   SLA          Service Level Agreement


3. Introduction
   
   In these days, traffic demand has been increasing rapidly because of 
   the explosive spread of the internet and telecommunication has been 
   getting more and more essential to our daily life. Under such a 
   circumstance, it is obvious that the layer 1 optical network, on
   which data is carried, is important as the backbone of
   telecommunication. Therefore layer 1 optical network should be
   reliable and secured in order to function as the necessary
   infrastructure.

   In addition to that, it is often said that generation shift in layer
   1 optical network is necessary to deal with the explosion of traffic
   demand. One of such next generation layer 1 network is ASTN
   (Automatic Switched Transport Network)[ITU-ASTN]. ASTN is able to
   supply on-demand lightpath provisioning by users and offer users
   
H. Ishimatsu et al.                                             [Page 2]
Internet Draft  Security Requirements for Lightpath Services  March 2001

   lightpath services. This means the layer 1 connection setup is
   controlled by users. Therefore it needs very severe accounting,
   call acceptance, billing, etc.
   
   The remainder of this draft claims security requirements for
   lightpath services.
   
   
4.Lightpath services

   Lightpath services are to offer users end-to-end connectivity. These
   connectivity may be in the form of SONET/SDH rate services, emerging
   OTN-based services, and transparent wavelength services.


5. Security prerequisites for lightpath services
   
   The following items are related to the security aspect of lightpath 
   services

   5.1 Confidentiality

   A lightpath should be disclosed only to authorized persons, entities
   and processes at authorized time and in the authorized manner.

   5.2 Integrity

   The characteristics of data and information that a lightpath carries
   should be accurate and complete. While a lightpath is offered, the
   presentation of accuracy and completeness should be kept. This 
   characteristic is inherent to the network design of each service 
   provider.

   5.3 Serviceability

   A lightpath should be available on demand by an authorized entity.
   An authorized entity should be able to request service for a light
   path on demand.

   5.4 Accountability

   It should be ensured that the billable actions of an entity can be
   allocatable to the correct account.

   5.5 Authenticity

   It should be ensured that the identity of a subject or resource is
   the one claimed authenticity. Authenticity applies to entities such
   as users, processes, systems and information.

   5.6 Reliability/Availability

   Intended behavior and results should be consistent with that agreed 
   between the authorized entity and the service provider.

H. Ishimatsu et al.                                             [Page 3]
Internet Draft  Security Requirements for Lightpath Services  March 2001

   5.7 Ethics

   Lightpath services should be provided and used in such a manner that
   the rights and legitimate interests of others are respected.


6. Required actions for prerequisites

   6.1 Confidentiality

   lightpaths on each link are isolated by wavelengths. Therefore
   confidentiality of each lightpath is naturally kept. Encryption of 
   data at application level can add additional confidentiality to a
   lightpath. As the connection-oriented world does not have issues
   with merging of packets, user traffic isolation and thus
   confidentiality mechanisms are not as critical. However,
   misconnection may still occur due to defected cross-connects by
   equipment fault or miss-destination by human error; thus a mechanism
   to ensure no misconnection is needed. One example of this mechanism
   may be making lightpath requestors send their IDs to lightpath
   receivers and allowing lightpath receivers to decide if they accept
   the lightpath by the ID sent.

   6.2 Integrity

   Perfect integrity is a trade-off against infinite-cost. Integrity
   requirements should be quantified, and those quantified requirements
   should be kept less than the thresholds set by a lightpath service
   provider in practice.
   
   Some performance monitoring scheme should be done in order to
   quantify integrity requirements. At wavelength level, performance can
   be monitored by analog measurements such as S/N, toned modulation
   monitor[TMM], and etc. In the case of transparent end-to-end
   lightpath service where optical signal is not terminated digitally 
   within a service provider's domain, analog type of measurements
   should be performed. At upper layers, where optical signal is
   terminated digitally, Digital performance monitoring, such as FEC,
   BIP, CRC and etc., can be done. For the emerging OTN-based network,
   the tandem connection monitoring may be used to provide flexible
   monitoring points across multiple sub-networks. Multiple performance
   monitoring schemes at multiple layers may be needed to keep integrity
   of data. Choice of performance monitoring scheme depends on service
   provider's policy and technical constraints.

   6.3 Serviceability

   Any lightpath service provider cannot guarantee 100%
   serviceability since denial of service (DoS) can be occurred by
   network failures, customer premises equipment (CPE) failures,
   shortage of network resource, and etc.. Practical actions that
   service providers can do is to set an objective percentage of
   serviceability and try to keep that percentage as possible as they
   can. An objective percentage of serviceability may be contracted
         
H. Ishimatsu et al.                                             [Page 4]
Internet Draft  Security Requirements for Lightpath Services  March 2001

   between a lightparh service provider and its customer as a single
   item, or may be included in the concept of availability. The way to
   show customers serviceability depends on service provider's policy.
   
   In order to maintain serviceability, DoS should be considered. DoS is
   categorized into two. One is the DoS caused by the network side, for
   example, network equipment failures, shortage of network resource,
   and etc.. The other is the DoS caused by the user side, for example, 
   CPE failures, destined end points being in use. From an SLA
   perspective, the network side DoS and the user side DoS should be
   distinguishable.
   
   As mentioned above, one possible cause of the network side DoS is
   shortage of network resource. If network resource is left little and
   someone tries to create a new lightpath, DoS might occur. To prevent
   this situation, network resource should be always monitored and some
   proactive action should be taken (for example, NMS alerts shortage of
   network resource when remained resource becomes less than 10%).
   
   Another aspect of DoS is DoS attack. DoS attack means that a
   malicious person continue to create a light path destined to some end
   point so that other persons cannot create a lightpath to that end
   point. In order to avoid malicious persons, users of lightpath
   services should be identified, authorized and managed by a service
   provider.

   6.4 Accountability

   In order to keep accountability, entities should be identified
   whenever they use lightpath services. In addition usage history of
   each entity's billable actions should be recorded.

   6.5 Authenticity

   To ensure authenticity, passwords, digital signatures, biometrics
   and etc. should be used between entities and a service provider.

   6.6 Reliability/Availability

   To make lightpath services reliable, MTBF and MTTR of the total
   lightpath system should be calculated, and managed by each service
   provider.

   6.7 Ethics

   In order to protect the rights and legitimate interests of others, 
   appropriate rules should be applied to users of lightpath services.
   Those rules may be on contracts.







H. Ishimatsu et al.                                             [Page 5]
Internet Draft  Security Requirements for Lightpath Services  March 2001

7. Security requirements for business models of lightpath services

   As mentioned in [ASON-UNI], layer 1 carriers lease a point-to-point
   service to customers. Layer 1 carriers cannot make any assumption
   about the business of their customers. A lightpath consists of a set
   of wavelength links, and links are connected with OXCs.

   From customers' view, customers construct user networks on the layer
   1 network which is leased from layer 1 carriers. Customers can
   construct any type of user network and can provide any type of
   services.

   The lightpath service is a layer 1 service, not layer 2 or above. So,
   customer can do business using any type of networks including not
   only packet networks but also circuit networks. 

   The path of light is able to be changed dynamically with some
   signalling protocols.
   
   Followings are some major business models using lightpath services;

   (a) ISP owning all layer 1 infrastructure
     ISP provides client service on its own layer 1 network. The ISP is
     its own layer 1 carrier and uses lightpath services for itself.
     Therefore there is no security issue between the layer 1 carrier
     and the ISP because they are the same entity. However internal
     security issue in the carrier exists. Only authorized persons
     should be able to change the configuration of layer 1 network.

   (b) ISP leasing partial or whole layer 1 infrastructure
     ISP provides client service, but leases partial or whole layer 1
     network from layer 1 carriers. There are security issues between
     the layer 1 carrier and the ISP. Prior to offering the ISP a
     lightpath, the ISP should be identified and authorized by the layer
     1 carrier. Any billable deeds of the ISP should be accountable 
     while the ISP uses a lightpath. On the other hand, the layer 1
     carrier should keep confidentiality and integrity of the ISP's
     data. the layer 1 infrastructure should be reliable as well.

   (c) Retailer or wholesaler for multi-services
     The Customer (retailer/wholesaler) leases layer 1 infrastructure
     from layer 1 carriers and again sells it to others. Between the 
     layer 1 carrier and its customer, the same security issues as in
     case (b) exist. Between the customer and the customer's customer,
     certain security issues apply. However this relation ship is out of
     the scope.

   (d) Carriers carrier, or bandwidth broker
     The customer leases layer 1 infrastructure from layer 1 carriers
     (carriers carrier) and uses it as its layer 1 infrastructure. The
     customer network is likely to be a circuit network. The same
     security issues as in case (b) exist.



H. Ishimatsu et al.                                             [Page 6]
Internet Draft  Security Requirements for Lightpath Services  March 2001

8. Acknowledgment

   The authors would like to thank Susumu Yoneda, Eve Varma, John
   Ellson, and Siva Sankaranarayanan for their helpful comments on this
   work.


9. References

[ITU-ASTN] ITU-T SG13 Draft Recommendation "G.astn; Architecture for the
           Automatic Switched Transport Network", work in progress,
           November 2000.

[TMM]      Ivan P. Kaminow et al., "OPTICAL FIBER TELECOMMUNICATIONS III
           A", p.280, 1997.

[ASON-UNI] Curtis Brownmiller et al., "Requirements on the ASON UNI", AN
           SI T1X1.5/2000-194, October 2000.


10. Security Considerations

   This document discussed general security requirements for lightpath
   services. In each prerequisite, further study in needed in order to
   implement secured lighpath services practically. It should be noted
   that the listed security requirements apply to all kinds of automatic
   switched layer 1 services offered to users, not only to lightpath
   services (e.g. SDH/SONET TDM services).
   
   
11. Authors' Addresses

    Hirokazu Ishimatsu
    Japan Telecom Co., Ltd.
    2-9-1 Hatchobori, Chuo-ku, Tokyo 104-0032 Japan
    Phone: +81 3 5540 8493
    Fax:   +81 3 5540 8485
    EMail: hirokazu@japan-telecom.co.jp

    Shinya Tanaka
    Japan Telecom Co., Ltd.
    2-9-1 Hatchobori, Chuo-ku, Tokyo 104-0032 Japan
    Phone: +81 3 5540 8493
    Fax:   +81 3 5540 8485
    EMail: tnk@japan-telecom.co.jp

    Zhi-Wei Lin
    Lucent Technologies
    101 Crawfords Corner Red, Room 3C-512, Holmdel, NJ 07733-3030, USA
    Phone: +1 731 949 5141
    Fax:   +1 731 949 3210
    EMail: zwlin@lucent.com



H. Ishimatsu et al.                                             [Page 7]
Internet Draft  Security Requirements for Lightpath Services  March 2001

    Yangguang Xu
    Lucent Technologies
    21-2A41, 1600 Osgood Street, North Andover, MA 01845, USA
    Phone: +1 978 960 6105
    Fax:   +1 978 960 6329
    Email: xuyg@lucent.com

    Juergen Heiles
    Siemens AG
    ICN TR ON BS, Munich, Germany
    Phone: +49 89 722 48664
    Fax:   +49 89 722 31508
    EMail: juergen.heiles@icn.siemens.de

    Yang Cao
    Sycamore Networks
    10 Elizabeth Dr., Chelmsford, MA 01824, USA
    Phone: +1 978 367 2518
    Fax:   +1 978 256 4203
    EMail: yang.cao@sycamorenet.com



































H. Ishimatsu et al.                                            [Page 8]