IPv6 Operations Working Group
Internet Draft                                        Jim Bound (Editor)
Document: draft-ietf-v6ops-ent-scenarios-00.txt          Hewlett Packard
Obsoletes: draft-pouffary-v6ops-ent-v6net-03.txt
Expires: April 2004


                   IPv6 Enterprise Network Scenarios

                <draft-ietf-v6ops-ent-scenarios-00.txt>


Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   This document is a submission by the Internet Protocol IPv6 Working
   Group of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF).  Comments should
   be submitted to the ipng@sunroof.eng.sun.com mailing list.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.


Abstract

   This document describes the scenarios for IPv6 deployment within
   Enterprise networks.  It will focus upon an Enterprise set of network
   base scenarios with assumptions, coexistence with legacy IPv4 nodes,
   networks, and applications, and network infrastructure requirements.
   These requirements will be used to provide analysis to determine a
   set of Enterprise solutions in a later document.
















draft-ietf-v6ops-ent-scenarios-00.txt  Expires April  2004      [Page 1]


Internet Draft     IPv6 Enterprise Network Scenarios        October 2003


Table of Contents:

1.  Introduction................................................3
2.  Terminology.................................................5
3.  Base Scenarios..............................................6
3.1  Base Scenarios Defined.....................................6
3.2  Scenarios Characteristics..................................6
3.3  Base Scenario Examples.....................................8
4.  Support for Legacy IPv4 Nodes and Applications..............9
4.1  IPv4 Tunnels to Encapsulate IPv6...........................9
4.2  IPv6 Tunnels to Encapsulate IPv4..........................10
4.3  IPv6 communicating with IPv4..............................10
5.  Network Infrastructure Requirements........................10
5.1  DNS.......................................................10
5.2  Routing...................................................10
5.3  Autoconfiguration.........................................11
5.4  Security..................................................11
5.5  Applications..............................................11
5.6  Network Management........................................11
5.7  Address Planning..........................................11
6.  Security Considerations....................................12
7.  References.................................................12
7.1  Normative References......................................12
7.2  Non-Normative References..................................12
Document Acknowledgments.......................................12
Authors-Design Team Contact Information........................13
Intellectual Property Statement................................14
Full Copyright Statement.......................................14
Acknowledgement................................................15































draft-ietf-v6ops-ent-scenarios-00.txt  Expires April  2004      [Page 2]


Internet Draft     IPv6 Enterprise Network Scenarios        October 2003


1.  Introduction

   This document describes the scenarios for IPv6 deployment within
   Enterprise networks.  It will focus upon an Enterprise set of network
   base scenarios with assumptions, coexistence with legacy IPv4 nodes,
   networks, and applications, and network infrastructure requirements.
   These requirements will be used to provide analysis to determine a
   set of Enterprise solutions in a later document.

   The audience for this document is the enterprise network team
   considering deployment of IPv6.  The document will be useful for
   Enterprise teams that will have to determine the IPv6 transition
   strategy for their enterprise.  It is expected those teams include
   members from management, network operations, and engineering. The
   scenarios presented provide an example set of cases the Enterprise
   can use to build an IPv6 network scenario.

   To frame the discussion, the document will describe a set of
   scenarios and characteristics for each scenario. It is impossible to
   define every possible Enterprise scenario that will apply to IPv6
   adoption and transition.

   Each enterprise will select the transition that best supports their
   business requirements. Any attempt to define a default or one-size-
   fits-all transition scenario, will simply not work. This document
   does not try to depict the drivers for adoption of IPv6 by an
   Enterprise.

   While it is difficult to quantify all the potential motivations for
   enterprise network teams to move to IPv6, there are some cases where
   an abstract description is possible.  The document presents three
   example motivations as a general use case. This model can be used to
   define additional abstractions, for the Enterprise to define
   scenarios to fit their requirements.

   The first scenario assumes the Enterprise decides to deploy IPv6 in
   parallel with IPv4.  The second scenario assumes the Enterprise
   decides to deploy IPv6 because of a specific set of applications the
   Enterprise wants to use over an IPv6 network.  The third scenario
   assumes an Enterprise is building a new network or re-structuring an
   existing network and decides to deploy IPv6.  The document then
   defines a set of characteristics that must be analyzed.  The document
   then provides several scenario examples using the characteristics to
   depict the requirements. These are common Enterprise deployment cases
   to depict the challenges for the Enterprise to transition a network
   to IPv6.

   The document then discusses the issues of supporting Legacy functions
   on the network, while the transition is in process, and the network
   infrastructure components required to be analyzed by the Enterprise.
   The interoperation with legacy functions within the Enterprise will
   be required for all transition except possibly by a new network that
   will be IPv6 from inception.  The network infrastructure components
   will inform the Enterprise of key points of transition in their
   networks that require consideration for IPv6 deployment and
   transition.

   Using the scenarios, characteristics, and examples in the document an


draft-ietf-v6ops-ent-scenarios-00.txt  Expires April  2004      [Page 3]


Internet Draft     IPv6 Enterprise Network Scenarios        October 2003


   Enterprise can define a scenario. Understanding the legacy functions
   and network infrastructure components required, the Enterprise can
   determine the network operations required to deploy IPv6. The tools
   and mechanisms to support IPv6 deployment operations will require
   Enterprise analysis.  The analysis to determine the tools and
   mechanisms to support the scenarios is the next document for the
   Enterprise network.





















































draft-ietf-v6ops-ent-scenarios-00.txt  Expires April  2004      [Page 4]


Internet Draft     IPv6 Enterprise Network Scenarios        October 2003


2.  Terminology

   Enterprise Network    - An Enterprise Network is a network that has
                           multiple links, a router connection to a
                           Provider, and is actively managed by a
                           network operations entity.

   Provider              - A Provider is an entity that provides
                           services and connectivity to the Internet or
                           other private external networks for the
                           Enterprise Network.

   IPv6/IPv4             - A node or network capable of supporting both
                           IPv6 and IPv4.

   IPv4 only             - A node or network capable of supporting only
                           IPv4.

   IPv6 only             - A node or network capable of supporting only
                           IPv6.








































draft-ietf-v6ops-ent-scenarios-00.txt  Expires April  2004      [Page 5]


Internet Draft     IPv6 Enterprise Network Scenarios        October 2003


3.  Base Scenarios

   Three base scenarios are defined to capture the essential abstraction
   set for the Enterprise. Each scenario has assumptions and
   requirements. This is not an exhaustive set of scenarios, but a base
   set of general cases.



3.1  Base Scenarios Defined

   Scenario 1: Enterprise with an existing IPv4 network wants to deploy
               IPv6 in parallel with their IPv4 network.

**Note To V6ops WG: Would a network topology map be useful here?

     Assumptions: The IPv4 characteristics have an equivalent in
                  IPv6.

     Requirements: Don't break IPv4 network characteristics
                   assumptions with IPv6. IPv6 should be equivalent or
                   "better" than the ones in IPv4, however, it is
                   understood that IPv6 is not required to solve every
                   single problem.

    Scenario 2: Enterprise with an existing IPv4 network wants to deploy a
                set of particular IPv6 "applications" (application is
                voluntarily loosely defined here, e.g. peer to peer).
                The IPv6 deployment is limited to the minimum required to
                operate this set of applications.

**Note To V6ops WG: Would a network topology map be useful here?

     Assumptions: IPv6 software/hardware components for the application
                  are available.

     Requirements: Don't break IPv4 network operations.

   Scenario 3: Enterprise deploying a new network or re-structuring an
               existing network, decides IPv6 is the basis for network
               communication.

**Note To V6ops WG: Would a network topology map be useful here?

     Assumptions: Required IPv6 network components are available, or
                  available over some defined timeline.

     Requirements: Interoperation and Coexistence with IPv4 network
                   operations and applications are required for
                   communications.



3.2  Scenarios Characteristics

   This section defines the characteristics that exist for the above
   Enterprise scenarios.  This is not an exhaustive set of
   characteristics, but a base list that can be expanded by the


draft-ietf-v6ops-ent-scenarios-00.txt  Expires April  2004      [Page 6]


Internet Draft     IPv6 Enterprise Network Scenarios        October 2003


   Enterprise. The characteristics components are presented as questions
   that the Enterprise must determine as part of defining the scenario.
   The answers to these questions will identify actions that are
   required to deploy IPv6.

   Characteristic 1 - Providers for External Network Operation
   - Is external connectivity required?
   - One site vs. multiple sites?
   - Leased lines or VPN?
   - IPv4 existing address ownership (Provider based addresses vs.
     Provider independent addresses)?
   - Multi-homing?
   - Do ISPs offer IPv6 service?
   - Is there an external data-center?

   Characteristic 2 - Enterprise Application Analysis
   - List of applications in use?
   - Can the application be upgraded to IPv6?
   - Can the application support both IPv4 and IPv6?

   Characteristic 3 - Enterprise IT Department Operations Analysis
   - Who "owns"/"operate" the network: in house, outsourced?
   - Is a Tele-commuter work force supported?
   - Is inter-site communications required?
   - Is network mobility used?
   - IPv4 addressing plan?
   - IPv4 addressing assignment procedure (DHCP vs. manual)?
   - Internal IPv4 routing protocols used?
   - External IPv4 routing protocols used?
   - IPv4 Network Management policy/procedure?
   - IPv4 QoS policy/procedure?
   - IPv4 Security policy/procedure?
   - List of "network operation" software that may be impacted by IPv6?
     - DNS
     - Management (SNMP & ad-hoc tools)
     - Enterprise Network Servers
     - Mail Servers
     - High Availability Software for Nodes
     - Directory Services
   - Are all these software functions upgradeable to IPv6?
   - If not upgradeable, then what are the workarounds?
   - Do any of the software functions store IP addresses?
   - List of "network operation" hardware that may be impacted by IPv6
     - Routers/switches
     - Firewalls
     - Load balancers
     - VPN Points of Entry/Exit
     - Security Servers
     - Printers
     - Network Interconnect for Platforms
     - Intelligent Network Interface Cards
     - Network Storage Devices
   - Are all these hardware functions upgradeable to IPv6?
   - If not, what are the workarounds?
   - Do any of the hardware functions store IP addresses?

   Characteristics 4 - Enterprise Network Management System
   - Performance Management Required?


draft-ietf-v6ops-ent-scenarios-00.txt  Expires April  2004      [Page 7]


Internet Draft     IPv6 Enterprise Network Scenarios        October 2003


   - Network Management Applications Required?
   - Configuration Management Required?
   - Policy Management and Enforcement Required?
   - Security Management Required?
   - Management of Transition Tools and Mechanisms?
   - What new considerations does IPv6 create for Network
     Management?



3.3  Base Scenario Examples

   This section presents a set of Base Scenario Examples and is not an
   exhaustive list of examples.  These examples were selected to provide
   further clarity of Base Scenarios within an Enterprise of a less
   abstract nature.

   Example Network A:

   A distributed network across a number of geographically separated
   campuses.

   - External network operation.
   - External connectivity required.
   - Multiple sites connected by leased lines.
   - Provider independent IPv4 addresses.
   - ISP does not offer IPv6 service.
   - Private Leased Lines no Service Provider Used

   Applications run by the enterprise:
   - Internal Web/Mail.
   - File servers.
   - Java applications.
   - Collaborative development tools.
   - Enterprise Resource Applications.
   - Multimedia Applications.
   - Financial Enterprise Applications.
   - Data Warehousing Applications.

   Internal network operation:
   - In house operation of the network.
   - DHCP (v4) is used for all desktops, servers use static address
     configuration.
   - The DHCP server to update naming records for dynamic desktops uses
     dynamic DNS.
   - A web based tool is used to enter name to address mappings for
     statically addressed servers.
   - Network management is done using SNMP.
   - All routers and switches are upgradeable to IPv6.
   - Existing firewalls can be upgraded to support IPv6 rules.
   - Load balancers do not support IPv6, upgrade path unclear.
   - Peer-2-Peer Application and Security supported.

   Example Network B:

   A bank running a large ATM network supporting an order of magnitude
   number of transactions per second, with access to a central database
   on an external network from the ATM network:


draft-ietf-v6ops-ent-scenarios-00.txt  Expires April  2004      [Page 8]


Internet Draft     IPv6 Enterprise Network Scenarios        October 2003


   - External connectivity not required.
   - Multiple sites connected by VPN.
   - Multiple sites connected by Native IP protocol.

   Applications in the enterprise:
   - ATM transaction application.
   - ATM management application.
   - Financial Software and Database.

   Internal Network Operation:
   - Existing firewalls can be upgraded to support IPv6 rules.
   - Load balancers do not support IPv6, upgrade path unclear.

   Example Network C:

   A Security Defense Network Operation:

   - External network required at secure specific points.
   - Network is its own Internet.
   - Network must be able absorb ad-hoc creation of sub-Networks.
   - Entire parts of the Network are completely mobile.
   - All nodes on the network can be mobile (including routers)
   - Network True High-Availability is mandatory.
   - Network must be able to be managed from ad-hoc location.
   - All nodes must be able to be configured from stateless mode.

   Applications run by the Enterprise:
   - Multimedia streaming of audio, video, and data for all nodes.
   - Data computation and analysis on stored and created data.
   - Transfer of data coordinate points to sensor devices.
   - Data and Intelligence gathering applications from all nodes.

   Internal Network Operations:
   - All packets must be secured end-2-end with encryption.
   - Intrusion Detection exists on all network entry points.
   - Network must be able to bolt on to the Internet to share
     bandwidth as required from Providers.
   - VPNs can be used but NAT can never be used.
   - Nodes must be able to access IPv4 legacy applications over IPv6
     network.



4.  Support for Legacy IPv4 Nodes and Applications

   The Enterprise network will have to support the coexistence of IPv6
   and IPv4, to support legacy IPv4 applications and nodes. The
   Enterprise user has the following choices for that coexistence to
   consider today.



4.1  IPv4 Tunnels to Encapsulate IPv6

   IPv6/IPv4 nodes want to communicate using IPv6, but an IPv4 Internal
   router is between them. These nodes could also be Mobile nodes on a
   visited network.



draft-ietf-v6ops-ent-scenarios-00.txt  Expires April  2004      [Page 9]


Internet Draft     IPv6 Enterprise Network Scenarios        October 2003


4.2  IPv6 Tunnels to Encapsulate IPv4

   An IPv4/IPv6 node wants to communicate with a legacy IPv4 node and is
   on an IPv6 only link and routing domain.



4.3  IPv6 communicating with IPv4

   An IPv6 only node wants to communicate with an IPv4 only node.

   In cases where the IPv6 host cannot be a dual stack, in order to
   continue support of communications with IPv4 nodes an IPv4/v6
   translator is required.  Introduction of such translator will prevent
   usage of end-to-end security and application carrying embedded IP
   addressing information.

   **Note to V6ops WG: Should we discuss porting of applications too in
   the legacy section?




5.  Network Infrastructure Requirements

   The Enterprise will need to determine what network infrastructure
   components require enhancements or to be added for deployment of
   IPv6. This infrastructure will need to be analyzed and understood as
   a critical resource to manage.



5.1  DNS

   DNS will now have to support both IPv4 and IPv6 DNS records and the
   Enterprise will need to determine how the DNS is to be managed and
   accessed, and secured.

   **Note to V6ops WG: Should we get into other DNS issues?



5.2  Routing

   Interior and Exterior routing will be required to support both IPv4
   and IPv6 routing protocols, and the coexistence of IPv4 and IPv6 over
   the enterprise network.  The enterprise will need to define the
   routing topology, and any ingress and egress points to provider
   networks.  The enterprise will also need to define points of
   transition mechanism to use within that routing topology.

   IPv6/IPv4 routers should be monitored to ensure the router has
   sufficient storage for both IPv6 and IPv4 route tables.  Existing
   network design principles to limit the number of routes in the
   network, such as prefix aggregation, become more critical with the
   addition of IPv6 to an existing IPv4 network.

   **Note to V6ops WG: Above is example of additional text we could add


draft-ietf-v6ops-ent-scenarios-00.txt  Expires April  2004     [Page 10]


Internet Draft     IPv6 Enterprise Network Scenarios        October 2003


   to each component we list here.  Are there other Routing issues?




5.3  Autoconfiguration

   IPv6 introduces the concept of stateless autoconfiguration in
   addition to statefull autoconfiguration.  The enterprise will have to
   determine the best method of autoconfiguration, for their network.

   **Note to V6ops WG: Should we get into other autoconfiguration
   issues?



5.4  Security

   Current existing mechanisms used for IPv4 to provide security need to
   be supported for IPv6 within the Enterprise.  IPv6 should create no
   new security concerns for IPv4.

   **Note to V6ops WG: Should we get into other security issues?



5.5  Applications

   Existing applications will need to be ported to support both IPv4 and
   IPv6.

   **Note to V6ops WG: Should we get into other application issues?




5.6  Network Management

   The addition of IPv6 and points of transition will need to be managed
   by the Enterprise network operations center.  This will affect many
   components of the network and software required on nodes.

   **Note to V6ops WG: Should we get into other Management issues?



5.7  Address Planning

   The address space within the Enterprise will need to be defined and
   coordinated with the routing topology of the Enterprise network.

   **Note to V6ops WG: Should we get into other Address Planning issues?

   **Note to V6ops WG: What other components are we missing?






draft-ietf-v6ops-ent-scenarios-00.txt  Expires April  2004     [Page 11]


Internet Draft     IPv6 Enterprise Network Scenarios        October 2003


6.  Security Considerations

   This document lists scenarios for the deployment of IPv6 in
   enterprise networks, and there are no security considerations
   associated with making such a list.

   There will security considerations for the deployment of IPv6 in each
   of these scenarios, but they will be addressed in the document that
   includes the analysis of each scenario.



7.  References



7.1  Normative References

   None at this time.



7.2  Non-Normative References

   None at this time.



Document Acknowledgments

   The Authors would like to acknowledge contributions from the
   following: IETF v6ops Working Group, Alan Beard, Brian Carpenter,
   Alain Durand, and Bob Hinden.



























draft-ietf-v6ops-ent-scenarios-00.txt  Expires April  2004     [Page 12]


Internet Draft     IPv6 Enterprise Network Scenarios        October 2003


Authors-Design Team Contact Information

Send email to ent-v6net@viagenie.qc.ca to contact the design team and send comments on the draft to v6ops@ops.ietf.org.

   Yanick Pouffary (Chair of Design Team)
   HP Competency Center
   950, Route des Colles, BP027,
   06901 Sophia Antipolis CEDEX
   FRANCE
   Phone: + 33492956285
   Email: Yanick.pouffary@hp.com

   Jim Bound (Editor)
   Hewlett Packard
   110 Spitbrook Road
   Nashua, NH 03062
   USA
   Phone: 603.884.0062
   Email: jim.bound@hp.co

   Marc Blanchet

   Tony Hain

   Paul Gilbert
   Cisco Systems
   1 Penn Plaza, 5th floor,
   NY, NY 10119
   USA
   Phone: 212.714.4334
   Email: pgilbert@cisco.com

   Margaret Wasserman
   Wind River
   10 Tara Blvd, Suite 330
   Nashua, NH 03062 USA
   USA
   Phone: 603.897.2067
   Email: mrw@windriver.com

   Jason Goldschmidt
   Sun Microsystems
   M/S UMPK17-103
   17 Network Circle
   Menlo Park, CA 94025
   USA
   Phone:   (650)-786-3502
   Fax:  (650)-786-8250
   Email:jason.goldschmidt@sun.com

   Aldrin Isaac
   Bloomberg L.P.
   499 Park Avenue
   New York, NY 10022
   USA
   Phone: 212.940.1812
   Email: aisaac@bloomberg.com


draft-ietf-v6ops-ent-scenarios-00.txt  Expires April  2004     [Page 13]


Internet Draft     IPv6 Enterprise Network Scenarios        October 2003


   Tim Chown

   Jordi Palet Martinez
   Consulintel
   San Jose Artesano, 1
   Madrid, SPAIN
   Phone: +34 91 151 81 99
   Fax:   +34 91 151 81 98
   Email: jordi.palet@consulintel.es

   Fred Templin
   Nokia
   313 Fairchild Drive
   Mountain View, CA 94043
   USA
   Phone: 650.625.2331
   Email: ftemplin@iprg.nokia.com

   Roy Brabson
   IBM
   PO BOX 12195
   3039 Cornwallis Road
   Research Triangle Park, NC 27709
   USA
   Phone: +1 919 254 7332
   Email: rbrabson@us.ibm.com



Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it
   has made any effort to identify any such rights.  Information on the
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11.  Copies of
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of
   licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to
   obtain a general license or permission for the use of such
   proprietary rights by implementors or users of this specification can
   be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF Executive
   Director.




Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002).  All Rights Reserved.



draft-ietf-v6ops-ent-scenarios-00.txt  Expires April  2004     [Page 14]


Internet Draft     IPv6 Enterprise Network Scenarios        October 2003


   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.



Acknowledgement

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.






























draft-ietf-v6ops-ent-scenarios-00.txt  Expires April  2004     [Page 15]
