

Network Working Group                               M. Brunner (Editor) 
Internet Draft                                                      NEC 
Category: Informational                                   December 2002 
                                                                        
 
 
                   Requirements for Signaling Protocols 
                       <draft-ietf-nsis-req-06.txt> 
 
Status of this Memo 
 
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026. 
 
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that      
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
   at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as 
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
Copyright Notice 
    
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002).  All Rights Reserved. 
    
Abstract 
    
   This document defines requirements for signaling across different 
   network environments, where different network environments mean 
   across administrative and technology domains. Signaling is mainly 
   though for QoS such as [RSVP], however in recent year several other 
   applications of signaling have been defined such as signaling for 
   MPLS label distribution [RSVP-TE]. To achieve wide applicability of 
   the requirements, the starting point is a diverse set of 
   scenarios/use cases concerning various types of networks and 
   application interactions. This memo present the assumptions and the 
   aspects not considered within scope before listing the requirements 
   grouped according to areas such as architecture and design goals, 
   signaling flows, layering, performance, flexibility, security, and 
   mobility.  
    
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in 
   this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119. 
    
Table of Contents 
    
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                    [Page 1] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols    December 2002 
    
   Status of this Memo................................................1 
   Abstract...........................................................1 
   Table of Contents..................................................1 
   1 Introduction.....................................................2 
   2 Terminology......................................................3 
   3 Problem Statement and Scope......................................5 
   4 Assumptions and Exclusions.......................................6 
   4.1 Assumptions and Non-Assumptions................................6 
   4.2 Exclusions.....................................................7 
   5 Requirements.....................................................9 
   5.1 Architecture and Design Goals..................................9 
   5.2 Signaling Flows...............................................11 
   5.3 Messaging.....................................................13 
   5.4 Control Information...........................................14 
   5.5 Performance...................................................16 
   5.6 Flexibility...................................................17 
   5.7 Security......................................................18 
   5.8 Mobility......................................................20 
   5.9 Interworking with other protocols and techniques..............20 
   5.10 Operational..................................................21 
   6 Security Considerations.........................................22 
   7 Informative References..........................................22 
   8 Acknowledgments.................................................22 
   9 Author's Addresses..............................................22 
   10 Appendix: Scenarios/Use cases..................................23 
   10.1 Terminal Mobility............................................23 
   10.2 Cellular Networks............................................25 
   10.3 UMTS access..................................................26 
   10.4 Wired part of wireless network...............................27 
   10.5 Session Mobility.............................................29 
   10.6 QoS reservations/negotiation from access to core network.....30 
   10.7 QoS reservation/negotiation over administrative boundaries...30 
   10.8 QoS signaling between PSTN gateways and backbone routers.....31 
   10.9 PSTN trunking gateway........................................32 
   10.10 Application request end-to-end QoS path from the network....34 
    
1 Introduction 
    
   This document defines requirements for signaling across different 
   network environments. It does not list any problems of existing 
   signaling protocols such as [RSVP].  
    
   In order to derive requirements for signaling it is necessary to 
   first have an idea of the scope within which they are applicable. 
   Therefore, we define a conceptual model of signaling on an abstract 
   level. Additionally, we describe the entities involved in signaling 
   and typical signaling paths. In the appendix are a list of use cases 
   and scenarios where an NSIS protocol could be applied. It is though 
   of helping derive the requirements and to t4est the requirements 
   against use cases. 
    
   QoS and signaling for QoS is a pretty large field with a lot of 
   interaction with other protocols, mechanisms, applications etc.  
   However, it is not the only field where signaling is used in the 
     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                    [Page 2] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols    December 2002 
    
   Internet. Even if this requirement documents mainly used QoS as the 
   sample application other application must be possible and are also 
   addressed. 
 
   There are several areas related to networking aspects which are 
   incomplete, for example, interaction with host and site multi-
   homing, use of anycast services, and so on. These issues should be 
   considered in any future analysis work. 
    
2 Terminology 
    
   We try to list the most often used terms in the document. However, 
   don't be to religious about it, they are not meant to prescribe any 
   solution in the document. All of them need refined definitions in 
   follow-up documents. 
    
   Resource Management Function (RMF): An abstract concept, 
   representing the management of resources in a domain or a node. This 
   includes admission control and resource allocation. 
 
   NSIS Domain (ND): Administrative domain where an NSIS protocol 
   signals for a resource or set of resources.  
    
   NSIS Entity (NE): The function within a node, which implements an 
   NSIS protocol.  
    
   NSIS Forwarder (NF): NSIS Entity on the path between a NI and NR, 
   which may interact with local resource management function (RMF) for 
   this purpose. NSIS Forwarder also propagates NSIS signaling further 
   through the network. It is responsible for interpreting the 
   signaling carrying the user parameters, optionally inserting or 
   modifying the parameters according to domain network management 
   policy. 
    
   NSIS Initiator (NI): NSIS Entity that initiates NSIS signaling for a 
   network resource based on user or application requirements. This can 
   be located in the end system, but may reside elsewhere in network. 
    
   NSIS Responder (NR): NSIS Entity that terminates NSIS signaling and 
   can optionally interact with applications as well. 
 
   Flow: A traffic stream (sequence of IP packets between two end 
   systems) for which a specific packet level treatment is provided. 
   The flow can be unicast (uni- or bi-directional) or multicast. For 
   multicast, a flow can diverge into multiple flows as it propagates 
   toward the receiver.  For multi-sender multicast, a flow can also 
   diverge when viewed in the reverse direction (toward the senders). 
    
   Higher Layers: The higher layer (transport protocol and application) 
   functions that request QoS or any other service from the network 
   layer. The trigger for the request might be generated within the end 
   system, or the trigger might be provided by some entity within the 
   network (e.g. application proxy or policy server). 
 
     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                    [Page 3] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols    December 2002 
    
   Data Path: the route across the networks taken by a flow or 
   aggregate, i.e. which domains/subdomains it passes through and the 
   egress/ingress points for each. 
    
   Signaling Path: the route across the networks taken by a signaling 
   flow or aggregate, i.e. which domains/subdomains it passes through 
   and the egress/ingress points for each. 
    
   Path Segment: The segment of a path within a single 
   domain/subdomain. 
    
   Control Information: the information the governs for instance the 
   QoS treatment to be applied to a flow or aggregate, including the 
   service class, flow administration, and any associated security or 
   accounting information. 
 
   Provisioning: the act of actually allocating resources to a flow or 
   aggregate of flows, may include mechanisms such as LSP initiation 
   for MPLS, packet scheduler configuration within a router, and so on. 
   The mechanisms depend on the overall technology and application 
   being used within the domain, and can be from static to dynamic. 
 
   Subdomain: a network within an administrative domain using a uniform 
   technology, e.g., a single QoS provisioning function to provision 
   resources. 
    
   QoS Technology: a generic term for a set of protocols, standards and 
   mechanisms that can be used within a QoS domain/subdomain to manage 
   the QoS provided to flows or aggregates that traverse the domain. 
   Examples might include MPLS, DiffServ, and so on. A QoS technology 
   is associated with certain QoS provisioning techniques. 
 
   Resource: something of value in a network infrastructure to which 
   rules or policy criteria are first applied before access is granted. 
   Examples of resources include the buffers in a router and bandwidth 
   on an interface. 
 
   Service: something provided by an entity and consumed by another.  
   It can be constructed by allocating resources. The network can 
   provide it to users or a network node can provide it to packets. 
 
   Sender-initiated signaling protocol: A sender-initiated signaling 
   protocol is a protocol where the NSIS Initiator initiates the 
   signaling on behalf of the sender of the data. What this means is 
   that resource management functions are processed from the data 
   sender towards the data receiver. However, the triggering instance 
   is not specified.  
    
   Receiver-initiated signaling protocol: A receiver-initiated protocol 
   (e.g., [RSVP]) is a protocol, where the NSIS Responder on behalf of 
   the receiver of the user data initiates the reservation. What this 
   means is that resource management functions are processed from the 
   data receiver back towards the data sender. However, the triggering 
   instance is not specified. 
     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                    [Page 4] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols    December 2002 
    
 
3 Problem Statement and Scope 
    
   We provide in the following a preliminary architectural picture as a 
   basis for discussion. We will refer to it in the following 
   requirement sections. 
    
   A basic goal should be to re-use these wherever possible, and to 
   focus requirements work at an early stage on those areas where a new 
   solution is needed (e.g. an especially simple one). We also try to 
   avoid defining requirements related to internal implementation 
   aspects. 
    
   Note that this model is intended not to constrain the technical 
   approach taken subsequently, simply to allow concrete phrasing of 
   requirements (e.g. requirements about placement of the NSIS 
   Initiator.) 
    
   Roughly, the scope of NSIS is assumed to be the interaction between 
   the NSIS Initiator and NSIS Forwarder(s), and NSIS Responder 
   including a protocol to carry the information, and the 
   syntax/semantics of the information that is exchanged. Further 
   statements on assumptions/exclusions are given in the next Section. 
    
   The main elements are: 
    
   1. Something that starts the request for resources, the NSIS 
   Initiator.  
    
   This might be in the end system or within some other part of the 
   network. The distinguishing feature of the NSIS Initiator is that it 
   acts on triggers coming (directly or indirectly) from the higher 
   layers in the end systems. It needs to map the resources requested 
   by them, and also provides feedback information to the higher 
   layers, which might be used by transport layer rate management or 
   adaptive applications. 
    
   2. Something that assists in managing resources further along the 
   signaling path, the NSIS Forwarder.  
    
   The NSIS Forwarder does not interact with higher layers, but 
   interacts with the NSIS Initiator, NSIS Responder, and possibly one 
   or more NSIS Forwarders on the signaling path, edge-to-edge or end-
   to-end. 
    
   3. Something that terminates the signaling path, the NSIS Responder. 
    
   The NSIS responder might be in an end-system or within other 
   equipment. The distinguishing feature of the NSIS Initiator is that 
   it responds to request at the end of a signaling path. 
    
   4. The path segment traverses an underlying network covering one or 
   more IP hops. The underlying network might use locally different 
   technology. For instance, QoS technology has to be provisioned 
     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                    [Page 5] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols    December 2002 
    
   appropriately for the service requested. In the QoS example, an NSIS 
   Forwarder maps service-specific information to technology-related 
   QoS parameters and receiving indications about success or failure in 
   response. 
    
   Now concentrating more on the overall end to end (multiple domain) 
   aspects, in particular: 
    
   1. The NSIS Initiator need not be located at an end system, and the 
   NSIS Forwarders are not assumed to be located on the flow's data 
   path. However, they must be able to identify the ingress and egress 
   points for the flow's data path as it traverses the NSIS domain. Any 
   signaling protocol must be able to find the appropriate NSIS 
   Forwarder. 
    
   2. We see the network at the level of domains/subdomains rather than 
   individual routers (except in the special case that the domain 
   contains one link). Domains are assumed to be administrative 
   entities, so security requirements apply to the signaling between 
   them.  
    
   3. Any domain may contain Resource Management Function (e.g.  
   traffic engineering, admission control, policy and so on). These are 
   assumed to interact with the NSIS Initiator, Responder, and 
   Forwarders using standard mechanisms. 
    
   4. The placement of the NSIS Initiators and NSIS Forwarders is not 
   fixed.  
 
4 Assumptions and Exclusions 
    
4.1 Assumptions and Non-Assumptions 
    
   1. The NSIS signaling could run end to end, end to edge, or edge to 
   edge, or network-to-network ((between providers), depending on what 
   point in the network acts as the initiator, and how far towards the 
   other end of the network the signaling propagates. In general, we 
   could expect NSIS Forwarders to become more 'dense' towards the 
   edges of the network, but this is not a requirement. An over-
   provisioned domain might contain no NSIS Forwarders at all (and be 
   NSIS transparent); at the other extreme, NSIS Forwarders might be 
   placed at every router. In the latter case, provisioning can be 
   carried out in a local implementation-dependent way without further 
   signaling, whereas in the case of remote NSIS Forwarders, a 
   provisioning protocol might be needed to control the routers along 
   the path. This provisioning protocol is then independent of the end-
   to-end NSIS signaling.  
    
   2. We do not consider 'pure' end-to-end signaling that is not 
   interpreted anywhere within the network. Such signaling is an 
   application-layer issue and IETF protocols such as SIP etc. can be 
   used. 
    

     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                    [Page 6] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols    December 2002 
    
   3. Where the signaling does cover several NSIS domains or 
   subdomains, we do not exclude that different signaling protocols are 
   used in each path segment. We only place requirements on the 
   universality of the control information that is being transported. 
   (The goals here would be to allow the use of signaling protocols, 
   which are matched to the characteristics of the portion of the 
   network being traversed.) Note that the outcome of NSIS work might 
   result in various protocols or various flavors of the same protocol. 
   This implies the need for the translation of information into domain 
   specific format as well. 
    
   4. We assume that the service definitions a NSIS Initiator can ask 
   for are known in advance of the signaling protocol running. For 
   instance in the QoS example, the service definition includes QoS 
   parameters, lifetime of QoS guarantee etc., or any other service-
   specific parameters. 
    
   There are many ways service requesters get to know about it. There 
   might be standardized services, the definition can be negotiated 
   together with a contract, the service definition is published at a 
   Web page, etc.  
    
   5. We assume that there are means for the discovery of NSIS entities 
   in order to know the signaling peers (solutions include static 
   configuration, automatically discovered, or implicitly runs over the 
   right nodes, etc.) The discovery of the NSIS entities has security 
   implications that need to be addressed properly. These implications 
   largely depend on the chosen protocol. For some security mechanisms 
   (i.e. Kerberos, pre-shared secret) it is required to know the 
   identity of the other entity. Hence the discovery mechanism may 
   provide means to learn this identity, which is then later used to 
   retrieve the required keys and parameters.  
    
   6. NSIS assumes to operate with networks using standard ("normal") 
   L3 routing. Where "normal" is not specified more exactly on purpose. 
    
4.2 Exclusions 
    
   1. Development of specific mechanisms and algorithms for application 
   and transport layer adaptation are not considered, nor are the 
   protocols that would support it. 
    
   2. Specific mechanisms (APIs and so on) for interaction between 
   transport/applications and the network layer are not considered, 
   except to clarify the requirements on the negotiation capabilities 
   and information semantics that would be needed of the signaling 
   protocol. 
    
   3. Specific mechanisms for provisioning within a domain/subdomain 
   are not considered. However, NSIS can be used for signaling within a 
   domain/subdomain performing provisioning. For instance in the QoS 
   example, it means that the setting of QoS mechanisms in a domain is 
   out of scope, but if we have a tunnel, NSIS could also be used for 
   tunnel setup with QoS guaranties. It should be possible to exploit 
     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                    [Page 7] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols    December 2002 
    
   these mechanisms optimally within the end-to-end context. 
   Consideration of how to do this might generate new requirements for 
   NSIS however. For example, the information needed by a NSIS 
   Forwarder to manage a radio subnetwork needs to be provided by the 
   NSIS solution. 
    
   4. Specific mechanisms (APIs and so on) for interaction between the 
   network layer and underlying provisioning mechanisms are not 
   considered.  
    
   5. Interaction with resource management capabilities is not 
   considered. Standard protocols might be used for this. This may 
   imply requirements for the sort of information that should be 
   exchanged between the NSIS entities. 
 
   6. Security implications related to multicasting are outside the 
   scope of the signaling protocol.  
 
   7. Protection of non-signaling messages is outside the scope of the 
   protocol  
    
   The protection of non-signaling messages (including data traffic 
   following a reservation) is not directly considered by a signaling 
   protocol. The protection of data messages transmitted along the 
   provisioned path is outside the scope of a signaling protocol. 
   Regarding data traffic there is an interaction with accounting 
   (metering) and edge routers might require packets to be integrity 
   protected to be able to securely assign incoming data traffic to a 
   particular user.  
 
   Additionally there might be an interaction with IPSec protected 
   traffic experiencing service-specific treatment and the established 
   state created due to signaling. One example of such an interaction is 
   the different flow identification with and without IPSec protection.  
    
   Many security properties are likely to be application specific and 
   may be provided by the corresponding application layer protocol.  
    
   8. Service definitions and in particular QoS services and classes 
   are out of scope. Together with the service definition any 
   definition of service specific parameters are not considered in this 
   document. Only the base NSIS signaling protocol for transporting the 
   service information are addressed. 
    
   9. Similarly, specific methods, protocols, and ways to express 
   service information in the Application/Session level are not 
   considered (e.g., SDP, SIP, RTSP, etc.).  
    
   10. The specification of any extensions needed to signal information 
   via application level protocols (e.g. SDP), and the mapping on NSIS 
   information are considered outside of the scope of NSIS working 
   group, as this work is in the direct scope of other IETF working 
   groups (e.g. MMUSIC). 
    
     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                    [Page 8] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols    December 2002 
    
   11. Handoff decision and trigger sources: An NSIS protocol is not 
   used to trigger handoffs in mobile IP, nor is it used to decide 
   whether to handoff or not. As soon as or in some situation even 
   before a handoff happened, an NSIS protocol might be used for 
   signaling for the particular service again. The basic underlying 
   assumption is that the route comes first (defining the path) and the 
   signaling comes after it (following the path). This doesn't prevent 
   a signaling application at some node interacting with something that 
   modifies the path, but the requirement is then just for NSIS to live 
   with that possibility. However, NSIS must interwork with several 
   protocols for mobility management. 
    
   12. Service monitoring is out of scope. It is heavily dependent on 
   the type of the application and or transport service, and in what 
   scenario it is used. 
 
5 Requirements 
    
   This section defines more detailed requirements for a signaling 
   solution, respecting the framework, scoping assumptions, and 
   terminology considered earlier. The requirements are in subsections, 
   grouped roughly according to general technical aspects: architecture 
   and design goals, topology issues, parameters, performance, 
   security, information, and flexibility. 
    
   Two general (and potentially contradictory) goals for the solution 
   are that it should be applicable in a very wide range of scenarios, 
   and at the same time lightweight in implementation complexity and 
   resource requirements in nodes. One approach to this is that the 
   solution could deal with certain requirements via modular components 
   or capabilities, which are optional to implement in individual 
   nodes.  
    
   In order to prioritize the various requirements we define different 
   'parts of the network'. In the different parts of the network a 
   particular requirement might have a different priority.  
    
   The parts of the networks we differentiate are the host-to-first 
   router, the access network, and the core network. The host to first 
   router part includes all the layer 2 technologies to access to the 
   Internet. In many cases, there is an application and/or user running 
   on the host initiating signaling. The access network can be 
   characterized by low capacity links, medium speed IP processing 
   capabilities, and it might consist of a complete layer 2 network as 
   well. The core network characteristics include high-speed forwarding 
   capacities and inter-domain issues. These divisions between network 
   types are not strict and do not appear in all networks, but where 
   they do exist they may influence signaling requirements and will be 
   highlighted as necessary. 
    
5.1 Architecture and Design Goals 
    


     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                    [Page 9] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols    December 2002 
    
   This section contains requirements related to desirable overall 
   characteristics of a solution, e.g. enabling flexibility, or 
   independence of parts of the framework. 
    
5.1.1 MUST be applicable for different technologies. 
     
   The signaling protocol MUST work with various QoS and non-QoS 
   technologies. The basic information exchanged over the signaling 
   protocol MUST be in such detail and quantity that it is useful for 
   various technologies.  
    
5.1.2 SHOULD provide resource availability information on request  
    
   NSIS SHOULD provide a mechanism to check whether resources are 
   available without performing a reservation. In some scenarios, e.g., 
   the mobile terminal scenario, it is required to query, whether 
   resources are available, without performing a reservation on the 
   resource.  
    
5.1.3 NSIS MUST be designed modularly  
    
   A modular design allows for more lightweight implementations, if 
   fewer features are needed. Mutually exclusive solutions are 
   supported. Examples for modularity: 
    
   - Work over any kind of network (narrowband versus broadband, error-
   prone versus reliable, ...). This implies low bandwidth signaling 
   and redundant information MUST be supported if necessary.  
    
   - Uni- and bi-directional reservations are possible 
    
   - Extensible in the future with different add-ons for certain 
   environments or scenarios  
    
   - Protocol layering, where appropriate. This means NSIS MUST provide 
   a base protocol, which can be adapted to different environments. 
    
5.1.4 NSIS MUST decouple protocol and information 
    
   The signaling protocol MUST be clearly separated from the control 
   information being transported. This provides for the independent 
   development of these two aspects of the solution, and allows for 
   this control information to be carried within other protocols, 
   including application layer ones, existing ones or those being 
   developed in the future. The gained flexibility in the information 
   transported allows for the applicability of the same protocol in 
   various scenarios.  
    
   However, note that the information carried needs to be standardized; 
   otherwise interoperability is difficult to achieve. 
 
5.1.5 NSIS MUST reuse existing provisioning 
    

     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                   [Page 10] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols    December 2002 
    
   Reuse existing functions and protocols for provisioning within a 
   domain/subdomain unchanged. (Motivation: 'Don't re-invent the 
   wheel'.) 
    
5.1.6 NSIS MUST support independence of signaling and provisioning 
     paradigm 
    
   The signaling MUST be independent of the paradigm and mechanism of 
   provisioning. E.g., in the case of signaling for QoS, the 
   independence of the signaling protocol from the QoS provisioning 
   allows for using the NSIS protocol together with various QoS 
   technologies in various scenarios. 
 
5.1.7 NSIS MUST be application independent 
    
   The signaling protocol MUST be independent of the application. The 
   control information SHOULD be application independent, because we 
   look into network level signaling.  
    
   The requirement relates to the way the signaling interacts with 
   upper layer functions (users, applications, and QoS administration), 
   and lower layer technologies. 
    
   Opaque application information MAY get transported in the signaling 
   message, without being handled in the network. Development and 
   deployment of new applications SHOULD be possible without impacting 
   the network infrastructure.  
    
5.2 Signaling Flows 
    
   This section contains requirements related to the possible signaling 
   flows that should be supported, e.g. over what parts of the flow 
   path, between what entities (end-systems, routers, middle boxes, 
   management systems), in which direction.  
 
5.2.1 The placement of NSIS Initiator, Forwarder, Responder MUST be 
     free 
    
   The protocol MUST work in various scenarios such as host-to-network-
   to-host, edge-to-edge, (e.g., just within one providers domain), 
   user-to-network (from end system into the network, ending, e.g., at 
   the entry to the network and vice versa), and network-to-network 
   (e.g., between providers).  
    
   Placing the NSIS Forwarder and NSIS Initiator functions at different 
   locations allows for various scenarios to work with the same 
   protocol. 
    
5.2.2 No constraint MUST be posed the signaling and NSIS Forwarders to 
     be in the data path. 
    
   There is a set of scenarios, where signaling is not on the data 
   path. The NSIS Forwarder being in the data path is one extreme case 

     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                   [Page 11] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols    December 2002 
    
   and useful in many cases. Therefore the case of having NSIS entities 
   on the data path only MUST be supported. 
    
   There are going to be cases where a centralized entity will take a 
   decision about service requests. In this case, there is no need to 
   have the data follow the signaling path, or have the signaling 
   follow the data path.  
    
   There are going to be cases without a centralized entity managing 
   resources and the signaling will be used as a tool for resource 
   management. For various reasons (such as efficient use of expensive 
   bandwidth), one will want to have fine-grained, fast, and very 
   dynamic control of the resources in the network. 
    
   There are going to be cases where there will be neither signaling 
   nor a centralized entity (over-provisioning). Nothing has to be done 
   anyway. 
    
   One can capture the requirement with the following, different 
   wording: If one views the domain as a virtual router then NSIS 
   signaling used between those virtual routers MUST follow the same 
   path as the data.  
    
   Routing the signaling protocol along an independent path is desired 
   by network operators/designers. Ideally, the capability to route the 
   protocol along an independent path would give the network 
   designer/operator the option to manage bandwidth utilization through 
   the topology. 
    
   There are other possibilities as well. An NSIS protocol MUST accept 
   all of these possibilities with a strong focus on the on-path 
   signaling.  
 
5.2.3 Concealment of topology and technology information SHOULD be 
     possible 
    
   The NSIS protocol SHOULD allow for hiding the internal structure of 
   a NSIS domain from end-nodes and from other networks. Hence an 
   adversary should not be able to learn the internal structure of a 
   network with the help of the signaling protocol. 
    
   In various scenarios, topology information should be hidden for 
   various reasons. From a business point of view, some administrations 
   don't want to reveal the topology and technology used.  
    
5.2.4 Transparent signaling through networks SHOULD be possible 
    
   It SHOULD be possible that the signaling for some flows traverse 
   path segments transparently, i.e., without interpretation at NSIS 
   Forwarders within the network. An example would be a subdomain 
   within a core network, which only interpreted signaling for 
   aggregates established at the domain edge, with the flow-related 
   signaling passing transparently through it. 
    
     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                   [Page 12] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols    December 2002 
    
   In other words, NSIS SHOULD work in hierarchical scenarios, where 
   big pipes/trunks are setup using NSIS signaling, but also flows 
   which run within that big pipe/trunk are setup using NSIS. 
 
5.3 Messaging 
 
5.3.1 Explicit release of resources MUST be possible 
    
   When a resource reservation is no longer necessary, e.g. because the 
   application terminates, or because a mobile host experienced a hand-
   off, it MUST be possible to explicitly release resources. In general 
   explicit release enhances the overall network utilization. 
    
5.3.2 Automatic release of resources after failure SHOULD be possible 
    
   When the NSIS Initiator goes down, the resources it requested in the 
   network SHOULD be released, since they will no longer be necessary. 
    
   After detection of a failure in the network, any NSIS 
   Forwarder/Initiator MUST be able to release a reservation it is 
   involved in. For example, this may require signaling of the "Release 
   after Failure" message upstream as well as downstream, or soft state 
   timing out of reservations. 
    
   The goal is to prevent stale state within the network and adds 
   robustness to the operation of NSIS. So in other words, an NSIS 
   signaling protocol or mechanisms MUST provide means for an NSIS 
   entity to discover and remove local stale state.  
    
   Note that this might need to work together with a notification 
   mechanism. 
    
5.3.3 NSIS SHOULD allow for sending notifications upstream 
    
   NSIS Forwarders SHOULD notify the NSIS Initiator or any other NSIS 
   Forwarder upstream, if there is a state change inside the network. 
   There are various types of network changes for instance among them: 
    
   Recoverable errors: the network nodes can locally repair this type 
   error. The network nodes do not have to notify the users of the 
   error immediately. This is a condition when the danger of 
   degradation (or actual short term degradation) of the provided 
   service was overcome by the network (NSIS Forwarder) itself. 
    
   Unrecoverable errors: the network nodes cannot handle this type of 
   error, and have to notify the users as soon as possible. 
    
   Service degradation/severe congestion: In case the service cannot be 
   provided completely but partially only. 
    
   Repair indication: If an error occurred and it has been fixed, this 
   triggers the sending of a notification. 
    

     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                   [Page 13] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols    December 2002 
    
   Service upgrade available: If a previously requested better service 
   becomes available. 
 
   The content of the notification is very service specific, but it is 
   must at least carry type information. Additionally, it may carry the 
   location of the state change. 
    
   The notifications may or may not be in response to a NSIS message. 
   This means an NSIS entity has to be able to handle notifications at 
   any time. 
    
   Note however, that there are a number of security consideration 
   needs to be solved with notification, even more important if the 
   notification is sent without prior request (asynchronously). The 
   problem basically is, that everybody could send notifications to any 
   NSIS entity and the NSIS entity most likely reacts on the 
   notification. E.g., if it gets an error notification it might 
   teardown the reservation, even if everything is ok. So the 
   notification might depend on security associations between the 
   sender of the notification and its receiver. If a hop-by-hop 
   security mechanism is chosen, this implies also that notifications 
   need to be sent on the reverse path. 
 
5.3.4 Feedback about success of service request MUST be provided 
    
   A request for service MUST be answered at least with yes or no. 
   However, it may be useful in case of a negative answer to also get a 
   description of what amount of resources a request is possible. So an 
   opaque element MAY be included into the answer. The element heavily 
   depends on the service requested. 
 
5.3.5 NSIS MUST allow for local information exchange  
    
   The signaling protocol MUST be able to exchange local information 
   between NSIS Forwarders located within one single administrative 
   domain. The local information exchange is performed by a number of 
   separate messages not belonging to an end-to-end signaling process. 
   Local information might, for example, be IP addresses, severe 
   congestion notification, notification of successful or erroneous 
   processing of signaling messages. 
    
   In some cases, the NSIS signaling protocol MAY carry identification 
   of the NSIS Forwarders located at the boundaries of a domain. 
   However, the identification of edge should not be visible to the end 
   host (NSIS Initiator) and only applies within one administrative 
   domain. 
    
5.4 Control Information 
    
   This section contains requirements related to the control 
   information that needs to be exchanged. 
 
5.4.1 Mutability information on parameters SHOULD be possible 
    
     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                   [Page 14] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols    December 2002 
    
   It SHOULD be possible for the NSIS initiator to control the 
   mutability of the signaled information. This prevents from being 
   changed in a non-recoverable way. The NSIS initiator SHOULD be able 
   to control what is requested end to end, without the request being 
   gradually mutated as it passes through a sequence of domains. This 
   implies that in case of changes made on the parameters, the original 
   requested ones must still be available.  
    
   Note that we do not require anything about particular parameters 
   being changed.  
    
   Additionally, note that a provider or that particular services 
   requested, can still influence the provisioning but in the signaling 
   message the request should stay the same. 
    
5.4.2 SHOULD possible to add and remove local domain information  
    
   It SHOULD be possible for the Resource Management Function to add 
   and remove local scope elements. Compared to Requirement 5.3.5 this 
   requirement does use the normal signaling process and message 
   exchange for transporting local information. E.g., at the entrance 
   to a domain domain-specific information is added, which is used in 
   this domain only, and the information is removed again when a 
   signaling message leaves the domain. The motivation is in the 
   economy of re-use the protocol for domain internal signaling of 
   various information pieces. Where additional information is needed 
   within a particular domain, it should be possible to carry this at 
   the same time as the end-to-end information. 
    
5.4.3 State MUST be addressed independent of flow identification 
    
   Addressing or identifying state MUST be independent of the flow 
   identifier (flow end-points, topological addresses). Various 
   scenarios in the mobility area require this independence because 
   flows resulting from handoff might have changed end-points etc. but 
   still have the same service requirement. Also several proxy-based 
   signaling methods profit from such independence. 
    
5.4.4 Modification of already reserved resources SHOULD be seamless 
    
   In many case, the reservation needs to be updated (up or downgrade). 
   This SHOULD happen seamlessly without service interruption. At least 
   the signaling protocol should allow for it, even if some data path 
   elements might not be capable of doing so.  
    
5.4.5 Grouping of signaling for several micro-flows MAY be provided 
    
   NSIS MAY group signaling information for several micro-flow into one 
   signaling message. The goal of this is the optimization in terms of 
   setup delay, which can happen in parallel. This helps applications 
   requesting several flows at once. Also potential refreshes (in case 
   of a soft state solution) might profit from grouping.  
    

     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                   [Page 15] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols    December 2002 
    
   However, the network MUST NOT know that a relationship between the 
   grouped flows exists. There MUST NOT be any transactional semantic 
   associated with the grouping. It is only meant for optimization 
   purposes and each reservation MUST be handled separately from each 
   other. 
    
5.5 Performance 
    
   This section discusses performance requirements and evaluation 
   criteria and the way in which these could and should be traded off 
   against each other in various parts of the solution. 
    
   Scalability is a must anyway. However, depending on the scenario the 
   question to which extends the protocol must be scalable.  
    
   Note that many of the performance issues are heavily dependent on 
   the scenario assumed and are normally a trade-off between speed, 
   reliability, complexity, and scalability. The trade-off varies in 
   different parts of the network. For example, in radio access 
   networks low bandwidth consumption will overweight the low latency 
   requirement, while in core networks it may be reverse. 
    
5.5.1 Scalability  
    
   NSIS MUST be scalable in the number of messages received by a 
   signaling communication partner (NSIS Initiator, NSIS Forwarder, and 
   NSIS Responder). The major concern lies in the core of the network, 
   where large numbers of messages arrive. 
    
   It MUST be scalable in number of hand-offs in mobile environments. 
   This mainly applies in access networks, because the core is 
   transparent to mobility in most cases. 
    
   It MUST be scalable in the number of interactions for setting up a 
   reservation. This applies for end-systems setting up several 
   reservations. Some servers might be expected to setup a large number 
   of reservations. 
    
   Scalability in the number of state per entity MUST be achieved for 
   NSIS Forwarders in the core of the network. 
    
   And Scalability in CPU use MUST be achieved on end terminals in case 
   of many reservations at the same time and intermediate nodes mainly 
   in the core. 
    
5.5.2 NSIS SHOULD allow for low latency in setup 
    
   NSIS SHOULD allow for low latency setup of reservations. This is 
   only needed in scenarios, where reservations are in a short time 
   scale (e.g. handover in mobile environments), or where human 
   interaction is immediately concerned (e.g., voice communication 
   setup delay).  
    

     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                   [Page 16] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols    December 2002 
    
5.5.3 NSIS MUST allow for low bandwidth consumption for signaling 
     protocol 
    
   NSIS MUST allow for low bandwidth consumption in certain access 
   networks. Again only small sets of scenarios call for low bandwidth, 
   mainly those where wireless links are involved.  
 
5.5.4 NSIS SHOULD allow to constrain load on devices 
    
   The NSIS architecture SHOULD give the ability to constrain the load 
   (CPU load, memory space, signaling bandwidth consumption and 
   signaling intensity) on devices where it is needed. One of the 
   reasons is that the protocol handling should have a minimal impact 
   on interior (core) nodes. 
    
   This can be achieved by many different methods. Examples, and this 
   are only examples, include message aggregation, by ignoring 
   signaling message, header compression, or minimizing functionality. 
   The framework may choose any method as long as the requirement is 
   met. 
    
5.5.5 NSIS SHOULD target highest possible network utilization 
 
   There are networking environments that require high network 
   utilization for various reasons, and the signaling protocol SHOULD 
   to its best ability support high resource utilization while 
   maintaining appropriate service quality. 
    
   In networks where resources are very expensive (as is the case for 
   many wireless networks), efficient network utilization is of 
   critical financial importance.  On the other hand there are other 
   parts of the network where high utilization is not required.  
 
5.6 Flexibility 
 
   This section lists the various ways the protocol can flexibly be 
   employed. 
    
5.6.1 Flow aggregation 
    
   NSIS MUST allow for flow aggregation, including the capability to 
   select and change the level of aggregation. 
    
5.6.2 Flexibility in the placement of the NSIS Initiator 
    
   NSIS MUST be flexible in placing an NSIS Initiator. The NSIS 
   Initiator might be the sender or the receiver of content. But also 
   network-initiated reservations MUST be allowed in various scenarios 
   such as PSTN gateways, some VPNs, and mobility. 
    
5.6.3 Flexibility in the initiation of re-negotiation 
    


     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                   [Page 17] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols    December 2002 
    
   The NSIS Initiator or the NSIS Responder SHOULD be able to initiate 
   a re-negotiation or change the reservation due to various reasons, 
   such as local resource shortage (CPU, memory on end-system) or a 
   user changed application preference/profiles.  
    
5.6.4 SOULD support network-initiated re-negotiation 
    
   NSIS SHOULD support network-initiated re-negotiation. This is used 
   in cases, where the network is not able to further guarantee 
   resources and want to e.g. downgrade a reservation. 
    
5.6.5 Uni / bi-directional reservation 
    
   Both unidirectional as well as bi-direction reservations SHOULD be 
   possible. With bi-directional reservations we mean here reservations 
   having the same end-points. But the path in the two directions does 
   not need to be the same. 
    
   The goal of a bi-directional reservation is mainly an optimization 
   in terms of setup delay. There is no requirements on constrains such 
   as use the same data path etc. 
    
5.7 Security 
    
   This section discusses security-related requirements. For a 
   discussion of security threats see [SEC-THR]. The NSIS protocol MUST 
   provide means for security, but it MUST be allowed that nodes 
   implementing NSIS signaling do not need use the security means. 
    
5.7.1 Authentication of signaling requests  
    
   A signaling protocol MUST make provision for enabling various 
   entities to be authenticated against each other using strong 
   authentication mechanisms. The term strong authentication points to 
   the fact that weak plain-text password mechanisms must not be used 
   for authentication. 
    
5.7.2 Resource Authorization  
    
   The signaling protocol MUST provide means to authorize resource 
   requests. This requirement demands a hook to interact with a policy 
   entity to request authorization data. This allows an authenticated 
   entity to be associated with authorization data and to verify the 
   resource request. Authorization prevents reservations by unauthorized 
   entities, reservations violating policies, and theft of service. 
   Additionally it limits denial of service attacks against parts of the 
   network or the entire network caused by unrestricted reservations. 
   Additionally it might be helpful to provide some means to inform 
   other protocols of participating nodes within the same administrative 
   domain about a previous successful authorization event. 
    
5.7.3 Integrity protection  
    

     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                   [Page 18] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols    December 2002 
    
   The signaling protocol MUST provide means to protect the message 
   payloads against modifications. Integrity protection prevents an 
   adversary from modifying parts of the signaling message and from 
   mounting denial of service or theft of service type of attacks 
   against network elements participating in the protocol execution. 
    
5.7.4 Replay protection 
    
   To prevent replay of previous signaling messages the signaling 
   protocol MUST provide means to detect old i.e. already transmitted 
   signaling messages. A solution must cover issues of synchronization 
   problems in the case of a restart or a crash of a participating 
   network element.  
    
5.7.5 Hop-by-hop security 
    
   Hop-by-Hop security SHOULD be supported. It is a well known and 
   proven concept in Quality-of-Service and other signaling protocols 
   that allows intermediate nodes that actively participate in the 
   protocol to modify the messages as it is required by processing rule. 
   Note that this requirement does not exclude end-to-end or network-to-
   network security of a signaling message. End-to-end security between 
   the initiator and the responder may be used to provide protection of 
   non-mutable data fields. Network-to-network security refers to the 
   protection of messages over various hops but not in an end-to-end 
   manner i.e. protected over a particular network. 
    
5.7.6 Identity confidentiality and location privacy 
    
   Identity confidentiality SHOULD be supported. It enables privacy and 
   avoids profiling of entities by adversary eavesdropping the signaling 
   traffic along the path. The identity used in the process of 
   authentication may also be hidden to a limited extent from a network 
   to which the initiator is attached. However the identity MUST provide 
   enough information for the nodes in the access network to collect 
   accounting data. 
    
   Location privacy MAY be supported. It is an issue for the initiator 
   who triggers the signaling protocol. In some scenarios the initiator 
   may not be willing to reveal location information to the responder as 
   part of the signaling procedure.  
    
5.7.7 Denial-of-service attacks 
    
   A signaling protocol SHOULD provide prevention of Denial-of-service 
   attacks. To effectively prevent denial-of-service attacks it is 
   necessary that the used security and protocol mechanisms MUST have 
   low computation complexity to verify a resource request prior to 
   authenticating the requesting entity. Additionally the signaling 
   protocol and the used security mechanisms SHOULD NOT require large 
   resource consumption (for example main memory or other additional 
   message exchanges) before a successful authentication was done.  
    

     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                   [Page 19] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols    December 2002 
    
5.7.8 Confidentiality of signaling messages 
    
   Based on the signaling information exchanged between nodes 
   participating in the signaling protocol an adversary may learn both 
   the identities and the content of the signaling messages. To prevent 
   this from happening, confidentiality of the signaling message in a 
   hop-by-hop manner MAY be provided. Note that the protection can be 
   provided on a hop-by-hop basis for most message payloads since it is 
   required that entities which actively participating in the signaling 
   protocol must be able to read and eventually modify the content of 
   the signaling messages. 
    
5.7.9 Ownership of a reservation 
    
   When existing reservations have to be modified then there is a need 
   to use a reservation identifier to uniquely identify the established 
   state. A signaling protocol MUST provide the appropriate security 
   protection to prevent other entities to modify state without having 
   the proper ownership.  
    
5.8 Mobility 
 
5.8.1 Allow efficient service re-establishment after handover 
    
   Handover is an essential function in wireless networks. After 
   handover, the reservation may need to be completely or partially re-
   established due to route changes. The re-establishment may be 
   requested by the mobile node itself or triggered by the access point 
   that the mobile node is attached to.  In the first case, the 
   signaling MUST allow efficient re-establishment after handover.  Re-
   establishment after handover MUST be as quick as possible so that 
   the mobile node does not experience service interruption or service 
   degradation. The re-establishment SHOULD be localized, and not 
   require end-to-end signaling. 
    
5.9 Interworking with other protocols and techniques 
 
   Hooks SHOULD be provided to enable efficient interworking between 
   various protocols and techniques including: 
    
5.9.1 MUST interwork with IP tunneling 
    
   IP tunneling for various applications MUST be supported. More 
   specifically tunneling for IPSec tunnels are of importance as 
   discussed in Section 4.2. This mainly impacts the identification of 
   flows. Using IPSec parts of information used for flow identification 
   (e.g. transport protocol information and ports) may not be accessible 
   due to encryption.   
 
5.9.2 The solution MUST NOT constrain either to IPv4 or IPv6 
    
5.9.3 MUST be independent from charging model 
    
     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                   [Page 20] 


                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols    December 2002 
    
   Signaling MUST NOT be constrained by charging models or the charging 
   infrastructure used.  
    
5.9.4 SHOULD provide hooks for AAA protocols 
    
   The NSIS SHOULD be developed with respect to be able to collect 
   usage records from one or more network elements. 
    
5.9.5 SHOULD interwork with seamless handoff protocols 
    
   An NSIS protocol SHOULD interwork with seamless handoff protocols 
   such as context transfer and candidate access router (CAR) 
   discovery.  
    
5.9.6 MAY interwork with non-traditional routing 
    
   NSIS assumes traditional routing, but networks, which do non-
   traditional L3 routing, should not break it. 
    
5.10 Operational 
    
5.10.1 Ability to assign transport quality to signaling messages. 
    
   The NSIS architecture SHOULD allow the network operator to assign 
   the NSIS protocol messages a certain transport quality. As signaling 
   opens up for possible denial-of-service attacks, this requirement 
   gives the network operator a mean, but also the obligation, to 
   trade-off between signaling latency and the impact (from the 
   signaling messages) on devices within his/her network. From protocol 
   design this requirement states that the protocol messages SHOULD be 
   detectable, at least where the control and assignment of the 
   messages priority is done. 
    
   Furthermore, the protocol design must take into account reliability 
   concerns. Communication reliability is seen as part of the quality 
   assigned to signaling messages. So procedures MUST be defined how an 
   NSIS signaling system behaves if some kind of request it sent stays 
   without answer. The basic transport protocol to be used between 
   adjacent NSIS units MAY ensure message integrity and reliable 
   transport. 
    
5.10.2 Graceful fail over 
    
   Any unit participating in NSIS signaling MUST NOT cause further 
   damage to other systems involved in NSIS signaling when it has to go 
   out of service. 
    
5.10.3 Graceful handling of NSIS entity problems 
    
   NSIS peers SHOULD be able to detect the malfunctioning peer. It may 
   notify the NSIS Initiator or another NSIS entity involved in the 
   signaling process. The NSIS peer may handle the problem itself e.g. 
   switching to a backup NSIS entity. In the latter case note that 

     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                   [Page 21] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols    December 2002 
    
   synchronization of state between the primary and the backup entity 
   is needed. 
    
6 Security Considerations 
    
   Section 5.7 of this document provides security related requirements 
   of a signaling protocol. 
    
7 Informative References 
    
   [RSVP] Braden, R., Zhang, L., Berson, S., Herzog, A., Jamin, S., 
   "Resource ReSerVation Protocol (RSVP) -- Version 1 Functional 
   Specification", RFC 2205, September 1997. 
    
   [RSVP-TE] D. Awduche, L. Berger, D. Gan, T. Li, V. Srinivasan, G. 
   Swallow, "RSVP-TE: Extensions to RSVP for LSP Tunnels", RFC 3209, 
   December 2001. 
    
8 Acknowledgments 
    
   Quite a number of people have been involved in the discussion of the 
   document, adding some ideas, requirements, etc. We list them without 
   a guarantee on completeness: Changpeng Fan (Siemens), Krishna Paul 
   (NEC), Maurizio Molina (NEC), Mirko Schramm (Siemens), Andreas 
   Schrader (NEC), Hannes Hartenstein (NEC), Ralf Schmitz (NEC), 
   Juergen Quittek (NEC), Morihisa Momona (NEC), Holger Karl (Technical 
   University Berlin), Xiaoming Fu (Technical University Berlin), Hans-
   Peter Schwefel (Siemens), Mathias Rautenberg (Siemens), Christoph 
   Niedermeier (Siemens), Andreas Kassler (University of Ulm), Ilya 
   Freytsis. 
    
   Some text and/or ideas for text, requirements, scenarios have been 
   taken from an Internet Draft written by the following authors: David 
   Partain (Ericsson), Anders Bergsten (Telia Research), Marc Greis 
   (Nokia), Georgios Karagiannis (Ericsson), Jukka Manner (University 
   of Helsinki), Ping Pan (Juniper), Vlora Rexhepi (Ericsson), Lars 
   Westberg (Ericsson), Haihong Zheng (Nokia). Some of those have 
   actively contributed new text to this document as well. 
    
   Another Internet Draft impacting this document has been written by 
   Sven Van den Bosch, Maarten Buchli, and Danny Goderis (all Alcatel). 
   These people contributed also new text. 
    
   Thanks also to Kwok Ho Chan (Nortel) for text changes. 
     
9 Author's Addresses 
    
   Marcus Brunner (Editor) 
   NEC Europe Ltd. 
   Network Laboratories 
   Kurfuersten-Anlage 34 
   D-69115 Heidelberg 
   Germany 
   E-Mail: brunner@ccrle.nec.de 
     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                   [Page 22] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols    December 2002 
    
    
   Robert Hancock 
   Roke Manor Research Ltd 
   Romsey, Hants, SO51 0ZN 
   United Kingdom 
   E-Mail: robert.hancock@roke.co.uk 
    
   Eleanor Hepworth 
   Roke Manor Research Ltd 
   Romsey, Hants, SO51 0ZN 
   United Kingdom 
   E-Mail: eleanor.hepworth@roke.co.uk 
 
   Cornelia Kappler 
   Siemens AG 
   Berlin  13623 
   Germany 
   E-Mail: cornelia.kappler@icn.siemens.de 
 
   Hannes Tschofenig  
   Siemens AG 
   Otto-Hahn-Ring 6 
   81739 Munchen 
   Germany 
   Email: Hannes.Tschofenig@mchp.siemens.de 
    
10 Appendix: Scenarios/Use cases 
    
   In the following we describe scenarios, which are important to 
   cover, and which allow us to discuss various requirements. Some 
   regard this as use cases to be covered defining the use of a 
   signaling protocol.  
    
10.1 Terminal Mobility 
    
   The scenario we are looking at is the case where a mobile terminal 
   (MT) changes from one access point to another access point. The 
   access points are located in separate QoS domains. We assume Mobile 
   IP to handle mobility on the network layer in this scenario and 
   consider the various extensions (i.e., IETF proposals) to Mobile IP, 
   in order to provide 'fast handover' for roaming Mobile Terminals. 
   The goal to be achieved lies in providing, keeping, and adapting the 
   requested QoS for the ongoing IP sessions in case of handover. 
   Furthermore, the negotiation of QoS parameters with the new domain 
   via the old connection might be needed, in order to support the 
   different 'fast handover' proposals within the IETF.  
 
   The entities involved in this scenario include a mobile terminal, 
   access points, an access network manager, and communication partners 
   of the MT (the other end(s) of the communication association). 
   From a technical point of view, terminal mobility means changing the 
   access point of a mobile terminal (MT). However, technologies might 
   change in various directions (access technology, QoS technology, 
   administrative domain). If the access points are within one specific 
     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                   [Page 23] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols    December 2002 
    
   QoS technology (independent of access technology) we call this 
   intra-QoS technology handoff. In the case of an inter-QoS technology 
   handoff, one change from e.g. a DiffServ to an IntServ domain, 
   however still using the same access technology. Finally, if the 
   access points are using different access technologies we call it 
   inter-technology hand-off. 
    
   The following issues are of special importance in this scenario: 
    
   1) Handoff decision 
    
   - The QoS management requests handoff. The QoS management can decide 
   to change the access point, since the traffic conditions of the new 
   access point are better supporting the QoS requirements. The metric 
   may be different (optimized towards a single or a group/class of 
   users). Note that the MT or the network (see below) might trigger 
   the handoff. 
    
   - The mobility management forces handoff. This can have several 
   reasons. The operator optimizes his network, admission is no longer 
   granted (e.g. emptied prepaid condition). Or another example is when 
   the MT is reaching the focus of another base station. However, this 
   might be detected via measurements of QoS on the physical layer and 
   is therefore out of scope of QoS signaling in IP. Note again that 
   the MT or the network (see below) might trigger the handoff. 
    
   - This scenario shows that local decisions might not be enough. The 
   rest of the path to the other end of the communication needs to be 
   considered as well. Hand-off decisions in a QoS domain do not only 
   depend on the local resource availability, e.g., the wireless part, 
   but involve the rest of the path as well. Additionally, 
   decomposition of an end-to-end reservation might be needed, in order 
   to change only parts of it. 
    
   2) Trigger sources  
    
   - Mobile terminal: If the end-system QoS management identifies 
   another (better-suited) access point, it will request the handoff 
   from the terminal itself. This will be especially likely in the case 
   that two different provider networks are involved. Another important 
   example is when the current access point bearer disappears (e.g. 
   removing the Ethernet cable). In this case, the NSIS Initiator is 
   basically located on the mobile terminal. 
    
   - Network (access network manager): Sometimes, the handoff trigger 
   will be issued from the network management to optimize the overall 
   load situation. Most likely this will result in changing the base-
   station of a single providers network. Most likely the NSIS 
   Initiator is located on a system within the network. 
    
   3) Integration with other protocols 
    


     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                   [Page 24] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols    December 2002 
    
   - Interworking with other protocol must be considered in one or the 
   other form. E.g., it might be worth combining QoS signaling between 
   different QoS domains with mobility signaling at hand-over. 
    
   4) Handover rates 
    
   In mobile networks, the admission control process has to cope with 
   far more admission requests than call setups alone would generate. 
   For example, in the GSM (Global System for Mobile communications) 
   case, mobility usually generates an average of one to two handovers 
   per call. For third generation networks (such as UMTS), where it is 
   necessary to keep radio links to several cells simultaneously 
   (macro-diversity), the handover rate is significantly higher. 
    
   5) Fast reservations 
    
   Handover can also cause packet losses. This happens when the 
   processing of an admission request causes a delayed handover to the 
   new base station. In this situation, some packets might be 
   discarded, and the overall speech quality might be degraded 
   significantly. Moreover, a delay in handover may cause degradation 
   for other users. In the worst-case scenario, a delay in handover may 
   cause the connection to be dropped if the handover occurred due to 
   bad air link quality. Therefore, it is critical that QoS signaling 
   in connection with handover be carried out very quickly. 
    
   6) Call blocking in case of overload 
    
   Furthermore, when the network is overloaded, it is preferable to 
   keep reservations for previously established flows while blocking 
   new requests. Therefore, the resource reservation requests in 
   connection with handover should be given higher priority than new 
   requests for resource reservation. 
 
10.2 Cellular Networks 
    
   In this scenario, the user is using the packet service of a 3rd 
   generation cellular system, e.g. UMTS. The region between the End 
   Host and the edge node connecting the cellular network to another 
   QoS domain (e.g. the GGSN in UMTS or the PDSN in 3GPP2) is 
   considered to be a single QoS domain. 
    
   The issues in such an environment regarding QoS include: 
    
   1) Cellular systems provide their own QoS technology with 
   specialized parameters to co-ordinate the QoS provided by both the 
   radio access and wired access network. For example, in a UMTS 
   network, one aspect of GPRS is that it can be considered as a QoS 
   technology; provisioning of QoS within GPRS is described mainly in 
   terms of calling UMTS bearer classes.  This QoS technology needs to 
   be invoked with suitable parameters when higher layers trigger a 
   request for QoS, and this therefore involves mapping the requested 
   IP QoS onto these UMTS bearer classes. This request for resources 
   might be triggered by IP signaling messages that pass across the 
     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                   [Page 25] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols    December 2002 
    
   cellular system, and possibly other QoS domains, to negotiate for 
   network resources. Typically, cellular system specific messages 
   invoke the underlying cellular system QoS technology in parallel 
   with the IP QoS negotiation, to allocate the resources within the 
   cellular system.  
    
   2) The placement of NSIS Initiators and NSIS Forwarders (terminology 
   in the framework given here). The NSIS Initiator could be located at 
   the End Host (triggered by applications), the GGSN/PDSN, or at a 
   node not directly on the data path, such as a bandwidth broker. In 
   the second case, the GGSN/PDSN could either be acting as a proxy on 
   behalf of an End Host with little capabilities, and/or managing 
   aggregate resources within its QoS domain (the UMTS core network). 
   The IP signaling messages are interpreted by the NSIS Forwarders, 
   which may be located at the GGSN/PDSN, and in any QoS sub-domains 
   within the cellular system.  
    
   3) Initiation of IP-level QoS negotiation. IP-level QoS re-
   negotiation may be initiated by either the End Host, or by the 
   network, based on current network loads, which might change 
   depending on the location of the end host. 
    
   4) The networks are designed and mainly used for speech 
   communication (at least so far). 
    
   Note that in comparison to the previous scenario emphasis is much 
   less on the mobility aspects, because mobility is mainly handled on 
   the lower layer. 
    
10.3 UMTS access 
    
   The UMTS access scenario is shown in Figure 1. The Proxy-Call State 
   Control Function/Policy Control Function (P-CSCF/PCF) is the 
   outbound SIP proxy of the visited domain, i.e. the domain where the 
   mobile user wants to set-up a call. The Gateway GPRS Support Node 
   (GGSN) is the egress router of the UMTS domain and connects the UMTS 
   access network to the Edge Router (ER) of the core IP network. The 
   P-CSCF/PCF communicates with the GGSN via the COPS protocol. The 
   User Equipment (UE) consists of a Mobile Terminal (MT) and Terminal 
   Equipment (TE), e.g. a laptop. 
    
                            
                           +--------+           
                +----------| P-CSCF |-------> SIP signaling 
               /           +--------+  
              / SIP            :            
             :             +--------+   NSIS  +----------------+ 
             :             |  PCF   |---------| NSIS Forwarder | 
             :             +--------+         +----------------+ 
             :                 : 
             :                 : COPS   
             :                 : 
           +----+          +--------+      +----+ 
           | UE |----------|  GGSN  |------| ER | 
     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                   [Page 26] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols    December 2002 
    
           +----+          +--------+      +----+ 
    
                      Figure 1: UMTS access scenario 
    
   In this scenario the GGSN has the role of Access Gate. According to 
   3GPP standardization, the PCF is responsible for the policy-based 
   control of the end-user service in the UMTS access network (i.e. 
   from UE to GGSN). In the current UMTS release R.5, the PCF is part 
   of the P-CSCF, but in UMTS R.6 the interface between P-CSCF and PCF 
   may evolve to an open standardized interface. In any case the PCF 
   has all required QoS information for per-flow admission control in 
   the UMTS access network (which it gets from the P-CSCF and/or GGSN). 
   Thus the PCF would be the appropriate entity to host the 
   functionality of NSIS Initiator, initiating the "NSIS" QoS signaling 
   towards the core IP network. The PCF/P-CSCF has to do the mapping 
   from codec type (derived from SIP/SDP signaling) to IP traffic 
   descriptor. SDP extensions to explicitly signal QoS information are 
   useful to avoid the need to store codec information in the PCF and 
   to allow for more flexibility and accurate description of the QoS 
   traffic parameters. The PCF also controls the GGSN to open and close 
   the gates and to configure per-flow policers, i.e. to authorize or 
   forbid user traffic. 
    
   The NSIS Forwarder is (of course) not part of the standard UMTS 
   architecture. However, to achieve end-to-end QoS a NSIS Forwarder is 
   needed such that the PCF can request a QoS connection to the IP 
   network. As in the previous example, the NSIS Forwarder could manage 
   a set of pre-provisioned resources in the IP network, i.e. bandwidth 
   pipes, and the NSIS Forwarder performs per-flow admission control 
   into these pipes. In this way, a connection can be made between two 
   UMTS access networks, and hence, end-to-end QoS can be achieved. In 
   this case the NSIS Initiator and NSIS Forwarder are clearly two 
   separate entities. 
   This use case clearly illustrates the need for an "NSIS" QoS 
   signaling protocol between NSIS Initiator and NSIS Forwarder. An 
   important application of such a protocol may be its use in the 
   inter-connection of UMTS networks over an IP backbone. 
 
10.4 Wired part of wireless network 
 
   A wireless network, seen from a QoS domain perspective, usually 
   consists of three parts: a wireless interface part (the "radio 
   interface"), a wired part of the wireless network (i.e., Radio 
   Access Network) and the backbone of the wireless network, as shown 
   in Figure 2. Note that this figure should not be seen as an 
   architectural overview of wireless networks but rather as showing 
   the conceptual QoS domains in a wireless network. 
    
   In this scenario, a mobile host can roam and perform a handover 
   procedure between base stations/access routers. In this scenario the 
   NSIS QoS protocol can be applied between a base station and the 
   gateway (GW).  In this case a GW can also be considered as a local 
   handover anchor point. Furthermore, in this scenario the NSIS QoS 

     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                   [Page 27] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols    December 2002 
    
   protocol can also be applied either between two GWs, or between two 
   edge routers (ER). 
    
                          |--| 
                          |GW| 
   |--|                   |--| 
   |MH|---                 . 
   |--|  / |-------|       . 
        /--|base   | |--|  . 
           |station|-|ER|... 
           |-------| |--|  . |--| back- |--|  |---|              |----| 
                           ..|ER|.......|ER|..|BGW|.."Internet"..|host| 
        -- |-------| |--|  . |--| bone  |--|  |---|              |----| 
   |--| \  |base   |-|ER|...     . 
   |MH|  \ |station| |--|        . 
   |--|--- |-------|             .          MH  = mobile host 
                              |--|          ER  = edge router 
      <---->                  |GW|          GW  = gateway 
     Wireless link            |--|          BGW = border gateway 
                                            ... = interior nodes 
            <-------------------> 
       Wired part of wireless network 
    
   <----------------------------------------> 
                Wireless Network 
    
      Figure 2. QoS architecture of wired part of wireless network 
    
   Each of these parts of the wireless network impose different issues 
   to be solved on the QoS signaling solution being used: 
    
    
   - Wireless interface: The solution for the air interface link 
     has to ensure flexibility and spectrum efficient transmission 
     of IP packets.  However, this link layer QoS can be solved in 
     the same way as any other last hop problem by allowing a 
     host to request the proper QoS profile. 
    
   - Wired part of the wireless network:  This is the part of 
     the network that is closest to the base stations/access 
     routers.  It is an IP network although some parts logically 
     perform tunneling of the end user data. In cellular networks, 
     the wired part of the wireless network is denoted as a 
     radio access network. 
    
     This part of the wireless network has different 
     characteristics when compared to traditional IP networks: 
    
         1. The network supports a high proportion of real-time 
            traffic.  The majority of the traffic transported in the 
            wired part of the wireless network is speech, which is 
            very sensitive to delays and delay variation (jitter). 
    
         2. The network must support mobility.  Many wireless 
     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                   [Page 28] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols    December 2002 
    
            networks are able to provide a combination of soft 
            and hard handover procedures. When handover occurs, 
            reservations need to be established on new paths. 
            The establishment time has to be as short as possible 
            since long establishment times for reservations degrade 
            the performance of the wireless network.  Moreover, 
            for maximal utilization of the radio spectrum, frequent 
            handover operations are required. 
    
         3. These links are typically rather bandwidth-limited. 
    
         4. The wired transmission in such a network contains a 
            relatively high volume of expensive leased lines. 
            Overprovisioning might therefore be prohibitively 
            expensive. 
    
         5. The radio base stations are spread over a wide 
            geographical area and are in general situated a large 
            distance from the backbone. 
    
   - Backbone of the wireless network: the requirements imposed 
     by this network are similar to the requirements imposed by 
     other types of backbone networks. 
    
   Due to these very different characteristics and requirements, often 
   contradictory, different QoS signaling solutions might be needed in 
   each of the three network parts. 
 
10.5 Session Mobility 
    
   In this scenario, a session is moved from one end-system to another. 
   Ongoing sessions are kept and QoS parameters need to be adapted, 
   since it is very likely that the new device provides different 
   capabilities. Note that it is open which entity initiates the move, 
   which implies that the NSIS Initiator might be triggered by 
   different entities. 
     
   User mobility (i.e., a user changing the device and therefore moving 
   the sessions to the new device) is considered to be a special case 
   within the session mobility scenario. 
 
   Note that this scenario is different from terminal mobility. Not the 
   terminal (end-system) has moved to a different access point. Both 
   terminals are still connected to an IP network at their original 
   points.  
    
   The issues include: 
    
   1) Keeping the QoS guarantees negotiated implies that the end-
   point(s) of communication are changed without changing the 
   reservations.  
    
   2) The trigger of the session move might be the user or any other 
   party involved in the session.  
     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                   [Page 29] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols    December 2002 
    
    
10.6 QoS reservations/negotiation from access to core network 
    
   The scenario includes the signaling between access networks and core 
   networks in order to setup and change reservations together with 
   potential negotiation. 
 
   The issues to be solved in this scenario are different from previous 
   ones. 
     
   1) The entity of reservation is most likely an aggregate. 
    
   2) The time scales of reservations might be different (long living 
   reservations of aggregates, less often re-negotiation).  
    
   3) The specification of the traffic (amount of traffic), a 
   particular QoS is guaranteed for, needs to be changed. E.g., in case 
   additional flows are added to the aggregate, the traffic 
   specification of the flow needs to be added if it is not already 
   included in the aggregates specification.  
    
   4) The flow specification is more complex including network 
   addresses and sets of different address for the source as well as 
   for the destination of the flow.  
 
10.7 QoS reservation/negotiation over administrative boundaries 
    
   Signaling between two or more core networks to provide QoS is 
   handled in this scenario. This might also include access to core 
   signaling over administrative boundaries. Compared to the previous 
   one it adds the case, where the two networks are not in the same 
   administrative domain. Basically, it is the inter-domain/inter 
   provider signaling which is handled in here. 
    
   The domain boundary is the critical issue to be resolved. Which as 
   various flavors of issues a QoS signaling protocol has to be 
   concerned with.  
    
   1) Competing administrations: Normally, only basic information 
   should be exchanged, if the signaling is between competing 
   administrations. Specifically information about core network 
   internals (e.g., topology, technology, etc.) should not be 
   exchanged. Some information exchange about the "access points" of 
   the core networks (which is topology information as well) may need 
   to be exchanged, because it is needed for proper signaling. 
    
   2) Additionally, as in scenario 4, signaling most likely is based on 
   aggregates, with all the issues raise there. 
    
   3) Authorization: It is critical that the NSIS Initiator is 
   authorized to perform a QoS path setup. 
    


     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                   [Page 30] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols    December 2002 
    
   4) Accountability: It is important to notice that signaling might be 
   used as an entity to charge money for, therefore the interoperation 
   with accounting needs to be available. 
 
10.8 QoS signaling between PSTN gateways and backbone routers 
    
   A PSTN gateway (i.e., host) requires information from the network 
   regarding its ability to transport voice traffic across the network. 
   The voice quality will suffer due to packet loss, latency and 
   jitter. Signaling is used to identify and admit a flow for which 
   these impairments are minimized.  In addition, the disposition of 
   the signaling request is used to allow the PSTN GW to make a call 
   routing decision before the call is actually accepted and delivered 
   to the final destination. 
    
   PSTN gateways may handle thousands of calls simultaneously and there 
   may be hundreds of PSTN gateways in a single provider network. These 
   numbers are likely to increase as the size of the network increases. 
   The point being that scalability is a major issue. 
    
   There are several ways that a PSTN gateway can acquire assurances 
   that a network can carry its traffic across the network. These 
   include: 
    
     1. Over-provisioning a high availability network. 
     2. Handling admission control through some policy server 
        that has a global view of the network and its resources. 
     3. Per PSTN GW pair admission control. 
     4. Per call admission control (where a call is defined as 
        the 5-tuple used to carry a single RTP flow). 
    
   Item 1 requires no signaling at all and is therefore outside the 
   scope of this working group. 
    
   Item 2 is really a better informed version of 1, but it is also 
   outside the scope of this working group as it relies on a particular 
   telephony signaling protocol rather than a packet admission control 
   protocol. 
    
   Item 3 is initially attractive, as it appears to have reasonable 
   scaling properties, however, its scaling properties only are 
   effective in cases where there are relatively few PSTN GWs. In the 
   more general case were a PSTN GW reduces to a single IP phone 
   sitting behind some access network, the opportunities for 
   aggregation are reduced and the problem reduces to item 4. 
    
   Item 4 is the most general case. However, it has the most difficult 
   scaling problems. The objective here is to place the requirements on 
   Item 4 such that a scalable per-flow admission control protocol or 
   protocol suite may be developed. 
    
   The case where per-flow signaling extends to individual IP end-
   points allows the inclusion of IP phones on cable, DSL, wireless or 
   other access networks in this scenario. 
     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                   [Page 31] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols    December 2002 
    
    
   Call Scenario 
    
   A PSTN GW signals end-to-end for some 5-tuple defined flow a 
   bandwidth and QoS requirement. Note that the 5-tuple might include 
   masking/wildcarding. The access network admits this flow according 
   to its local policy and the specific details of the access 
   technology.   
    
   At the edge router (i.e., border node), the flow is admitted, again 
   with an optional authentication process, possibly involving an 
   external policy server.  Note that the relationship between the PSTN 
   GW and the policy server and the routers and the policy server is 
   outside the scope of NSIS. The edge router then admits the flow into 
   the core of the network, possibly using some aggregation technique. 
    
   At the interior nodes, the NSIS host-to-host signaling should either 
   be ignored or invisible as the Edge router performed the admission 
   control decision to some aggregate. 
    
   At the inter-provider router (i.e., border node), again the NSIS 
   host-to-host signaling should either be ignored or invisible, as the 
   Edge router has performed an admission control decision about an 
   aggregate across a carrier network.  
    
10.9 PSTN trunking gateway 
    
   One of the use cases for the NSIS signaling protocol is the scenario 
   of interconnecting PSTN gateways with an IP network that supports 
   QoS. 
   Four different scenarios are considered here. 
     1. In-band QoS signaling is used. In this case the Media Gateway 
        (MG) will be acting as the NSIS Initiator and the Edge Router 
        (ER) will be the NSIS Forwarder. Hence, the ER should do 
        admission control (into pre-provisioned traffic trunks) for the 
        individual traffic flows. This scenario is not further 
        considered here. 
     2. Out-of-band signaling in a single domain, the NSIS forwarder is 
        integrated in the MGC. In this case no NSIS protocol is 
        required. 
     3. Out-of-band signaling in a single domain, the NSIS forwarder is 
        a separate box. In this case NSIS signaling is used between the 
        MGC and the NSIS Forwarder. 
     4. Out-of-band signaling between multiple domains, the NSIS 
        Forwarder (which may be integrated in the MGC) triggers the 
        NSIS Forwarder of the next domain. 
    
   When the out-of-band QoS signaling is used the Media Gateway 
   Controller (MGC) will be acting as the NSIS Initiator.   
    
   In the second scenario the voice provider manages a set of traffic 
   trunks that are leased from a network provider. The MGC does the 
   admission control in this case. Since the NSIS Forwarder acts both 

     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                   [Page 32] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols    December 2002 
    
   as a NSIS Initiator and a NSIS Forwarder, no NSIS signaling is 
   required. This scenario is shown in Figure 3. 
    
      +-------------+    ISUP/SIGTRAN     +-----+              +-----+ 
      | SS7 network |---------------------| MGC |--------------| SS7 | 
      +-------------+             +-------+-----+---------+    +-----+ 
            :                    /           :             \ 
            :                   /            :              \ 
            :                  /    +--------:----------+    \    
            :          MEGACO /    /         :           \    \     
            :                /    /       +-----+         \    \   
            :               /    /        | NMS |          \    \    
            :              /     |        +-----+          |     \   
            :              :     |                         |     :    
     +--------------+  +----+    |   bandwidth pipe (SLS)  |  +----+ 
     | PSTN network |--| MG |--|ER|======================|ER|-| MG |-- 
     +--------------+  +----+     \                       /   +----+ 
                                   \     QoS network     / 
                                    +-------------------+ 
    
                 Figure 3: PSTN trunking gateway scenario 
    
   In the third scenario, the voice provider does not lease traffic 
   trunks in the network. Another entity may lease traffic trunks and 
   may use a NSIS Forwarder to do per-flow admission control. In this 
   case the NSIS signaling is used between the MGC and the NSIS 
   Forwarder, which is a separate box here. Hence, the MGC acts only as 
   a NSIS Initiator. This scenario is depicted in Figure 4. 
    
    
    
    
      +-------------+    ISUP/SIGTRAN     +-----+              +-----+ 
      | SS7 network |---------------------| MGC |--------------| SS7 | 
      +-------------+             +-------+-----+---------+    +-----+ 
            :                    /           :             \ 
            :                   /         +-----+           \ 
            :                  /          | NF  |            \  
            :                 /           +-----+             \ 
            :                /               :                 \ 
            :               /       +--------:----------+       \  
            :       MEGACO :       /         :           \       : 
            :              :      /       +-----+         \      : 
            :              :     /        | NMS |          \     : 
            :              :     |        +-----+          |     : 
            :              :     |                         |     : 
     +--------------+  +----+    |   bandwidth pipe (SLS)  |  +----+  
     | PSTN network |--| MG |--|ER|======================|ER|-| MG |-- 
     +--------------+  +----+     \                       /   +----+ 
                                   \     QoS network     / 
                                    +-------------------+ 
    
                 Figure 4: PSTN trunking gateway scenario 
    
     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                   [Page 33] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols    December 2002 
    
   In the fourth scenario multiple transport domains are involved. In 
   the originating network either the MGC may have an overview on the 
   resources of the overlay network or a separate NSIS Forwarder will 
   have the overview. Hence, depending on this either the MGC or the 
   NSIS Forwarder of the originating domain will contact the NSIS 
   Forwarder of the next domain. The MGC always acts as a NSIS 
   Initiator and may also be acting as a NSIS Forwarder in the first 
   domain. 
    
10.10  Application request end-to-end QoS path from the network 
    
   This is actually the easiest case, nevertheless might be most often 
   used in terms of number of users. So multimedia application requests 
   a guaranteed service from an IP network. We assume here that the 
   application is somehow able to specify the network service. The 
   characteristics here are that many hosts might do it, but that the 
   requested service is low capacity (bounded by the access line). 
   Additionally, we assume no mobility and standard devices. 
    
   QOS for Virtual Private Networks 
    
   In a Virtual Private Network (VPN) a variety of tunnels might be 
   used between its edges. These tunnels could be for example, IP-Sec, 
   GRE, and IP-IP. One of the most significant issues in VPNs is 
   related to how a flow is identified and what quality a flow gets. A 
   flow identification might consist among others of the transport 
   protocol port numbers. In an IP-Sec tunnel this will be problematic 
   since the transport protocol information is encrypted. 
    
   There are two types of L3 VPNs, distinguished by where the endpoints 
   of the tunnels exist. The endpoints of the tunnels may either be on 
   the customer (CPE) or the provider equipment or provider edge (PE). 
    
   Virtual Private networks are also likely to request bandwidth or 
   other type of service in addition to the premium services the PSTN 
   GW are likely to use. 
    
   Tunnel end points at the Customer premises 
    
   When the endpoints are the CPE, the CPE may want to signal across 
   the public IP network for a particular amount of bandwidth and QoS 
   for the tunnel aggregate. Such signaling may be useful when a 
   customer wants to vary their network cost with demand, rather than 
   paying a flat rate. Such signaling exists between the two CPE 
   routers. Intermediate access and edge routers perform the same exact 
   call admission control, authentication and aggregation functions 
   performed by the corresponding routers in the PSTN GW scenario with 
   the exception that the endpoints are the CPE tunnel endpoints rather 
   than PSTN GWs and the 5-tuple used to describe the RTP flow is 
   replaced with the corresponding flow spec to uniquely identify the 
   tunnels. Tunnels may be of any variety (e.g. IP-Sec, GRE, IP-IP). 
    
   In such a scenario, NSIS would actually allow partly for customer 
   managed VPNs, which means a customer can setup VPNs by subsequent 
     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                   [Page 34] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols    December 2002 
    
   NSIS signaling to various end-point. Plus the tunnel end-points are 
   not necessarily bound to an application. The customer administrator 
   might be the one triggering NSIS signaling. 
    
   Tunnel end points at the provider premises 
    
   In the case were the tunnel end-points exist on the provider edge, 
   requests for bandwidth may be signaled either per flow, where a flow 
   is defined from a customers address space, or between customer 
   sites. 
    
   In the case of per flow signaling, the PE router must map the 
   bandwidth request to the tunnel carrying traffic to the destination 
   specified in the flow spec. Such a tunnel is a member of an 
   aggregate to which the flow must be admitted. In this case, the 
   operation of admission control is very similar to the case of the 
   PSTN GW with the additional level of indirection imposed by the VPN 
   tunnel. Therefore, authentication, accounting and policing may be 
   required on the PE router. 
    
   In the case of per site signaling, a site would need to be 
   identified. This may be accomplished by specifying the network 
   serviced at that site through an IP prefix. In this case, the 
   admission control function is performed on the aggregate to the PE 
   router connected to the site in question. 
 
Full Copyright Statement 
 
  Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002). All Rights Reserved. 
   
  This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
  others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 
  or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published 
  and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any 
  kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are 
  included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this 
  document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
  the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
  Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
  developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for 
  copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be 
  followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than 
  English. 
   
  The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be 
  revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns. 
   
  This document and the information contained herein is provided on an 
  "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING 
  TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDIN 
  BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION 
  HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF 
  MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
 
     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                   [Page 35] 

