
           
         Network Working Group                                   S. McHenry 
         Internet Draft                Advanced Software Technologies, Ltd. 
         Expires August 22, 2001                           22 February 2001 
           



           
                 A Standard for the Transmission of IP Datagrams on 
                          Rising Visual Incineration Debris 
                        draft-mchenry-iporvid-protocol-00.txt
                        
         Conformance 
           
            This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
            all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026. 
             
            Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
            Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
            other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
            Drafts. 
             
            Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
            and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
            time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
            material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
             
            The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
            http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
             
            The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
            http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
             
          
         Status of this Memo 
           
            This memo describes an experimental method for the transmission of IP 
            datagrams using rising visual incineration debris (RVID).  This 
            specification is primarily useful in Very Remote Area Networks.  This 
            is an experimental, not recommended standard.  Distribution of this 
            memo is unlimited. 
           
         Overview and Rationale 
           
            Internet Protocol Datagram Transmission over Rising Visual 
            Incineration Debris (IPoRVID) can provide high availability, low 
            throughput, and low cost service to very remote areas.  The 
            connection topology may be configured in either a single point-to-
            point path or a single point to multiple point path (multicast) for 
            each connection.  IPoRVID provides a highly available alternative to 
            traditional communication technologies in very remote areas due to 
            both the lack of requirements for traditional, electrically powered 
            transmission devices and the high availability of materials suitable 

         McHenry               Expires August 22, 2001                [Page 1] 

         Internet-Draft          IP Datagrams on RVID            February 2001 
          
          
          
            for protocol enablement. IPoRVID does not suffer from traditional 
            signal attenuation present in traditional copper-based mediums, thus 
            enabling the utilization of significantly longer network segments 
            when coupled with the use of a visual magnification enhancement 
            device. Installation requirements and maintenance of transmission 
            facilities are minimal. A single IPoRVID connection is limited to 
            line-of-sight distance.  
           
         Frame Format 
           
            Initially, a source of rising visual incineration debris (RVID) must 
            be created. One procedure that has demonstrated its effectiveness is 
            the application of significant heat to a pile of moist wood or 
            leaves. The resulting incineration will produce a sufficient column 
            of RVID for datagram transmission.  
             
            The datagram is encoded bitwise in large endian order, by allowing 
            and interrupting the flow of RVID. The clocking frequency shall be 
            five thousand (5,000) milliseconds. Demarcation of bits shall be done 
            by introducing an interruption device into the RVID for the duration 
            of the clocking interval. Covering the source of RVID with a wet 
            blanket has been demonstrated to be a suitable device for 
            interruption of the RVID. Dry blankets are not recommended as they 
            tend to become assimilated into the source of RVID. Transmission of 
            zero bits are done by removing the interruption device for duration 
            of one clocking interval. Transmission of one bits are done by 
            removing the interruption device for duration of two clocking 
            intervals. Between each zero or one bit transmitted, one clocking 
            interval of demarcation shall be present. 
             
            Receipt is accomplished by viewing the RVID and applying the clocking 
            interval to determine the pattern of ones and zeros. In the event 
            that the RVID is not clearly visible, the recipient has the option to 
            either move closer to the source, or to clean their lenses. 
          
         Discussion 
           
            In addition to the benefits stated above, additional benefits arise 
            from the wide availability of material for constructing RVID. This 
            material is prevalent in virtually all wilderness areas and many 
            populated areas as well, although use of IPoRVID in populated areas 
            is generally discouraged by local authorities. 
             
            It is important to note that usage of IPoRVID is limited to days with 
            a wind component less than five (5) knots, with the best results 
            being achieved on calm days. On calm days, the dispersal factor is 
            virtually non-existent, resulting in a significant decrease in the 
            signal attenuation due to distance. 
             
            IPoRVID is also recommended for use in environments external to 
            buildings and other man-made structures. Attempted use of IPoRVID in 
            certain controlled environments, such as computer rooms, can result 

         McHenry               Expires August 22, 2001                [Page 2] 

         Internet-Draft          IP Datagrams on RVID            February 2001 
          
          
          
            in high decibel emissions perilous to eardrums. Furthermore, 
            secondary dihydrogen monoxide dispersion systems can inhibit the 
            effectiveness of the IPoRVID protocol in these environments.  
             
            Shielding is also recommended for the RVID source. (Note: while the 
            term “firewall” could accurately be used to describe this shielding, 
            this term, in common practice, is recognized to have a different 
            meaning when used in the context of data communication and, thus, 
            should be avoided.) Additional shielding is recommended during 
            extended periods of dry weather or on windy days or combinations 
            thereof. Unshielded RVID sources may result in expansion of the RVID 
            source, and significant decrease in the signal to noise ratio (SNR) 
            with the consequent increase in transmission errors. Furthermore, the 
            RVID interruption device operator may become distracted by concerns 
            for personal safety, resulting in a deviation from the established 
            clocking interval. 
          
         Security Considerations 
           
            Security is not generally a problem in normal operation, but special 
            measures must be taken (such as data encryption) when IPoRVID is used 
            to carry confidential information. 
          
         Author's Address 
           
            Stephen McHenry 
            Advanced Software Technologies, Ltd. 
            305 Vineyard Town Center, #251 
            Morgan Hill, CA 95037 
           
            Phone: (408) 683-2500 
           
            EMail: stephen@softi.com 




















         McHenry               Expires August 22, 2001                [Page 3] 


