draft                        Language Tag                       Dec 93


                 Tags for the identification of languages

                       Thu Mar 18 14:03:38 MET 1993


                         Harald Tveit Alvestrand
                                 UNINETT
                       Harald.Alvestrand@uninett.no






    Abstract

    This document describes a Content-Language: header for use with
    body parts of MIME.

    It also describes a new parameter to the Multipart/Alternative
    type, to aid in the usage of the Content-Language: header.


    Status of this Memo

    This draft document is being circulated for comment.

    If consensus is reached it may be submitted to the RFC editor as a
    Proposed Standard protocol specificiation.

    Please send comments to the author, or to the IETF-822 mailing
    list <ietf-822@dimacs.rutgers.edu>

    The following text is required by the Internet-draft rules:

    This document is an Internet Draft.  Internet Drafts are working
    documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its
    Areas, and its Working Groups. Note that other groups may also
    distribute working documents as Internet Drafts.

    Internet Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
    months. Internet Drafts may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by
    other documents at any time.  It is not appropriate to use
    Internet Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than





Alvestrand                Expires Jun 23 93                   [Page 1]

draft                        Language Tag                       Dec 93


    as a "working draft" or "work in progress."

    Please check the I-D abstract listing contained in each Internet
    Draft directory to learn the current status of this or any other
    Internet Draft.

    The filename of this document is draft-alvestrand-language-tag-
    00.txt









































Alvestrand                Expires Jun 23 93                   [Page 2]

draft                        Language Tag                       Dec 93


    1.  The Language tag

    The language tag is composed of 2 parts: A language tag and a
    subtag.

    The syntax of this header is:


    Language-Header ::= 'Content-language:' Language [',' Language]...
    Language ::= ALPHA*8 [ '-' ALPHA*8 ]

    The namespace of language tags and subtags is administered by the
    IANA. The following registrations are predefined:

    In the language tag:


    -    All 2-letter codes are interpreted according to ISO 639.

    -    All 3-letter codes are reserved for the (hopefully)
         forthcoming revision to ISO 639

    -    The value "IANA" is reserved for IANA-defined
         subregistrations

    -    The value "X" is reserved for private use. Subtags of "X"
         will not be registered by the IANA.

    -    No other registration is allowed.

    In the sublanguage tag:


    -    All 2-letter codes are interpreted as ISO 3166 country codes,
         according to the rules laid down in ISO 639.

    -    Codes of 3 to 8 letters may be registered with the IANA by
         anyone who feels a need for it. IANA has the right to reject
         registrations that are felt to be misleading.

    The information in the sublanguage tag may for instance be:








Alvestrand                Expires Jun 23 93                   [Page 3]

draft                        Language Tag                       Dec 93


    -    Country identification, such as en-US (this usage is
         described in ISO 639)

    -    Dialect information, such as no-NYNORSK or en-COCKNEY

    -    Languages not listed in ISO 639, which can be registered with
         the IANA prefix, such as IANA-CHEROKEE


    If multiple languages are used in the MIME body part, they are
    listed with commas between them.


    2.  MEANING

    The meaning of the header is:


    -    For a single information object, it should be taken as the
         set of languages that is required for a complete
         comprehension of the complete object. Examples: Simple text.

    -    For an aggregation of information object, it should be taken
         as the set of languages used inside components of that
         aggregation.  Examples: Document stores and libraries.

    -    For information objects whose purpose in life is providing
         alternatives, it should be regarded as a hint that the
         material inside is provided in several languages, and that
         one has to inspect each of the alternatives in order to find
         its language or languages.  In this case, multiple languages
         need not mean that one needs to be multilingual to get
         complete understanding of the document. Examples: MIME
         multipart/alternative.

         EXAMPLES:

         NOTE: NONE of the sublanguage codes shown in this document
         have actually been assigned; they are used for illustration
         purposes only.

         Norwegian official document, with parallel text in both
         official versions of Norwegian. Both versions are readable by
         all Norwegians.





Alvestrand                Expires Jun 23 93                   [Page 4]

draft                        Language Tag                       Dec 93


           Content-language: no-nynorsk, no-bokmaal

         Voice recording from the London docks

           Content-language: en-cockney

         Document in Sami, which does not have an ISO 639 code, and is
         spoken in several countries, but with about half the speakers
         in Norway

           Content-language: iana-sami

         An English-French dictionary

           Content-language: en, fr (This is a dictionary)

         An official EC document

           Content-language: en, fr, ge, da, gr, it

         An excerpt from Star Trek dialogue

           Content-language: x-klingon


    3.  Usage examples

    Examples of protocol usage of this header are:


    -    WWW selection of an appropriate version of information for
         display, based on a profile for the user listing languages
         that are understood

    -    MIME usage of alternate body parts in E-mail


    4.  The difference parameter to multipart/alternative

    As defined in RFC 1541, Multipart/Alternative only has one
    parameter: boundary.

    The common usage of Multipart/Alternative is to have more than one
    format of the same message (f.ex. PostScript and ASCII).





Alvestrand                Expires Jun 23 93                   [Page 5]

draft                        Language Tag                       Dec 93


    The use of language tags to differentiate between different
    alternatives will certainly not lead all MIME UAs to present the
    most sensible body part as default.

    Therefore, a new parameter is defined, to allow the configuration
    of MIME readers to handle language differences in a sensible
    manner.

    Name: Difference
    Value: One of
         content-type
         content-language

    Further values can be registered with IANA; it must be the name of
    a header for which a definition exists in a published document.
    If not present, Difference=Content-type is assumed.

    The intent is that the MIME reader can look at this header of the
    message component to do an intelligent choice of what to present
    to the user.

    (The intent of having registration with IANA of the fields used in
    this context is to maintain a list of usages that a mail UA may
    expect to see, not to reject usages)

    MIME EXAMPLE:

    Content-type: multipart/alternative; difference=content-language;
              boundary="limit"
    Content-language: en, fr

    --limit
    Content-language: fr

    --limit
    Content-language: en

    --limit--

    When composing a message, the choice of sequence may be somewhat
    arbitary. However, non-MIME mail readers will show the first body
    part first, meaning that this should most likely be the language
    understood by most of the recipients.






Alvestrand                Expires Jun 23 93                   [Page 6]

draft                        Language Tag                       Dec 93


    5.  Security considerations

    Security considerations are not considered in this memo


    6.  Character set considerations

    Codes are always US-ASCII. The issue of deciding upon the
    rendering of a character set based on the language encoding is not
    addressed in this memo; however, the author cautions against
    thinking that such a decision can be made correctly for all cases
    (for example, a rendering engine that decides font based on
    Japanese or Chinese language will fail to work when a mixed
    Japanese-Chinese text is encountered)


    7.  Gatewaying considerations

    RFC 1327 defines a Language: header. This header is not
    recommended now, because it is defined to be a single 2-letter
    language code, and the X.400 header it is supposed to gateway is a
    list of language codes.

    It is suggested that RFC 1327 be updated to produce the Content-
    language: header, and to turn this header into the ISO/CCITT
    specified Language components rather than the RFC-822-headers
    heading extension.


    8.  References

    ISO 639

    ISO 3166

    RFC 1521

    RFC 1327











Alvestrand                Expires Jun 23 93                   [Page 7]

