


Geopriv                                                  J. Winterbottom
Internet-Draft                                                M. Thomson
Intended status: Best Current                                  M. Dawson
Practice                                              Andrew Corporation
Expires: December 16, 2007                                 June 14, 2007


           Using HELD as a Location URI Dereference Protocol
            draft-winterbottom-geopriv-held-deref-bcp-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 16, 2007.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).













Winterbottom, et al.    Expires December 16, 2007               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                 HELD Deref                      June 2007


Abstract

   This document describes how HELD can be used by a third-party to
   deference an HTTP location URI.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   4.  Detailed Description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   5.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   6.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   7.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   8.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     8.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     8.2.  Informative references . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 13































Winterbottom, et al.    Expires December 16, 2007               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                 HELD Deref                      June 2007


1.  Introduction

   The HELD specification [I-D.ietf-geopriv-http-location-delivery]
   provides a set of features that can be used by an end-point to
   retrieve location information from an LCS.  HELD is desgined for an
   end-point to query its own location from an LCS, but can also be the
   protocol to retrieve location from an LCS where a third-party
   application possesses a location reference in the form of an HTTP
   location URI.  This document describes best common practice (BCP) on
   how HELD is used as a dereference protocol for HTTP location URIs.









































Winterbottom, et al.    Expires December 16, 2007               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                 HELD Deref                      June 2007


2.  Terminology

   The key conventions and terminology used in this document are defined
   as follows:

   This document reuses the terms Target, as defined in [RFC3693].

   This document uses the term Location Configuration Server, LCS, as
   the node in the access network providing location information to an
   end-point.  This term is also used in [I-D.ietf-geopriv-l7-lcp-ps].

   Basic terms from the HELD specification
   [I-D.ietf-geopriv-http-location-delivery] are also reused.

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].


































Winterbottom, et al.    Expires December 16, 2007               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                 HELD Deref                      June 2007


3.  Overview

   HELD provides a specification for obtaining location information from
   a Location Configuration Server (LCS), either by value, as a PIDF-LO,
   and/or as a set of location URIs that can be used by third-parties to
   retrieve the location the location of the Target.  The benefits and
   requirements for location by reference (LbyR) are provided in
   [I-D.marshall-geopriv-lbyr-requirements], along with characteristics
   of different kinds of location reference.  This document addresses
   HTTP location URIs.  Other URI forms, the required permissions, and
   the need for authentication by any specific recipient is deemed to be
   in the application domain and therefore out of scope for this
   document.  Resuing HELD in this manner reduces the number of
   protocols that need to be supported on the LIS, simplfies
   development, reduces complexity and improves interoperability by
   ensuring consistency between the form of location available at the
   end-point and the dereferencer interfaces.

   The location recipient in this document is in possession of an HTTP
   location URI which, when successfully de-referenced, will yield the
   location of the Target.  How the recipient obtained the location URI
   is not in scope for this document, however mechanisms such as
   [I-D.ietf-sip-location-conveyance] support this functionality.




























Winterbottom, et al.    Expires December 16, 2007               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                 HELD Deref                      June 2007


4.  Detailed Description

   HELD has explicit support for providing location URIs to an end-
   point.  The URI type returned over HELD can, in principle be any
   valid URI, in practice it will be limited to URI types for which a
   location acquisition function exists or can be defined.  This
   document describes a best common practice for using HELD as a
   dereference protocol with HTTP location URIs.  Only a subset of HELD
   is required to support the needs of an external dereference protocol,
   these needs can be summarized as follows:

   1: The ability to identify the Target for which location is required.

   2: The ability to request location in the form required by the
      application.

   3: The ability to indicate how long to wait for location information.

   Item 1 is addressed by the location URI itself and the remaining two
   requirements can be satisfied by parameters in the HELD
   locationRequest message.  The following locationRequest parameters
   represent the valid set that can be used when HELD is used as a
   dereference protocol:

   locationType:  The type of location being requested.

   exact:  indicates that the recipient is not prepared to accept an
      alternative location form if the requested form is not available.

   responseTime:  The period of time that the recipient is prepared to
      wait for a response.

   If any other parameters are received in a locationRequest message
   where HELD is being used as the dereference protocol for a location
   URI, the LCS MUST respond with a 400 "Request Error" message to the
   requesting entity.

   Where HELD is being used as the derefernce protocol the LCS MUST
   return location as a PIDF-LO [RFC4119] in the corresponding
   heldResponse message, and the PIDF-LO MUST comply with
   [I-D.ietf-geopriv-pdif-lo-profile].  Where the LCS is unable to
   process the location recipient's request, it SHOULD return the
   appropriate error from the existing HELD error set defined in
   [I-D.ietf-geopriv-http-location-delivery].







Winterbottom, et al.    Expires December 16, 2007               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                 HELD Deref                      June 2007


5.  Security Considerations

   Depending on the application, dereferencing a location URI may
   require the recipient to authenticate with the LCS.  How the
   recipient knows when to do this and under what circumstances this
   behaviour is required is out of scope for this document.  It is
   expected that common HTTP authentication techniques will be used,
   including:

   1: Basic HTTP authentication [RFC2617]

   2: HTTP Digest authentication [RFC2617]

   3: Client-side X.509 certifcates [RFC2818]

   The LCS MUST use server authentication methods described in HTTP on
   TLS [RFC2818].

   Any Target provided access rules MUST be adhered to by the LCS where
   these do not contravene local jurisdictional obligations.































Winterbottom, et al.    Expires December 16, 2007               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                 HELD Deref                      June 2007


6.  IANA Considerations

   There are no specific IANA considerations for this document.
















































Winterbottom, et al.    Expires December 16, 2007               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                 HELD Deref                      June 2007


7.  Acknowledgements

   Thanks to Barbara Stark and Guy Caron for providing early comments.
















































Winterbottom, et al.    Expires December 16, 2007               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                 HELD Deref                      June 2007


8.  References

8.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC4119]  Peterson, J., "A Presence-based GEOPRIV Location Object
              Format", RFC 4119, December 2005.

   [RFC3693]  Cuellar, J., Morris, J., Mulligan, D., Peterson, J., and
              J. Polk, "Geopriv Requirements", RFC 3693, February 2004.

   [RFC2818]  Rescorla, E., "HTTP Over TLS", RFC 2818, May 2000.

   [RFC2617]  Franks, J., Hallam-Baker, P., Hostetler, J., Lawrence, S.,
              Leach, P., Luotonen, A., and L. Stewart, "HTTP
              Authentication: Basic and Digest Access Authentication",
              RFC 2617, June 1999.

   [I-D.ietf-geopriv-pdif-lo-profile]
              Tschofenig, H., "GEOPRIV PIDF-LO Usage Clarification,
              Considerations and Recommendations",
              draft-ietf-geopriv-pdif-lo-profile-07 (work in progress),
              April 2007.

   [I-D.ietf-geopriv-http-location-delivery]
              Barnes, M., "HTTP Enabled Location Delivery (HELD)",
              draft-ietf-geopriv-http-location-delivery-00 (work in
              progress), June 2007.

   [I-D.marshall-geopriv-lbyr-requirements]
              Marshall, R., "Requirements for a Location-by-Reference
              Mechanism used in Location  Configuration and Conveyance",
              draft-marshall-geopriv-lbyr-requirements-01 (work in
              progress), March 2007.

8.2.  Informative references

   [I-D.ietf-sip-location-conveyance]
              Polk, J. and B. Rosen, "Session Initiation Protocol
              Location Conveyance",
              draft-ietf-sip-location-conveyance-07 (work in progress),
              February 2007.

   [I-D.ietf-geopriv-l7-lcp-ps]
              Tschofenig, H. and H. Schulzrinne, "GEOPRIV Layer 7
              Location Configuration Protocol; Problem Statement and



Winterbottom, et al.    Expires December 16, 2007              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft                 HELD Deref                      June 2007


              Requirements", draft-ietf-geopriv-l7-lcp-ps-02 (work in
              progress), April 2007.

















































Winterbottom, et al.    Expires December 16, 2007              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft                 HELD Deref                      June 2007


Authors' Addresses

   James Winterbottom
   Andrew Corporation
   PO Box U40
   University of Wollongong, NSW  2500
   AU

   Email: james.winterbottom@andrew.com


   Martin Thomson
   Andrew Corporation
   PO Box U40
   University of Wollongong, NSW  2500
   AU

   Email: martin.thomson@andrew.com


   Martin Dawson
   Andrew Corporation
   PO Box U40
   University of Wollongong, NSW  2500
   AU

   Email: martin.dawson@andrew.com
























Winterbottom, et al.    Expires December 16, 2007              [Page 12]

Internet-Draft                 HELD Deref                      June 2007


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Winterbottom, et al.    Expires December 16, 2007              [Page 13]

