

Internet Architecture Board                               G. Huston, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                                       IAB
Expires: December 23, 2003                                 June 24, 2003


   Defining the Role and Function of IETF Protocol Parameter Registry
                               Operators
                           draft-iab-iana-02

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at http://
   www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 23, 2003.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   Many IETF protocols make use of commonly defined values that are
   passed within protocol objects.  To ensure consistent interpretation
   of these values between independent implementations, there is a need
   to ensure that the values and associated semantic intent are uniquely
   defined.  The IETF uses a registry function to record assigned
   protocol parameter values and their associated semantic intent. For
   each IETF protocol parameter It is current practice for the IETF to
   delegate the role of protocol parameter registry operator to a
   nominated entity.  This document describes a description of this
   delegated function.





Huston, Ed.            Expires December 23, 2003                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                 IETF-IANA                       June 2003


1. Introduction

   Many IETF protocols make use of commonly defined values that are
   passed within protocol objects.  To ensure consistent interpretation
   of these values between independent implementations, there is a need
   to ensure that the values and associated semantic intent are uniquely
   defined.  The IETF uses a registry to register each of the possible
   values of a protocol parameter and their associated semantic intent.
   The document describes this registry function as it applies to
   individual protocol parameters defined by the IETF Internet Standards
   Process [1].

   At the time of writing this document (June 2003) the operation of the
   majority of the protocol parameter registries is delegated to the
   Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN) according
   to the terms and conditions described in RFC 2860  [2]. Not all IETF
   protocol parameter registries are delegated to ICANN, and at present
   the operation of the 'e164.arpa' registry has been delegated to the
   RIPE Network Coordination Center (RIPE NCC) [12].

   The term "Internet Assigned Numbers Authority" (IANA), has been used
   historically to refer to the entire collection of protocol parameter
   registries. It is noted that there is current general use of this
   term to refer specifically to the set of registries operated by ICANN
   under terms of this delegation of function. While IETF documents
   continue to use the term "IANA Considerations" when referring to
   specific functions to be performed with respect to a protocol
   parameter registry [4], it is noted that the use of the term 'IANA'
   in this context does not necessarily imply the delegation to ICANN of
   the associated role of operation of the protocol parameter registry
   for the particular protocol parameter so described.

2. Definition of an IETF Protocol Parameter Registry

   Using the term 'IANA' in the sense of the entire set of IETF protocol
   parameter registries, the Internet Standards document, STD 2,
   published in October 1994, defined the role of the IANA as follows:

      The Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA) is the central
      coordinator for the assignment of unique parameter values for
      Internet protocols.  The IANA is chartered by the Internet Society
      (ISOC) and the Federal Network Council (FNC) to act as the
      clearinghouse to assign and coordinate the use of numerous
      Internet protocol parameters.

      The Internet protocol suite, as defined by the Internet
      Engineering Task Force (IETF) and its steering group (the IESG),
      contains numerous parameters, such as Internet protocol addresses,



Huston, Ed.            Expires December 23, 2003                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                 IETF-IANA                       June 2003


      domain names, autonomous system numbers (used in some routing
      protocols), protocol numbers, port numbers, management information
      base object identifiers, including private enterprise numbers, and
      many others.

      The common use of the Internet protocols by the Internet community
      requires that the particular values used in these parameter fields
      be assigned uniquely.  It is the task of the IANA to make those
      unique assignments as requested and to maintain a registry of the
      currently assigned values. [3]

   Again using the term 'IANA' in the sense of the entire set of IETF
   protocol parameter registries, the definition of the protocol
   parameter registry role is provided in BCP 26:

      Many protocols make use of identifiers consisting of constants and
      other well-known values.  Even after a protocol has been defined
      and deployment has begun, new values may need to be assigned
      (e.g., for a new option type in DHCP, or a new encryption or
      authentication algorithm for IPSec).  To insure that such
      quantities have consistent values and interpretations in different
      implementations, their assignment must be administered by a
      central authority. For IETF protocols, that role is provided by
      the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA). [4]


3. Publication of Protocol Parameter Registry Assignments

   The current mode of publication of protocol parameter registry
   assignments undertaken within registries whose operation is currently
   delegated to ICANN is described in the Informational Document RFC
   3232 [5], published in January 2002:

      From November 1977 through October 1994, the Internet Assigned
      Numbers Authority (IANA) periodically published tables of the
      Internet protocol parameter assignments in RFCs entitled,
      "Assigned Numbers". The most current of these Assigned Numbers
      RFCs had Standard status and carried the designation: STD 2.  At
      this time, the latest STD 2 is RFC 1700.

      Since 1994, this sequence of RFCs have been replaced by an online
      database accessible through a web page (currently, www.iana.org).
      The purpose of the present RFC is to note this fact and to
      officially obsolete RFC 1700, whose status changes to Historic.
      RFC 1700 is obsolete, and its values are incomplete and in some
      cases may be wrong. [5]

   The mode of publication of the e164.arpa protocol parameter registry



Huston, Ed.            Expires December 23, 2003                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                 IETF-IANA                       June 2003


   operated by the RIPE NCC is documented in reference [13].

4. The Procedures related to IETF Protocol Parameter Management

   IETF Protocol Parameter registry actions are defined through the
   inclusion of an "IANA Considerations" section in Internet Standards
   documents, as described in RFC 2434 [4]. There are also RFCs that
   specifically address IETF protocol parameter considerations for
   particular protocols, such as RFC 2780 [6], RFC 2939 [7], and RFC
   2978 [8].

5. The Operation of IETF Protocol Parameter Registries

   As documented in the IAB Charter [9], the role of the Internet
   Architecture Board includes responsibility for the IETF Protocol
   Parameter registration function (referred to in the charter as
   'IANA'). The IAB, acting on behalf of the IETF, approves the
   appointment of an organization to act as a protocol parameter
   registry operator on behalf of the IETF, and also approves the terms
   and conditions of this delegation of this function.

   The technical direction of the IETF Protocol Parameter registry
   function is provided by the Internet Engineering Steering Group
   (IESG) [9].

6. Current IETF  Protocol Parameter Assignments

   The list of current IETF  protocol parameters for which parameter
   value assignments are registered within registries whose operation is
   currently delegated to ICANN is listed in reference [10]. In addition
   there is the e164.arpa registry function, which is listed in
   reference [13].

   With reference to the list contained in reference [10], protocol
   parameter registries that refer to the unicast IPv4 address space,
   unicast IPv6 address space, Autonomous System Numbers and the top
   level delegations within the Domain Name System all use allocation
   mechanisms that have been delegated to the IANA function operated
   under the auspices of ICANN. Other bodies are responsible for the
   development of policies to manage this allocation function.

7. A Description of the Role and Responsibilities of an IETF Protocol
   Parameter Registry Operator

   This section describes the operation and role of a delegated IETF
   Protocol Parameter Registry Operator. This section also includes a
   description of the roles of related bodies with reference to this
   function.



Huston, Ed.            Expires December 23, 2003                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                 IETF-IANA                       June 2003


7.1 Introduction

   Many protocols make use of identifiers consisting of constants and
   other well-known values. Even after a protocol has been defined and
   deployment has begun, new values may need to be assigned (e.g., for a
   new option type in DHCP, or a new encryption or authentication
   algorithm for IPSec).  To insure that such quantities have consistent
   values and interpretations in different implementations, their
   assignment must be administered by a central authority. For IETF
   protocols, that role is provided by a delegated Protocol Parameter
   Registry operator. For any particular protocol parameter there is a
   single delegated registry operator.

7.2 Protocol Parameter Registry Operator Role

   A IETF Protocol Parameter registry function is undertaken under the
   auspices of the Internet Architecture Board (IAB).

   The roles of the Protocol Parameter registry operator are as follows:

   o  Review and Advise

      *  The registry operator may be requested to review
         Internet-Drafts that are being considered by the Internet
         Engineering Task Force Steering Group (IESG), with the
         objective of offering advice to the IESG regarding the need for
         an "IANA Considerations" section, whether such a section, when
         required, is clear in terms of direction to the registry
         operator and whether the section is consistent with the current
         published registry operator guidelines.

   o  Registry

      *  To operate a registry of protocol parameter assignments.

      *  The delegated registry operator registers values for the
         protocol parameter Internet protocol parameters only as
         directed by the criteria and procedures specified in RFCs,
         including Proposed, Draft and full Internet Standards and Best
         Current Practice documents, and any other RFC that calls for
         protocol parameter assignment, and only for those protocol
         parameters specified by the IAB.  If they are not so specified,
         or in case of ambiguity, the registry operator will continue to
         assign and register only  those  protocol parameters that have
         already been delegated to the operator, following past and
         current practice for such assignments, unless otherwise
         directed in terms of operating practice by the IESG.




Huston, Ed.            Expires December 23, 2003                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                 IETF-IANA                       June 2003


      *  For each protocol parameter, the associated registry includes:

         +  a reference to the RFC document that describes the parameter
            and the associated "IANA Considerations" concerning the
            parameter, and

         +  for each registration of a protocol parameter value, the
            source of the registration and the date of the registration.

      *  If in doubt or in case of a technical dispute, the registry
         operator will seek and follow technical guidance exclusively
         from the IESG.  Where appropriate the IESG will appoint an
         expert to advise the registry operator.

      *  The registry operator will work with the IETF to develop any
         missing criteria and procedures over time, which the registry
         operator will adopt when so instructed by the IESG.

      *  Each protocol parameter registry operates as a public registry,
         and the contents of the registry are openly available to the
         public, on-line and free of charge.

      *  The registry operator assigns protocol parameter values in
         accordance with the policy associated with the protocol
         parameter. (Some policies are listed in RFC2434  [4]).

   o  Mailing Lists

      *  The registry operator maintains public mailing lists as
         specified in IANA Considerations. Such lists are designated for
         the purpose of review of assignment proposals in conjunction
         with a designated expert review function.

   o  Review and Advise

      *  The registry operator will nominate a liaison point of contact.
         The registry operator, though this liaison, may be requested to
         provide advice to the IESG on IETF protocol parameters as well
         as the IANA Considerations section of Internet-drafts that are
         being reviewed for publication as an RFC.

   o  Reporting

      *  The registry operator will submit periodic reports to the IAB
         concerning the operational performance of the registry
         function.

      *  At the request of the chair of the IETF, the registry operator



Huston, Ed.            Expires December 23, 2003                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                 IETF-IANA                       June 2003


         will undertake periodic reports to the IETF Plenary concerning
         the status of the registry function.

      *  The registry operator will publish an annual report describing
         the status of the function and a summary of performance
         indicators.

   o  Intellectual Property Rights and the Registry Operator

      *  All assigned values are to be published and made available free
         of any charges and free of any constraints relating to further
         redistribution, with the caveat that the assignment information
         may not be modified in any redistributed copy.

      *  Any intellectual property rights of the IETF Protocol Parameter
         assignment information, including the IETF Protocol Parameter
         registry and its contents, are to be held by the IETF and ISOC,
         and all IETF Protocol Parameter registry publications relating
         to assignment information are to be published under the terms
         of Section 10 of RFC2026, and are to include the copyright
         notice as documented in Section 10.4 (C) of RFC2026 [1].


7.3 IAB role

   An operator of an IETF Protocol Parameter registry undertakes the
   role as a delegated function under the auspices of the Internet
   Architecture Board (IAB).

   The IAB has the responsibility to, from time to time, review the
   current description of the registry function and direct the registry
   operator to adopt amendments relating to its role and mode of
   operation of the registry according to the best interests of the
   IETF.

   The IAB has the responsibility to select an organization to undertake
   the delegated functions of the Protocol Parameter registry for each
   IETF protocol parameter.

   The IAB has the responsibility to determine the terms and conditions
   of this delegated role. Such terms and conditions should ensure that
   the registry operates in a manner that is fully conformant to the
   functions described in this document. In addition, such terms and
   conditions must not restrict the rights and interests of the IETF
   with respect to the registry function.

7.4 IESG Role




Huston, Ed.            Expires December 23, 2003                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                 IETF-IANA                       June 2003


   The IESG is responsible for the technical direction of the IETF
   Protocol Parameter registries. Such technical direction is provided
   through the adoption of IETF RFC documents within the "IANA
   Considerations" section of such documents, or as stand-alone "IANA
   Considerations" RFC documents.

   The IESG shall ensure that the review of Internet-Drafts that are
   offered for publications as RFCs ensures that IANA Considerations
   sections are present when needed, and that IANA Considerations
   sections conform to the current published guidelines.

   At the discretion of the IESG, the registry operator may be required
   to designate a non-voting liaison to the IESG to facilitate clear
   communications and effective operation of the registry function.

7.5 Internet Society Role

   Any intellectual property rights of IETF Protocol Parameter
   assignment information, including the registry and its contents, and
   all registry publications, are to be held by the Internet Society on
   behalf of the IETF.

8. Acknowledgement

   This document is adapted from RFC2434 [4], and has been modified to
   include explicit reference to Intellectual Property Rights, and the
   roles of the IAB and IESG in relation to the IETF Protocol Parameter
   registry function.

   The Internet Architecture Board acknowledges the assistance provided
   by reviewers of earlier drafts of this document, including Scott
   Bradner.

9. Security Considerations

   This document does not propose any new protocols, and therefore does
   not involve any security considerations in that sense.

References

   [1]   Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3",
         RFC 2026, BCP 9, October 1996.

   [2]   Carpenter, B., Baker, F. and M. Roberts, "Memorandum of
         Understanding Concerning the Technical Work of the Internet
         Assigned Numbers Authority", RFC 2860, June 2000.

   [3]   Reynolds, J. and J. Postel, "Assigned Numbers", RFC 1700, STD



Huston, Ed.            Expires December 23, 2003                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                 IETF-IANA                       June 2003


         2, October 1994.

   [4]   Narten, T. and H. Alvestrand, "Guidelines for Writing an IANA
         Considerations Section in RFCs", RFC 2434, BCP 26, October
         1998.

   [5]   Reynolds, J., "Assigned Numbers: RFC 1700 is Replaced by an
         On-line Database", RFC 3232, January 2002.

   [6]   Bradner, S. and V. Paxson, "IANA Allocation Guidelines For
         Values In the Internet Protocol and Related Headers", RFC 2780,
         BCP 37, March 2000.

   [7]   Droms, R., "Procedures and IANA Guidelines for Definition of
         New DHCP Options and Message Types", RFC 2939, BCP 43,
         September 2000.

   [8]   Freed, N. and J. Postel, "IANA Charset Registration
         Procedures", RFC 2978, BCP 19, October 2000.

   [9]   Carpenter, B., "Charter of the Internet Architecture Board",
         RFC 2850, BCP 39, May 2000.

   [10]  Reynolds, J., "IANA Protocol Numbers and Assignment Services",
         October 1994, <http://www.iana.org/numbers.htm>.

   [11]  Dyson, E., "Correspondence from Esther Dyson, Interim Chairman,
         ICANN to Scott Bradner, Brian Carpenter and Fred Baker of the
         IETF", February 1999, <http://www.icann.org/correspondence/
         bradner-dyson-25feb99.htm>.

   [12]  IAB, "ENUM LIAISON ON IAB INSTRUCTIONS TO RIPE-NCC", September
         2002, <http://www.iab.org/Documents/
         sg2-liaison-e164-sep-02.html>.

   [13]  RIPE NCC, "ENUM Registry", September 2002, <http://
         www.ripe.net/enum>.


Author's Address

   Geoff Huston, Editor.
   Internet Architecture Board

Appendix A. IAB Members

   Internet Architecture Board Members at the time this document was
   published were:



Huston, Ed.            Expires December 23, 2003                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                 IETF-IANA                       June 2003



      Bernard Aboba
      Harald Alvestrand
      Rob Austein
      Leslie Daigle, Chair
      Patrik Faltstrom
      Sally Floyd
      Jun-ichiro Itojun Hagino
      Mark Handley
      Geoff Huston
      Charlie Kaufman
      James Kempf
      Eric Rescorla
      Michael StJohns





































Huston, Ed.            Expires December 23, 2003               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft                 IETF-IANA                       June 2003


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it
   has made any effort to identify any such rights. Information on the
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11. Copies of
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of
   licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to
   obtain a general license or permission for the use of such
   proprietary rights by implementors or users of this specification can
   be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice
   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF Executive
   Director.


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assignees.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION



Huston, Ed.            Expires December 23, 2003               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft                 IETF-IANA                       June 2003


   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Acknowledgement

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.











































Huston, Ed.            Expires December 23, 2003               [Page 12]

