IETF Mobile IP Working Group		                     Kyungjoo Suh 
INTERNET DRAFT                                                    Samsung
	   				                     October 2002                                          
                                                     

                  Regional Mobile IPv6 mobility management
                         draft-suh-rmm-00.txt
		       

Status of This Memo
   
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.  Internet-Drafts are working
   documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas,
   and its working groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at
   any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at:
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at:
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.


Abstract 

   This document defines a new protocol, namely, Regional Mobile IPv6 
   mobility management (RMM/RMIPv6). RMM mechanism satisfies the LMM 
   requirements while it is more flexible mobility management scheme 
   than existing solution, for example HMIPv6. This document therefore
   describes methods to be used to reduce the amount of signaling to
   the Home Agent and Correspondent Nodes. In addition, this scheme 
   is flexible enough to adapt to any network topology assumed by 
   IPv6. The network that using RMM/RMIPv6 is robust against the failure 
   or the performance degradation. The mechanism is intended to reuse 
   the Care of Address. Moreover, the forwarding tunnel length from 
   an anchor point to a Mobile Node can be a controllable or 
   configurable. 
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   

Suh 			           Expires  April 2003             [Page 1]

Internet Draft  Regional Mobile IPv6 mobility management   October 2002

			        Table of Contents
					
1. Introduction ......................................................2
2. Terminology .......................................................3
3. Overview of RMM/RMIPv6 ............................................4
4. RMM/RMIPv6l Operation  ............................................5
нннннннн4.1 Mobile Node Operation ....................................6
нннннннн4.2 Regional Anchor Point Operation  .........................7
5. Interoperability with Fast Handoff ................................7
6. Security Considerations ...........................................8
Acknowledgements .....................................................8
References ...........................................................8
Author's Addresses ...................................................8
 
Appendix A: Comparison with HMIPv6 ...................................9
  A.1. Address Configuration
  A.2. MAP vs RAP 
Appendix B: Forwarding Cost Function .................................9

1. Introduction  

   In general, in the basic Mobile IP protocol[2], movement between two 
   subnets and routing changes requires the mobile node must issue
   binding updates to its Home Agent and its Correspondent Nodes. This
   binding updates sent to the Home Agent and the Correspondent Nodes 
   for route optimization can cause latency. This latency may cause some
   packets for the mobile node to be lost.

   Localized Mobility Management (LMM)[4] for Mobile IP is introduced to 
   enhance Mobile IP to reduce the amount of latency in binding updates 
   and amount of signaling over the Internet. The Hierarchical Mobile 
   IPv6 mobility management (HMIPv6) [3] is suggested to reduce the 
   amount of signaling to the Home Agent and the Correspondent Nodes. 
   In addition, HMIPv6 may improve handoff speed of Mobile IPv6. 

   This document describes a proposed protocol, Regional Mobile IPv6 
   mobility management (RMM/RMIPv6). This mechanism satisfies the LMM 
   requirements while it is more flexible mobility management scheme 
   than existing solution, for example HMIPv6. 
   
   The motivation of designing the RMM/RMIPv6 is summarized as follows:
     - Reducing the signaling overhead resulted from the movement of MNs
     - Interoperable with Mobile IPv6
     - No assumption on the network architectures
     - Simplify the network design
     - Reuse the CoA that was made by a MN previously, thus avoid the 
       unnecessary delay obtaining the CoA (RCoA)
     - Avoid creating a single point of failure or a bottleneck for 
       the performance


Suh			           Expires  April 2003             [Page 2]

Internet Draft  Regional Mobile IPv6 mobility management   October 2002

2. Terminology 

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL
   NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL"
   in this document are to be interpreted as described in [1].
   Other terminology is used as defined in the basic Mobile IP
   specification [2]. In addition, new terms are defined below:

       Region 
	    In RMM/RMIPv6 the term "region" is used instead of the term 
            "domain".

       Regional Mobility Management (RMM) 
                Regional Mobility Management is a kind of Localized Mobility
		Management[4]. In [4] this is referred to as the method of 
                restricting the signaling area. In this document, the RMM is 
                used to distinguish it from the LMM, because the LMM is 
                currently requirements and RMM is a concrete mechanism.    

       Regional Anchor Point (RAP)
                The Regional Anchor Point is an access router located in the 
                mobile node's visited domain.  The RAP has the following 
                functionality: 
                        RAP which is newly introduced 
                	here acts as a local Home Agent for the MN within 
               		a certain region. It reduces the amount of latency 
                        in binding updates sent to the Home Agent and the 
                        Correspondent Nodes and the amount of signaling 
                        when mobile node traverses within a local domain.        
                In [3] there is a similar functional entity called Mobility 
		Anchor Point (MAP) which is distinguished from RAP because of 
		discovery process.   

       future RAP (fRAP)	 		    
		The future RAP is the RAP which will be used as an RAP when 
		the current RAP is not available or is not proper to use. 

       current RAP (cRAP)	
		The current RAP is the RAP which is used as a RAP currently. 
		Therefore, the current RAP serves as a regional anchor point 
                for the mobile node when a mobile node moves to a visited
		domain. 

       Regional Care-of Address (RCoA)
		An RCoA is an address obtained by the mobile node as defined 
		in [3] from the visited domain. However, in this document
	        the obtaining method is different from the method in HMIPv6. 
		It may be configured by obtaining  the CoA which mobile
		node obtains from the previous RAP in a stateless or stateful 
		manner. However, the RCoA in [3] is auto-configured by the 
  		mobile node or assigned to the MAP's interfaces.  
		    			  
Suh			           Expires  April 2003             [Page 3]

Internet Draft  Regional Mobile IPv6 mobility management   October 2002

       On-Link Care-of Address (LCoA)  
		The LCoA defined here is similar to the LCoA in HMIPv6, 
		except that the LCoA is obtained in a stateless or stateful
		method.


3. Overview of RMM/RMIPv6 

   This document defines Regional Mobile IPv6 mobility management
   (RMM/RMIPv6). In RMM/RMIPv6 the term "region" means "domain". The 
   region is dynamically determined by MNs or Regional Anchor Points
   (RAP) based on forwarding cost function.  The RAP serves as a local 
   Home Agent, i.e. a local mobility anchor point, for the MN within a certain
   region. Any AR can be a RAP for a specific MN and the anchoring point 
   for each MN may be different. Therefore, RAPs can be distributed over
   the network. This make the network using RMM/RMIPv6 to be robust 
   against the failure or the performance degradation, since there is no 
   single point of failure or bottleneck for packet forwarding.

   The mechanism defined in this document is intended to reduce the 
   amount of signaling to Mobile Node's Home Agent and its Correspondent
   Nodes. Moreover, the protocol does not assume a certain network 
   topology of Access Routers, for example hierarchical structure. As a 
   result, the protocol is flexible enough to adapt to any network 
   topology assumed by IPv6. 
   
   The RMM mechanism is intended to reuse the Care of Address that was 
   obtained by MN in the previous AR and make the AR (visited by MN) as 
   a RAP for the MN. The forwarding path from a RAP to a MN can be a 
   controllable or configurable, because the RAPs are dynamically 
   determined by MNs (mobile determined region) or RAPs themselves 
   (network determined region).  
  
   In this mechanism, at first a mobile node must remember whether the 
   current AR supports RAP service. After a mobile node hands off and if 
   it wants to use the previous AR as a RAP, it must check cost function, 
   for example distance limitation. RMM/RMIPv6 mechanism reuses the
   Care of Address that was obtained by MN in the previous AR, and it
   makes the AR (visited by MN) as a RAP for the MN. The reused Care of
   Address is utilized as a RCoA for the MN. The MN binds its current 
   location with the RCoA.  Within a RAP region, the RCoA does not 
   change. The RAP serves as a local Home Agent for the MN within a 
   certain region. Therefore, if the mobile node changes its current
   address within a region, it registers the new address to the RAP. 
   
   In RMM/RMIPv6, if possible, within a certain region the previous AR 
   visited by a MN becomes a RAP simply being an anchoring point and it 
   performs packet forwarding service to the MN. Thus, if the RAP 
   functionality is not required, MN can stop using RMM/RMIPv6 and 
   revert back to the basic Mobile IPv6 protocol service.
   
Suh 			           Expires  April 2003             [Page 4]

Internet Draft  Regional Mobile IPv6 mobility management   October 2002

The RMM/RMIPv6 concept is a simple extension of smooth handoff 
   mechanism of the Mobile IPv6 protocol. RMM/RMIpv6 is fully 
   interoperable with Mobile IPv6 including Smooth Handoff and Fast 
   Handoff.For the optimization of routing path in a certain network 
   assumption, HMIPv6 and RMM/RMIPv6 can be used together.
   
4. RMM/RMIPv6 Operation

    Figure 1 illustrates a network architecture as an example of the 
    use of RMM/RMIPv6.


             +-------+ 
             |  HA   |     
             +-------+       
                 |           +----+ 
                 |           | CN |     
                 |           +----+ 
                 +-----+        | 
                       |        |  
                       |    +---+ 
                       |    | 
                     +---------+                 
                     | AR1(RAP)|         +-------+ 
                     |         |---------|  AR2  |   
                     +---------+         +-------+         
                          |   
                   	  |				 +-------+
			  +------------------------------|  AR3  |		
                                                         +-------+ 
	
                     +----+ 
                     | MN | 
                     +----+   ------------> 
                     Movement

 

 
   Figure 1: Regional Mobile IPv6 

   Among ARs, an AR (AR1) which supports RAP functionality announces 
   through Agent Advertisement that it can serve as a RAP.  If MN wants to 
   use a RAP at first, MN must remember the current AR(AR1) supports 
   RAP service. Therefore, after MN hands off, if MN wants to use the 
   previous AR(AR1) as a RAP, it must check two things which runs as
   follow: 
      First, MN must check that the current AR(AR2) supports RAP.
      Second, MN must check distance limitation.   

Suh 			           Expires  April 2003             [Page 5]

Internet Draft    Regional Mobile IPv6 mobility management   October 2002  

   According to the evaluation of the cost function(distance limitation), 
   there are four categories of operation following:
     
     First, if the current AR(AR2) supports RAP functionality and it is
     located within distance limitation, the mobile node use the CoA 
     which is obtained the previous AR(AR1) as a RCoA. The reuse the 
     Care of Address reduces the overheads obtaining RCOA.
     
     Second, if the current AR supports RAP functionality and it is
     located out of distance limitation, the mobile node reverts back
     to the basic Mobile IPv6 protocol service.
    
     Third, if the current AR does not support RAP functionality and it is 
     located within distance limitation, the mobile node use the CoA which
     is obtained the previous AR(AR1) as a RCoA.  
    
     Last, if the current AR does not support RAP functionality and it is
     located out of distance limitation,  MN stops using RMM/RMIPv6 and 
     reverts back to the basic Mobile IPv6 protocol service as described 
     in the draft of Mobile IP support[2].

   When a mobile node depends on a RAP to maintain mobility locally, it
   may not have any modification of binding updates to either Home 
   Agent or Correspondent Nodes. The method defined in this document 
   allows a RAP to be used as the local agent of registration. The RAP 
   that will act on these functions is part of the localized mobility 
   management, and is typically identified within the visited domain. 
   The protocol and messages in this document are intended to facilitate
   the operations which may occur between the mobile node, a RAP, 
   a Home Agent, and Correspondent Nodes. However, the only message
   flows specified in this document are the binding update messages 
   between the mobile node and the RAP, and binding update 
   acknowledgement between the RAP and the mobile node.

4.1. Mobile Node Operation
 
   The mobile node must check if the current access router has a function of
   a RAP for the use of future, whenever the mobile node hands off from one 
   access router to another access router. After MN hands off, if MN wants 
   to use the previous AR as a RAP, it must check distance limitation. 
   
   According to the evaluation of the cost function(distance limitation)
   and supportability of RAP function (at the previous AR), 
   the MN's behaviors are categorized into two fold:  
   
      First, the mobile node may reuse the CoA which was obtained by MN
      in  the previous AR as a RCoA, if the distance from the previous 
      RAP to the current access router can satisfy distance limitation. 
      
      Second, the mobile node reverts back to the basic Mobile IPv6 
      protocol service, if the current AR is located out of distance limitation.  

Suh 			           Expires  April 2003             [Page 6]

Internet Draft    Regional Mobile IPv6 mobility management   October 2002  

   The care of address configuration of mobile node is classified into
   two categories. First, for the RCoA the mobile node may reuse the 
   CoA which is obtained by MN in the previous AR, if the distance
   limitation is satisfied and RAP functionality of previous AR is 
   supported. Second, the method of obtaining the LCoA is the same as
   HMIPv6, except that it can be done in a stateless manner or stateful 
   manner.  
   
   A mobile node depends on a RAP to maintain a local mobility. A mobile 
   node therefore must receive the binding update acknowledgement from 
   the RAP, because the RAP is used as the local agent of registration. 
   The mobile node reverts back to the basic Mobile IPv6 protocol service,
   if there is no binding update acknowledgement or it receives a binding 
   update acknowledgement that contains the denial of RAP service for a 
   certain reason from the RAP.

4.2. Regional Anchor Point Operation
 
    Within a certain region RAP is an anchoring point and it performs 
    packet forwarding service to the MN. In RMM/RMIPv6 any AR can be a 
    RAP for a specific MN and the anchoring point for each MN may be 
    different. As a result, RAPs are distributed over the network. 

    The following steps are performed on the RAP: 

    1. The RAP binds the RCoA and LCoA without Duplicate Address
       Detection procedure for the RCoA. There is no DAD procedure 
       because the RCoA has been used as CoA by the MN before MN leaves 
       the RAP (AR).

    2. The RAP intercepts packets and tunnels them to mobile node's 
        LCoA.

    3. The RAP works for Mobile Node's deregistration process. The RAP
       releases the binding entry for the mobile node, when the Mobile 
       Node sets the lifetime=0 and sends binding updates to the current RAP.

5. Interoperability with Fast Handoff

   The RMM/RMIPv6 protocol can be used with Smooth Handoff and/or Fast
   Handoff. In some case, forwarding tunnel of Smooth Handoff and/or 
   Fast Handoff can be used for RMM/RMIPv6. In other words, RMM/RMIpv6 
   is fully interoperable with Mobile IPv6 including Smooth Handoff and
   Fast Handoff.





Suh 			           Expires  April 2003             [Page 7]

Internet Draft  Regional Mobile IPv6 mobility management   October 2002

6. Security Considerations

   The security considerations resulting from use of these extensions
   do not offer any higher level of security than what is already implicit
   in use of the security solutions in basic mobile node operation. 
   Therefore, in the next version of this document will include appropriate 
   level of security for Mobile IP entities, such as mobile node and Home
   Agent, to operate Mobile IP operations. 

Acknowledgement

   The author would like to thank Young-Joo Suh and Dong-Hee Kwon for
   their valuable feedback and comments on this draft. The author would
   also like to thank Kil-Suk Yang and Jae-Myung Jang for participating
   in the initial discussion. 

References
   
   [1] S. Bradner.  Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
       Levels.  Request for Comments (Best Current Practice) 2119,
       Internet Engineerifng Task Force, March 1997.

   [2] D. Johnson, C. Perkins, J. Arkko.  Mobility Support in IPv6 
       (work in progress). Internet Draft, Internet Engineering Task Force.
        draft-ietf-mobileip-ipv6-18, June 2002.   
    
   [3] H. Soliman, C. Castelluccia, K. El-Malki, L. Bellier.  
       Hierachical MIPv6 mobility management (work in progress).  
       Internet Draft, Internet Engineering Task Force.  
       draft-ietf-mobileip-hmipv6-07.txt, October 2002.   

   [4] C. Williams. Localized Mobility Management (work in progress), 
       Internet Draft, Internet Engineering Task Force.  
       draft-ietf-mobileip-lmm-requirements-02.txt, June 2002.

Author's Addresses
 
   Questions about this document can be directed to the authors:

   Kyungjoo Suh (Joo Suh)
   
	Global Standards and Strategy team
	Telecommunication R & D Center
	Samsung Electronics Co., LTD.
	Suwon P.O. BOX 105,
	416, Maetan-3dong, Paldal-gu,
	Suwon-city, Gyeonggi-do, 442-742 
	Korea 
	Phone: +82-31-279-5123
	Email: joo.suh@samsung.com
	Fax: +82-31-279-5130 

 Suh 			           Expires  April 2003             [Page 8]
 
 Internet Draft  Regional Mobile IPv6 mobility management   October 2002
 
 Appendix A: Comparison with HMIPv6 
  
  A.1. Address Configuration
   
  In the hierarchical MIPv6, the LCoA must be obtained in a stateless 
  manner. On the other hand, in the basic mode of operation, the mobile
  node configures the RCoA in a stateless manner from the combination 
  of the MAP's subnet prefix and the mobile node's interface identifier.
  This kind of method to obtaining the RCoA can cause overhead. In the
  extended mode operation, the RCoA is obtained in the MAP option.  

  In contrast, in this document, the LCoA can be obtained in a stateless
  manner or stateful manner. In addition, the method of obtaining the 
  RCoA is quite different from that of HMIPv6. If the previous access
  router supports a RAP functionality and the mobile node wants to use
  the previous access router as a RAP, the mobile node use the CoA 
  obtained in the previous access router as RcoA. Therefore, that CoA 
  is already obtained in a stateless or stateful manner, and at this
  point the previous access router is called the current RAP. The mobile
  node may reuse the CoA which is obtained from the previous RAP, when
  the mobile node hands off from one router to another router (current
  access router to which the mobile node is currently attached), and if 
  the distance from the previous RAP to the current access router can
  satisfy distance limitation. 
   
  A.2. MAP vs RAP 
 
  In the HMIPv6, the process of MAP discovery is dynamic MAP discovery
  or using route renumbering methods. In the case of basic mode of 
  operation of HMIPv6, after acquisition of RCoA there is the process of
  Duplicate Address Detection (DAD) by the MAP. 

  In this document to find out an appropriate RAP the distance limitation 
  is mentioned, however, details of this function are currently out of 
  scope of this memo and will be specified in next version of this 
  document. On the other hand there is no DAD procedure because 
  RCoA is obtained by using the CoA obtained when the mobile node 
  connected to the previous RAP. 

Appendix B: Forwarding Cost Function 
  
  The forwarding cost function may be defined following and described 
  in detail in the next version:
  
  Cost = Function of  (Delay, Hop Count, Reliability, Load)

  The useful example of forwarding cost function is 

  Distance (hop) based Forwarding Cost Function.
 

Suh 			           Expires  April 2003             [Page 9]
