


Network Working Group                                           L. Zhang
Internet-Draft                                                     Z. Li
Intended status: Informational                       Huawei Technologies
Expires: January 5, 2015                                          D. Liu
                                                            China Mobile
                                                                S. Hares
                                                 Hickory Hill Consulting
                                                            L. Contreras
                                                          Telefonica I+D
                                                            July 4, 2014


              Use Cases of I2RS in Mobile Backhaul Network
                    draft-zhang-i2rs-mbh-usecases-00

Abstract

   In a mobile backhaul network, traditional configuration and diagnoses
   mechanisms based on device-level management tools and manual
   processing are ill-suited to meet the requirements of today's
   scalable, flexible, and complex network.  Thanks to the new
   innovation of Interface to the Routing System's (I2RS) programmatic
   interfaces, as defined in [I-D.ietf-i2rs-architecture], an
   alternative way is available to control the configuration and
   diagnose the operational results.  This document discusses the use
   case for I2RS in mobile backhaul network.

Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."




Zhang, et al.            Expires January 5, 2015                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft          Use Cases of I2RS in MBH               July 2014


   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 5, 2015.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2014 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   2.  Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  Topology Change Adaptation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     3.1.  Frequently Access Network Topology Changes  . . . . . . .   4
     3.2.  Requirements for I2RS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   4.  Application Configuration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     4.1.  Application Configuration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     4.2.  Requirements for I2RS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   5.  Route Policy Enforcement  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     5.1.  Route Policy Description  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     5.2.  Requirements for I2RS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   6.  Service Tunnel Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     6.1.  Service Tunnel Description  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     6.2.  Requirements for I2RS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   7.  Protection Mechanism  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
     7.1.  Protection Mechanism Description  . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
     7.2.  Requirements for I2RS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   8.  Network Monitoring  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
     8.1.  Network Monitoring Description  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
     8.2.  Requirements for I2RS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   9.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   10. References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
     10.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
     10.2.  Informative Reference  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13







Zhang, et al.            Expires January 5, 2015                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft          Use Cases of I2RS in MBH               July 2014


1.  Introduction

   In mobile backhaul network, traditional configuration and diagnoses
   mechanisms based on device-level management tools and manual
   processing are ill-suited to meet the requirements of today's
   scalable, flexible, and complex network.  The mobile backhaul network
   now needs to serve various radio access modes and applications across
   2G/3G/LTE/5G, build various network architectures based on the number
   of network devices or the integration of different Areas or
   Autonomous System Numbers (ASNs), and support various network
   protocols that can be adopted to meet different network requirements.
   These needs make the mobile backhaul network configuration more and
   more arduous.

   Interface to the Routing System's (I2RS) Programmatic interfaces, as
   defined in [I-D.ietf-i2rs-architecture], provides an alternative way
   to control the configuration and diagnose the operational results.
   The use cases described in this document cover the critical elements
   of mobile backhaul networks, such as: application configuration,
   route policy enforcement, service tunnel implementation, protection
   mechanisms and network monitoring.  The goal is to increase the
   community's understanding of the mobile backhaul requirements for
   I2RS in a the context of an entire network solution.

   This draft notes unique I2RS Requirements in the draft with the
   abbreviation "MBB-REQnn" where nn is the number of the requirements.

2.  Definitions

   I2RS: Interface to the Routing System

   IGP: Interior Gateway Protocol

   BGP: Border Gateway Protocol

   MPLS: Multi-Protocol Label Switching

   LDP: Label Distribution Protocol

   RSVP-TE: Resource Reservation Protocol Traffic Engineering

   PWE3: Pseudo Wire Emulation Edge-to-Edge

   VPN: Virtual Private Network

   L2VPN: L2 Virtual Private Network

   L3VPN: L3 Virtual Private Network



Zhang, et al.            Expires January 5, 2015                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft          Use Cases of I2RS in MBH               July 2014


   SS-PW: Singe Segment PW

   MS-PW: Multi-Segment PW

   HVPN: Hierarchical VPN

   EPC: Evolved Packet Core

   LTE: Long Term Evolution

   FRR: Fast Reroute

   ECMP: Equal Cost Multi-path

3.  Topology Change Adaptation

3.1.  Frequently Access Network Topology Changes

   As wireless becomes the primary or even sole access method for more
   and more people, the mobile backhaul network must carry higher
   volumes of traffic.  Growing traffic has necessitated more and more
   cells in the radio access networks (RANs) that provide mobile
   subscribers with an onramp to wireless networks.  Mobile operators
   are turning to small-cell technology to increase capacity through
   frequency reuse, especially in densely populated areas.  Finally,
   network capabilities must be highly scalable and agile, which lead to
   more frequently topology change, such as:

   o  Change linear access network to ring access network

         Whether the access network is linear or ring is based on the
         optical links resource.  The linear access network is less
         reliable than ring.  So when the optical links are ready, it
         may be necessary to change linear access network to ring access
         network.

   o  Add nodes for an access network

         Every access network is deployed to cover a given region.
         Along with the growth of wireless users, one access network may
         add new nodes to accommodate more users.

   o  Split one ring access network into multiple linear or ring access
      networks

         The mobile traffic an access ring can bear is limited by the
         device capability such as the route/LSP specification and the
         bandwidth.  When access users and traffic load are overloaded



Zhang, et al.            Expires January 5, 2015                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft          Use Cases of I2RS in MBH               July 2014


         in a ring access network, it may be necessary to split this
         ring into multiple linear or ring access networks according to
         the optical link resource.

   o  Add more access networks

         This is the direct approach to cope with the growth of users
         and traffic, especially when the small-cell technology is
         introduced.

3.2.  Requirements for I2RS

   The devices in the access network have limited capability for route
   and LSP specification, so the access network has to be divided into
   different IGP domains to reduce the number of routes and LSPs.  This
   division into multiple IGPS has the benefit of isolating the impact
   of failure among different convergence domains and decreasing the
   time it takes to configure the IGP.  Frequent changes of the access
   network topology require fast provision of IGP domain deployment,
   including both the whole IGP domain provision and the IGP
   configuration on the individual node.

   I2RS' programmatic interface would enable the IGP domain provisioning
   to operate automatically and simultaneously to topology changes while
   using global information of mobile backhaul network stored in a
   central location.

   MBH-REQ-01: The I2RS client-agent communication can distribute
   position-critical changes to IGP nodes using this global knowledge to
   quicken changes to support traffic during failures or traffic
   overloads.

   To enable this feature, the I2RS Clients-Agent communication needs to
   pass information on which IGP process or Level or Area the given node
   and links belong to.

4.  Application Configuration

4.1.  Application Configuration

   The mobile backhaul network has evolved into an IP-based network,
   which faces three main challenges in network construction:

   1.  various radio access modes:

          To protect existing investment and end user resource, TDM/ATM-
          based access modes belonging to 2G and 3G will coexist with
          Ethernet-based access mode belonging to 3G, LTE, and 5G for an



Zhang, et al.            Expires January 5, 2015                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft          Use Cases of I2RS in MBH               July 2014


          extended time into the future.  The radio architecture
          evolution will bring out new radio interfaces, such as the X2
          interface in LTE which will not work in hub-spoke
          communication mode and needs much more shorter latency.  A
          mobile backhaul network must be built to have the ability to
          adapt to all the mobile access modes, providing PWE3 service
          for TDM /ATM-based access mode and Native IP/Ethernet, PWE3/
          VPLS or L3VPN service for IP-based access mode.

   2.  various radio applications:

          A variety of radio applications (such as OM, signaling, data,
          video, etc. ) which have different quality of services (QoS),
          should be delivered in specific service channels in mobile
          backhaul networks, meaning there will be more than one PW or
          L3VPN instances binding with specific interfaces and service
          tunnels.

   3.  various network architectures:

          The mobile backhaul network may consist of hundreds of nodes
          in a small county or thousands of nodes in a populous region.
          It will be an integration of different ASNs rather than a
          single AS[I-D.li-mpls-seamless-mpls-mbb], when EPC is deployed
          in the Core network with LTE.  The network devices on
          different points of the network (e.g. access\aggregation\core)
          have different routing and protocol processing capabilities,
          resulting in an integration of different IGP routing areas
          rather than a single large IGP routing area.  Within various
          network architectures, different service modes should be
          provided, such as SS-PW or MS-PW, E2E L3VPN or HVPN, Seamless
          MPLS, and the integration of them.

   4.  various traffic patterns

          User applications run on mobile phones now encompass the full
          range of user programs.  Traffic from mobile phones may have
          different requirements for bandwidth and application responses
          (real-time, near real-time, non-real-time).  This user traffic
          combines with the mobile phone control traffic that keeps
          tracks network usage and QoS.

4.2.  Requirements for I2RS

   The challenges in mobile backhaul network construction show the
   flexibility and complexity requirements of network configuration and
   modification, such as:




Zhang, et al.            Expires January 5, 2015                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft          Use Cases of I2RS in MBH               July 2014


   o  where the T-LDP should be configured,

   o  where a BGP peer should be established,

   o  where the VPN instance should be deployed, and

   o  where the BGP-based LSP should be set up.

   Faced with flat or reduced budgets, network operators are trying to
   squeeze the most from their network using device-level management
   tools and manual processing.  In contrast to management of entire
   network devices, I2RS' programmatic interface would allow network
   operators to distribute such configurations from a central location
   where global mobile backhaul network solution provisioning
   information could be stored.

   MBH-REQ-02: I2RS must allow operators to use of I2RS clients to
   distribute time-critical changes in configuration to I2RS agents
   associated with each routing node.  This feature will simplify and
   automate configuration and monitoring of a mobile backhaul network to
   allow it to readily adapt to changing network sizes (and scales) and
   radio applications.

   MBB-REQ-03: I2RS Clients-Agent communication needs to pass
   information on:

   o  T-LDP configurations and status;

   o  BGP peer configurations, peer topologies and status;

   o  BGP-based LSP topologies and status;

   o  Reset VPN topologies, and per node configurations;

   While a beginning exists in the I2RS RIB Information Model
   [[I-D.ietf-i2rs-rib-info-model]] which includes in the route
   interfaces with MPLS LSP or VPN technology, additional features need
   to be added to support mobile backhaul networks.

5.  Route Policy Enforcement

5.1.  Route Policy Description

   The route policy in mobile backhaul networks mainly refers to BGP
   policy when L3VPN is used to serve the radio applications.  The
   complexity of the existing network architecture and radio interfaces
   make it very difficult to apply a network-wide route policy, for:




Zhang, et al.            Expires January 5, 2015                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft          Use Cases of I2RS in MBH               July 2014


   o  avoiding route advertisement across entire network

         When a mobile backhaul network contains more than 500 nodes,
         utilizing a multi-segments service like HVPN is recommended to
         reduce the routing and protocol processing overhead of network
         devices.  BGP policy should be configured with prefix filters
         to advertise only the default or aggregate route to the access
         nodes which have limited capability, while advertising to the
         whole network routes to the core nodes which must have
         capability to store large number of routes.

   o  supporting best route selection for VPN FRR or ECMP

         The mobile backhaul network is recommended to be built with a
         multi-homed network architecture for node failure protection,
         where VPN FRR or ECMP should be configured.  The best route
         selection relies on BGP Policy using Local Preference, MED or
         other path attributes defined in [RFC4760].  When a BGP RR is
         adopted to simplify the BGP peer architecture from full-mesh
         mode, the policy would become more complex, in some cases may
         make be per-peer or per-route worse.

   o  allowing On-demand route advertisement

         The advent of X2 interfaces in LTE, which need specific route
         information between any two access nodes, makes the network
         route advertisement more dynamic and unpredictable.  The BGP
         policy should be adjusted dynamically to meet this route
         advertisement need across the entire network.

5.2.  Requirements for I2RS

   MBB-REQ04: Route policy enforcement in mobile backhaul networks needs
   to be more dynamic and flexible than the current methods take hours
   (or even days) to configure route policy across a network.

   The I2RS interface must provide a programmatic way to configure (both
   policy and device) and monitor thousands of devices individually
   whose configuration is based on the devices role (such as ASRSs in
   one AS, ASBRs between ASs and other service-touch nodes).

   MBB-REQ-05: I2RS clients should be able to contact I2RS agents on
   nodes to query role-based information from the network status.  After
   collecting the status, the I2RS client can develop the BGP policies
   based on role information and push the BGP policies to the I2RS
   agents that would load the alternate policies into the network
   device.  The I2RS Agents loading the alternate policies could then
   send status back to the I2RS Client.



Zhang, et al.            Expires January 5, 2015                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft          Use Cases of I2RS in MBH               July 2014


6.  Service Tunnel Implementation

6.1.  Service Tunnel Description

   In mobile backhaul network, more than one kind of Service Tunnel can
   be used according to network ability or other consideration in
   different scenarios.  The Tunnel deployment use case in mobile
   backhaul includes:

   o  MPLS LDP LSP

         MPLS LDP LSP is set up through LDP protocol.  Both Label
         Advertisement Mode of Downstream Unsolicited (DU) and
         Downstream on Demand (DOD) defined in [RFC3036] can be used
         individually or integrated across access networks and
         aggregate/core networks.  If needed, the longest length match
         defined in [RFC5283] for LDP LSP should be supported.  MPLS LDP
         LSP has excellent scalability with flexible policy to control
         the label advertisement of route, especially in DU mode, to
         decrease needless LSPs to reduce the LSP capability requirement
         of network devices.

   o  MPLS-TE LSP

         MPLS-TE LSP is set up through RSVP-TE protocol, which has
         multiple path control attributes (such as explicit-path, path
         affinity property , path bandwidth assurance , path hop
         limitation, e.g.) and multiple protection modes (such as hot-
         standby, Fast Re-Route, protection group, e.g.).  MPLS-TE LSP
         should be designed using the attributes and protection modes
         according to the requirements of the service delivery as
         integrated across access network and aggregate/cores network.

   o  MPLS-TP LSP

         MPLS-TP includes unidirectional LSP, bidirectional co-routed
         LSP, and bidirectional associated LSP, which can be calculated
         and set up manually or using dynamic network protocols such as
         GMPLS.  In mobile backhaul networks, the LSP selection depends
         on the service need, and the creation of MPLS-TP LSP is always
         assumed to be decoupled with the protocol control plane running
         on separate network devices.  Ideally, the static MPLS-TP LSP
         should be designed and configured on the centralized control
         plane.







Zhang, et al.            Expires January 5, 2015                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft          Use Cases of I2RS in MBH               July 2014


6.2.  Requirements for I2RS

   The mobile backhaul network is divided into an access network and an
   aggregation/core network where service tunnel implementation is not
   constant and unique.  Therefore, it may be necessary to deploy
   different kind of LSPs separately (such as LDP LSP or MPLS-TE LSP in
   both access network and aggregate/core networks) or simultaneously
   (such as MPLS-TP static LSP in access network while LDP LSP or MPLS-
   TE LSP in aggregate/core network).  Network operators need to know
   the ability of all of the network devices and the service
   requirements to make the most appropriate tunnel implementation.

   MBH-REQ06: I2RS clients can provide centralized control of many
   network devices via the I2RS Client-Agent communication.  The I2RS
   programmatic interface can automate the collection and analysis of
   each device's capability so that the centralized I2RS client could
   calculate the optimal LSP path and distribute the configuration to
   individual devices.  Automation of the collection of device
   capability should be available as query, notification, or a published
   stream.

   MBH-REQ07: While the I2RS RIB Information Model
   [[I-D.ietf-i2rs-rib-info-model]] provides for routes with tunnels or
   MPLS LSP, the features defined in this model are not sufficient to
   configure both types of LSPs needed for the VPN technology in mobile
   backhaul networks.  Additional I2RS Informational models need to be
   created to support these features.

7.  Protection Mechanism

7.1.  Protection Mechanism Description

   The SLA for radio services is strict, which requires interworking
   among multiple protection mechanisms.  Two critical aspects should be
   taken into account for inter-working, hierarchical protection
   architectures and multiple OAM protocol interactions.

   1.  tunnel protection:

          The protection mechanisms of different tunnel protocols,
          mentioned above, are different from each other.  To enhance
          the reliability, LDP LSP should configure LDP FRR, which is
          calculated depending on the protect route algorithm, and be
          Loop-Free Algorithm (LFA), Remote-LFA, or Maximally Redundant
          Trees (MRT) used together with LDP MT as described in
          [I-D.ietf-mpls-ldp-multi-topology].  MPLS-TE LSP should apply
          TE Fast Reroute or TE hot-standby.  When MPLS-TP LSP is used,
          the LSP protection group should be configured with 1:1 or 1+1



Zhang, et al.            Expires January 5, 2015               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft          Use Cases of I2RS in MBH               July 2014


          mode for MPLS-TP line protection, as well as wrapping or
          steering modes fault processing for MPLS-TP ring protection.

   2.  service protection:

          Service protection is recommended to be configured for node
          failure handover in mobile backhaul network, where PW
          redundancy defined in [RFC6718] or BGP VPN FRR or ECMP
          realization should be deployed exactly.

7.2.  Requirements for I2RS

   MBH-REQ08: The hierarchical protection architecture in mobile
   backhaul network offer high network reliability and more flexibility
   to meet the various needs of the tunnels and services.  The I2RS
   interface in this use case is needed to automate the configuration
   and monitoring so that tunnel protection and service protection
   interwork in a flexible and reliable manner.

8.  Network Monitoring

8.1.  Network Monitoring Description

   The mobile backhaul network operators requires to determine the
   accurate cause as fast as possible when a link or node failure occurs
   and get the real reason for service quality degradation.  For this,
   different network monitor tools are introduced for different service
   mode ( MPLS-TP OAM for section or LSP, Y.1731 for PW , IP Flow
   Performance Monitor (IPFPM) for IP service, etc.).  The network
   operators should decide what a combination of multi-layer network
   monitor tools should be deployed, and what the exact detection
   parameters for these tools should be provisioned.  Meanwhile, the
   network devices should report the detection result to the controller,
   which is used to analyze the network status.

8.2.  Requirements for I2RS

   MBB-REQ09: The I2RS architecture (client-agent) should allow the two
   features for network monitoring naturally in its basic modes:

   o  allow a combination of multi-layer network monitor tools with
      exact detection parameters to be configured on the network device

   o  Facilitate the reporting the detection result as notification or
      publication stream

   It is important the result of these features allow the outages and
   traffic congestion or discards to be detected real-time with I2RS



Zhang, et al.            Expires January 5, 2015               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft          Use Cases of I2RS in MBH               July 2014


   Client(s) in each node, and the detection result will be reported to
   the I2RS agents to get the exact status of the network.

9.  Security Considerations

   The mobile backhaul network use cases described in this document
   assumes use of I2RS' programmatic interfaces described in the I2RS
   framework mentioned in[I-D.ietf-i2rs-architecture].  This document
   does not change the underlying security issues inherent in the
   existing [I-D.ietf-i2rs-architecture].

10.  References

10.1.  Normative References

   [I-D.ietf-i2rs-architecture]
              Atlas, A., Halpern, J., Hares, S., Ward, D., and T.
              Nadeau, "An Architecture for the Interface to the Routing
              System", draft-ietf-i2rs-architecture-04 (work in
              progress), June 2014.

   [I-D.ietf-i2rs-rib-info-model]
              Bahadur, N., Folkes, R., Kini, S., and J. Medved, "Routing
              Information Base Info Model", draft-ietf-i2rs-rib-info-
              model-03 (work in progress), May 2014.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

10.2.  Informative Reference

   [I-D.ietf-mpls-ldp-multi-topology]
              Zhao, Q., Raza, K., Zhou, C., Fang, L., Li, L., and D.
              King, "LDP Extensions for Multi Topology", draft-ietf-
              mpls-ldp-multi-topology-12 (work in progress), April 2014.

   [I-D.li-mpls-seamless-mpls-mbb]
              Li, Z., Li, L., Morillo, M., and T. Yang, "Seamless MPLS
              for Mobile Backhaul", draft-li-mpls-seamless-mpls-mbb-01
              (work in progress), February 2014.

   [RFC3036]  Andersson, L., Doolan, P., Feldman, N., Fredette, A., and
              B. Thomas, "LDP Specification", RFC 3036, January 2001.

   [RFC4760]  Bates, T., Chandra, R., Katz, D., and Y. Rekhter,
              "Multiprotocol Extensions for BGP-4", RFC 4760, January
              2007.




Zhang, et al.            Expires January 5, 2015               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft          Use Cases of I2RS in MBH               July 2014


   [RFC5283]  Decraene, B., Le Roux, JL., and I. Minei, "LDP Extension
              for Inter-Area Label Switched Paths (LSPs)", RFC 5283,
              July 2008.

   [RFC6718]  Muley, P., Aissaoui, M., and M. Bocci, "Pseudowire
              Redundancy", RFC 6718, August 2012.

Authors' Addresses

   Li Zhang
   Huawei Technologies
   Huawei Bld., No.156 Beiqing Rd.
   Beijing  100095
   China

   Email: monica.zhangli@huawei.com


   Zhenbin Li
   Huawei Technologies
   Huawei Bld., No.156 Beiqing Rd.
   Beijing  100095
   China

   Email: lizhenbin@huawei.com


   Dapeng Liu
   China Mobile
   Unit2, 28 Xuanwumenxi Ave,Xuanwu District
   Beijing  100053
   China

   Email: liudapeng@chinamobile.com


   Susan Hares
   Hickory Hill Consulting
   7453 Hickory Hill
   Saline, MI  48176
   USA

   Email: shares@ndzh.com








Zhang, et al.            Expires January 5, 2015               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft          Use Cases of I2RS in MBH               July 2014


   Luis M. Contreras
   Telefonica I+D
   Ronda de la Comunicacion, Sur-3 building, 3rd floor
   Madrid  28050
   Spain

   Email: luismiguel.contrerasmurillo@telefonica.com
   URI:   http://people.tid.es/LuisM.Contreras/











































Zhang, et al.            Expires January 5, 2015               [Page 14]

