

Network Working Group                                         J. Klensin
Internet-Draft                                                S. Dawkins
Expires: September 16, 2004                               March 18, 2004


                  A model for IETF Process Experiments
                  draft-klensin-process-july14-01.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, I certify that any applicable
   patent or other IPR claims of which I am aware have been disclosed,
   and any of which I become aware will be disclosed, in accordance with
   RFC 3667.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at http://
   www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 16, 2004.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004). All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   In the last two years, the IETF has initiated a number of
   interrelated efforts to improve or fine-tune its standards process
   and its internal procedures using the procedures intended for
   development of protocol specifications.  None of these efforts has
   had an observable impact on the quality or timeliness of IETF
   outputs, and, based on the proposed charter milestones now under
   discussion, approval to try to improve things is still between six
   and eighteen months away. This document proposes a radically
   different approach to the system of making changes to IETF process,
   one that relies heavily on a "propose and carry out an experiment,
   evaluate the experiment, and then establish permanent procedures



Klensin & Dawkins      Expires September 16, 2004               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft            Process Experiments                 March 2004


   based on operational experience" model rather than the ones that have
   been attempted previously.

Table of Contents

   1. Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   2. Not an Accident, Not a Coincidence . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   3. Evidence We Are Headed in the Wrong Direction  . . . . . . . .   6
   4. Proposal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   5. Implications for the Present Paralysis . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   6. Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   7. Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
      Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
   A. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
      Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . .  15




































Klensin & Dawkins      Expires September 16, 2004               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft            Process Experiments                 March 2004


1. Introduction

   Starting with IETF 54 in Yokohama in July 2002, the IETF has been
   spending significant time and energy on analysis of actual and
   perceived problems that keep us from producing high quality standards
   on a timely and efficient basis.  Ironically, these reform activities
   have been impeded by some of the same difficulties that impact the
   standards process itself, e.g.,

   o  Seemingly interminable discussion about charter details that
      derails a focus on the work to be done and the problems to be
      solved.

   o  Discussion that doesn't converge, because it relies on logic and
      persuasion, instead of experiments and experience.

   o  Proposals for "improvements" based on intuition, not experience. A
      significant percentage of the postings about how the IETF
      standards process should work are coming from participants who
      have never authored an RFC. A large percentage of the MPOWR
      postings about what WG chairs should do is coming from people who
      have never had the experience of being WG chairs. An overwhelming
      percentage of the postings on several mailing lists about
      offloading the IESG is coming from people who are not present or
      former IESG members and have no other direct information about how
      the IESG functions internally.

   o  There has been uncertainty about the level of IESG enthusiasm for
      some of the proposals and doubts about whether they were worth the
      investment to develop if the IESG was not enthusiastic.

   In addition, these activities have shared two unfortunate
   characteristics with previous major process initiatives in the IETF:

   o  There is an inevitable time conflict -- whether in following and
      contributing to mailing lists, developing and evaluating documents
      and proposals, or scheduling face to face meetings -- between
      process efforts and actual IETF technical/ engineering work.
      Especially when process efforts drag out for many months, there is
      a tendency for people whose primary commitment is to the
      development of technical specifications to go back to doing that,
      leaving process efforts to those who are strongly interested in
      process issues and, to some measure, less inclined or able to do
      the technical work.  This creates a situation in which the process
      groups and efforts may be significantly unrepresentative of the
      range of IETF participants who are materially concerned with their
      outcomes.  The meeting time conflict portion of the problem is the
      reason why the then co-Chairs of POISSON tried to avoid face to



Klensin & Dawkins      Expires September 16, 2004               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft            Process Experiments                 March 2004


      face meetings entirely: a situation in which IETF participants
      needed to choose between attending standards-oriented WGs and a
      process-oriented one would ultimately benefit no one.

   o  With protocol standards, the IETF understands, as a community, the
      dangers of standardization in the absence of implementation,
      deployment, and operational experience.  As a result, we have
      traditionally had Experimental RFCs, a standards track with
      multiple maturity levels, and even implementations from Internet
      Drafts that could then be evaluated as definition and
      standardization progressed. Except, possibly, when the IESG has
      initiated process changes on its own initiative without going
      through a community-wide review first, we have had no parallel for
      procedures.  We try to develop them (usually in Working Groups),
      instantiate them in BCPs, and then put them into effect.  This
      appears to be unwise.  It is certainly inefficient if efficiency
      is measured by the length of time between achievement of some
      level of community consensus and putting a procedure into effect.

   This document is specifically addressed to that set of problems with
   proposed modifications to procedures, especially the last one.

   In reading the balance of this document, it is worth noting that the
   difference between a procedural document and a protocol standard is
   that the former comes with a body (the IESG), that is responsible
   both for its adoption and for its ongoing and dynamic interpretation.
   For protocol specifications, the specification is required to be good
   enough to enable interoperable independent implementations (without a
   lot of shared oral tradition, especially beyond the first maturity
   level). That will typically require getting more details nailed down,
   and nailed down fairly precisely.  That difference implies that we
   can be a lot more relaxed about fine details of procedural documents,
   especially experimental ones, at least as long as we can trust the
   IESG to document their interpretations so that those can be
   incorporated into a final document should the "experiment" succeed.
















Klensin & Dawkins      Expires September 16, 2004               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft            Process Experiments                 March 2004


2. Not an Accident, Not a Coincidence

   To be very clear - the problems encountered using procedures intended
   for protocol specification development to fix procedural problems are
   systemic, and have existed since the POISED working group in the
   early 1990s. These problems will not go away.

   We recognize the efforts that have been made to make this work by a
   number of contributors, including current IESG members. At this time,
   the longest-serving Area Director the IETF has had is shepherding
   NEWTRK, and both ICAR and MPOWR are being shepherded by current Area
   Directors. The quality of these contributors argues strongly that
   it's not possible to use the existing working group process to
   accomplish significant process improvements in the IETF and that, if
   it is possible, it is probably not efficient.




































Klensin & Dawkins      Expires September 16, 2004               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft            Process Experiments                 March 2004


3. Evidence We Are Headed in the Wrong Direction

   [[Note in draft: This section, and some other parts of the document,
   are very specific to observations about events in the year or two
   preceding its writing.  If the document evolves in the direction of
   an RFC, the sections will, at least, need to be recast to put the
   remarks in historical context.]]

   The authors observe that, in the year prior to the creation of the
   initial version of this draft,

   o  The Senior Internet Reviewer effort fizzled out, largely due to a
      "chicken and egg problem".  It became clear that it was not
      possible to get an adequate number of volunteers and generate
      high-quality reviews unless there was a strong commitment to using
      the results, but it also became clear that there couldn't be a
      strong commitment to integrating the SIR reviews into the
      specification review process unless there were adequate volunteers
      and it had been demonstrated that reviews of sufficient quality
      were being produced.

   o  Proposals to create new process WGs [NEWTRK] and [ICAR] to try to
      devise and define solutions to particular problems became bogged
      down for extended periods in discussions of charter details,
      discussions that did nothing to either address the problems or to
      quickly generate alternatives for solving them. Five proposals to
      modify the existing standards track were under active discussion
      on [SOLUTIONS] before IETF 58, where they were presented at the
      NEWTRK BoF [NEWTRK58], but since IETF 58 the NEWTRK focus for an
      entire IETF meeting cycle has been on charter discussion, not on
      proposing changes that might improve document quality or
      timeliness. None of the existing proposals have been discussed on
      the mailing list or updated, no new proposals have been discussed
      on the mailing list or posted, and two-thirds of the NEWTRK
      postings have discussed the charter and planning for the upcoming
      IETF meeting.

   o  Other proposals for ways to address procedural issues, or to
      schedule BOFs to discuss some of them, have deteriorated into
      arguments (or whining) about boundaries, definitions, priorities,
      etc.

   o  We have not been successful in modularizing these efforts - taking
      SOLUTIONS, NEWTRK, and ICAR mailing lists as one example, only one
      active participant has stayed exclusively on one list. Anyone who
      cares about overall IETF process improvement is forced to
      subscribe to an increasingly large set of semi-connected mailing
      lists (SOLUTIONS, NEWTRK, ICAR, MPOWR, PROTO, EDU,...). We believe



Klensin & Dawkins      Expires September 16, 2004               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft            Process Experiments                 March 2004


      there is already a "backlash" of people who have contributed
      previously, but don't think continued participation is worth the
      time and effort it takes to keep track of all the semi-independent
      proposals.

   o  Finally, and most damaging - the draft charters for all of these
      efforts feature schedules in which the first milestone that
      produces a possible improvement is six to eighteen months away.
      If the problems involved are important enough to need solving --
      keeping in mind that we have already been at the problem
      definition and evaluation process for eighteen months -- another
      six to eighteen months before we can start to do anything is far
      too long - and this assumes no slippages from the milestones as
      proposed.  If they are not that important, then we should stop
      wasting time on them.

   In some cases, these lengthy discussions about how to organize work
   (rather than about the work itself) may have been completely
   appropriate. But they are not an efficient way to improve document
   quality or timeliness. It cannot be overstated that no one,
   regardless of depth or breadth of experience, really "knows" the
   effect that these proposals will have on the IETF's ability to
   produce quality specifications in a timely manner. After all of the
   discussion is complete, we still will not know with certainty whether
   a proposal is a good idea, and we will still need experience to know
   whether we have improved anything at all.

























Klensin & Dawkins      Expires September 16, 2004               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft            Process Experiments                 March 2004


4. Proposal

   Since the 1992 changes, the IESG has adopted a number of procedural
   changes on its own initiative and documented them informally,
   utilizing the wide discretion implicitly granted them by RFC 2026.
   This document proposes to regularize and formalize that mechanism as
   a means of moving forward with procedural changes that might prove
   valuable.  We note that, if the procedures the IESG has adopted (and
   procedural exceptions it has made) over the last decade are
   legitimate, then the IESG has the authority to institute the changes
   proposed here by bootstrapping the proposed process.

   The mechanisms outlined here are not intended to be exclusive: they
   add to the IESG's range of tools for dealing with process issues on
   an ongoing basis, rather that replacing those tools with a single
   "magic bullet".  The choice as to whether to use the procedure
   outlined in this document, if it is adopted, or other mechanisms
   available to the IESG and the community --present or future-- remains
   in the IESG's hands.  If the IESG does not exercise that discretion
   wisely, this document provides no additional remedies.

   Some have read the current procedures as giving the IESG all of the
   capabilities outlined in this document, i.e., that it changes almost
   nothing.   If this is true, this document only encourages the IESG to
   use this type of mechanism more frequently rather than less
   streamlined ones,  and to more explicitly document what it is doing
   and what decisions it is making.

   We propose to permit (and encourage) the IESG to adopt and institute
   "process experiments" using the following procedure:

   1.  An I-D is written that describes what the proposed new or altered
       procedure is about and how it works. A statement of what problem
       it is expected to solve would be desirable, but is not a
       requirement (the intent is to keep the firm requirements for such
       an experiment as lightweight as possible).  Similarly, specific
       experimental or evaluation criteria are very desirable, but not
       required -- for some of the process changes we anticipate, having
       the IESG reach a conclusion at the end of the sunset period that
       the community generally believes things to be better (or worse)
       will be both adequate and sufficient.  The I-D must state an
       explicit "sunset" timeout, typically not to exceed one year after
       adoption.

   2.  If the IESG believes the proposal is plausible and plausibly
       useful, a four week IETF Last Call is initiated.   The IESG can
       institute whatever procedures it wishes to make that
       determination and to avoid denial of service attacks from large



Klensin & Dawkins      Expires September 16, 2004               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft            Process Experiments                 March 2004


       numbers of spurious or unimportant proposals.  In particular,
       they might institute a procedure requiring some number of
       endorsements, or endorsements of a particular type, before the
       IESG considers the draft.  The IESG is, however, expected to
       understand that procedures or review processes that act as a
       mechanism for significant delays do not fall within the intent of
       this proposal.

   3.  At the conclusion of the Last Call, the IESG reevaluates the
       plausibility and appropriateness of the proposal.  If they
       conclude that the proposed experiment is appropriate, a second
       I-D is generated (either by the IESG or by the original authors
       with IESG advice) that cleans up any definitional issues exposed
       in the Last Call and that explicitly identifies and responds to
       issues raised during that Last Call.

   4.  The document and experiment are then announced, the experiment is
       begun, and the document is forwarded for RFC publication.

   The IESG could, of course, reach a "bad idea" conclusion at any stage
   in this process and abandon the experiment.  It might recommend
   publication of the experimental document, with a discussion of why it
   was a bad idea, but is not required to do so.  The list above is
   deliberately agnostic about where the I-Ds come from: a WG, design
   team, individual contribution, editing group, or other mechanism,
   could be used in the first and/or third steps, but no specific
   mechanisms are required and the IESG is explicitly permitted to
   generate such proposals internally.

   In each case, the IESG's making of the decisions to go forward (or
   not) with a procedural experiment, or the steps leading up to one, is
   expected to reflect their judgment of the existence of rough
   consensus in the community.  That judgment may be appealed using the
   usual procedures, but the IESG and the community are reminded that an
   experimental attempt to try something for a fixed period is typically
   a better engineering approach than extended philosophical discussion
   without any experience to back it up.

   Nothing above is to be construed as a requirement that any given
   process experiment be attempted IETF-wide.  A proposal for such an
   experiment may specify selected areas, selected working groups,
   working groups meeting some specific criteria (such as those created
   after a particular time or more than a specified number of years
   old), or be specific in other ways.

   At or before the end of the "sunset" timeout, the IESG would either
   revise (or cause to be revised) the document into a BCP RFC or the
   procedure would expire and, presumably, not be tried again unless



Klensin & Dawkins      Expires September 16, 2004               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft            Process Experiments                 March 2004


   something changed radically.  A document describing why the
   experiment had succeeded or failed would be desirable but could not,
   realistically, be a requirement.  If the procedure went to BCP, the
   BCP would reflect what we would call "operational experience" in the
   real world.














































Klensin & Dawkins      Expires September 16, 2004              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft            Process Experiments                 March 2004


5. Implications for the Present Paralysis

   On the basis of this model, if the IESG believes that ICAR is
   probably a useful idea and that the community is at least tentatively
   in favor of trying it, then the first steps are not community review
   and IESG approval of a charter for a WG to study the issue.  Instead,
   the first step is a proposal to do something and IESG consensus that
   the "something" is worth trying.  A year later, if it seems to have
   helped and not caused harm, it gets cast in concrete.  If not, we
   discard it and move on.    Similar comments apply to other proposed
   WGs (or BOFs) concerned with process, such as MPOWR: if the IESG is
   convinced that something is needed, and that there is community
   backing for that "something", then it should be documented and
   deployed experimentally, with formal procedural changes, if any,
   occurring only after experience had been accumulated, observed, and
   evaluated.

   This model can, and in the opinion of the authors, probably should,
   be applied to changes in the standards process as well. Specifically,
   we tune the standards process in place, experimentally, largely by
   changes in what IESG _does_, rather than the language used to
   describe things.  If those actions produce favorable results or
   directions, we _then_ go off and write up the details, rather than
   trying to make changes based on speculation about what might or might
   not work better (much less spending months on debates about the
   charter for considering those changes).

























Klensin & Dawkins      Expires September 16, 2004              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft            Process Experiments                 March 2004


6. Security Considerations

   This document specifies a mechanism for evolving IETF procedures. It
   does not raise or consider any protocol-specific security issues. In
   considering experimental changes to procedures, the IESG should, of
   course, exercise due caution that such changes not reduce the quality
   of security review and consideration for protocols or, at least, that
   the process experiment proposals contain early detection and
   correction mechanisms should quality deterioration occur.










































Klensin & Dawkins      Expires September 16, 2004              [Page 12]

Internet-Draft            Process Experiments                 March 2004


7. Acknowledgements

   The first revision of this document benefited significantly from
   suggestions and comments from Avri Doria, Margaret Wasserman, and
   Harald Alvestrand, and from discussions with the General Area
   Directorate and at its open meeting during IETF 59.


Authors' Addresses

   John C Klensin
   1770 Massachusetts Ave, #322
   Cambridge, MA  02140
   USA

   Phone: +1 617 491 5735
   EMail: john-ietf@jck.com


   Spencer Dawkins
   1547 Rivercrest Blvd.
   Allen, TX  75002
   USA

   Phone: +1 469 330 3616
   EMail: spencer@mcsr-labs.org

























Klensin & Dawkins      Expires September 16, 2004              [Page 13]

Internet-Draft            Process Experiments                 March 2004


Appendix A. References

   [EDU]: Edu-Discuss Mailing List, https://www1.ietf.org/mail-archive/
      working-groups/edu-discuss/current/threads.html

   [ICAR]: Improved Cross-Area Review, https://www1.ietf.org/mailman/
      listinfo/icar

   [MPOWR]: Management Positions -- Oversight, Work and Results, https:/
      /www1.ietf.org/mailman/listinfo/mpowr

   [NEWTRK]: New IETF Standards Track mailing list, http://
      darkwing.uoregon.edu/~llynch/newtrk/threads.html

   [NEWTRK58]: New IETF Standards Track BoF at IETF 58, https://
      www1.ietf.org/proceedings/03nov/130.htm

   [SOLUTION]: Solutions Mailing List, http://eikenes.alvestrand.no/
      mailman/listinfo/solutions
































Klensin & Dawkins      Expires September 16, 2004              [Page 14]

Internet-Draft            Process Experiments                 March 2004


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights. Information
   on the IETF's procedures with respect to rights in IETF Documents can
   be found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004). This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Klensin & Dawkins      Expires September 16, 2004              [Page 15]


