

   IPR WG                                                               
   Internet-Draft                                       V. See (editor) 
   Document: draft-ietf-ipr-template-05.txt                   Microsoft 
   Expires: December 13, 2003                             June 13, 2003 
    
    
     A Template for IETF Patent Disclosures and Licensing Declarations 
    
    
Status of this Memo 
    
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 [i].  
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that      
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
    
Abstract 
    
   This document describes a template for IETF patent disclosures and 
   licensing declarations. The optional use of this template is meant to
   simplify the process of such disclosures and licensing declarations 
   and to assist disclosers in providing the necessary information to 
   meet the obligations documented in RFC XXXX [ii]. 
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
 
 
See (editor)         Expires - December 13, 2003             [Page 1] 
Patent Disclosure and Licensing Declaration Template     June 13, 2003
 
 
Table of Contents 
    
   1. Introduction...................................................2 
   2. The Patent Disclosure and Licensing Declaration Template.......2 
   3. Commentary on Terms used in the Template.......................5 
   Security Considerations...........................................7 
   References........................................................7 
   Acknowledgments...................................................7 
   Authors' Addresses................................................7 
   Full Copyright statement..........................................8 
    
    
1. Introduction 
    
   RFC XXXX [ii] documents the current IETF policies and obligations 
   with respect to disclosure of patents and patent applications. It 
   also documents the information requested in licensing declarations 
   for IETF specifications. In the interest of making these patent 
   disclosure and licensing declaration processes simpler, this document
   proposes a patent disclosure and licensing declaration template that 
   may be optionally used as one method for IETF participants and patent
   holders to comply with patent disclosure requirements and licensing 
   declaration provisions under RFC XXXX. For the latest information on 
   how to submit a patent disclosure or licensing declaration, please 
   see http://www.ietf.org/ipr-instructions. 
    
    
2. The Patent Disclosure and Licensing Declaration Template 
    
   START OF TEMPLATE 
    
   This document is an IETF Patent Disclosure and Licensing Declaration 
   Template and is submitted to inform the IETF of a) patent information
   regarding the IETF document or contribution listed in Section IV, and
   b) a Patent Holder's intention with respect to the licensing of its 
   necessary patent claims upon approval by the IESG for publication as 
   an RFC of the relevant IETF specification. No actual license is 
   implied by submission of this template. Please complete and submit a 
   separate template for each IETF document or contribution to which the
   disclosed patent information relates. 
    
   I. Patent Holder/Organization ("Patent Holder") 
    
   Legal Name:  
    
   II. Patent Holder's Contact for License Application 
    
   Name:  
    
 
 
See (editor)         Expires - December 13, 2003             [Page 2] 
Patent Disclosure and Licensing Declaration Template     June 13, 2003
 
 
   Title: 
    
   Department:  
    
   Address:  
    
    
   Telephone:  
    
   Fax:  
    
   Email:  
    
   III. Contact Information for the IETF Participant Whose Personal 
   Belief Triggered the Disclosure in this Template (Optional): 
    
   Name:  
    
   Title: 
    
   Department:  
    
   Address:  
    
    
   Telephone:  
    
   Fax:  
    
   Email:  
    
   IV. IETF Document or Working Group Contribution to Which Patent 
   Disclosure Relates 
    
    
   Title:  
    
    
   RFC Number or I-D Tag:  
    
    
   Other Designations:  
    
    
   V. Disclosure of Patent Information (i.e., patents or patent 
   applications required to be disclosed by Section 6 of RFC XXXX)
    
   A. For granted patents or published pending patent applications,
   please provide the following information: 
 
 
See (editor)         Expires - December 13, 2003             [Page 3] 
Patent Disclosure and Licensing Declaration Template     June 13, 2003
 
 
    
   Patent, Serial, Publication, Registration, or Application/File 
   number(s): 
    
    
   Date(s) granted or applied for:  
    
    
   B. Does your disclosure relate to an unpublished pending patent 
   application? 
    
   Select one:  Yes  ______  No ______ 
    
   C. If an Internet-Draft or RFC includes multiple parts and it is not
   reasonably apparent which part of such Internet-Draft or RFC is 
   alleged to be covered by the patent information disclosed in Section
   V(A) or V(B), it is helpful if the discloser identifies here the 
   sections of the Internet-Draft or RFC that are alleged to be so 
   covered.  
    
    
    
   VI. Licensing Declaration  
    
   The Patent Holder states that, upon approval by the IESG for 
   publication as an RFC of the relevant IETF specification, its 
   position with respect to licensing any patent claims contained in the
   patent(s) or patent application(s) disclosed above that would be 
   necessary to implement the technology required by such IETF 
   specification ("Patent Claims"), for the purpose of implementing the 
   specification, is as follows (select one licensing declaration option
   only): 
    
   a) ___   No License Required for Implementers 
              Check here if this licensing declaration is limited solely
              to standards-track IETF documents ___ 
    
   b) ___   Royalty-Free, Reasonable and Non-Discriminatory License to 
            All Implementers  
              Check here if this licensing declaration is limited solely
              to standards-track IETF documents ___ 
    
   c) ___   Reasonable and Non-Discriminatory License to All  
            Implementers with Possible Royalty/Fee 
              Check here if this licensing declaration is limited solely
              to standards-track IETF documents ___ 
    
   d) ___   Licensing Declaration to be Provided Later (implies a  
            willingness to commit to the provisions of a), b), or c) 
 
 
See (editor)         Expires - December 13, 2003             [Page 4] 
Patent Disclosure and Licensing Declaration Template     June 13, 2003 
 
 
            above to all implementers; otherwise, the next option - 
            "Unwilling to Commit to the Provisions of a), b), or c)  
            Above" - must be selected) 
    
   e) ___   Unwilling to Commit to the Provisions of a), b), or c) 
            Above 
    
   NOTE: The individual submitting this template represents and warrants
   that he or she is authorized by the Patent Holder to agree to the 
   above-selected licensing declaration. 
    
   VII. Contact Information of Submitter of this Form (if different from
   IETF Participant in Section III above) 
    
   Name: 
    
   Title: 
    
   Department: 
    
   Address: 
    
    
   Telephone: 
    
   Fax: 
    
   Email: 
    
   VIII. Other Notes: 
    
    
    
    
    
    
   END OF TEMPLATE 
    
    
3. Commentary on Terms used in the Template 
    
   Section III requests contact information for the Patent Holder's IETF
   participant whose personal belief that necessary patent claims are 
   implicated by an IETF document or contribution caused this template 
   to be filed. This is an optional section. However, if Section III is 
   not completed, then Section VII must be completed. Even if Section 
   III is completed, Section VII must still be completed if the 
   submitter of this template is different from the IETF participant 
   identified in Section III. 
 
 
See (editor)         Expires - December 13, 2003             [Page 5] 
Patent Disclosure and Licensing Declaration Template     June 13, 2003 
 
 
    
   The "Other Designations" field in Section IV may be used to identify 
   an IETF working group contribution (oral or written) other than an 
   Internet-Draft or RFC to which a disclosure is related. 
    
    
   Here is an explanation of the licensing declaration options in 
   Section VI of the template: 
    
   a) No License Required for Implementers: The Patent Holder does not 
   require parties to acquire any license to its Patent Claims in order
   to implement the IETF specification. 
     
   b) Royalty-Free, Reasonable and Non-Discriminatory License to All 
   Implementers: The Patent Holder is willing, upon request, to grant a
   license to its Patent Claims to all implementers of the IETF 
   specification on a royalty-free basis (i.e., no royalty or other fee)
   and under reasonable and non-discriminatory terms.  
     
   c) Reasonable and Non-Discriminatory License to All Implementers with
   Possible Royalty/Fee: The Patent Holder is willing, upon request, to 
   grant a license to its Patent Claims to all implementers of the IETF 
   specification under reasonable and non-discriminatory terms (which 
   may include a royalty/fee). 
    
   d) Licensing Declaration to be Provided Later: The Patent Holder is 
   willing to commit to the provisions of a), b), or c) above to all 
   implementers of the IETF specification, but wants to defer its 
   specific selection of one of these licensing declaration options 
   until a later point in time (or when asked for this information by 
   the IESG). This option may not be selected if the Patent Holder is 
   unwilling to commit to the provisions of a), b), or c) above. In that
   case, the Patent Holder must select licensing declaration option e) - 
   "Unwilling to Commit to the Provisions of a), b), or c) Above". 
    
   e) Unwilling to Commit to the Provisions of a), b), or c) Above: The 
   Patent Holder indicates an unwillingness to commit to the provisions 
   of any of options a), b), or c) described above. 
    
   Options a), b), and c) above also allow the Patent Holder to indicate
   (with a check) whether its licensing declaration is limited solely to
   standards-track documents. If left unchecked, the Patent Holder's 
   licensing declaration will be deemed to apply to all IETF documents, 
   including non-standards-track documents. This standards-track 
   qualifier is not relevant to licensing declaration options d) and e), 
   because under d) the Patent Holder has not yet indicated its specific
   licensing intention and under e) the Patent Holder has indicated a 
   general refusal to commit to the provisions of any of options a), b), 
   or c) above. 
 
 
See (editor)         Expires - December 13, 2003             [Page 6] 
Patent Disclosure and Licensing Declaration Template     June 13, 2003 
 
 
    
   Section VIII in the template, "Other Notes," may be used for any 
   additional information a discloser or Patent Holder wishes to 
   provide. For example, a Patent Holder may use the "Other Notes" 
   Section to indicate any other conditions on the licensing declaration
   option selected in Section VI (e.g., reciprocity). 
    
    
    
Security Considerations 
    
   This document relates to IETF process, not any particular technology.
   There are security considerations when adopting any particular 
   technology, regardless of whether patent or patent application 
   disclosures or licensing declarations are implicated by such 
   technology. A working group should take those security considerations
   into account as one part of evaluating the technology, but there are 
   no security considerations per se with these IETF processes. 
    
    
References 
    
                     
   i  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3", BCP 
      9, RFC 2026, October 1996. 
    
   ii  Bradner, S., "Intellectual Property Rights in IETF Technology", 
      RFC XXXX, <month> 2003. 
    
Acknowledgments 
    
   The authors acknowledge the thoughtful contributions of Harald 
   Alvestrand and Scott Bradner to this document. 
    
Authors' Addresses 
    
   Valerie See 
   Microsoft Corporation 
   One Microsoft Way, Redmond, WA 98052 USA 
   Email: vsee@microsoft.com 
    
   Robert Barr 
   Cisco Systems, Inc. 
   170 West Tasman Drive, San Jose, CA 95134 USA 
   Email: rbarr@cisco.com 
    
   Scott Brim 
   Cisco Systems, Inc. 

 
 
See (editor)         Expires - December 13, 2003             [Page 7] 
Patent Disclosure and Licensing Declaration Template     June 13, 2003 
 
 
   146 Honess Lane, Ithaca, NY 14850 USA 
   Email: sbrim@cisco.com 
    
   Paul Gleichauf 
   Cisco Systems, Inc. 
   170 West Tasman Drive, San Jose, CA 95134 USA 
   Email: phg@cisco.com 
    
   Allen Lo 
   Juniper Networks 
   1194 North Mathilda Ave., Sunnyvale, CA 94089 USA 
   Email: alo@juniper.net 
    
Full Copyright statement 
 
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003).  Except as set forth 
   below, authors retain all their rights. 
    
   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published 
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any 
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are 
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this 
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for rights 
   in submissions defined in the Internet Standards process must be 
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than 
   English. 
    
   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be 
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns. 
    
   THIS DOCUMENT AND THE INFORMATION CONTAINED HEREIN IS PROVIDED ON AN 
   "AS IS" BASIS AND THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS 
   (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK 
   FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT 
   LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL 
   NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY 
   OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
    






 
 
See (editor)         Expires - December 13, 2003             [Page 8] 
