Network Working Group                                 Suresh Boyapati
Internet Draft                                        Juniper Networks
Intended Status: Experimental                       

                                                     January 26, 2015

     
	 
	 Selection of MPLS LSP's based on Loss and Delay Measurement values.
       			draft-sboyapati-mpls-lmdm-00.txt                    



Status of This Memo

 This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering Task
Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that other
groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.     


Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at
any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as
reference material or to cite them other than as "work in
progress."

The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html

The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

This Internet-Draft will expire on June 25, 2015.


Copyright Notice

Copyright (c) 2012 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
document authors. All rights reserved.

IETF Trust Legal Provisions of 28-dec-2009, Section 6.b(ii), paragraph 3:
This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal Provisions
Relating to IETF Documents (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info)
in effect on the date of publication of this document.  Please
review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
 and restrictions with respect to this document.
 
 Relating to IETF Documents (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info)
in effect on the date of publication of this document. Please
review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
and restrictions with respect to this document. Code Components
extracted from this document must include Simplified BSD License
text as described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions
and are provided without warranty as described in the Simplified 
BSD License.





Abstract

MPLS is the heart and soul of the service provider network. MPLS can carry any data payload which
gives the flexibility to the service provider to provision new service with any expense.
As loss and delay sensitive applications such as Voice and Video are running on MPLS network, 
they may suffer delays in packet transmission and delivery. So Voice and Video traffic on MPLS network needs 
low loss and delay LSP's to transfer Voice and Video packets.
This draft is proposing a solution to selection of Low loss and latency LSP's for Voice and Video applications 
using MPLS Loss and Delay measurement parameters.

   
The benefit of this technology results in delivery voice and video packets with best possible lsp i.e. 
LSP's with less loss and delay. 















Table of Contents

1. Introduction.....................................................3
2. MPLS LSP Problem Statement........................................4
3. How MPLS LSP works ............................................4
3.1 Selection on MPLS LSP for Voice,Video networks based on Loss and delay Parameters................................7


4.1. Normative References-----------------------------------11














1.Introduction

MPLS is the heart and soul of the service provider network. MPLS can carry any data payload which
gives the flexibility to the service provider to provision new service with any expense.
As loss and delay sensitive applications such as Voice and Video are running on MPLS network, 
they may suffer delays in packet transmission and delivery. So Voice and Video traffic on MPLS network needs 
low loss and delay LSP's to transfer Voice and Video packets.
This draft is proposing a solution to selection of Low loss and latency LSP's for Voice and Video applications 
using MPLS Loss and Delay measurement parameters.

   
The benefit of this technology results in delivery voice and video packets with best possible lsp i.e. LSP's with less loss and delay. 



















2. Problem Statement

There are different transport mechanism to carry customer data end to end. One of the famous transport media is MPLS LSP's. 
Service/Enterprise providers will have 100's of LSP's configured end-to-end to carry voice,video,data,vpn, internet etc.services. 
So on Ingress router all services/specific services will be mapped to a set of LSP's to have load balancing of traffic on set of lsp's which travel the same or different paths. 
When a set of lsp's are selected and all are ECMP lsp's, system will decide which packet to be transmitted on which lsp. Being a large network with large number of routers present in a network
LSP's will introduce variable characteristics for Loss and delay of packets what they carries. i.e. few LSP's will have minimal loss and minimal delay. Some LSP's will have maximum loss but minimum delay.
Some lsp's will have minimum loss and maximum delay and some lsp's will have maximum loss and maximum delay. 
As network can have all types of above listed lsp's, when voice and video traffic transmits over that might induce un-necessary loss and delay.

So for sensitive applications like Voice and Video we need to avoid LSP's which may induce high loss and delay.


 
 
 
 



3.How it works 

       |---------Router F--------Router G----------Router H------------|
       |                                                               |
Router A---------Router B--------Router C----------Router D----------Router E
       |                           |                                   |
       |---------Router I----------|-----------------------------------|	   

                        


There are 100 LSP's are established between A and E. So on Router A it will install 10 LSP's to carry Voice traffic, 
let's lsp's 1 to 10. 10 lsp's to carry video traffic i.e. 11 to 20. rest of the lsp's will be used for other purposes.

What ever the 10 lsp's used to carry voice traffic i.e. lsp's 1 to 10, might not be best lsp's or there are better lsp's than 1 to 10 
out of 100 which has less loss and delay characteristics. 
As MPLS Loss and Delay Measurement introduced via RFC https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6374 introduces a method to measure Loss and Delay 
characteristics, use this infrastructure to determine the best top 10 best lsp's and place it for Voice group.

Similarly we can derive another set of 10 best lsp's out of 100 and place it for video group.

3.1 Selection on MPLS LSP for Voice,Video networks based on Loss and delay Parameters

As the RFC 6374 suggests two modes of measurement i.e. on-demand and continuous measurement, this proposal can use 
continuous mode of lsp loss and delay measurements over a period of time. Derive and submit the loss and delay results to lsp selection 
algorithm of ingress routers. Now the ingress routers can decide installation of best lsp's for the applications what they are supporting.

Thresholds can be defined for each application for loss and delay measurements so that each application can select set of lsp's 
when they meet the lees than or equal to threshold values.


If Loss threshold equal to 1 out of 1 million packets and delay of 10 usec for Voice application. 
Now the selection algorithm on ingress router will walk through all lsp's loss and delay measurements and picks only the lsp's which 
meet the threshold values.

Example 2: If loss threshold equal to 10 out of 1 million packets and delay of 5 usec for Video application,
Now the selection can go ahead and select the best lsp's from the available list of lsp's.

Implementations can have option to prioritize loss or delay so that algorithm can remove the links which does not satisfy the criteria.
By default should have loss and delay threshold values passed to selection algorithm.

Optionally can provide a default fall back option to select either loss or delay or both in case no lsp's meets the requirements.

Optionally we can have either loss or delay as threshold parameters for selection of lsp's.

 
 










References
4.1. Normative References
[RFC6374] Packet Loss and Delay Measurement for MPLS Networks





















Author Addresses
Suresh Boyapati
Juniper Networks 
Bangalore, India
Email: sureshkb@juniper.net