





PKIX Working Group                S. Chokhani (CygnaCom Solutions, Inc.)
Internet Draft                                  W. Ford (VeriSign, Inc.)

expires in six months                                      June 1997

   Certificate Policy and Certification Practice Statement Framework

                     <draft-chokhani-cps-00.txt>

Status of this Memo

   This  document  is  an  Internet-Draft.   Internet-Drafts are working
   documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF),  its  areas,
   and  its  working groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of  6  months
   and  may  be  updated,  replaced,  or  may  become  obsolete by other
   documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as
   reference material or to cite them other than as work in progress.

   To  learn  the current status of any Internet-Draft, please check the
   1id-abstracts.txt listing contained  in  the  Internet-Drafts  Shadow
   Directories    on   ftp.is.co.za(Africa),   nic.nordu.net   (Europe),
   munnari.oz.au (Pacific Rim),  ds.internic.net  (US  East  Coast),  or
   ftp.isi.edu (US West Coast).

Abstract

   This  document presents an initial draft of a framework to assist the
   writers of  X.509  certificate  policies  or  certification  practice
   statements    for    certification   authorities   and   public   key
   infrastructures.   In  particular,   the   framework   identifies   a
   comprehensive  list  of  topics  that  potentially  (at  the writer's
   discretion) need to be covered in an X.509 certificate  policy  or  a
   certification practice statement.

1. INTRODUCTION

   1.1  BACKGROUND

      An  X.509 public key certificate (henceforth termed a certificate)
      binds an entity to the entity's public key.  The degree to which a
      certificate  user  (a  certificate  user  is typically a signature
      verifier or a key token generator) can trust this binding  depends
      on  several  factors.  These  factors  include  the  Certification
      Authority (CA) policy and procedures  for  authentication  of  end
      entities,  CA  operating policy, procedures and security controls,



Chokhani                                                        [Page 1]





Internet-Draft                CPF and CPSF                  January 1997


      end entity policy and procedures for handling private  keys,  etc.
      The liability assumed by certificate issuers and end entities also
      plays a role in the degree of trust.

      Version 3 X.509 certificates may contain certificate policies [8].
      A  certificate  policy allows the users of a certificate to decide
      how much trust to place in the certificate, i.e., in  the  binding
      of  the  entity's identity and the entity's public key.  According
      to X.509, version 3, a certificate policy is "a named set of rules
      that  indicates the applicability of a certificate to a particular
      community  and/or  class  of  application  with  common   security
      requirements."

      A detailed description of how certificate policies are implemented
      by a particular CA is called a  Certification  Practice  Statement
      (CPS).  According to the American Bar Association (ABA), "a CPS is
      a statement of  the  practices  which  a  certification  authority
      employs   in  issuing  certificates."  When  negotiating  a  cross
      certification, CAs examine and compare each other's CPS.

   1.2  PURPOSE

      The purpose of this  document  is  to  present  a  framework  that
      identifies  the  elements  that  may  need  to  be  considered  in
      formulating a certificate policy or a CPS, to assist  the  writers
      of  certificate  policies or CPSs with their task.  The purpose is
      not to define particular certificate policies or CPSs per se.

   1.3  SCOPE

      There are many classes of policies, such as organization  security
      policy,  system  security  policy, data labeling policy, etc.  The
      scope of this document is limited  to  defining  the  aspects  and
      elements of a certificate policy (as described and intended in the
      X.509, version 3 certificate standard and  ABA  digital  signature
      guidelines).   While  the  certificate  policy  and  certification
      practices statement framework presented here was motivated by  the
      X.509 version 3 certificate standard, the framework can be used by
      other public key certificate standards.

      This document does not define a  specific  certificate  policy  or
      CPS.   Instead,  it  describes what types of information should be
      included in a certificate policy (and documented in a CPS).   This
      document  does  not provide specific values or specific mechanisms
      to  choose  those  values.   Specific  security  policy  and   the
      mechanisms  that  implement  them  are  the  scope  of  a detailed
      document, a CPS.




Chokhani                                                        [Page 2]





Internet-Draft                CPF and CPSF                  January 1997


      This document's  scope  is  limited  to  provide  a  comprehensive
      framework.  It does not contain any guidance on how to write sound
      certificate policies or CPS.

      This certificate policy and CPS framework  contains  many  topics.
      It  is  not  necessary  for  a policy or a CPS to define something
      concrete for each topic.   A tangible statement, "none", and  "not
      applicable"  are  all acceptable values. Addressing each and every
      topic ensures that the policy and CPS  writers  have  not  omitted
      anything.  Addressing each and every topic in the defined sequence
      also facilitates comparison of policies and certification practice
      statements for the purpose of equivalency mapping (as described in
      Section 3).

   1.4  AUDIENCE

      The audience for this  document  are  the  designers  and  policy-
      makers  of  certificate  infrastructures  using  version  3  X.509
      certificates.

   1.5  DOCUMENT ORGANIZATION

      This document contains seven  main  sections.   This  section  has
      provided  an  introduction.  Section 2 contains definitions of key
      terms  used  in  this  document.   Section  3   further   explains
      certificate  policy and CPS related terms and Section 4 provides a
      list of references  and  related  work.   Section  5  provides  an
      overview  of  the  certificate  policy and certification practices
      framework.  Section 6 contains  the  details  of  the  certificate
      policy  and  CPS  framework.  Section 7 provides an outline format
      for a certificate policy and certification practice statement.

2.  DEFINITIONS

   In  this  section,  we  define  terms  used  in  the  development  of
   certificate  policy  and  CPS.   These terms are closely related, but
   have subtle differences.  The definitions  are  intended  to  clarify
   those subtle differences.

      Certificate  Policy  -  A  named  set  of rules that indicates the
      applicability of a certificate to a  particular  community  and/or
      class  of  application  with  common  security  requirements.  For
      example,  a   particular   certificate   policy   might   indicate
      applicability  of  a  type of certificate to the authentication of
      electronic data interchange transactions for the trading of  goods
      within a given price range.  The certificate policy should be used
      by the user of the certificate to decide whether or not to  accept
      the  binding  between  the  subject  (of  the certificate) and the



Chokhani                                                        [Page 3]





Internet-Draft                CPF and CPSF                  January 1997


      public key. A subset of the components in the  certificate  policy
      and certification practices statement framework are given concrete
      values to define a certificate policy.  The certificate policy  is
      represented  by  a  registered  object  identifier  in  the X.509,
      version 3 certificate.  The object owner also registers a  textual
      description   of   the  policy  and  makes  it  available  to  the
      certificate users.

      The certificate policy object identifier can be  included  in  the
      following   extensions  in  the  X.509,  version  3  certificates:
      certificate policies, policy  mappings,  and  policy  constraints.
      The object identifier(s) may appear in none, some, or all of these
      fields.  These object identifiers may be the  same  (referring  to
      the  same  certificate  policy)  or may be different (referring to
      different certificate policies).

      Element of Policy - A topic that may  need  to  be  covered  in  a
      certificate policy or in a certification practice statement.

      Certification  Path  - A set of certificates that provides a chain
      of trust from the relying party's trusted CA to the  entity  whose
      public key is required by the relying party.

      Certificate   Policy  and  Certificate  Practice  Statement  (CPS)
      Framework - A comprehensive set of security and liability  related
      components  that  can  be used to define a certificate policy or a
      CPS.  A subset of the components in the certificate policy and CPS
      framework are given concrete values to define a certificate policy
      or a CPS.

      Certification Practice  Statement  (CPS)  -  A  statement  of  the
      practices  which  a  certification  authority  employs  in issuing
      certificates.

      Issuing Certification Authority (CA) - A CA  who  has  elected  to
      apply a policy to itself and its subjects (CA and end entities).

      Policy Qualifier - Policy-dependent information that accompanies a
      certificate policy identifier in an X.509 certificate.

      Registration Authority (RA) - An entity  who  is  responsible  for
      identification  and authentication of subjects of certificate, but
      is not a CA, and hence does not sign or issue certificates.

      Subject CA - A CA that is certified by the issuing  CA  and  hence
      complies with the certificate policy of the issuing CA.

      Subject RA - See Registration Authority (RA).



Chokhani                                                        [Page 4]





Internet-Draft                CPF and CPSF                  January 1997


3.  CERTIFICATE POLICY AND CPS RELATED CONCEPTS

   This  section contains a detailed explanation of a certificate policy
   and a certification practice statement.

   3.1  CERTIFICATE POLICY

      When  a  certification  authority  issues  a  certificate,  it  is
      providing  a  statement  to  a  certificate  user (i.e., a relying
      party) that a particular public  key  is  bound  to  a  particular
      entity  (the  certificate  subject).   But  to what extent can the
      certificate user rely  on  that  statement  by  the  certification
      authority?   Different certificates are issued following different
      practices and  procedures,  and  may  be  suitable  for  different
      applications and/or purposes.

      The  term  certificate policy derives from the X.509 standard [8].
      Certificate  policy  refers  to  the  way  an  X.509   certificate
      indicates  to a certificate user whether or not the certificate is
      suitable for use for  a  particular  application.   A  certificate
      policy  needs  to be recognized by both the issuer and user of the
      certificate.   Any  individual  certificate  will   typically   be
      associated  with  a  single  certificate  policy  or, possibly, be
      issued consistent with a small number of different policies.

      The X.509 standard defines a certificate policy as "a named set of
      rules  that  indicates  the  applicability  of  a certificate to a
      particular community  and/or  class  of  application  with  common
      security requirements."

      A  certificate policy is registered and assigned a globally unique
      ISO/IEC/ITU object identifier (OID).   This  registration  process
      follows the procedures specified in ISO/IEC/ITU standards.

   3.2  CERTIFICATE POLICY EXAMPLES

      An  organization  can be expected to support a number of different
      certificate policies.  For example, a certain  organization  might
      support  two different certificate policies.  One might govern how
      certificates   are   issued   for   confidentiality   (encryption)
      applications,  while  the  second might deal with how certificates
      are issued for non-repudiation (digital signature) applications.

      For the purposes of this  example,  call  this  organization  ACME
      research,  and  call  the  two  policies  the ACME Electronic Mail
      policy, and the ACME Purchase policy.  The  ACME  Electronic  Mail
      policy  is  used  by  the  ACME  employees  for protecting routine
      information (e.g., causal electronic mail) and for  authenticating



Chokhani                                                        [Page 5]





Internet-Draft                CPF and CPSF                  January 1997


      connections  from the World Wide Web browsers to the corporate Web
      servers. The Certified key pairs may  be  generated,  stored,  and
      managed using low-cost software-based systems.  Under this policy,
      a certificate is automatically issued to anybody identified in the
      corporate  directory who submits a signed certificate request form
      to a network administrator.

      The  ACME  Purchase  policy   is   used   to   protect   financial
      transactions.  Under this policy, ACME requires that certified key
      pairs be generated and stored in approved  cryptographic  hardware
      tokens.   A  certificate  and  token is provided to employees with
      disbursement authority. These authorized individual  are  required
      to  present  themselves  to  a special security office, and show a
      valid identification badge before a token is issued.

   3.3 X.509 CERTIFICATE FIELDS RELATING TO CERTIFICATE POLICIES

      The following extension fields in an X.509 certificate are used to
      support certificate policies:

         * Certificate Policies extension
         * Policy Mappings extension
         * Policy Constraints extension

      3.3.1 Certificate Policies Extension

         The  Certificate Policies extension has two variants - one with
         the field flagged non-critical and  one with the field  flagged
         critical.   The  purpose  of the field is slightly different in
         the two cases.

         Each Certificate Policy may define one  or  more  purposes  for
         which  certificates  issued  on  the policy may be used. A non-
         critical Certificate Policies field lists certificate  policies
         that  the  certification  authority  declares  are  applicable,
         however, use of  the  certificate  is  not  restricted  to  the
         purposes  indicated  by  the  applicable  policies.   Using the
         example of the "Electronic Mail" and  the  "Purchase"  policies
         defined  in  Section  3.2 above, the certificates issued to the
         organization's  regular  employees  will  contain  the   object
         identifier  for  certificate  policy  for  the  Electronic Mail
         policy.   The  certificates  issued  to  the   employees   with
         disbursement  authority will contain the object identifiers for
         both the Electronic Mail policy and the Purchase  policy.   The
         Certificate Policies field may also optionally convey qualifier
         values  for  each  identified  policy;  use  of  qualifiers  is
         discussed below in Section 3.4.




Chokhani                                                        [Page 6]





Internet-Draft                CPF and CPSF                  January 1997


         The  non-critical  Certificate Policies field is designed to be
         used by applications as  follows.   Each  application  is  pre-
         configured  to know what policy it requires.  Using the example
         in Section 3.2, electronic mail applications  and  Web  servers
         will  be configured to require the Electronic Mail policy.  The
         corporate financial applications will be configured to  require
         the Purchase policy for validating financial transactions.

         When processing a certification path, a certificate policy that
         is acceptable to  the  certificate-using  application  must  be
         present   in   every   certificate   in   the  path,  i.e.,  in
         certification authority certificates  as  well  as  end  entity
         certificates.

         If  the  certificate  policies  field  is  flagged critical, it
         serves the same purpose as described  above  but  also  has  an
         additional  role.  It indicates that the use of the certificate
         is restricted to one of  the  identified  policies,  i.e.,  the
         certification  authority is declaring that the certificate must
         not be used for any purpose other than those identified by  the
         certificate   policies.  This  field  is  intended,  first  and
         foremost, to protect the certification authority against damage
         claims by some party who has used the certificate for a purpose
         not defined in the applicable policies.

         For  example,  the  government  might  issue  certificates   to
         taxpayers  for  the  purpose  of  protecting  tax filings.  The
         government  understands  and  can  accommodate  the  risks   of
         accidentally  issuing  a  bad  certificate, e.g., to a wrongly-
         authenticated  person.   However,  suppose   someone   used   a
         government  tax-filing  certificate as the basis for encrypting
         multi-million-dollar-value    proprietary     secrets     which
         subsequently  fell  into the wrong hands because of an error in
         issuing the government certificate.  Would it not  be  possible
         for  the  damaged party to sue the government for issuing a bad
         certificate?  It is this type of situation that  the  critical-
         flagged  Certificate  Policies  extension is intended to avert.
         To provide protection  against  this  type  of  situation,  the
         extension field should always be set critical in a certificate,
         i.e., any  application  using  the  certificate  must  use  the
         certificate  only for the purpose(s) defined by the policies in
         the field.









Chokhani                                                        [Page 7]





Internet-Draft                CPF and CPSF                  January 1997


      3.3.2  Policy Mapping Extension

         The next policy related extension field is the Policy  Mappings
         extension.    This   extension   may   only   be  used  in  CA-
         certificates, i.e., certificates for certification  authorities
         issued  by other certification authorities. This field allows a
         certification authority to indicate that  certain  policies  in
         its  own  domain  can be considered equivalent to certain other
         policies in the subject certification authority's domain.

         For  example,  suppose  the  ACE  Corporation  establishes   an
         agreement  with  the  ABC  Corporation  to  cross-certify  each
         others' public-key infrastructures for the purposes of mutually
         protecting  electronic  data interchange. Further, suppose that
         both  companies   have   pre-existing   financial   transaction
         protection  policies  called ace-e-commerce and abc-e-commerce,
         respectively.   One  can  see  that  simply  generating   cross
         certificates  between  the  two  domains  will  not provide the
         necessary interoperability, as the two companies'  applications
         are  configured  and  employee  certificates are populated with
         their respective certificate policies.  One  possible  solution
         is  to reconfigure all of the financial applications to require
         either policy and to reissue all  the  certificates  with  both
         policies.    Another   solution,   which   is  much  easier  to
         administer, uses the Policy Mapping field.  If  this  field  is
         included  in  a  cross-  certificate  for  the  ABC Corporation
         certification  authority  issued   by   the   ACE   Corporation
         certification  authority,  it  can provide a statement that the
         ABC's financial transaction  protection  policy  (i.e.,  abc-e-
         commerce)  can  be  considered  equivalent  to  that of the ACE
         Corporation (i.e., ace-e- commerce).

      3.3.3  Policy Constraints Extension

         The  Policy  Constraints  extension   supports   two   optional
         features.   The  first  is  the  ability  for  a  certification
         authority to require explicit certificate policy to be  present
         in   all  subsequent  certificates  in  a  certification  path.
         Certificates at the  start  of  a  certification  path  may  be
         considered  by  a  certificate  user  to  be  part of a trusted
         domain, i.e., certification authorities  are  trusted  for  all
         purposes  so  no particular certificate policy is needed in the
         Certificate  Policies  extension.  Whenever   a   certification
         authority  in  the trusted domain certifies outside the domain,
         it should activate  the  requirement  for  explicit  policy  in
         subsequent certificates.

         The  other  optional feature in the Policy Constraints field is



Chokhani                                                        [Page 8]





Internet-Draft                CPF and CPSF                  January 1997


         the ability for a certification  authority  to  disable  policy
         mapping   by   subsequent   certification   authorities   in  a
         certification path.   Unless  special  requirements  arise,  it
         would   be  prudent  to  always  disable  policy  mapping  when
         certifying  outside  the  domain.   This  will  eliminate   the
         increase  in  security  risk  due  to transitive trust. i.e., a
         domain A trusts domain B, domain B trusts domain C,  and  hence
         domain  A trusts domain C even though domain A does not wish to
         trust any other domain except domain B.

   3.4  POLICY QUALIFIERS

      The Certificate Policies  extension  field  has  a  provision  for
      conveying,   along   with   each  certificate  policy  identifier,
      additional policy-dependent information in a qualifier field.  The
      X.509  standard  does not mandate the purpose for which this field
      is to be used, nor does it prescribe the syntax  for  this  field.
      Policy qualifier types can be registered by any organization.

      In  practice,  policy  qualifiers  will not be particularly useful
      unless agreement is reached, outside the standard, on the purposes
      for  which  they  will  be used and on the syntax for representing
      them.  A collection of common qualifier types will likely  emerge.

      Some important purposes currently envisaged for qualifiers are:

         a.   for providing a solid link back to a location from which a
         copy of the full certification  practice  statement  (see  next
         section)  can  be retrieved;  the qualifier will convey a World
         Wide Web URL and a digest field to enable a user to check  that
         the document has been retrieved uncorrupted; and

         b.   for  conveying  textual information comprising appropriate
         legal text, e.g., disclaimer of limitation  of  liability,  for
         display to certificate users whenever certificates are used.

      It   is   anticipated  that  the  IETF  PKIX  Working  Group  will
      standardize these qualifier types.

   3.5  CERTIFICATION PRACTICE STATEMENT

      The  term  certification  practice  statement  derives  from   the
      American  Bar Association (ABA) Digital Signature Guidelines [10].
      (E1) A certification practice statement is defined to be:

         A statement of the practices which  a  certification  authority
         employs in issuing certificates.




Chokhani                                                        [Page 9]





Internet-Draft                CPF and CPSF                  January 1997


      In  the  1995  draft  of  the ABA guidelines, the ABA expands this
      definition with the following comments:

         A certification practice statement  may  take  the  form  of  a
         declaration  by  the  certification authority of the details of
         its trustworthy system and the  practices  it  employs  in  its
         operations  and  in support of issuance of a certificate, or it
         may be a statute or regulation applicable to the  certification
         authority  and covering similar subject matter.  It may also be
         part of the contract between the  certification  authority  and
         the  subscriber. A certification practice statement may also be
         comprised of multiple documents, a combination of  public  law,
         private contract, and/or declaration.

         Certain  forms  for legally implementing certification practice
         statements lend themselves  to  particular  relationships.  For
         example,  when  the  legal relationship between a certification
         authority  and  subscriber  is  consensual,  a  contract  would
         ordinarily  be  the  means  of giving effect to a certification
         practice statement. The certification authority's duties  to  a
         relying   person  are  generally  based  on  the  certification
         authority's representations, which may include a  certification
         practice statement.

         Whether  a  certification  practice  statement  is binding on a
         relying person  depends  on  whether  the  relying  person  has
         knowledge or notice of the certification practice statement.  A
         relying person has knowledge or at least notice of the contents
         of  the  certificate  used  by  the  relying person to verify a
         digital signature, including documents  incorporated  into  the
         certificate   by   reference.  It  is  therefore  advisable  to
         incorporate  a  certification   practice   statement   into   a
         certificate by reference.

            NOTE:    When  the  legal  relationship  is  regulatory, for
            example, between a government and its  citizens,  a  statute
            may  be  the  means  of  giving  effect  to  a certification
            practice statement.

         As much as possible, a certification practice statement  should
         indicate  any  of  the widely recognized standards to which the
         certification  authority's  practices  conform.   Reference  to
         widely   recognized   standards   may  indicate  concisely  the
         suitability of  the  certification  authority's  practices  for
         another   person's   purposes,   as   well   as  the  potential
         technological compatibility of the certificates issued  by  the
         certification authority with repositories and other systems.




Chokhani                                                       [Page 10]





Internet-Draft                CPF and CPSF                  January 1997


   3.6    RELATIONSHIP  BETWEEN  CERTIFICATE  POLICY  AND  CERTIFICATION
   PRACTICE STATEMENT

      The concepts of  certificate  policy  and  certification  practice
      statement  come  from  different  sources  and  were developed for
      different reasons.  However, they are interrelated.  This  section
      describes the relationship between the two.

      A  certification  practice  statement is a detailed statement by a
      certification authority as  to  its  practices,  that  potentially
      needs   to   be   understood  and  consulted  by  subscribers  and
      certificate users (relying parties).  A certificate  policy  is  a
      mutually  understood  indicator  from  certification  authority to
      certificate user as to suitable applications and  purposes  for  a
      particular  certificate.   A certification authority with a single
      certification practice statement may support multiple  certificate
      policies  (used by different certificate user communities).  Also,
      multiple different certification authorities,  with  non-identical
      certification   practice   statements,   may   support   the  same
      certificate policy.

      For example, the Government of Canada might define  a  government-
      wide  certificate policy for handling confidential human resources
      information.  The certificate policy definition will  be  a  broad
      statement  of  the  general  characteristics  of  that certificate
      policy, and an indication of the types of applications  for  which
      it  is  suitable  for use.  Different departments or agencies that
      operate certification  authorities  with  different  certification
      practice statements might support this certificate policy.  At the
      same  time,  such  certification  authorities  may  support  other
      certificate policies.

      In  addition to populating the certificate policies field with the
      certificate  policy  identifier,  a  certification  authority  may
      include,   in   certificates   it   issues,  a  reference  to  its
      certification practice statement.  A  standard  way  to  do  this,
      using a certificate policy qualifier, is described in Section 3.4.

   3.7  CA DISCLOSURE RECORD

      A CA Disclosure Record [9]  is  a  body  of  textual  information,
      intended  to  convey  information about a particular certification
      authority that may be of  some  help  to  a  certificate  user  in
      evaluating  the  suitability  of  a  certificate  issued  by  that
      certification authority.

      The following excerpt from the Utah Administrative  Code  has  the
      following  recommendations  for  the  contents  of a certification



Chokhani                                                       [Page 11]





Internet-Draft                CPF and CPSF                  January 1997


      authority disclosure record:

         1.  an indication that the certification  authority  disclosure
         record is provided and maintained by this state;

         2.  the name, street address, and voice telephone number of the
         certification authority;

         3.  the  telephone  number  of  the  certification  authority's
         facsimile  transmission machine, if the certification authority
         has such a machine;

         4.   the  electronic  mail  or  other  address  by  which   the
         certification authority may be contacted electronically;

         5.  the distinguished name of the certification authority;

         6.   the  current  public  key  or  keys  of  the certification
         authority  by  which  its  digital  signatures   on   published
         certificates may be verified;

         7.   the  restrictions,  if  any,  placed  on the certification
         authorities license pursuant to section 201(3);

         8.  if the certification authority's license has  been  revoked
         or is currently suspended, the data of revocation or suspension
         and the grounds for revocation or suspension;

         9.   the  amount  of  the  certification  authority's  suitable
         guaranty;

         10.  the total amount of all claims filed with the division for
         payment from the suitable guaranty filed by  the  certification
         authority;

         11.  a brief description of any limit known to the division and
         applicable to the certification authority's liability or  legal
         capacity  to  pay  damages  in  tort  or  for  breach of a duty
         prescribed in this document; unless the limitation is specified
         in this document;

         12.   the  categorization  pursuant  to  section  202(2) of the
         certification authority's compliance  with  this  document  and
         resulting  from  the  most  recent  performance  audit  of  the
         certification authority's activities, and the data of the  most
         recent performance audit;

         13.   any  event  which substantially affects the certification



Chokhani                                                       [Page 12]





Internet-Draft                CPF and CPSF                  January 1997


         authority's ability to conduct its business or the validity  of
         a  certificate  published  in  the  repository  provided by the
         Division or in a recognized repository;

         14.  if a certificate containing the  public  key  required  to
         verify  one  or  more  certificates issued by the certification
         authority has been revoked or is currently suspended, the  date
         of its revocation or suspension; and

         15.   if  the  certification  authority has a material, primary
         certification practice statement, indications of its  location,
         the  method or procedure by which it may be retrieved, its form
         and structure, its authorship, and its date, as  prescribed  in
         rule 302.

4.  REFERENCES

   This  document  is  based  on  the  certificate taxonomy developed by
   CygnaCom and documented in [1].  References 2  through  7  have  been
   used to refine the framework.

      1.     Technical    Specifications    for   Federal   Public   Key
      Infrastructure-Annex D:  Interoperability Profiles, (Appendix  E),
      CygnaCom Solutions, Inc., December, 1995.

      2.     Technical    Specifications    for   Federal   Public   Key
      Infrastructure-Annex  B:   Technical  Security  Policy,   National
      Institutes of Standards and Technology, December, 1995.

      3.   Statement  of  Work  Federal Public Key Infrastructure Pilot,
      (Appendix   A-Technical    Specifications),    Solicitation    No.
      52SBN5C8535,  National  Institutes  of  Standards  and Technology,
      October, 1994.

      4.  Information System Security Policy and Certification  Practice
      Statement, National Security Agency, March 12, 1996.

      5.    Government   of   Canada   PKI   -  Certificate  Policy  and
      Certification Practices Statement Framework, November 12, 1996.

      6.  MISSI Policy Analysis, Booz, Allen and Hamilton, March 1996.

      7.  Recommendation X.509 and ISO  9594-8,  Information  Processing
      System   -   Open   Systems  Interconnection  -  The  Directory  -
      Authentication Framework, 1988.

      8.  Final Text of Draft Amendment DAM 4 to ISO/IEC 9594-2,  DAM  2
      to  ISO/IEC  9594-6, DAM 1 to ISO/IEC 9594-7, and DAM 1 to ISO/IEC



Chokhani                                                       [Page 13]





Internet-Draft                CPF and CPSF                  January 1997


      9594-8 on Certificate Extensions, June 1996.

      9. Utah Administrative Code.

      10.  American Bar Association, Digital Signature Guidelines: Legal
      Infrastructure   for   Certification  Authorities  and  Electronic
      Commerce, Draft 1995.

      11.  Baum, Michael S., Federal Certification  Authority  Liability
      and Policy, NIST-GCR-94-654, June 1994.

      12. Certification Practices Statement, Verisign, 1996.

      13. Privacy Enhanced Mail, Internet RFC 1421-23, 1994

5.  CERTIFICATE POLICY AND CERTIFICATION PRACTICES FRAMEWORK: OVERVIEW

   This  section  provides  a  brief  overview of the certificate policy
   components.   Section  6  provides  a  complete  refinement  of   the
   components.   Both the certificate policy and the CPS are composed of
   components described in this section and further refined  in  Section
   6.    Components   can   be   further   divided  into  subcomponents.
   Subcomponents can be divided into elements.  Elements can be  divided
   into subelements.

   A certificate policy or CPS consists of the following components:

      * Community and Applicability

      * Identification and Authentication Policy

      * Key Management Policy

      * Local Security Policy

      * Technical Security Policy

      * Operations Policy

      * Legal Provisions

      * Certificate and CRL Profile

      * Policy Administration

   Each of these components is described below.





Chokhani                                                       [Page 14]





Internet-Draft                CPF and CPSF                  January 1997


   5.1  COMMUNITY AND APPLICABILITY

      Under this component, the following are described:

         *  types of subject CA certified (e.g., subordinate banks, peer
         banks, regional offices, etc.) (2)

         * types of subject Registration Authority (RA) certified (e.g.,
         regional offices)

         *   types   of   end   entities   certified  (e.g.,  employees,
         contractors, subscribers, customers, etc.) (3)

         * applications  for  which  the  policy  is  suitable  for,  is
         restricted to, or must not be used in conjunction with.

   5.2  IDENTIFICATION AND AUTHENTICATION (I&A) POLICY

      This  component  is used to describe the various I&A policies. The
      I&A policies are fundamental to ensuring that the bindings between
      the public keys and the individuals are correct.  The I&A policies
      may  be  the  same  or  different  for  the  subject  CA,  subject
      Registration  Authority  (RA), and subject end entities.  For each
      class of subject (CA, RA, or end entity), the I&A  policy  may  be
      different  for  the  various interactions with the parent CA.  The
      interactions include, initial  registration,  rekey,  rekey  after
      revocation,  and revocation request.  The component also describes
      if and how the trademarks  are  recognized  (authenticated).   The
      component also describes if and how name disputes are resolved.

   5.3  KEY MANAGEMENT POLICY

      This  component  is  used to define the security measures taken by
      the CA to protect its cryptographic  keys  and  critical  security
      parameters  (e.g.,  Personal  Identification Number or PIN).  This
      component may also be used to impose constraints  on  subject  CAs
      and  end entities to protect their cryptographic keys and critical
      security parameters.  For the sake of completeness, for each  type
      of  entity  (issuer  CA,  subject CA, RA, and end entity), and for
      each type of keying material (private key, parameters, public key,
      and  critical  security  parameters)  this  element  addresses the
      entire key life-cycle from generation, through storage and  usage,
      to archival and destruction.

      Secure  key  management  is critical to ensure that all secret and
      private keys and critical security parameters  are  protected  and
      used only by authorized personnel.




Chokhani                                                       [Page 15]





Internet-Draft                CPF and CPSF                  January 1997


   5.4  LOCAL SECURITY POLICY

      This  component  is  used  to  define  the  non-technical security
      controls used by the CA to perform CA functions securely.  The  CA
      functions include key generation, user authentication, certificate
      registration, certificate revocation, audit,  and  archival.   The
      non-technical  security  controls include physical, personnel, and
      procedural controls.

      This component is  also  used  to  define  non-technical  security
      controls on subject CAs, RAs, and end entities.  The non technical
      security controls for the subject CAs, RAs, and end entities could
      be  the same, similar, or quite different.  In most cases they are
      envisioned to be quite different  with  tighter  controls  on  the
      subject  CAs  and RAs due to the sensitivity of the functions they
      perform.

      The security controls are critical  to  trusting  the  public  key
      certificates  since lack of security may compromise CA operations,
      resulting in creation  of  certificates  or  CRLs  with  erroneous
      information or even the compromise of the CA private key.

   5.5  TECHNICAL SECURITY POLICY

      This  component  is used to define the technical security controls
      used by the CA to perform CA functions securely. The CA  functions
      include   key   generation,   user   authentication,   certificate
      registration, certificate revocation, audit,  and  archival.   The
      technical controls include life-cycle security controls (including
      software  development  environment  security,   trusted   software
      development methodology) and operational security controls.

      This  component is also used to define technical security controls
      on subject CAs, RAs, and end  entities.   The  technical  security
      controls  for  the subject CAs, RAs, and end entities could be the
      same,  similar,  or  quite  different.  In  most  cases  they  are
      envisioned  to  be  quite  different  with tighter controls on the
      subject CAs and RAs due to  the  sensitivity  of  the  roles  they
      perform.

      The  security  controls  are  critical  to trusting the public key
      certificates since lack of security may compromise CA  operations,
      resulting  in  the creation of certificates or CRLs with erroneous
      information or even the compromise of the CA private key.







Chokhani                                                       [Page 16]





Internet-Draft                CPF and CPSF                  January 1997


   5.6  OPERATIONS POLICY

      This component is  used  to  describe  the  frequency  of  routine
      Certificate  Revocation  List (CRL) issuance, frequency of special
      CRL issuance (e.g., key compromise CRL), and frequency for CA  key
      changeover.    It   also  describes  how  the  CA  operations  are
      periodically audited by another entity and the  CA's  relationship
      with  that  entity.  This component is also used to define who can
      revoke certificates under what circumstances.

      This component is used to describe periodic compliance audits  the
      CA  performs  on the subject CAs, RAs, and end entities.  Periodic
      compliance audit on subject CAs and RAs is recommended  to  ensure
      compliance   and   to   maintain   trustworthiness  of  the  whole
      infrastructure.  Periodic compliance audit of subject end entities
      is also desirable, but not as critical as the subject CAs.

      This component is also used to define the frequency of routine CRL
      issuance, frequency of special CRL issuance (e.g., key  compromise
      CRL),  and frequency for key changeover for the subject CAs.  This
      component is also used to define the typical validity  period  for
      subject  end entity certificates.  These validity periods could be
      different based on key usage (e.g., signature, key  establishment,
      etc.)

      This  component  is  also  used  to  describe the CA, subject CAs,
      subject RAs, and subject end entities archival policies.

      This component  is  also  used  to  describe  the  procedures  for
      recovering from CA and RA failure and compromise.

      This  component  is also used to define the confidentiality policy
      for the information that the CA and RA hold.

      This  component  is  relevant  for  certificate  policy,  since  a
      compliance  audit  policy increases the overall trustworthiness of
      the infrastructure entities.  The CRL  issuance  frequency  allows
      the  users  of  the  certificate  to  develop  appropriate caching
      strategies.  The key changeover period  in  conjunction  with  key
      size  directly relate to the security offered by the cryptosystem.

   5.7  LEGAL PROVISIONS

      This  component   describes   the   liability   policy   including
      disclaimers of warranty and limitations on liability.

      This  component  also  defines  the obligations of the subscribers
      (subject CA, RA, and end entities) and those  of  the  certificate



Chokhani                                                       [Page 17]





Internet-Draft                CPF and CPSF                  January 1997


      users (relying parties).

      It  also  describes  applicable  laws  and regulations and dispute
      resolution procedures.

   5.8  CERTIFICATE AND CRL PROFILE

      This component is used to define the certificate and CRL  versions
      and extensions supported (populated) by the CA and the criticality
      of the extensions.  This component describes typical values of the
      following fields within the policy constraints extension:  require
      explicit policy, and inhibit policy mapping.

      This component is also used to  define  the  certificate  and  CRL
      versions  and  extensions supported (populated) by the subject CAs
      and the criticality of the extensions.  This  component  describes
      typical   values   of  the  following  fields  within  the  policy
      constraints  extension:   require  explicit  policy,  and  inhibit
      policy mapping.

      The certificate profile could be different for different key usage
      such  as  signature,  key  management,  certificate  signing,  CRL
      signing, etc.

   5.9  POLICY ADMINISTRATION

      This component is used to define the authority that is responsible
      for  the  registration,  maintenance  and  interpretation  of  the
      policy.   The  information  includes  the  name and address of the
      organization, and the name and the telephone number of  a  contact
      person.

      This   component   also   describes   how  the  policy  change  is
      administered  and  how   various   notices   are   published   and
      distributed.

      This component also describes how the compliance of a specific CPS
      with the policy is determined.

6.   CERTIFICATE   POLICY   AND   CERTIFICATION   PRACTICES   FRAMEWORK:
DESCRIPTION

   In  this section, we provide a complete refinement of the certificate
   policy and certification practices statement framework.







Chokhani                                                       [Page 18]





Internet-Draft                CPF and CPSF                  January 1997


   6.1  COMMUNITY AND APPLICABILITY

      This component consists of the following subcomponents:

         * Subject CAs

         * Subject RAs

         * Subject End Entities

         * Applicability
      This  component  describes  the  various  types   of   certificate
      subscribers, and applications and standards.

      The following sections describe these subcomponents.

      6.1.1  Subject CAs

         This  subcomponent contains a brief description of the types of
         entities that are certified as subject CAs. (4)

      6.1.2  Subject RAs

         This subcomponent contains a brief description of the types  of
         entities that are certified as subject RAs. (5)

      6.1.3  Subject End Entities

         This  subcomponent contains a brief description of the types of
         entities that are certified as end entities. (6)

      6.1.4  Applicability

         This subcomponent contains:

            * A list of applications for which the  issued  certificates
            are suitable

            *  A  list  of applications that the issued certificates are
            restricted to.  (This list implicitly  prohibits  all  other
            uses for the certificates.)

            *  A  list  of applications that the issued certificates are
            prohibited from being used for







Chokhani                                                       [Page 19]





Internet-Draft                CPF and CPSF                  January 1997


   6.2  IDENTIFICATION AND AUTHENTICATION (I&A) POLICY

      This component contains the I&A policies for subject CAs,  subject
      RAs,  and  subject end entities.  These policies could be the same
      or different for each of these entities.

         * Initial Registration

         * Routine Rekey

         * Rekey After Revocation

         * Revocation Request

      6.2.1  Initial Registration

         This subcomponent contains the following:

            * Identification and authentication policy for each  subject
            type (CA, RA, and end entity) for initial registration

            * Types of names assigned to the subject (7)

            * Whether names have to be meaningful or not (8)

            * Rules for interpreting various name forms

            * Whether names have to be unique

            * How name claim disputes are resolved

            * Whether trademarks are recognized or not

            * How trademarks are authenticated

            * What role trademarks play in naming and identification and
            authentication

            * If and how the subject must prove that (s)he possesses the
            companion  private  key  for the public key being registered
            (9)

            * Authentication requirements for organizational identity of
            subject (CA, RA, or end entity) (10)

            *  Authentication requirements for a person acting on behalf
            of subject (CA, RA, or end entity) (11)




Chokhani                                                       [Page 20]





Internet-Draft                CPF and CPSF                  January 1997


            * Number of identifications required

            * How a CA or RA validates the identification cards provided

            *  If  the person must present himself to the authenticating
            CA or RA

            *  How  an  individual  as  an  organizational   person   is
            authenticated (12)

      6.2.2  Routine Rekey

         This subcomponent contains the I&A policy for routine rekey for
         each subject type (CA, RA, and end entity). (13)

      6.2.3  Rekey After Revocation -- No Key Compromise

         This subcomponent is used to describe the I&A policy for  rekey
         for  each  subject  type  (CA,  RA,  and  end entity) after the
         subject certificate has been revoked. (14)

      6.2.4  Revocation Request

         This subcomponent is  used  to  describe  the  I&A  policy  for
         revocation  request  by  each  subject  type  (CA,  RA, and end
         entity). (16)

   6.3  KEY MANAGEMENT POLICY

      This component consists of the key  management  policies  for  the
      following  entities:  issuing  CA,  subject  CAs, subject RAs, and
      subject end entities.  These four sets of policies  could  be  the
      same or different.

      6.3.1  Public and Private Key Pair

         The  key  management  policies for the issuing CA, subject CAs,
         Subject RAs, and subject end entities address the entire  life-
         cycle  of  the  public  and  private  key  pair from generation
         through archival and destruction.  For each of these  types  of
         entities  (issuing  CA,  subject  CA,  subject  RA, subject end
         entity) the following questions should be answered:

            6.3.1.1  Key Pair Generation and Installation

               1. Who generates the entity public, private key pair?

               2. How is  the  private  key  provided  securely  to  the



Chokhani                                                       [Page 21]





Internet-Draft                CPF and CPSF                  January 1997


               entity?

               3.  How  is  the entity's public key provided securely to
               the certificate issuer?

               4. If the entity is a CA (issuing or subject) how is  the
               entity's public key provided securely to the users?

               5. What are the key sizes?

               6. Who generates the public key parameters?

               7.  Is  the  quality of the parameters checked during key
               generation?

               8.  Is  the  key  generation  performed  in  hardware  or
               software?

               9.  For what purposes may the key be used (these purposes
               should be same as the key usage flags in the  Version  3,
               X.509 certificates)?

               10.  For  what  purposes  may  the key must be restricted
               to(these purposes should be same as the key  usage  flags
               in  the  Version  3, X.509 certificates and the key usage
               field must be marked criical)?

               11. What standards, if any, are required for  the  module
               used  to  generate  the  keys?  For example, are the keys
               certified by the infrastructure required to be  generated
               using  modules complaint with the US FIPS 140-1?  If yes,
               what is the security level of the module?

            6.3.1.2  Private Key Protection

               1. Is the private key  under  n  out  of  m  multi-person
               control?(18)  If yes, provide n and m (two person control
               is a special case of n out of m, where n = m = 2)?

               2. Is the private key escrowed? (19) If so,  who  is  the
               escrow  agent, what form is the key escrowed in (examples
               include plaintext, encrypted, split key),  and  what  are
               the security controls on the escrow system?

               3.  Is  the  private  key  backed  up?  If so, who is the
               backup agent, what form is the key backed up in (examples
               include  plaintext,  encrypted,  split key), and what are
               the security controls on the backup system?



Chokhani                                                       [Page 22]





Internet-Draft                CPF and CPSF                  January 1997


               4. Is the private  key  archived?   If  so,  who  is  the
               archival   agent,  what  form  is  the  key  archived  in
               (examples include plaintext, encrypted, split  key),  and
               what are the security controls on the archival system?

               5.  Who  enters  the  private  key  in  the cryptographic
               module?  In what form  (i.e.,  plaintext,  encrypted,  or
               split key)?

               6.  How  is  the  private key stored in the module (i.e.,
               plaintext, encrypted, or split key)?

               7. Who can activate (use) the private key?  What  actions
               must  be  performed  to  activate  the private key (e.g.,
               login, power on, supply PIN, insert token/key, automatic,
               etc.)?   Once the key is activated, is the key active for
               an indefinite period, active for one time, or active  for
               a defined time period?

               8.  Who  can deactivate the private key and how?  Example
               of how include,  logout,  power  off,  remove  token/key,
               automatic, time expiration, etc.

               9.  Who can destroy the private key and how?  Examples of
               how  include  token  surrender,  token  destruction,  key
               overwrite, etc.

            6.3.1.3  Other Aspects of Key Pair Management

               1.  Is  the  public  key  archived?   If  so,  who is the
               archival agent and what are the security controls on  the
               archival  system?   The  archival  system  should provide
               integrity controls other than digital  signatures  since:
               the archival period may be greater than the cryptanalysis
               period for  the  key  and  the  archive  requires  tamper
               protection,  which is not provided by digital signatures.

               2. What are the validity periods for the public  and  the
               private key respectively?












Chokhani                                                       [Page 23]





Internet-Draft                CPF and CPSF                  January 1997


      6.3.2  Critical Security Parameters (20)

         The  key  management  policies for the issuing CA, subject CAs,
         Subject RAs, and subject end entities address the entire  life-
         cycle  of  the  critical  security  parameters  from generation
         through archival and destruction.  For each of these  types  of
         entities  (issuing  CA,  subject  CA,  subject  RA, subject end
         entity) the following questions should be answered:

            6.3.2.1   Critical   Security   Parameter   Generation   and
            Installation

               1.   Who   generates   the   initial   critical  security
               parameters?

               2. How are  the  critical  security  parameters  provided
               securely to the entity?

               3.  What  are  the  size  requirements  on the parameters
               (e.g., PIN size, password size, etc.)?

            6.3.2.2  Critical Security Parameter Protection

               1. Are the parameters stored in  a  token  (e.g.,  crypto
               ignition key)?

               2.  Are  the  parameters  under  n  out of m multi-person
               control?  If yes, provide n and m (two person control  is
               a special case of n out of m, where n = m = 2).

               3. Are the parameters escrowed?  If so, who is the escrow
               agent, what form are the parameters escrowed in (examples
               include  plaintext,  encrypted,  split key), and what are
               the security controls on the escrow system?

               4. Are the parameters backed  up?   If  so,  who  is  the
               backup  agent,  what form are the parameters backed up in
               (examples include plaintext, encrypted, split  key),  and
               what are the security controls on the backup system?

               5.  Are  the  parameters  archived?   If  so,  who is the
               archival agent, what form are the parameters archived  in
               (examples  include  plaintext, encrypted, split key), and
               what are the security controls on the archival system?

            6.3.2.3  Other Aspects of Critical Security Parameters

               1. Who enters the parameters in the cryptographic module?



Chokhani                                                       [Page 24]





Internet-Draft                CPF and CPSF                  January 1997


               In  what form (i.e., plaintext, encrypted, or split key)?

               2. How are the parameters used in the module  (e.g.,  for
               authentication  and  private  key activation, private key
               decryption and activation, etc.)?

               3. What is the recommended life for the parameters?

               4.  Who can change the parameters?

   6.4  LOCAL SECURITY POLICY

      This component consists of four security  policies  for  the  four
      types  of  entities:   one for the issuer CA, one for subject CAs,
      one for the subject RAs, and one for  subject  end-entities.   The
      following  sections  describe  the  items  required for these four
      security policies:

         * Physical Controls

         * Procedural Controls

         * Personnel Controls

      6.4.1  Physical Controls

         The physical  controls  on  the  facility  housing  the  entity
         systems are described.(21)

      6.4.2  Procedural Controls

         The  procedural  controls  for  the entity are described. These
         controls include the description of various trusted  roles  and
         responsibilities for each of the roles.(22)

         For  each of these roles, n out m rules should be defined, i.e.
         define how many  people  are  required  to  perform  the  task.
         Identification  and  authentication  requirements for each role
         must also be defined.












Chokhani                                                       [Page 25]





Internet-Draft                CPF and CPSF                  January 1997


      6.4.3  Personnel Controls

         This subcomponent contains the following:

            * Background checks and clearance  procedures  required  for
            the personnel filling the trusted roles (23)

            *  Background  checks  and clearance procedures requirements
            for other personnel (24)

            * Training requirements and  training  procedures  for  each
            role

            *  Any  retraining period and retraining procedures for each
            role

            * Frequency and sequence  for  job  rotation  among  various
            roles

            *  Sanctions  against  personnel  for  unauthorized actions,
            unauthorized use  of  authority,  and  unauthorized  use  of
            entity systems (25)

            *  Controls  on  the contracting personnel for operating the
            entity system and facility

               - Bonding requirements on contract personnel

               - Contractual requirements including indemnification  for
               damages due to the actions of the contractor personnel

               - Audit and monitoring of contractor personnel

               - Other controls on contracting personnel

   6.5  TECHNICAL SECURITY POLICY

      This  component  consists  of four technical security policies for
      the four types of entities: one for the issuer CA, one for subject
      CAs,   one for the subject RAs, and one for subject end- entities.
      The following sections describe the items required for these  four
      technical security policies:

         * Computer Security Controls

         * Life-Cycle Security Controls

         * Network Security Controls



Chokhani                                                       [Page 26]





Internet-Draft                CPF and CPSF                  January 1997


         * Cryptographic Module Engineering Controls

         * Computer Security Assurance

         * Life-Cycle Assurance

         * Cryptographic Assurance

      6.5.1  Computer Security Controls

         This   subcomponent  is  used  to  describe  computer  security
         controls.  Examples of computer security controls are:  trusted
         computing  base  concept, discretionary access control, labels,
         mandatory access controls, object reuse, audit,  identification
         and authentication, trusted path, security testing, penetration
         testing, etc.

      6.5.2  Life Cycle Security Controls

         This  subcomponent  is  used  to  describe  system  development
         controls and security management controls.

         System  development  controls  include  development environment
         security,   development   personnel   security,   configuration
         management   security   during  product  maintenance,  software
         engineering  practices,   software   development   methodology,
         modularity,  layering,  use of Fail-Safe design techniques, use
         of  Fail-Safe  implementation   techniques   (e.g.,   defensive
         programming) and development facility security.

         Security  management  controls  include  execution of tools and
         procedures to ensure that the operational systems and  networks
         adhere  to  configured  security.   These  tools and procedures
         include  checking  the  integrity  of  the  security  software,
         firmware, and hardware to ensure their correct operation.

      6.5.3  Network Security Controls

         This  subcomponent is used to describe network security related
         controls for the system.  Examples of network security controls
         are: firewalls, guards, etc.










Chokhani                                                       [Page 27]





Internet-Draft                CPF and CPSF                  January 1997


      6.5.4  Cryptographic Module Engineering Controls (26)

         This   subcomponent  contains  the  following  aspects  of  the
         cryptographic  module:  identification  of  the   cryptographic
         module boundary, input/output, roles and services, finite state
         machine, physical security, software security, operating system
         security,  algorithm compliance, electromagnetic compatibility,
         key management, and self tests.

      6.5.5  Computer Security Assurance

         This subcomponent is used to  describe  the  computer  security
         rating  for  the computer system.  The rating could be based on
         the  Trusted  System  Evaluation  Criteria  (TCSEC),   Canadian
         Trusted  Products  Evaluation  Criteria,  European  Information
         Technology  Security  Evaluation  Criteria,   or   the   Common
         Criteria.

         This  subcomponent  is  also  used  to  describe the evaluation
         analysis,    testing,    profiling,    certification,    and/or
         accreditation related activity undertaken.

      6.5.6  Life-Cycle Assurance

         This  subcomponent  is used to describe the life-cycle security
         controls  rating  such  as  the  Trusted  Software  Development
         Methodology (TSDM) level, IV&V, independent life-cycle security
         controls audit, and Software Engineering Institute's Capability
         Maturity Model (SEI-CMM).

      6.5.7  Cryptographic Assurance

         This   subcomponent  is  used  to  describe  the  cryptographic
         module's compliance with applicable standards  (e.g.,  US  FIPS
         140-1). (27)

   6.6  OPERATIONS POLICY

      The operations policy is used to describe the operating procedures
      for the issuing CA, subject CAs,  subject  RAs,  and  subject  end
      entities.   Each  operations  policy  consists  of  the  following
      subcomponents:

         * revocation policy

         * key compromise policy

         * audit policy



Chokhani                                                       [Page 28]





Internet-Draft                CPF and CPSF                  January 1997


         * archive policy

         * key changeover policy

         * recovery procedures

         * compliance audit

         * non-disclosure policy.  The subject end  entity  policy  does
         not contains the non-disclosure policy subcomponent.

      6.6.1  Revocation Policy

         This subcomponent contains the following:

            *  Circumstances  under  which the entity certificate may be
            revoked

            * Who can request the revocation of the entity certificate

            * Procedures used for certificate revocation request

            * Revocation request grace period available to the entity

            * Circumstances under which the entity  certificate  may  be
            suspended (held)

            *  Who  can  request  the  suspension  (hold)  of the entity
            certificate

            * Procedures used for certificate suspension (hold) request

            * How long the suspension may last

            * CRL issuance frequency by the entity

            * Requirements on the entity to check CRLs

            * On-line revocation checks available

            * Requirements on the entity to perform  on-line  revocation
            checks

            * Other forms of revocation advertisements available

            *  Requirements  on  the  entity  to  checks  other forms of
            revocation advertisements




Chokhani                                                       [Page 29]





Internet-Draft                CPF and CPSF                  January 1997


      6.6.2  Key Compromise Policy

         This subcomponent is used to describe the following:

            * Procedures used by the entity to report key compromise

            * Key compromise notification grace period available to  the
            entity

            * Key compromise CRL issuance frequency by the entity

            * Requirements on the entity to check key compromise CRL

      6.6.3  Audit Policy

         This subcomponent is used to describe the following:

            * Types of events the entity audits (28)

            * Frequency with which each event is audited

            * Period for which audit logs are kept

            * Protection of audit logs

               - Who can view the audit log

               - Protection against modification of audit log

               - Protection against deletion of audit log

            * Audit log back up procedures

            *  Whether  the  audit  collection  system  is  internal  or
            external to the entity

            * Whether the subject who caused an audit event to occur  is
            notified of the audit action













Chokhani                                                       [Page 30]





Internet-Draft                CPF and CPSF                  January 1997


      6.6.4  Archive Policy

         This subcomponent is used to describe the following:

            * Types of event to be archived (29)

            * Retention period for archive

            * Protection of archive

               - Who can view the archive

               - Protection against modification of archive

               - Protection against deletion of archive

            * Archive back up procedures

            *  Whether  the  archive  collection  system  is internal or
            external to the entity

            * Archive custodian in case of entity termination

            * Procedures to obtain and verify archive information

      6.6.5  Key Changeover

         This subcomponent contains the following:

            * Entity public key validity period

            * Procedures to provide the new entity  public  key  to  the
            users

      6.6.6  Recovery Procedures

         This  subcomponent  is  used  to describe the disaster recovery
         procedures for the entity.

         This subcomponent also contains the recovery procedures used by
         the entity under each of the following circumstances:

            *  The  recovery  procedures  used  if  the entity computing
            resources, software, and/or data are corrupted or  suspected
            to  be  corrupted.   These  procedures describe how a secure
            environment is reestablished, which certificates and CRL are
            revoked,  whether  the  entity  key  is revoked, how the new
            entity public key is provided to  the  users,  and  how  the



Chokhani                                                       [Page 31]





Internet-Draft                CPF and CPSF                  January 1997


            subjects are recertified.

            *  The  recovery procedures used if the entity public key is
            revoked.  These procedures describe how a secure environment
            is  reestablished, how the new entity public key is provided
            to the users, and how the subjects are recertified.

            *  The  recovery  procedures  used  if  the  entity  key  is
            compromised.    These   procedures  describe  how  a  secure
            environment is reestablished, how the new entity public  key
            is   provided  to  the  users,  and  how  the  subjects  are
            recertified.

      6.6.7  Compliance Audit

         This subcomponent contains the following:

            * Frequency of compliance audit for the entity

            * Identity of the audit entity

            * Auditing entity's relationship to the entity being audited
            (30)

            * List of topics covered under the compliance audit(31)

            *  Actions  taken  as  a result of a deficiency found during
            compliance audit (32)

            * Compliance audit results: who are they shared with  (e.g.,
            subject  CA,  RA,  and/or  end  entities), who provides them
            (e.g., entity being  audited,  or  auditor),  how  are  they
            provided, i.e., communication mechanism

      6.6.8  Non-disclosure Policy

         This subcomponent contains the following:

            * Information that must be kept confidential by the entity

            *  Who  is entitled to know what in terms of the reasons for
            revocation and suspension of the certificates issued by  the
            entity

            *  Who  is entitled to know what in terms of the reasons for
            revocation and suspension requested by the entity

            * Information that can be revealed to  the  law  enforcement



Chokhani                                                       [Page 32]





Internet-Draft                CPF and CPSF                  January 1997


            personnel

            *  Information  that  can  be  revealed  as  part  of  civil
            discovery

            *  List  of  other  mitigating  circumstances  under   which
            confidential information may be disclosed

   6.7  LEGAL PROVISIONS

      The  legal provisions include the following subcomponents for each
      of the four types  of  the  entities  (issuing  CA,  subject  CAs,
      subject RAs, and subject end entities):

         * Entity Liability Policy

         * Entity Obligations

         * Certificate User (Relying Party) Obligations

         * Financial Responsibility

         * Laws and Procedures

         * Fees

      The subject end entities only contain the following subcomponents:
      entity liability policy, entity obligations.

      6.7.1  Entity Liability Policy

         This subcomponent contains the following:

            * Warranties and disclaimers of warranties

            * Liabilities and limitations on liabilities

      6.7.2  Entity Obligations

         This subcomponent contains the following:

            *   Entity's   obligations   in   terms   of   accuracy   of
            representation

            * Obligations of the entity to protect the private key

            *  Purpose for which the entity's private key is constrained
            to be used for



Chokhani                                                       [Page 33]





Internet-Draft                CPF and CPSF                  January 1997


            * Entity's obligations for notification  of  issuance  of  a
            certificate  to  the  subscriber  who  is the subject of the
            certificate being issued

            * Entity's general obligations for notification of  issuance
            of   a  certificate  to  others  than  the  subject  of  the
            certificate

            * Entity's obligations for notification of revocation  of  a
            certificate  to  the  subscriber  whose certificate is being
            revoked

            *  Entity's  general   obligations   for   notification   of
            revocation of a certificate to others than the subject whose
            certificate is being revoked

            * Entity's obligations for notification of suspension  of  a
            certificate  to  the  subscriber  whose certificate is being
            suspended

            *  Entity's  general   obligations   for   notification   of
            suspension of a certificate to others than the subject whose
            certificate is being suspended

      6.7.3  Certificate User (Relying Party) Obligations

         This subcomponent contains the following elements:

            *  Purposes  for  which  a  relying  party   may   use   the
            certificates issued by the entity

            *  Certificate  verification responsibilities of the relying
            parties

            * Revocation and suspension checking responsibilities of the
            relying parties

      6.7.4  Financial Responsibility

         This subcomponent contains the following elements:

            *  Indemnification  clause for the entity by the certificate
            users

            * Fiduciary relationship of the entity with subscribers  and
            entities in the infrastructure





Chokhani                                                       [Page 34]





Internet-Draft                CPF and CPSF                  January 1997


      6.7.5  Laws and Procedures

         This subcomponent contains the following elements:

            * Statement about applicable laws and regulations

            * Dispute resolution procedures

      6.7.6  Fees

         This subcomponent contains the following elements:

            * Certificate issuance fee

            * Certificate access fee

            * Revocation information access fee

            *  Fee  for  other  services such as the certificate status,
            policy information, etc.

            * Refund policy for the various services

   6.8  CERTIFICATE AND CRL PROFILES

      This component is used to define the certificate and CRL  versions
      and  extensions  supported  (populated)  by the issuing CA and the
      subject CAs.  This component contains the following information:

      * Certificate Profile

      * CRL Profile

      6.8.1  Certificate Profile

         This subcomponent has the  following  information:  certificate
         version, naming, policy related information.

            6.8.1.1  Certificate Version

            This subcomponent has the following elements:

               * A list of version numbers supported for the certificate

               * A list of certificate  profiles  (e.g.,  PKIX,  Federal
               PKI, or ANSI X9.57, etc.)

               * Certificate extensions populated and their criticality.



Chokhani                                                       [Page 35]





Internet-Draft                CPF and CPSF                  January 1997


               * Signature,  key  management,  and  other  cryptographic
               algorithms object identifiers

            6.8.1.2  Naming

            This subcomponent has the following elements:

               * Name forms used for the CA, RA, and end entity names

               *  Name  constraints  used and the name forms used in the
               name constraints

            6.8.1.3  Policy

            This subcomponent has the following elements:

               * Applicable policy OID for this policy

               * Typical values for  the  following  fields  within  the
               policy constraints extension: require explicit policy and
               inhibit policy mapping

               *  Policy  qualifiers  syntax,   semantics,   and   their
               processing semantics

               *  Processing  semantics  for  the  critical  certificate
               policy extension

      6.8.2  CRL Profile

         This subcomponent has the following elements:

            * A list of the version numbers supported for CRLs

            *  CRL  and  CRL  entry  extensions  populated   and   their
            criticality

   6.9  POLICY ADMINISTRATION

      This component is used to define the authority that is responsible
      for the  registration,  maintenance,  and  interpretation  of  the
      policy.









Chokhani                                                       [Page 36]





Internet-Draft                CPF and CPSF                  January 1997


      6.9.1  Contact Information

         This  subcomponent  includes  the  name, mailing address of the
         organization, and the name, electronic mail address,  telephone
         number,  and fax number of a contact person.  It also describes
         who performs the analysis of a CPS to determine its suitability
         as an implementation vehicle for the policy.

      6.9.2  Policy Definition and Practice Statement Change Procedures

         It   will  occasionally  be  necessary  to  change  certificate
         policies and Certification Practice Statements.  Some of  these
         changes will not change the assurance that a certificate policy
         or its implementation provide, and will be judged by the policy
         administrator as not changing the acceptability of certificates
         asserting the policy for the purposes for which they have  been
         used.   Such  changes  to  security  policies and Certification
         Practice Statements need not require a  change  in  the  policy
         Object  Identifier  (OID).   Changes to other policy components
         (or their implementations) will  change  the  acceptability  of
         certificates  for  specific  purposes,  and  these changes will
         require changes to the OID representing the changed policy.

         This subcomponent contains the following information:

            * a list of policy or  CPS  components,  subcomponents,  and
            elements  that  can  be  changed  without  notification  and
            without changes to the policy OID.

            * a list of the policy or CPS components, subcomponents, and
            elements  that  may  change  following a notification period
            without changing the policy OID.  The procedures to be  used
            to notify interested parties (relying parties, certification
            authorities,  etc.)  of  the  policy  or  CPS   changes   is
            described.    The  description  of  notification  procedures
            includes the notification mechanism, notification period for
            comments,  mechanism  to receive, review and incorporate the
            comments, mechanism for final changes to the policy, and the
            period before final changes become effective.

            *  a list of components, subcomponents, and elements changes
            to which require a change in the policy object identifier.









Chokhani                                                       [Page 37]





Internet-Draft                CPF and CPSF                  January 1997


      6.9.3  Publication and Notification Policies

         This subcomponent contains the following elements:

            * list of components, subcomponents, and elements  that  are
            not published in the CPS(33)

            *  descriptions of mechanisms used to distribute the policy,
            CPS, certificates, certificate status, and CRLs

            *  access  control  on  information  objects  including  the
            policy, CPS, certificates, certificate status, and CRLs

            *  notification  procedures  for the security breaches of CA
            and RA

            *   procedures   for   termination   and   for   termination
            notification of the CA and RA, including the identity of the
            custodian of CA and RA archival records

7. CERTIFICATE POLICY AND CPS OUTLINE

This appendix contains a possible outline for a certificate policy or  a
CPS.   With  further development, it is intended to evolve to a standard
template suitable for use by certificate policy or CPS writers.  Such  a
common format will facilitate:

   1. ease in comparing two policies during cross-certification (for the
   purpose of equivalency mapping).

   2. ease in comparing a CPS with a  policy  to  ensure  that  the  CPS
   faithfully implements the policy.

   3. ease in comparing two CPS for equivalency.

Following  is  the  proposed  outline  for  a certificate policy or CPS.
Since a certificate policy and a CPS both address the same issues (a CPS
is  a  detailed  description  of how a policy is implemented), we expect
that they both should be able to use the same outline.

It is proposed that the upper two levels of this outline form the  basis
of a certificate policy or CPS template.  Lower level items constitute a
useful checklist for the certificate or CPS writer, but would  not  form
part of the template.

COMMUNITY AND APPLICABILITY

   Types of CAs certified



Chokhani                                                       [Page 38]





Internet-Draft                CPF and CPSF                  January 1997


   Types of RAs certified

   Types of end entities certified

   Applicability

      List of suitable applications

      List of approved applications

      List of prohibited applications

IDENTIFICATION AND AUTHENTICATION (34)

   Initial registration

      Types of names

      Need for names to be meaningful

      Rules for interpreting various name forms

      Uniqueness of names

      Name claim dispute resolution procedure

      Recognition, authentication and role of trademarks in I&A

      Method to prove possession of private key

      Authentication of organization identity

      Authentication of individual identity

         Number of identifications required

         Authentication confirmation procedure

         Need to present in person

   Routine Rekey

      Authentication method

      Method to prove possession of private key

   Rekey after revocation




Chokhani                                                       [Page 39]





Internet-Draft                CPF and CPSF                  January 1997


      Authentication method

      Method to prove possession of private key

   Revocation Request

      Authentication method

KEY MANAGEMENT (34)

   Key Pair Generation and Installation

      Key pair generating entity

      Method for private key delivery to entity

      Method for public key delivery to certificate issuer

      Method for CA public key delivery to users

      Key sizes

      Public key parameters generating entity

      Parameter quality checking

      Hardware/software key generation

      Key usage purposes (as per X.509 v3 key usage field)

      Key usage restrictions (as per X.509 v3 critical key usage field)

      Standards for cryptographic module

   Private Key Protection

      Private key under (n out of m) multi-person control

      Private key escrow

      Private key backup

      Private key archival

      Private key entry into cryptographic module

      Storage form of the private key in the module




Chokhani                                                       [Page 40]





Internet-Draft                CPF and CPSF                  January 1997


      Method of activating private key

      Method of deactivating private key

      Method of destroying private key

   Other Aspects of Key Pair Management

      Public key archival

      Usage periods for the public and private keys

   Critical Security Parameters Generation and Installation

      Critical security parameter generating entity

      Method for delivery of critical security parameters

      Critical security parameter sizes

   Critical Security Parameter Protection

      Storage medium for critical security parameters

      Critical  security  parameters  under  (n  out  of m) multi-person
      control

      Critical security parameters escrow

      Critical security parameters backup

      Critical security parameters archival

   Other Aspects of Critical Security Parameters

      Critical security parameters entry into cryptographic module

      Critical security parameters purpose

      Usage periods for critical security parameters

      Changes to critical security parameters

LOCAL SECURITY POLICY (34)

   Physical controls

   Procedural controls



Chokhani                                                       [Page 41]





Internet-Draft                CPF and CPSF                  January 1997


      Separation of duties

      n out of m rule for each role

      I&A requirement for each role

   Personnel Controls

      Clearance procedures

      Training requirements

      Retraining period and requirements

      Job rotation frequency and sequence

      Sanctions for unauthorized use

      Contracting personnel

         Bonding requirements

         Indemnification for damages due to contractor

         Audit and monitoring of contractor personnel

         Other controls

TECHNICAL SECURITY POLICY (34)

   Computer security controls

      Trusted Computing Base

      Identification and Authentication

      Discretionary Access Controls

      Labels

      Mandatory Access Controls

      Object Reuse

      Audit

      Trusted Path




Chokhani                                                       [Page 42]





Internet-Draft                CPF and CPSF                  January 1997


      Security Testing

      Penetration Testing

   Life cycle technical controls

      System development controls

         Development environment security

         Development personnel security

         Configuration management

         Development facility physical controls

         Software engineering practices

         Software development methodology

         Modularity

         Layering

         Fail-Safe Design

         Fail-Safe Implementation

      Security management controls

         Procedures

         Tools

         Software Integrity

         Firmware Integrity

         Hardware Integrity

   Network security controls

      firewalls and guard

      firewall and guard policy

      firewall and guard security rating




Chokhani                                                       [Page 43]





Internet-Draft                CPF and CPSF                  January 1997


   Crypto Engineering Controls

      input/output

      roles and services

      finite state machine

      physical security

      software security

      operating system security

      algorithm compliance

      electromagnetic compatibility

      key management

      self tests

   Computer Security Assurance

      standard

      rating organization

      accreditation of rating organization

      rating

      Evaluation analysis

      Security testing

      System security profiling

      System certification and/or accreditation

   Life-cycle Security Assurance

      TSDM level,  rating  organization,  and  accreditation  of  rating
      organization

      IV&V

      Independent life-cycle security controls audit



Chokhani                                                       [Page 44]





Internet-Draft                CPF and CPSF                  January 1997


      SEI  CMM  level,  rating organization, and accreditation of rating
      organization

   Cryptographic Module Assurance

      standard

      rating organization

      accreditation of rating organization

      rating

OPERATIONS POLICY (34)
   Revocation

      When can entity (CA, RA, or end entity) certificate be revoked

      Who can request revocation of entity certificate

      Procedure for entity certificate revocation

      Revocation request grace period

      When can the entity certificate be suspended (put on hold)

      Who can request the entity certificate suspension

      Procedures for entity certificate suspension request

      Length of suspension

      CRL issuance frequency by the entity (if applicable)

      CRL check requirement on the entity

      On-line revocation checks available

      Requirements on the entity to perform on-line revocation checks

      Other forms of revocation advertisements available

      Requirements on the entity to  check  other  forms  of  revocation
      advertisements

   Key compromise

      Procedure used by the entity to report key compromise



Chokhani                                                       [Page 45]





Internet-Draft                CPF and CPSF                  January 1997


      Key compromise notification grace period

      Key compromise CRL issuance by the entity (if applicable)

      Requirement on the entity to check key compromise CRL

   Audit policy

      Types of event to be audited

      Frequency with which each event is audited

      Retention period for audit log

      Protection of audit log

         Who can view the audit log

         Protection against modification of audit log

         Protection against deletion of audit log

      Audit log back up procedures

      Audit collection system (internal or external to the entity)

      Notification to audit causing subject

   Archive policy

      Types of event to be archived

      Retention period for archive

      Protection of archive

         Who can view the archive

         Protection against modification of archive

         Protection against deletion of archive

      Archive back up procedures

      Archive collection system (internal or external to the entity)

      Archive custodian in case of entity termination




Chokhani                                                       [Page 46]





Internet-Draft                CPF and CPSF                  January 1997


      Procedures to obtain and verify archive information

   Key changeover

      Public key validity period

      Procedures to provide new key to users

   Recovery procedures

      Disaster recovery procedures

      Recovery from entity resources corruption

      Recovery from entity public key revocation (no key compromise)

      Recovery from entity private key compromise

   Compliance audit

      Frequency of entity compliance audit

      Entity's relationship to the auditor

      Topic covered by the audit

      Actions taken as a result of deficiency

      Entities who are provided the results of compliance audit

      Entity who provides the results of compliance audit

      Mechanism used to provide results of compliance audit

   Non-disclosure policy

      Information to be kept confidential by the entity

      Disclosure   rules   (who   can  be  told  what)  for  reasons  of
      revocation/suspension of certificates

      Information that can be revealed to the law enforcement personnel

      Information that can be revealed as part of civil discovery

      Mitigating circumstances  when  confidential  information  may  be
      disclosed




Chokhani                                                       [Page 47]





Internet-Draft                CPF and CPSF                  January 1997


LEGAL PROVISIONS

   Certification Authority

      Liability

         Warranties and disclaimers of warranties

         Liabilities and limitations on liabilities

      CA obligations

         Accuracy of representations

         Protection of issuing CA private key

         Restrictions on issuing CA private key use

         Notification of issuance of a certificate to the subject of the
         certificate

         Notification of issuance of a certificate to others

         Notification of revocation of a certificate to the  subject  of
         the certificate

         Notification of revocation of a certificate to others

         Notification  of  suspension of a certificate to the subject of
         the certificate

         Notification of suspension of a certificate to others

      Certificate user obligations

         Use of certificates for appropriate purpose

         Certificate verification responsibilities

         Revocation/suspension check responsibility

      Financial responsibility

         Indemnification of issuing CA by certificate users

         Fiduciary relationships of the issuing CA

      Laws and procedures



Chokhani                                                       [Page 48]





Internet-Draft                CPF and CPSF                  January 1997


         Applicable laws and regulations

         Dispute resolution procedures

      Fees

         Certificate issuance fee

         Certificate access fee

         Revocation information access fee

         Fee for other services such as the certificate  status,  policy
         information, etc.

         Refund policy for the various services.

   Registration Authority

      Liability

         Warranties and disclaimers of warranties

         Liabilities and limitations on liabilities

      Subject RA obligations

         Accuracy of representations

         Protection of RA private key

         Restrictions on RA private key use

      Certificate user obligations

         Use of certificates for appropriate purpose

         Certificate verification responsibilities

         Revocation/suspension check responsibility

      Financial responsibility

         Indemnification of RA by certificate users

         Fiduciary relationships of RA

      Laws and procedures



Chokhani                                                       [Page 49]





Internet-Draft                CPF and CPSF                  January 1997


         Applicable laws and regulations

         Dispute resolution procedures

      Fees

         Certificate registration fee

         Certificate revocation fee

         Fee for other services

         Refund policy for the various services.

   End entity

      Liability

         Warranties and disclaimers of warranties

         Liabilities and limitations on liabilities

      End entity obligations

         Accuracy of representations

         Protection of end entity private key

         Restrictions on end entity private key use

CERTIFICATE AND CRL PROFILES (34)

   Certificate Profile

      Certificate Version

         A list of version numbers supported for the certificate

         A  list  of  certificate  profiles (e.g., PKIX, Federal PKI, or
         ANSI X9.57, etc.)

         Certificate extensions populated and their criticality.

         Signature, key management, and other  cryptographic  algorithms
         object identifiers

      Naming




Chokhani                                                       [Page 50]





Internet-Draft                CPF and CPSF                  January 1997


         Name forms used for the CA, RA, and end entity names

         Name  constraints  used  and  the  name  forms used in the name
         constraints

      Policy

         Applicable policy OID for this policy

         Typical values for  the  following  fields  within  the  policy
         constraints  extension:  require  explicit  policy  and inhibit
         policy mapping

         Policy  qualifiers  syntax,  semantics,  and  their  processing
         semantics

         Processing   semantics  for  the  critical  certificate  policy
         extension

   CRL Profile

      A list of the version numbers supported for CRLs

      CRL and CRL entry extensions populated and their criticality

POLICY ADMINISTRATION

   Contact information

      Name and mailing address of the policy administration organization

      Name, electronic mail address, telephone number, and fax number of
      a contact person

      Name and telephone number of person  determining  CPS  suitability
      for the policy

   Policy definition change procedures

      List the items that can change without notification

      Items that can change with notification

         List of items

         Notification mechanism

         Comment period



Chokhani                                                       [Page 51]





Internet-Draft                CPF and CPSF                  January 1997


         Mechanism to handle comments

         Period for final change notice

      List of items whose change requires a new policy

   Publication and notification policies

      List of items not published in the CPS

      Mechanisms   used   to   distribute   policy,  CPS,  certificates,
      certificate status, and CRLs.

      Access control on information objects including the  policy,  CPS,
      certificates, certificate status, and CRLs

      Notification procedures for security breaches of issuing CA

      Notification procedures for security breaches of subject CA

      Notification procedures for security breaches of  subject RA

      Termination procedure and notification for issuing CA

      Termination procedure and notification for subject CA

      Termination procedure and notification for subject RA

8. LIST OF ACRONYMS

   ABA - American Bar Association

   CA - Certification Authority
   CC - Common Criteria
   CMM - Capability Maturity Model
   CPS - Certification Practice Statement
   CRL - Certificate Revocation List

   DAM - Draft Amendment
   DAP - Directory Access Protocol

   FIPS - Federal Information Processing Standard
   FSDA - Fail Safe Design Analysis

   I&A - Identification and Authentication
   IEC - International Electrotechnical Commission
   IETF - Internet Engineering Task Force
   IP - Internet Protocol



Chokhani                                                       [Page 52]





Internet-Draft                CPF and CPSF                  January 1997


   ISO - International Organization for Standardization
   ITU - International Telecommunications Union
   IV&V - Independent Validation and Verification

   MSP - Message Security Protocol

   NIST - National Institute of Standards and Technology

   OID - Object Identifier

   PIN - Personal Identification Number
   PKCS - Public Key Cryptography Standard
   PKI - Public Key Infrastructure
   PKIX - Public Key Infrastructure (X.509) (IETF Working Group)

   RA - Registration Authority
   RFC - Request For Comment

   SEI - Software Engineering Institute
   S-HTTP  - Secure HyperText Transfer Protocol
   S/MIME   - Secure/Multipurpose Internet Mail Extension

   TCP - Transmission Control Protocol
   TCSEC - Trusted Computer System Evaluation Criteria
   TSDM - Trusted Software Development Methodology

   URL - Uniform Resource Locator
   US - United States

9. GLOSSARY OF TERMS

   Accreditation:   A  decision  by  the  responsible  official  of  the
   organization to operate  a  system  and  accept  the  residual  risks
   identified  by  the  certification activities, or to accept the risks
   even though no certification activities have been done or  completed.

   (System)  Certification:  A series of security engineering activities
   to ensure that the security requirements for a system are implemented
   correctly,   and  to  identify  residual  risks.   The  certification
   activities typically consist  of  security  analysis  of  the  system
   architecture,  design, and implementation and security testing of the
   system.

   End Entity: A person or a computer system who is not a CA or RA.

   Entity: A CA, RA, or end entity.

   Relying Party: Someone who uses a public  key  in  a  certificate  to



Chokhani                                                       [Page 53]





Internet-Draft                CPF and CPSF                  January 1997


   either verify a digital signature or to encrypt keys or data.

   Critical  Security  Parameters:  security-related  information (e.g.,
   cryptographic  keys,  authentication  data  such  as  passwords   and
   personal identification number (PIN))

   Subject:  An  entity  whose  public  key is certified in a public key
   certificate.

   Subject  End  Entity:  An  end  entity  who  is  the  subject  of   a
   certificate.

   Subscriber: See subject

   User: See relying party

10. ENDNOTES

   1  Extracts of the ABA Digital Signature Guidelines presented in this
   report are taken from the  1995  draft  version  which  was  publicly
   released  for  review and comment.  Later work  revising the document
   has not been publicly released, but does not  materially  impact  the
   correctness of this report.

   2  Example:  A  bank  claims  that  it  issues CA certificates to its
   branches only.  Now, the user of a CA certificate issued by the  bank
   can  assume that the subject CA in the certificate is a branch of the
   bank.

   3 Example: A Government CA claims  that  it  issues  certificates  to
   Government  employees only.  Now, the user of a certificate issued by
   the Government CA can assume that the subject of the certificate is a
   Government employee.

   4  Examples  of  the  types  of subject CA entities are a subordinate
   organizations (e.g., branch, division, etc.), a US Federal Government
   agency,   a Government of Canada agency, a state agency, a provincial
   department, etc.

   5 Examples of the  types  of  subject  RA  entities  are  branch  and
   division of an organization.

   6  Examples  of  types  of  subject  end  entities  are uniformed and
   civilian  DoD  personnel,  DoD  contractors,  Ministry   of   Defense
   employees, bank customers, telephone company subscribers, etc.

   7 Examples include X.500 distinguished names, RFC 822 Internet names,
   URL, etc.



Chokhani                                                       [Page 54]





Internet-Draft                CPF and CPSF                  January 1997


   8  The  term  meaningful  means  that  the  name  form  has  commonly
   understood  semantics  to  determine  identity  of  the person and/or
   organization.  The directory names and RFC 822 names are examples  of
   meaningful names.

   9  Examples  of  proof  include the issuing CA generating the key, or
   requiring the subject to send an electronically signed request or  to
   sign a challenge.

   10  Examples of organization identity authentication are: articles of
   incorporation, duly signed corporate resolutions, company  seal,  and
   notarized documents.

   11  Examples  of  individual  identity authentication are: biometrics
   (thumb print,  ten  finger  print,  face,  palm,  and  retina  scan),
   driver's   license,   passport,   credit  card,  company  badge,  and
   government badge.

   12 Examples  include  duly  signed  authorization  papers,  corporate
   badge, etc.

   13  The identification policy for routine rekey should be the same as
   the one  for  initial  registration  since  the  same  subject  needs
   rekeying.  The  rekey  authentication  may  be accomplished using the
   techniques for initial I&A or using digitally signed requests.

   14 This I&A  policy  could  be  the  same  as  the  one  for  initial
   registration.

   15 This policy could be the same as the one for initial registration.

   16 The identification policy for Revocation request could be the same
   as   the   one  for  initial  registration  since  the  same  subject
   certificate needs to be revoked.   The  authentication  policy  could
   accept  a  Revocation  request  digitally  signed  by  subject.   The
   authentication information used during initial registration could  be
   acceptable    for    Revocation   request.   Other   less   stringent
   authentication policy could be defined.

   17 The identification policy for key compromise notification could be
   the  same  as the one for initial registration since the same subject
   certificate needs to be revoked.   The  authentication  policy  could
   accept  a  Revocation  request  digitally  signed  by  subject.   The
   authentication information used during initial registration could  be
   acceptable  for  key  compromise  notification.  Other less stringent
   authentication policy could be defined.

   18 The n out of m rule allows a key to be split in m  parts.   The  m



Chokhani                                                       [Page 55]





Internet-Draft                CPF and CPSF                  January 1997


   parts  may  be  given to m different individuals.  Any n parts out of
   the m parts may be used to fully reconstitute the key, but having any
   n-1 parts provides one with no information about the key.

   19  A  key  may  be  escrowed,  backed up or archived.  Each of these
   functions have different purpose.  Thus, a key  may  go  through  any
   subset of these functions depending on the requirements.  The purpose
   of escrow is to allow a third  party  (such  as  an  organization  or
   government)  to legally obtain the key without the cooperation of the
   subject.  The  purpose  of  back  up  is  to  allow  the  subject  to
   reconstitute  the  key  in  case  of the destruction of the key.  The
   purpose of archive is to provide for reuse  of  the  key  in  future,
   e.g., use the private key to decrypt a document.

   20  The  critical  security parameters are the information other than
   the public and private key pair and public key parameters required to
   operate  the module.  An example of a critical security parameters is
   a PIN or passphrase.  The public key parameters are NOT an example of
   critical security parameters.

   21  Examples  of  physical  controls are: monitored facility, guarded
   facility, locked facility, access  controlled  using  tokens,  access
   controlled  using  biometrics,  access  controlled  through an access
   list, etc.

   22 Examples  of  the  roles  include,  system  administrator,  system
   security  officer, system auditor, and crypto officer.  The duties of
   the system  administrator  are  to  configure,  generate,  boot,  and
   operate the system.  The duties of the system security officer are to
   assign accounts and privileges.  The duties of the system auditor are
   to  set  up  system audit profile, perform audit file management, and
   audit review.  The duties of the crypto officer are to hold,  manage,
   and  protect  the  CA  keys  and PINs, and to use them to operate the
   cryptographic devices used by the CA to sign the certificates and the
   CRLs.

   23  The  background  checks  may include clearance level (e.g., none,
   sensitive, confidential, secret, top secret, etc.) and the  clearance
   granting  authority  name.   In  lieu  of or in addition to a defined
   clearance, the background checks  may  include  types  of  background
   information (e.g., name, place of birth, date of birth, home address,
   previous residences, previous employment, and any  other  information
   that  may  help  determine  trustworthiness).  The description should
   also include which information was verified and how.

   24 For example, the certificate policy may impose personnel  security
   requirements  on  the  network system administrator responsible for a
   CA's network access.



Chokhani                                                       [Page 56]





Internet-Draft                CPF and CPSF                  January 1997


   25 Each authorized person should be accountable for his/her  actions.

   26  A  cryptographic module is hardware, software, or firmware or any
   combination of them.

   27 The compliance description should be specific  and  detailed.  For
   example,  for  each  FIPS  140-1  requirement, describe the level and
   whether the level has been certified by an accredited laboratory.

   28 Example of audit events are:  request  to  create  a  certificate,
   request   to  revoke  a  certificate,  key  compromise  notification,
   creation of a certificate, revocation of a certificate, issuance of a
   certificate,  issuance  of  a  CRL,  issuance  of key compromise CRL,
   establishment  of  trusted  roles  on  the  CA,  actions  of   truste
   personnel, changes to CA keys, etc.

   29  Example  of  archive events are: request to create a certificate,
   request  to  revoke  a  certificate,  key  compromise   notification,
   creation of a certificate, revocation of a certificate, issuance of a
   certificate, issuance of a CRL, issuance of key compromise  CRL,  and
   changes to CA keys.

   30 a parent CA is an example of audit relationship.

   31  Example  of  compliance audit topics: sample check on the various
   I&A policies,   comprehensive  checks  on  key  management  policies,
   comprehensive  checks  on  system  security  controls,  comprehensive
   checks on operations policy, and comprehensive checks on  certificate
   profiles,

   32  The  examples  include,  temporary suspension of operations until
   deficiencies are corrected, revocation of entity certificate,  change
   in   personnel,   invocation   of  liability  policy,  more  frequent
   compliance audit, etc.

   33 An organization may choose not to make public some of its security
   controls,  clearance procedures, or some others elements due to their
   sensitivity.

   34 All or some of the  following  items  may  be  different  for  the
   various types of entities, i.e., CA, RA, and end entities.

11. Security Considerations

This entire memo deals with security related to public key certificates.






Chokhani                                                       [Page 57]





Internet-Draft                CPF and CPSF                  January 1997


12. Acknowledgments

   We would like to thank Dave  Fillingham  and  Jim  Brandt  for  their
   inspiration, numerous valuable suggestions and inputs.  We would also
   like to thank Edmond Van Hees for his support and inputs.   We  would
   also  like  to  thank  the  Government  of Canada's Policy Management
   Authority (PMA) Committee for their contribution and support of  this
   work.

   This   document   has  been  developed  under  the  guidance  of  the
   International Policy Framework Working Group.  The  members  of  this
   working  group are: Richard Bloom, US Federal Security Infrastructure
   Program Management Office;  Santosh  Chokhani  (Co-Author),  CygnaCom
   Solutions,  Inc.;  David  W.  Fillingham,  National  Security Agency;
   Warwick  Ford  (Co-Author);  Richard  Kemp,   US   Federal   Security
   Infrastructure  Program  Management  Office;  Noel  Nazario, National
   Institute of Standards and Technology; David Simonetti,  Booz,  Allen
   and   Hamilton;   and   Edmond   Van   Hees,  Communication  Security
   Establishment, Government of Canada.

   We would also like the following industry members  for  their  review
   and  input:  Teresa  Acevedo, A&N Associates; Michael Baum, Verisign;
   Patrick Cain, BBN; Michael  Harrop,  Government  of  Canada  Treasury
   Board; John Morris, CygnaCom Solutions, Inc.; Tim Moses, Nortel; John
   Nicolletos, A&N Associates; Jean Petty, CygnaCom Solutions, Inc.; and
   Darryl Stal, Nortel.

   Johnny  Hsiung  and  Chris  Miller assisted in the preparation of the
   manuscript.

13. Author's Address

   Questions about this document can be directed to the authors:

      Santosh Chokhani
      CygnaCom Solutions, Inc.
      Suite 100 West
      7927 Jones Branch Drive
      McLean, VA 22102

      Phone: (703) 848-0883
      Fax: (703) 848-0960
      EMail: chokhani@cygnacom.com



      Warwick Ford
      VeriSign, Inc.



Chokhani                                                       [Page 58]





Internet-Draft                CPF and CPSF                  January 1997


      Phone: (613) 225-3487
      Fax: (613) 225-6361
      Email: wford@verisign.com

expires in six months                                      June 1997














































Chokhani                                                       [Page 59]


