


Network Working Group                                      J-F C. Morfin
Internet-Draft                                                   Intlnet
Intended status: Informational                         December 15, 2008
Expires: June 18, 2009


         Application of the Precautionary Principle by the IETF
              http://iucg.org/draft-iucg-precaution-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on June 18, 2009.

Abstract

   This Memo documents how the IETF pursues its mission in adherence to
   the Precautionary cardinal principle and may benefit from its
   application in its goal to make the Internet work better and in
   addressing some of its documented problems.











Morfin                    Expires June 18, 2009                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft           Precautionary principle           December 2008


Table of Contents

   1.  Requirements notation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3.  Better safe than sorry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     3.1.  Definition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     3.2.  Legal status . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     3.3.  Areas of applications  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     3.4.  Innovation ethic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   4.  Enacting the Precautionary principle . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     4.1.  When does the principle apply? . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     4.2.  Investigating a possible case of application . . . . . . .  5
     4.3.  Attitude to be adopted . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   5.  IETF mission, cardinal principles, and the standard process  .  6
     5.1.  Cardinal principles  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     5.2.  The standard process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
       5.2.1.  Criteria for selecting new work  . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     5.3.  Charter  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   6.  A way to address identified IETF difficulties  . . . . . . . .  9
     6.1.  The Balance Between Research, Invention, and Adoption  . .  9
     6.2.  The Reach of the Internet  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     6.3.  Funding the Internet R&D . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
       6.3.1.  Commercial funding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
       6.3.2.  Precautionary alternative to commercial funding  . . . 10
     6.4.  Difficulties of the IETF in accomplishing its Mission  . . 10
     6.5.  The IETF has Difficulty Handling Large and/or Complex
           Problems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
       6.5.1.  Engineering in the large . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
       6.5.2.  Contribution of the lead users community . . . . . . . 13
   7.  Precautionary considerations section . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
     7.1.  Approaches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
     7.2.  Practical organization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
     7.3.  Conceptual terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   8.  Proposed Precautionary oriented questionnaire  . . . . . . . . 15
     8.1.  Evolution of this questionnaire  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
   9.  Security considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
   10. IANA considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
   11. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
     11.1. Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
     11.2. Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
   Appendix A.  Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
   Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 19








Morfin                    Expires June 18, 2009                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft           Precautionary principle           December 2008


1.  Requirements notation

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL"in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].


2.  Introduction

   The IETF Precautionary duty consists in responsibly considering the
   risks that may be created, on the Internet architecture and its
   deployment, international relations, global economy, cultural,
   societal, natural environment, people's future, etc. by the influence
   of each of its engineering documents, independently from the high
   quality and technical relevance that they must achieve.

   The IETF adherence to this Precautionary cardinal principle is
   implied as a requirement or as a need in the RFCs that define the
   mission of the IETF [RFC 3935], as well as in the way it organizes
   itself [RFC 2418] and processes Internet standardization [RFC 2026],
   its research and development objectives [RFC 3869], and its
   professional ethic in approving its documents [PROTO project] and
   considering the needs for improvements that it itself has identified
   [RFC 3774].

   There is a general increase in users' concerns, from civil society,
   the regalian domain, private sector, and international organizations
   throughout the world, about technological precaution.  Such a concern
   necessarily extends to the Internet, which has become a key structure
   for humankind.  This Memo seeks to identify what precaution means
   exactly when documenting the Internet as the IETF does, and to
   summarize how the IETF addresses and progresses on this issue.  It
   also seeks to call on the contribution of all those who may help the
   IETF in new ways towards a better Internet for every person on earth.


3.  Better safe than sorry

   Everyone knows about precaution as a responsible duty for every
   individual.  However, the recent technological development calls for
   a rethinking of this notion within the collective standardization
   process, global operations, and world governance.

3.1.  Definition

   The Principle of precaution is an emerging societal, ethical,
   cultural, political, technical, and economic principle that states
   that if an action or strategy might cause severe or irreversible



Morfin                    Expires June 18, 2009                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft           Precautionary principle           December 2008


   harm, in the absence of a scientific and implementation governance
   responsible consensus that harm would not ensue, the burden of proof
   falls on those who would advocate taking the respective action or
   following the respective strategy.

3.2.  Legal status

   It is not a fully juridical principle, as it still can hardly provide
   regulations that are sanctioned by laws, or describe what actions to
   take.  In most cases, it seeks to trigger reactions in advance,
   before any irreversible damage occurs.  However, in some legal
   systems and international agreements, the precautionary principle is
   a general and compulsory principle.  The principle of Precaution
   appears as a new mode of collective or global action or governance,
   which is often associated with subsidiarity and proportionality
   principles.

   In addition, many countries choose to consider consumer points of
   view, and media reporting, to create a new space for debate, where
   politicians, experts, and journalists are answerable to other actors
   (e.g. consumer associations, juridical authorities, etc.).

3.3.  Areas of applications

   The precautionary principle reflects the belief that when there is
   scientific or a practical deployment, uncertainty concerning a
   project, an action, or a standard and their consequences, preventive
   measures may be justified.

   This principle is often invoked when the consequences are considered
   sufficiently great to require expensive amelioration, even when the
   risks are considered low.  In the Internet case as well as in
   Internet direct or indirect usage areas this will be invoked where
   scientific evidence is insufficient, inconclusive, or uncertain and
   preliminary scientific evaluation indicates that there are reasonable
   grounds for concern that the potential dangerous effect on the
   network, human, economic, cultural, and operational environment may
   be inconsistent with the level of quality and protection that is
   chosen by users or their country.

3.4.  Innovation ethic

   The concept includes an implicit ethical responsibility that is
   assumed by engineers, governance, lead users, and every informed
   person, entity, or process towards maintaining the integrity of the
   common technical and natural systems and acknowledges the fallibility
   of human understanding.  It is very technically familiar to the
   Internet operators who are, for example, constantly confronted with



Morfin                    Expires June 18, 2009                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft           Precautionary principle           December 2008


   the DNS system pollution and mismanagement risks and the real-time
   precaution duty that this requires.

   As such, the application of the principle modifies the status of
   innovation and risk assessment: it is not the risk that must be
   avoided or amended, like when considering security, but rather a
   potential risk that must be prevented.  Thus, in the case of the
   operations of scientific and engineering research and development,
   there is a third party, beyond the technical scientist and engineer
   side, and the regulator and operator governance: the consumer, or the
   user in the Internet case.


4.  Enacting the Precautionary principle

   The precautionary principle is not an absolute rule.  It should be
   first accepted as a cultural concept helping to clarify arguments, in
   particular to determine where the burden of proof lies between the
   designers of a new protocol or architectural proposition, the
   operators, and the users.

4.1.  When does the principle apply?

   It may apply everywhere, as a perfect protocol does not necessarily
   deploy perfectly.  Two conditions should lead to precautionary
   considerations:

   o  a threat or a user's fear of serious or irreversible damage,
      pollution, or confusion.
   o  a scientific and operational uncertainty as to the extent of that
      respective possible damage.

   Once these two conditions have been addressed, precautionary measures
   can still be taken or advised, but they should be proportionate.

   The principle should not be used to try to avoid all the risks or to
   block a competitive project.

4.2.  Investigating a possible case of application

   Five points should be considered:

   o  whether there are scientifically or operationally rational grounds
      for the concern.
   o  the extent of the threat: local to an application, network wide,
      application level, cultural or economic impact, etc. and human
      lives.




Morfin                    Expires June 18, 2009                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft           Precautionary principle           December 2008


   o  the perceived value of what is put at risk, the future being more
      important than the past.
   o  if the impact can be managed or not in an acceptable manner.
   o  the level of public and user concerns.

4.3.  Attitude to be adopted

   Evaluation of the technical, scientific, and operational level of
   uncertainty should consider what would constitute sufficient
   evidence; the level and kind of uncertainty, the potential to reduce
   uncertainty; the possibility of locally or time contained
   experimentation; previous experience, etc.

   If the principle applies, it shifts the burden of proof and
   legitimacy.

   o  The decision maker must assume that the threat is real and that in
      making it accepted by the concerned parties that it is negligible
      or sufficiently compensated reverts back to him or her.
   o  The concerned parties are permitted to take preventive measures
      without having to wait until the reality of the seriousness of the
      threat becomes fully known.  The more significant and uncertain
      the threat is, the more the precaution should be required.

   Decisions applying to the precautionary principle must be open,
   informed, and democratic and must include the affected parties.


5.  IETF mission, cardinal principles, and the standard process

   The precautionary principle is implied at the core of the cardinal
   principles that the IETF is in adherence to when it carries out its
   mission.  This mission is to produce, along the Internet standard
   process [RFC 2026], high quality, relevant technical and engineering
   documents that influence the way people design, use, and manage the
   Internet in such a way to make the Internet work better [RFC 3935] in
   every part of it, as a whole, and for everyone.

5.1.  Cardinal principles

   These documents describe protocols and practices for which secure and
   scalable implementations of a certain impact, consistency, and
   coherence are expected to have wide deployment and interoperation on
   the Internet in order to form a part of the infrastructure of the
   Internet, or to interoperate with technologies that are designed
   outside the IETF.





Morfin                    Expires June 18, 2009                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft           Precautionary principle           December 2008


   o  Open process: any interested person of the IETF compatible
      language and culture can directly participate in the work, know
      what is being decided on, and make his or her voice heard on the
      issue.
   o  Technical competence: the issues on which the IETF produces its
      documents are issues where the IETF has the competence that is
      needed to speak of them, and the IETF is willing to listen to
      technically competent input from any source.  Where it does not
      have, and cannot gather, the competence needed to make technically
      sound standards, it should not attempt to take on the leadership
      role.
   o  Volunteer Core: the IETF participants and leadership are people
      who come to the IETF because they want to do work that furthers
      the IETF's goal of "making the Internet work better" in every part
      of it, as a whole, and for everyone.
   o  Rough consensus and running code: IETF makes standards based on
      the combined engineering judgment of its participants and their
      real-world experience in implementing and deploying its
      specifications.
   o  Protocol ownership: when the IETF takes ownership of a protocol or
      function, it accepts the responsibility for all the aspects of the
      protocol, even though some aspects may rarely or never be seen on
      the Internet.

5.2.  The standard process

   The IETF standard process has been optimized over time to permit the
   production of high quality, relevant, technical, and engineering
   documents concerning the design, use, and management of the Internet
   in such a way as to make it work better: it is now also necessary to
   make it interoperate better with other systems, as a whole, and for
   everyone.  This is a broad part that is obtained through, and due to,
   the quality of the Internet standard process.

   This process is characterized by at least three main aspects: the
   criteria used when selecting new work, the charter defining it, and
   the progression of the work from WG establishment to the final
   approval by the IESG.  Different precautionary aspects are embedded
   or are still to be ascertained.

5.2.1.  Criteria for selecting new work

   When determining whether it is appropriate to engage in new work,
   promoters, Area Director(s), and the IESG consider the following
   points that are precautionary in terms of selecting a good topic, but
   also that is the best for managing the IETF resources and voluntary
   participants' time and efforts.




Morfin                    Expires June 18, 2009                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft           Precautionary principle           December 2008


   o  Are the considered issues clear and relevant to the Internet
      community, achievable within a reasonable timeframe, and are there
      risks and urgency for the work?
   o  Is there an overlap with other currently engaged work, and
      sufficient and broad enough available interest within the IETF and
      expertise in the topic?
   o  Does a base of interested consumers (end-users) appear to exist
      for the planned work?  This is where a precautionary attitude will
      attract the interest of lead users and of consumer organizations?
   o  Is the IETF the best suited place to take the lead in the "real
      world?.
   o  Are all the known intellectual property rights that are relevant
      to the proposed work issues well understood?
   o  Is the proposed work an open effort or an attempt to "bless" non-
      IETF technology?  Is their at all (inside or outside the IETF) a
      good understanding of what is technically and operationally
      relevant to the proposed topic: it will be a starting point for
      any precaution related debate.

5.3.  Charter

   The formation of an IETF working group requires a charter to be
   approved by the promoters and the IESG with advice from the IAB.  A
   charter is a contract between a working group and the IETF to perform
   a set of tasks.  This notion of a contract will be of the essence in
   further precautionary work and considerations in order to make sure
   that everyone has the same understanding of the expected influence of
   the document being worked on/out.

   To facilitate the evaluation of the intended work and to provide
   ongoing guidance to the working group, RFC 2026 states that the
   charter must describe the problem being solved and should discuss the
   objectives and expected impact with respect to: architecture,
   operations, security, network management, scaling, and transition
   (where applicable).  This list should also include concerns about the
   network, international, cultural, economic, strategic, technological,
   etc. environment.

   The IETF acknowledges that the proposed working groups often comprise
   technically competent participants who are not familiar with the
   history of Internet architecture or IETF processes.  This can,
   unfortunately, lead to good working group consensus about a bad
   design.  To prevent this, Area Directors may assign a Consultant from
   among the ranks of senior IETF participants.  This practice should
   extend to User senior experts in the non-Internet areas that may be
   impacted.  An example is the direct participation of the ICANN Staff
   to the WG-IDNABIS.




Morfin                    Expires June 18, 2009                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft           Precautionary principle           December 2008


6.  A way to address identified IETF difficulties

   The precautionary principle deals with the problem of introducing
   innovation in any environment.  In documenting network elements, the
   IETF constantly faces that kind of situation.  This is why it turns
   out that this principle may help the IETF to better approach, and
   sometimes seamlessly address, difficulties that it has identified
   over the years but where its participants have not yet perceived the
   roots.

6.1.  The Balance Between Research, Invention, and Adoption

   The IETF has traditionally been a community for experimentation with
   things that are not fully understood, the standardization of
   protocols for which some understanding has been reached, and the
   publication of (and refinement of) protocols that were originally
   specified outside the IETF process.

   The first precaution is to decide whether or not these activities
   should be performed within the IETF.  Then, one should not chiefly
   look at the type of activity, but rather the potential benefit to the
   Internet system and the Internet community - an experiment that
   yields information about the fact that an approach is not viable
   could be of real benefit.

6.2.  The Reach of the Internet

   The people interested in the Internet's evolution are from every
   culture under the sun and from all walks of life.  The IETF puts its
   emphasis on technical competence, rough consensus, live testing and
   operations, and individual participation.  It, therefore, needs to be
   open to competent input from any source whatever the language.  The
   IETF uses the English language for its final work and documents.
   This may raise users concerns, provoke a lack of trust, and lead to
   conflicting alternative usage developments.  The IETF must,
   therefore, as a precaution try out imaginative multilinguistics
   propositions (multilinguistics is understood here as the methodology
   to address the diversity of the phenomena of linguistic diversity).
   This is why it should consider how to best benefit, as in ISO, from
   the multilinguistic adage: "semantics add, pragmatics subtract".

6.3.  Funding the Internet R&D

   There are three observed sources of network R&D:
   o  the academic effort
   o  the commercial funding sources that more likely fund the research
      that leads to a direct competitive advantage.




Morfin                    Expires June 18, 2009                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft           Precautionary principle           December 2008


   o  the Internet lead users that are partly visible through external
      innovation the IETF uses further on [RFC 3935]

   This is because no single organization (e.g., no single government,
   software company, equipment vendor, or network operator) has a sense
   of ownership of the global Internet infrastructure, research on the
   general issues of the Internet infrastructure are often not
   adequately funded.

6.3.1.  Commercial funding

   If there was no commercial funding for Internet research, then few
   research projects would be taken to completion with implementations,
   deployment, and follow-up evaluation.  However, the IAB has
   documented [RFC 3869] that if commercial funding is the main source
   of funding for future Internet research, the future of the Internet
   infrastructure could be in trouble.  In addition to issues about
   which projects are funded, the funding source can also affect the
   content of the research, for example, towards or against the
   development of open standards, or taking varying degrees of care
   about the effect of the developed protocols on the other traffic on
   the Internet.

6.3.2.  Precautionary alternative to commercial funding

   This is why self-precaution calls for the IETF to consider all of
   what can be done together with the academic and lead user communities
   to make them more focused on research concerning the basic, applied,
   and usage architectures of the Internet and be more productively
   listened to.  This might also attract governments and non-commercial
   sponsors, as they themselves are specialized innovative users, so
   that they might sustain the necessary FLOSS funding and join forces
   with the lead users, who are more interested in people/SNHN (Small
   Network/Home Network - Standalone Host) centered innovation.

6.4.  Difficulties of the IETF in accomplishing its Mission

   The IETF has now a clearly defined and commonly understood Mission
   [RFC 3935].  Its Mission Statement does not document the
   Precautionary principle, but it does imply it.  This has many
   positive consequences.  However, some identified problems [RFC 3774]
   remain that a broader consideration of the Precautionary principle
   might help to address.

   o  Working Groups can potentially be hijacked by sectional interests
      to the detriment of the IETF's mission.  Embedding Precautionary
      considerations in the Internet process (WG work) and documents
      (Drafts, PROTO evaluation, RFC) can certainly help to reduce that



Morfin                    Expires June 18, 2009                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft           Precautionary principle           December 2008


      risk, in which the responsibility of the non-hijacking falls on
      the hijackers themselves.
   o  It would be desirable to have road maps and architectural views
      for portions of work that extend beyond a single working group: it
      may also be the case that it is no longer possible to fit the
      whole Internet within a single architecture.  This is something
      the external point of view of lead users and other SDOs should
      help to appreciate through the expression of their own
      Precautionary concerns, most probably offering cross-fertilized
      views of the "good of the Internet" and how to make the Internet
      useful to the greatest number of stakeholders for the long-term.
      The resulting dialog can only help a general debate where the IETF
      itself may in turn benefit from the application of the Precaution
      principle by other SDOs and users.
   o  One of the requirements of the Precautionary principle is for the
      IETF to issue Precautionary considerations concerning its own
      engineering choices and practices, covering both the techniques
      that are used to derive and verify the technical solutions needed,
      and the management and organizational strategies that are expected
      to help with the engineering process.  This includes points such
      as:
      *  timely, high-quality, predictable outputs, respecting the WG
         Charters and timelines.
      *  methodology to ensure that the there is a uniform view in the
         WG of the scope of the WG activity, especially over the
         intended purpose of the solutions wherein the Precautionary
         considerations may have to document the state-of-the-art
         scientific consensus of negligible risk.
      *  the WG reflection road-mad that leads to that conclusion.
      *  the identification and articulation of the engineering trade-
         offs that have been adopted without inappropriately reducing
         the 'fitness for purpose' for the intended users.
      *  the conclusion of adequacy with no further possible refinement
         in order to meet the requirements that are placed on it by the
         intended purpose that is documented in the charter.

   This may call for more detailed and respected charters, WG commonly
   agreed upon road-maps, detailed plans, timelines to be followed,
   audits on users' explicit criteria for the concerned standard
   development, early reviews and dialogs with users directly or
   indirectly interested in the immediate focus of the documents, and
   questions about the problem areas that might arise due to
   interactions with other popular IETF protocols.

   This should give a clear and simple incentive that will help to
   transparently address the problems listed in RFC 3774.  The users'
   dialog should provide metrics to measure the achievement of the
   desired quality and performance of both WGs and the whole IETF: the



Morfin                    Expires June 18, 2009                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft           Precautionary principle           December 2008


   shorter the users' wish list, the fewer users who would have to post
   comments and the higher their trust, along with the document's
   probable quality, and the better the Internet should work.

   Direct cooperation with lead users, should also enable the parallel
   testing of running prototype code to verify the suitability of the
   documented propositions.  This should also ensure improved dialog of
   the WG and of the interested lead users, and probably - through them
   - with other WGs.

6.5.  The IETF has Difficulty Handling Large and/or Complex Problems

   As RFC 3774 states it, the IETF has historically been most successful
   when dealing with tightly focused problems that have few interactions
   with other parts of the total problem solution.  Given that the
   Internet has become more complex, such tightly focused problems are
   becoming the exception.  IETF standardization procedures are
   optimized for tightly constrained working groups and are generally
   less effective if 'engineering in the large' is needed to reach a
   satisfactory solution.

   The IETF does not always seem to be aware of the interactions between
   the protocols that are bound to be thrown off by deployment in more
   complex situations and thereby the IETF fails to minimize the chances
   of unwelcome consequences arising when a new protocol is deployed.
   This is precisely where the Precautionary principle has a key role to
   play, since the duty of precaution consists in making sure that such
   unwelcome situations do not arise.

6.5.1.  Engineering in the large

   As we have learned more about the ways in which systems on and
   outside the Internet interact, the design of components needs to take
   into account increasingly external constraints.  The understanding of
   these constraints tends to require more engineering in the large.

   Engineering in the large can encompass many aspects of system design
   including:
   o  Architecture
   o  Frameworks
   o  Security
   o  Internationalization
   o  General systemic modeling, issues, and precaution.

   It also appears that handling large and/or complex systems calls for
   a deeper focus on a narrower range of issues (for practical reasons)
   with a wider understanding of the system and the context in which
   they will be used or in the way that they will be supported.



Morfin                    Expires June 18, 2009                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft           Precautionary principle           December 2008


   There are two main ways to practice this engineering in the large:
   o  by way of theory, specialized studies, and inter-SDO relations:
      this is the role of the IAB, which is suited to represent the deep
      interests of the technology's core.
   o  by way of experimentation, usage, and in the field adaptation:
      this is the increasing role of the "lead users" who are directly
      confronted with the demands of the real world's diversity and to
      its permanent operational evolution.

6.5.2.  Contribution of the lead users community

   A lead-user is a user that adapts what he or she purchases to the
   real needs at hand rather than adapting his or her needs to what is
   available on the market.  This adaptation may sometimes amount to an
   entire redesign or brand new development.  The FLOSS phenomenon is a
   good example.  Lead users usually represent between 0.1 and 2 percent
   of a customer population, depending on the technological level of a
   sector and the cost of the engaged upgrading.  They become, in some
   areas, a heavy industrial trend, where the "market" actually sub-
   contracts its solutions to industry.

   In the Internet viral environment, they represent a strong capacity
   for innovation and contribution.  The IETF has not been able so far
   to take full advantage from them.  However, the IETF wasinitially
   lead-usersengineering group.  One of the reasons of the disconnect is
   that, for a time, lead-users were mostly small entrepreneurs with
   market priorities.  This time is over as there is more and more
   motivation for people to drive their own "cybercraft" and become
   "home lead users".  Another reason is their more user centric
   distributed vision of the network, which prevails now in the WSIS
   framework, while the IETF's vision is still more network centric.
   There also are some remnants of the "alt-root" / "open-root" issue
   about the management of the virtual DNS root.  The multilaterality of
   a systemic understanding of the Internet helps to merge these
   visions: precautionary concerns demand their dialog since it actually
   consists in the IETF convincing users that its solutions do not harm
   them, which could turn out to be an excellent quality test for the
   IETF deliverables.

   The difficulty is a practical interface problem because visions,
   languages, priorities, time-to-usage, practices, and operational
   needs all differ.  There is, therefore, a need to build, provide, and
   maintain such interfaces.  The IUCG@ietf.org mailing list and its
   attached site and resources have been created to experimentally
   explore that possibility in two connate directions: the community of
   the users of the IETF documents, and the community of the lead users
   of the Internet that documents influence the design, use, and
   management.



Morfin                    Expires June 18, 2009                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft           Precautionary principle           December 2008


   Based on experience, the target should be to replace the technical/
   process appeal procedure.  When an individual user thinks that the
   Internet standard process has produced a result that is harmful to
   the Internet or thinks that the IETF processes have not been adhered
   to, there should be a process to aid that individual in seeking to
   change that result, or to possibly even prevent the outcome in
   permitting the IETF community to understand him or her better and
   possibly benefit from users' conceptions and experience.


7.  Precautionary considerations section

   In order to prevent this kind of conflict without destabilizing their
   own work, WGs or authors can choose to include a Precautionary
   considerations section in their IETF document.

7.1.  Approaches

   This may resort from two general approaches:
   o  to explain that the IETF consensus, as verified by the operators'
      community, considers uncertainty and risks to be negligible or
      adequately compensated compared to the expected return.
   o  or to detail the risks and incertitudes that remain to be solved
      or that may have to be met under certain circumstances u such as,
      for example, security violations documented in the Security
      consideration section, technological transitions or interfacing,
      governance policies. or usage trends.

7.2.  Practical organization

   WG Chairs and WG Members may be confronted with two kinds of equally
   embarrassing minority situations:
   o  either there is an opposition to the consequences of the WG
      choices but no alternative proposition.
   o  or there is one or several alternative propositions to the WG
      choices.

   In both cases, one or several "design teams" should be created.  In
   the first case to document a list of points calling for clarification
   or a consensual IETF precautionary position, comforted by the
   Operators' community.  In the second case, to try to reach a multi-
   consensus where each position should be made interoperable et
   published with precautionary comments by its opponents.

7.3.  Conceptual terminology

   Usually an IETF document treats an individual system, concept,
   protocol, black box, etc.  Precautionary considerations necessarily



Morfin                    Expires June 18, 2009                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft           Precautionary principle           December 2008


   belong to a systemic global vision of interpenetrated systems.  In
   order to help differentiate the parts of the involved systems in a
   multiple system network context, the following concepts may be used:

   o  endotem: is the system internality.  This is what the document is
      usually about.  Its coherence and stability have been discussed at
      length by the WG, designers, and reviewers.
   o  exotem: is the rest of the world system, which is external to the
      considered system and that may be polluted or irreversibly changed
      or harmed by such a considered system.
   o  peritem: is the interface between the endotem and exotem.
      Security considers its break-ins.  It is to be noted that in an
      interpenetrated system (such as a virtual network, an inter-
      governance mechanism, a distributed architecture, etc.) the
      peritem may have top level discontinuities.  In such cases it
      should be extended down to the first continuous layer.


8.  Proposed Precautionary oriented questionnaire

   For consistency purposes, this section builds on the "RFC-to-be
   draft-ietf-proto-wgchair-doc-shepherding", current template.  Its aim
   is to help every IESG and IAB Member, IETF Participant, and Internet
   user to share the same precautionary logic based on a common
   questionnaire, which can be maintained online.

   o  (1.a) What are the positions and who are the Shepherd (IESG) or
      Mentor(s)(Users) for this document?  Do they believe that this
      version of the document is ready for for final review and
      publication?
   o  (1.b) Has the document been adequately reviewed from key WG
      members and from key non-WG members, including Users?  Is there
      any concern about the depth or breadth of the reviews that have
      been performed?  Have such concerns been expressed along the
      regular open Internet standard process (other oppositions should
      not be considered as not prepared enough).
   o  (1.c) Are there concerns that the document needs more review from
      a particular or broader perspective, e.g., architecture, security,
      operational complexity, someone familiar with AAA,
      multilinguistics and internationalization, system theory,
      operational deployment, usage governance, XML, and ISO standards?
   o  Does the document respect the Charter and the resulting WG's road
      map?  If not, why?
   o  (1.d) Are there any specific concerns or issues with this document
      that one should be aware of?  For example, uncomfortability with
      certain parts of the document, or concerns over whether there is
      really a need for some.  In any event, if the WG has discussed
      those issues and has indicated that it still wishes to advance the



Morfin                    Expires June 18, 2009                [Page 15]

Internet-Draft           Precautionary principle           December 2008


      document, this should be detailed and answered.  Has an IPR
      disclosure that is related to this document been filed?  If so,
      the reference to the disclosure should be noted and summarized in
      the WG discussion and conclusion of this issue.
   o  (1.e) How solid and large is the WG consensus behind this
      document?  How construed, shared, and deep are the concerns raised
      by this document?  Are there existing or investigated alternative
      approaches?
   o  (1.f) Has anyone threatened an appeal or otherwise indicated
      extreme discontent?  Is the position documented?  Are the
      alternative or complementary propositions documented?
   o  (1.g) Is the document presented clearly enough for Users to
      understand it, as well as for the RFC Editor to publish it?
   o  (1.h) Has the document split its references into normative and
      informative?  Are there normative references to the documents that
      are not ready for advancement or are otherwise in an unclear
      state?  Are these normative references from the IETF, or by other
      SDO(s)?  If such normative references exist, what is the strategy
      for their completion and expected pubication date?  Are there
      normative references that are downward references, as described in
      [RFC3967]?
   o  (1.i) Does the document have an IANA consideration section and is
      it consistent with the body of the document?  If the document
      specifies protocol extensions, are reservations requested in the
      appropriate IANA registries?  Are the IANA registries clearly
      identified?  If the document creates a new registry, does it
      define the proposed initial contents of the registry and an
      allocation procedure for future registrations?  Is the IANA
      registry created to be interoperable with external or Users'
      registries that are being (or will be) used on the Internet.  What
      are the procedures to protect clear interoperability?
   o  Are there usage oriented tables or information to be gathered,
      supported, and maintained?  Are their metadata (and possible
      additional attributes) documented online?
   o  (1.j) Do the sections of the document that are written in a formal
      language, such as XML code, BNF rules, MIB definitions, etc.,
      validate correctly in an automated checker?  If new terminology is
      being used in the document, is it consistent with other
      (multilingual) terminology(ies) in use in the international and
      Internet standards?
   o  (1.k) The IESG approval announcement implies some bureaucracy .
      Are there concerns related to it?
   o  (2.a) Which Internet Modeling perspective does the document use?
      Is it adequate?  Is it documented enough?  Does it benefit from
      reasonable support?
   o  (2.b) Does the document include a "Precautionary consideration
      section"?  Is it coherent with the "Security consideration
      section"?



Morfin                    Expires June 18, 2009                [Page 16]

Internet-Draft           Precautionary principle           December 2008


   o  (2.c) If the Precautionary considerations section recommends
      precautions, can they be deemed as complete and sufficiently
      documented?
   o  (2.d) If the Precautionary considerations section concludes that
      possible risks, uncertainty, or harm that are created by the
      influence of the document are negligible: is it convincing?  Does
      the IESG and IAB formally support its conclusions?  Would an
      appeal against them succeed or fail?
   o  (2.e) What would be, if any, the alternatives to the document
      proposition, their impact, delay, and degree of reliability?  To
      which extent do they imply or require an architectural model
      change?
   o  (2.f) What is the timed deployment strategy?  Is the proposition
      worth its cost and delays?  Does it call on external cooperation?
      Were the providers of that cooperation involved in the document's
      preparation?

8.1.  Evolution of this questionnaire

   This questionnaire should evolve with the Internet architecture and
   with the digital convergence in order to consider the technological
   and usage interface of the datacommunications strata the Internet
   technology belongs to with the telecommunications (hardware, signal)
   and the metacommunications (semiotic, meaning and semantic coherence)
   strata.


9.  Security considerations

   The Precautionary domain is an environmental extension of security.
   Failing to consider it would be a major security violation.


10.  IANA considerations

   The main Internet issue, until it transitions to an MDRS
   (Multilingual Distributed Referential Systemic) permiting the multi-
   dissemination of the user-centric metastructure necessary to support
   the Multilingual and Semantic Internet, is the precaution of
   protecting the IANA independence from political, strategic,
   commercial interests.

   This Memo gives some hints on the way to proceed, but did not intent
   to discuss the non-technical Internet Governance issues.


11.  References




Morfin                    Expires June 18, 2009                [Page 17]

Internet-Draft           Precautionary principle           December 2008


11.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2026]  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision
              3", BCP 9, RFC 2026, October 1996.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC2418]  Bradner, S., "IETF Working Group Guidelines and
              Procedures", BCP 25, RFC 2418, September 1998.

   [RFC3774]  Davies, E., "IETF Problem Statement", RFC 3774, May 2004.

   [RFC3869]  Atkinson, R., Floyd, S., and Internet Architecture Board,
              "IAB Concerns and Recommendations Regarding Internet
              Research and Evolution", RFC 3869, August 2004.

   [RFC3935]  Alvestrand, H., "A Mission Statement for the IETF",
              BCP 95, RFC 3935, October 2004.

11.2.  Informative References

   [PROTO]    Changes are expected over time, "PROTO Shepherd Write-up",
              Sept. 17 2008,
              <http://www.ietf.org/IESG/content/Doc-Writeup.html>.


Appendix A.  Acknowledgments

   Thanks to Russ Housley for the questions he asked.  And to
   france@large for their help in addressing them.


Author's Address

   Jean-Francois C. Morfin
   INTLNET
   23 rue Saint Honore
   Versailles  78000
   France

   Phone: (33.1) 39 50 05 10
   Email: jefsey@jefsey.com
   URI:   http://intlnet.org







Morfin                    Expires June 18, 2009                [Page 18]

Internet-Draft           Precautionary principle           December 2008


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.











Morfin                    Expires June 18, 2009                [Page 19]


