
  L2VPN Working Group                H. Shah                       Ciena 
  Internet Draft                     E. Rosen              Cisco Systems 
                                     W. Augustyn              consultant 
  April 2005                         G. Heron                    Tellabs 
  Expires: September 2005            T. Smith            Laurel Networks 
                                     A. Moranganti     Big Band Networks 
                                     S. Khandekar                Alcatel 
                                     V. Kompella                 Alcatel 
                                     A. Malis                    Tellabs 
                                      S. Wright                Bell South 
                                      V. Radoaca       Westridge Networks 
                                      A. Vishwanathan    Force10 Networks 
                                        
                                      
  
           ARP Mediation for IP Interworking of Layer 2 VPN  
     
                   draft-ietf-l2vpn-arp-mediation-01.txt 
     
     
  Status of this memo                                       
      
    By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any   
    applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware   
    have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes   
    aware will be disclosed, in accordance with RFC 3668. 
     
    Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
    Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that 
    other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
    Drafts. 
     
    Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
    months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
    documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts 
    as reference 
    material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
     
    The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
    http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt. 
     
    The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
    http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
      
  Abstract  
     
    The VPWS service [L2VPN Framework] provides point-to-point 
    connections between pairs of Customer Edge (CE) devices.  It does 
    so by binding two Attachment Circuits (each connecting a CE device 
    with a Provider Edge, PE, device) to a Pseudowire (connecting the 
    two PEs).  In general, the Attachment Circuits must be of the same 
    technology (e.g., both ethernet, both ATM), and the Pseudowire must 
    carry the frames of that technology.  However, if it is known that 
    the frames' payload consists solely of IP datagrams, it is possible 
    to provide a point-to-point connection in which the Pseudowire 
                 draft-ietf-l2vpn-arp-mediation-01.txt 
  
    connects Attachment Circuits of different technologies.  This 
    requires the PEs to perform a function known as "ARP Mediation".  
    ARP Mediation refers to the process of resolving Layer 2 addresses 
    when different resolution protocols are used on either Attachment 
    Circuit. The methods described in this document are applicable even 
    when the CEs run a routing protocol between them, as long as the 
    routing protocol runs over IP. In particular, the applicability of 
    ARP mediation to ISIS is not addressed.  
     
     Table of Contents 
     
    1 .0 Introduction................................................2 
    2 .0 ARP Mediation (AM) function.................................3 
    3 .0 IP Layer 2 Interworking Circuits............................4 
    4 .0 Discovery of IP Addresses of Locally Attached CE Device.....4 
    4.1 Monitoring Local Traffic.....................................4 
    4.2 CE Devices Using ARP.........................................4 
    4.3 CE Devices Using Inverse ARP.................................5 
    4.4 CE Devices Using PPP.........................................6 
    4.5 Router Discovery method......................................6 
    5 .0 CE IP Address Signaling between PEs.........................7 
    5.1 When to Signal a CEÆs IP Address.............................7 
    5.2 LDP Based Distribution.......................................7 
    5.3 Out-of-band Distribution Configuration.......................8 
    6 .0 How a CE Learns the Remote CE's IP address..................8 
    6.1 CE Devices Using ARP.........................................8 
    6.2 CE Devices Using Inverse ARP.................................9 
    6.3 CE Devices Using PPP.........................................9 
    7 .0 Use of IGPs with IP L2 Interworking L2VPNs..................9 
    7.1 OSPF.........................................................9 
    7.2 RIP.........................................................10 
    8 .0 Security Considerations....................................10 
    8.1 Control plane security......................................10 
    8.2 Data plane security.........................................11 
    9 .0 Acknowledgements...........................................11 
    10 .0 References................................................11 
    10.1 Normative References.......................................11 
    10.2 Informative References.....................................11 
    11 .0 Authors' Addresses........................................12 
     
    1.0 Introduction 
     
    Layer 2 Virtual Private Networks (L2VPN) are constructed over  a 
    Service Provider IP backbone but are presented to the Customer Edge 
    (CE) devices as Layer 2 networks.  In theory, L2VPNs can carry any 
    Layer 3 protocol, but in many cases, the  Layer 3 protocol is IP.  
    Thus it makes sense to consider procedures that are  optimized for 
    IP. 
     
    In a typical implementation, illustrated in the diagram below, the 
    CE devices are connected to the Provider Edge (PE) devices via 
    Attachment Circuits (AC).  The ACs are Layer 2 links.  In a pure 
   
 Shah, et. al.           Expires September 2005                       2 
                 draft-ietf-l2vpn-arp-mediation-01.txt 
  
    L2VPN, if traffic sent from CE1 via AC1 reaches CE2 via AC2, both 
    ACs would have to be of the same type (i.e., both Ethernet, both 
    FR, etc.). However, if it is known that only IP traffic will be 
    carried, the ACs can be of different technologies, provided that 
    the PEs provide the appropriate procedures to allow the proper 
    transfer of IP packets. 
     
                                                     +-----+ 
                                +--------------------| CE3 | 
                                |                    +-----+ 
                             +-----+ 
                     ........| PE3 |......... 
                     .       +-----+        . 
                     .          |           . 
                     .          |           . 
      +-----+ AC1 +-----+    Service     +-----+ AC2 +-----+ 
      | CE1 |-----| PE1 |--- Provider ---| PE2 |-----| CE2 | 
      +-----+     +-----+    Backbone    +-----+     +-----+ 
                     .                      . 
                     ........................ 
     
    A CE, which is connected via a given type of AC, may use an IP 
    Address Resolution procedure that is specific to that type of AC.  
    For example, an Ethernet-attached CE would use ARP, a FR-attached 
    CE might use Inverse ARP.  If we are to allow the two CEs to have a 
    Layer 2 connection between them, even though each AC uses a 
    different Layer 2 technology, the PEs must intercept and "mediate" 
    the Layer 2 specific address resolution procedures. 
     
    In this draft, we specify the procedures, which the PEs must 
    implement in order to mediate the IP address resolution mechanism.  
    We call these procedures "ARP Mediation".  
     
    Consider a Virtual Private Wire Service (VPWS) constructed between 
    CE1 and CE2 in the diagram above.  If AC1 and AC2 are of different 
    technologies, e.g. AC1 is Ethernet and AC2 is Frame Relay (FR), 
    then ARP requests coming from CE1 cannot be passed transparently to 
    CE2.  PE1 must interpret the meaning of the ARP requests and 
    mediate the necessary information with PE2 before responding. 
     
    2.0 ARP Mediation (AM) function 
     
    The ARP Mediation (AM) function is an element of a PE node  that 
    deals with the IP address resolution for CE devices connected via 
    an L2VPN. By placing this function in the PE node, ARP Mediation is 
    transparent to the CE devices. 
           
    For a given point-to-point connection between a pair of CEs, a PE 
    must perform three logical steps as part of the ARP Mediation 
    procedure: 
         
      1. Discover the IP addresses of the locally attached CE device 
   
 Shah, et. al.           Expires September 2005                       3 
                 draft-ietf-l2vpn-arp-mediation-01.txt 
  
      2. Distribute those IP Addresses to the remote PE 
      3. Notify the locally attached CE of the remote CE's IP address. 
          
    This information is gathered using the mechanisms described in the 
    following sections.  
     
    3.0 IP Layer 2 Interworking Circuits 
     
    The IP Layer 2 Interworking Circuits refer to Pseudowires that 
    carry IP datagrams as payload.  The ingress PE removes the data 
    link header of its local Attachment Circuit and transmits the 
    payload (an IP frame) over the Pseudowire with or without the 
    optional control word. The egress PE encapsulates the IP packet 
    with the data link header used on its local Attachment Circuit. 
     
    The IP Pseudowire encapsulation is described in [PWE3-IANA]. 
     
    4.0 Discovery of IP Addresses of Locally Attached CE Device 
     
    An IP Layer 2 Interworking Circuit enters monitoring state 
    immediately  after the configuration. During this state it performs 
    two functions. 
       . Discovery of locally attached CE IP device 
       . Establishment of the PW 
     
    The establishment of the PW occurs independently from local CE IP 
    address discovery. During the period when the (bi-directional) PW 
    has been established but local CE IP device has not been detected, 
    only datagrams inside of broadcast/multicast frames are propagated; 
    IP datagrams inside unicast frames are dropped. The IP datagrams 
    from unicast frames flow only when IP end systems on both 
    Attachment Circuits have been discovered, notified and proxy 
    functions have completed. 
     
    4.1 Monitoring Local Traffic 
     
    The PE devices may learn the IP addresses of the locally attached 
    CEs from any IP traffic, such as link local multicast packets 
    (e.g., destined to 224.0.0.x), and are not restricted to the 
    operations below.  
     
    4.2 CE Devices Using ARP 
     
    If a CE device uses ARP to determine the MAC address to IP address 
    binding of its neighbor, the PE processes the ARP requests to learn 
    the IP address of local CE for the stated locally attached circuit. 
    If we observe the strict topology restriction whereby only one IP 
    router CE can exist for a given attachment circuit then the PE can 
   
 Shah, et. al.           Expires September 2005                       4 
                 draft-ietf-l2vpn-arp-mediation-01.txt 
  
    assume that ARP request received is from the candidate IP CE and 
    can learn the IP to MAC address binding of the local CE.  
      
    However, if this topology restriction is relaxed, the PE can learn 
    the MAC address to IP address binding of the local CE but can not 
    assume that this CE (possibly amongst many) is the candidate IP 
    device that is to be interworked with the remote attachment 
    circuit. In this case, the PE may select the local CE device using 
    following criteria. 
     
      .  Wait to learn the IP address of the remote CE (through PW 
         signaling) and then select the local CE that is sending the 
         ARP request for the remote CEÆs IP address. 
      .   Augment cross checking with the local IP address learned 
         through listening of link local multicast packets (as per 
         section 4.1 above) 
      .   Augment cross checking with the local IP address learned 
         through the Router Discovery protocol (as described below in 
         section 4.5). 
      .   There is still a possibility that the local PE may not receive 
         an IP address advertisement from the remote PE and there may 
         exist multiple local IP routers that attempt to 'connect' to 
         remote CEs. In this situation, the local PE may use some other  
         criteria to select one IP device from many (such as ôthe first 
         ARP receivedö), or an operator may configure the IP address of 
         local CE. Note that the operator does not have to configure 
         the IP address of the remote CE (as that would be learned 
         through Pseudowire signaling). 
      
    Once the local CE has been discovered for the given Attachment 
    Circuit, the local PE responds to subsequent ARP requests from that 
    device with its own MAC address. The local PE signals the CEÆs IP 
    address to the remote PE and may initiate an unsolicited ARP 
    response to notify local CE MAC address to  IP address binding of 
    the remote CE. Once this is completed, unicast traffic between two 
    CEs can start flowing. 
      
    The PE may periodically generate ARP request messages to the CE's 
    IP address as a means of verifying the continued existence of the 
    address and its binding to the MAC address. The absence of a 
    response from the CE device for a given number of retries could be 
    used as cause for withdrawal of the IP address advertisement to the 
    remote PE. The local PE would then enter into the address 
    resolution phase to rediscover the attached CE's IP address. Note 
    that this "heartbeat" scheme is needed only for broadcast links, as 
    the loss of a CE may otherwise be undetectable. 
     
    4.3 CE Devices Using Inverse ARP 
     
   
 Shah, et. al.           Expires September 2005                       5 
                 draft-ietf-l2vpn-arp-mediation-01.txt 
  
    If a CE device uses Inverse ARP to determine the IP address of its 
    neighbor, the attached PE processes the Inverse ARP request for 
    stated circuit and responds with an Inverse ARP reply containing 
    the remote CE's IP address, if the address is known. If the PE does 
    not yet have the remote CE's IP address, it does not respond, but 
    notes the IP address of the local CE and the circuit information. 
    Subsequently, when the IP address of the remote CE becomes 
    available, the PE may initiate the Inverse ARP request as a means 
    to notify the local CE about the IP address of the remote CE. 
     
    This is a typical operation for Frame Relay and ATM attachment 
    circuits. When the CE does not use Inverse ARP, PE could still 
    discover the local CEÆs IP address as described in section 4.1 and 
    4.5.  
     
    4.4 CE Devices Using PPP 
     
    When a PPP link becomes operational after the LCP negotiations, the 
    local PE performs following actions 
       . If the local PE does not know the IP address of the local CE, 
         it generates a configure-request without the configure IP 
         address TLV. The response from CE is accepted as IP address of 
         the local CE. 
       . If PE knows the IP address of the remote CE, it sends an IPCP 
         configure-request with the IP address of the remote CE in the 
         configure IP address TLV 
       . If the local PE receives an IPCP configure-request without the 
         configure IP address TLV, and if it knows the IP address of 
         the remote CE, it responds with configure NAK with the 
         configure IP address TLV set with remote CEÆs IP address. 
         However, if PE does not know the remote CEÆs IP address yet, 
         it responds with a configure NAK. 
       . If the local PE does not know the IP address of the remote CE, 
         it sends an IPCP configure-request with IP address as zero. 
         The response from CE is recorded and used to validate the 
         incoming remote CEÆs IP address via PW signaling. 
         
    The local PE must deny configurations such as header compression 
    and encryptions in the NCP packets with such options. 
     
    4.5 Router Discovery method 
     
    In order to learn the IP address of the CE device for a given 
    Attachment Circuit, the PE device may execute Router Discovery 
    Protocol [RFC 1256] whereby a Router Discovery Request (ICMP û 
    router solicitation) message is sent using a source IP address of 
    zero. The IP address of the CE device is extracted from the Router 
    Discovery Response (ICMP û router advertisement) message from the 
    CE.  
     
   
 Shah, et. al.           Expires September 2005                       6 
                 draft-ietf-l2vpn-arp-mediation-01.txt 
  
    The use of the Router Discovery method by the PE is optional. 
     
    5.0 CE IP Address Signaling between PEs 
     
    5.1 When to Signal a CEÆs IP Address  
     
    A PE device advertises the IP address of the attached CE only when 
    the encapsulation type of the Pseudowire is IP L2 interworking . It 
    is quite possible that the IP address of a CE device is not 
    available at the time the PW labels are signaled. For example, in 
    Frame Relay the CE device sends an inverse ARP request only when 
    the DLCI is active; if the PE signals the DLCI to be active only 
    when it has received the IP address along with the PW FEC from the 
    remote PE, a chicken and egg situation arises. In order to avoid 
    such problems, the PE must be prepared to advertise the PW FEC 
    before the CE's IP address is known. When the IP address of the CE 
    device does become available, the PE re-advertises the PW FEC along 
    with the IP.  
     
    Similarly, if the PE detects  a CE's IP address is no longer 
    valid(by methods described above), the PE must re-advertise the PW 
    FEC with null IP address to denote the withdrawal of the CE's IP 
    address. The receiving PE then waits for notification of the remote 
    IP address. During this period, propagation of unicast IP traffic 
    is suspended, but multicast IP traffic can continue to flow. 
      
    If two CE devices are locally attached to the PE where one CE is 
    connected to an Ethernet port and the other to a Frame Relay port, 
    for example, the IP addresses are learned in the same manner 
    described above. However, since the CE devices are local, the 
    distribution of IP addresses for these CE devices is a local step. 
     
    5.2 LDP Based Distribution 
     
    The [PWE3-CONTROL] uses Label Distribution Protocol (LDP) transport 
    to exchange PW FEC in the Label Mapping message in the Downstream 
    Unsolicited (DU) mode. The PW FEC comes in two flavors; PWid and 
    Generalized ID FEC elements and have some  common fields between 
    them. The discussions below refer to these common fields for IP L2 
    Interworking Circuits.  
     
    The IP L2 Interworking uses an IP datagram as payload over the 
    Pseudowire[PWE3-IANA].  
         
    In addition, this document defines an IP address TLV that must be 
    included as an optional parameter in the  Label Mapping message 
    when advertising the PW FEC for the IP L2 Interworking Circuit. The  
    use of optional parameters in the Label Mapping message to extend 
    the attributes of the PW FEC is specified in the [PWE3-Control].  
   
 Shah, et. al.           Expires September 2005                       7 
                 draft-ietf-l2vpn-arp-mediation-01.txt 
  
     
    When processing a received PW FEC, the PE matches the PW Id and PW 
    type with the locally configured PW Id to determine if the PW FEC 
    is of type IP L2 Interworking. If there is a match, it further 
    checks the presence of IP address optional parameter. If absent, a 
    Label Release message is issued to reject the PW establishment.  
     
    The optional parameter of the Label Mapping message is defined as 
    follows. 
     
    Optional Parameter   type    length    value 
    IP address           TBD      04       CEÆs IP address 
     
    The IP address field is set to value null to denote that 
    advertising PE has not learned the IP address of his local CE 
    device. The non-zero value of the IP address field denotes IP 
    address of advertising PEÆs attached CE device.  
     
    The CEÆs IP address is also supplied in the optional parameter 
    field of the LDPÆs Notification message along with the PW FEC. The 
    LDP Notification message is used to signal the change in CEÆs IP 
    address. 
     
    5.3 Out-of-band Distribution Configuration 
     
    In some cases, it may not be possible either to deduce the IP 
    addresses from the VPN traffic nor induce remote PEs to supply the 
    necessary information on demand.  For those cases, out-of-band 
    methods, such as manual configuration,  MAY be used.   
    6.0 How a CE Learns the Remote CE's IP address  
         
    Once the local PE has received the remote CE's IP address 
    information from the remote PE, it will either initiate an address 
    resolution request or respond to an outstanding request from the 
    attached CE device. 
     
    6.1 CE Devices Using ARP     
     
    When the PE learns the remote CE's IP address as described in 
    section 5.1 and 5.2, it may or may not know the local CE's IP 
    address. If the local CE's IP address is not known, the PE must 
    wait until it is acquired through one of the methods described in 
    sections 4.1, 4.3 and 4.5. If the IP address of the local CE is 
    known, the PE may choose to generate an unsolicited ARP message to 
    notify the local CE about the binding of the remote CE's IP address 
    with the PE's own MAC address. 
     
    When the local CE generates an ARP request, the PE must proxy the 
    ARP response using its own MAC address as the source hardware 
   
 Shah, et. al.           Expires September 2005                       8 
                 draft-ietf-l2vpn-arp-mediation-01.txt 
  
    address and remote CE's IP address as the source protocol address. 
    The PE must respond only to those ARP requests whose destination 
    protocol address matches the remote CE's IP address. 
     
    6.2 CE Devices Using Inverse ARP 
         
    When the PE learns the remote CE's IP address, it should generate 
    an Inverse ARP request. In case, the local circuit requires 
    activation e.g. Frame Relay, PE should activate it first before 
    sending Inverse ARP request. It should be noted, that PE might 
    never receive the response to its own request, nor see any CE's 
    Inverse ARP request in cases where CE is pre-configured with remote 
    CE IP address or the use of Inverse ARP is not enabled. In either 
    case CE has used other means to learn the IP address of his 
    neighbor. 
     
    6.3 CE Devices Using PPP 
         
    When the PE learns the remote CE's IP address, it should initiate 
    the Configure-Request using the remote CE's IP address or respond 
    to pending Configure-Request from the local CE. As noted earlier, 
    all other configuration options related to compression, 
    encryptions, etc., should be rejected. 
       
    7.0 Use of IGPs with IP L2 Interworking L2VPNs  
     
    In an IP L2 interworking L2VPN, when an IGP on a CE connected to a 
    broadcast link is cross-connected with an IGP on a CE connected to 
    a point-to-point link, there are routing protocol related issues 
    that must be addressed. The link state routing protocols are 
    cognizant of the underlying link characteristics and behave 
    accordingly when establishing neighbor adjacencies, representing 
    the network topology, and passing protocol packets. 
     
    7.1 OSPF  
         
    The OSPF protocol treats a broadcast link type with a special 
    procedure that engages in neighbor discovery to elect a designated 
    and a backup designated router (DR and BDR respectively) with which 
    it forms adjacencies. However, these procedures are neither 
    applicable nor understood by OSPF running on a point-to-point link. 
    By cross-connecting two neighbors with disparate link types, an IP 
    L2 interworking L2VPN may experience connectivity issues. 
     
    Additionally, the link type specified in the router LSA will not 
    match for two routers that are supposedly sharing the same link 
    type. Finally, each OSPF router generates network LSAs when 
    connected to a broadcast link such as Ethernet, receipt of which by 
   
 Shah, et. al.           Expires September 2005                       9 
                 draft-ietf-l2vpn-arp-mediation-01.txt 
  
    an OSPF router on the point-to-point link further adds to the 
    confusion. 
         
    Fortunately, the OSPF protocol provides a configuration option 
    (ospfIfType), whereby OSPF will treat the underlying physical 
    broadcast link as a point-to-point link. 
         
    It is strongly recommended that all OSPF protocols on CE devices 
    connected to Ethernet interfaces use this configuration option when 
    attached to a PE that is participating in an IP L2 Interworking 
    VPN. 
     
     
    7.2 RIP  
         
    RIP protocol broadcasts RIP advertisements every 30 seconds. If the 
    group/broadcast address snooping mechanism is used as described 
    above, the attached PE can learn the advertising (CE) router's IP 
    address from the IP header of the advertisement. No special 
    configuration is required for RIP in this type of Layer 2 IP 
    Interworking L2VPN. 
     
    8.0 Security Considerations  
     
    The security aspect of this solution is addressed for two planes; 
    control plane and data plane.  
     
    8.1 Control plane security 
     
    The control plane security pertains to establishing the LDP 
    connection, Pseudowire establishment and CEÆs IP address 
    distribution. The LDP connection between two trusted PEs can be 
    achieved by each PE verifying the incoming connection against the 
    configured peerÆs address and authenticating the LDP messages using 
    MD5 authentication. The Pseudowire establishments between two 
    secure LDP peers do not pose security issue but mis-wiring could 
    occur due to configuration error. Some checks, such as, proper 
    Pseudowire type and other Pseudowire options may prevent mis-wiring 
    due to configuration errors. 
     
    The learning of the appropriate CEÆs IP address can be a security 
    issue. It is expected that the local attachment circuit to CE is 
    physically secured. If this is a concern, the PE must be configured 
    with CEÆs IP and MAC address when connected with Ethernet or CEÆs 
    IP and virtual circuit information (e.g. DLCI or VPI/VCI). During 
    each ARP/inARP frame processing, PE must verify the received 
    information against the configuration before accepting to protect 
    against hijacking the connection. 
   
 Shah, et. al.           Expires September 2005                      10 
                 draft-ietf-l2vpn-arp-mediation-01.txt 
  
    8.2 Data plane security 
     
    The data traffic between CE and PE is not encrypted and it is 
    possible that in an insecure environment, a malicious user may tap 
    into the CE to PE connection and generate traffic using the spoofed 
    destination MAC address on the Ethernet Attachment Circuit. In 
    order to avoid such hijacking, local PE may verify the source MAC 
    address of the received frame against the MAC address of the 
    admitted connection. The frame is forwarded to PW only when 
    authenticity is verified. When spoofing is detected, PE must severe 
    the connection with the local CE, tear down the PW and start over.  
     
     
    9.0 Acknowledgements 
         
    The authors would like to thank Yetik Serbest, Prabhu Kavi, Bruce 
    Lasley and other folks who participated in the discussions related 
    to this draft. 
     
    10.0 References 
     
    10.1 Normative References 
     
    [ARP] RFC 826, STD 37, D. Plummer, "An Ethernet Address Resolution 
    Protocol:  Or Converting Network Protocol Addresses to 48.bit 
    Ethernet Addresses for Transmission on Ethernet Hardware". 
      
    [INVARP] RFC 2390, T. Bradley et al., "Inverse Address Resolution 
    Protocol".     
     
    10.2 Informative References 
     
     
    [L2VPN-FRM] L. Andersson et al., "Framework for L2VPN", June 2004, 
    work in progress. 
     
    [PPP-IPCP] RFC 1332, G. McGregor, "The PPP Internet Protocol 
    Control Protocol (IPCP)". 
     
     
    [PWE3-CONTROL] L. Martini et al., "Pseudowire Setup and Maintenance 
    using LDP", February 2005, work in progress. 
     
    [PWE3-IANA] L. Martini et al,. ôIANA Allocations for pseudo Wire 
    Edge to Edge Emulation (PWE3)ö, February 2005, work in progress. 
     
          
     
   
 Shah, et. al.           Expires September 2005                      11 
                 draft-ietf-l2vpn-arp-mediation-01.txt 
  
    [PROXY-ARP] RFC 925, J. Postel, "Multi-LAN Address Resolution". 
     
     
    11.0 Authors' Addresses 
     
    Himanshu Shah 
    35 Nagog Park, 
    Acton, MA 01720 
    Email: hshah@ciena.com 
     
    Eric Rosen 
    Cisco Systems  
    1414 Massachusetts Avenue,  
    Boxborough, MA 01719 
    Email: erosen@cisco.com 
     
    Waldemar Augustyn 
    Email: waldemar@nxp.com 
     
    Giles Heron 
    Email: giles@tellabs.com 
     
    Sunil Khandekar and Vach Kompella 
    Email: sunil@timetra.com 
    Email: vkompella@timetra.com 
     
    Toby Smith 
    Laurel Networks 
    Omega Corporate Center 
    1300 Omega drive 
    Pittsburgh, PA 15205 
    Email: jsmith@laurelnetworks.com 
     
    Arun Vishwanathan 
    Force10 Networks 
    1440 McCarthy Blvd., 
    Milpitas, CA 95035 
    Email: arun@force10networks.com 
     
     
    Andrew G. Malis 
    Tellabs 
    2730 Orchard Parkway 
    San Jose, CA 95134 
    Email: Andy.Malis@vivacenetworks.com 
     
    Steven Wright 
    Bell South Corp 
    Email: steven.wright@bellsouth.com 
     
    Vasile Radoaca 
    Email: vasile@westridgenetworks.com 
   
 Shah, et. al.           Expires September 2005                      12 
                 draft-ietf-l2vpn-arp-mediation-01.txt 
  
     
  IPR Notice 
     
    The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
    intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to 
    pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in 
    this document or the extent to which any license under such rights 
    might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it 
    has made any effort to identify any such rights. Information on the 
    IETFÆs procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and 
    standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11. Copies of 
    claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances 
    of licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made 
    to obtain a general license or permission of such proprietary 
    rights by implementers or users of this specification can be 
    obtained from the IETF Secretariat. 
     
    The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
    copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
    rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice 
    this standard. Please address the information to the IETF Executive 
    Director. 
     
  Full Copyright Statement 
    Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).  This document is 
    subject 
    to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78 and 
    except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights. 
     
    This document and the information contained herein are provided on 
    an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE 
    REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND 
    THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, 
    EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT 
    THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR 
    ANY IMPLIED 
    WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
     
  
     
   
 Shah, et. al.           Expires September 2005                      13 

