
Internet-Draft                                                Nora Liao
document: draft-liao-mpls-ofcl-tsl-00.txt                        Wei Li 
                                                            Zhengbin Li
                                               Peking University, China                                	
Expires:  June 2005                                        December 2004



  	          Time Space Label Switching Protocol 
	(TSL-SP) Description for Optical Burst Switched Netwoks
		
	
Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, I certify that any applicable
   patent or other IPR claims of which I am aware have been disclosed,
   or will be disclosed, and any of which I become aware will be
   disclosed, in accordance with RFC 3668.
   
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering    
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that    
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.   
   
   This document may not be modified, and derivative works of it may not
   be created, except to publish it as an RFC and to translate it into
   languages other than English.
   
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months    
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any    
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference    
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
       
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt. 
    
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
   
   
Copyright Notice


   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).  All Rights Reserved.                                                                   
                                                                           		

Abstract

  In this article, we propose a protocol of time-space label switching.
   First we give the definition to time-space label and time-space
   label, switched paths, then expatiate on the process of building and
   removing time-space label switched paths, finally bring forward the
   resource forecasting scheme and the architecture for OBS Networks,
   which based on time-space label switched protocol.

Nora Liao                                                       [Page 1]
Internet-Draft                TSL-SP                       November 2004


Table of Contents


   1. Introduction.....................................................2
   2. Backgrounds......................................................3 
   3. Label Related Formats............................................4
     3.1 Time Label....................................................4
     3.2 Space Label...................................................5
     3.3 Time Space Label..............................................5
   4. Time Space Label Switched Paths..................................6   
     4.1 Resource Forecast Scheme......................................6
     4.2 Routing algorithm.............................................8             
     4.3 Path Processing...............................................8
   5. Architecture for OBS Networks based on TSL-SP....................9 
     5.1 Logistic Configurations.......................................9
     5.2 hysical Configurations........................................9
   6. Next Steps......................................................11
   7. Conventions.....................................................11 
   8. References......................................................11
   9. Intellectual Property Considerations............................12
   10. Authors' Addresses.............................................12
   11. Full Copyright Statement.......................................13
  
                                                                                                               Page 2 of 12                                                								
1. Introduction


   Time-space label switching is a new type of switching method, which
   combines OBS(optical burst switching) with GMPLS (generalized
   multi-protocol label switching) and supports the self-similitude
   property of modern network flux and multi-granularity OBS (including
   wavelength level, waveband level and fiber level etc). Using the
   thought of optical label in GMPLS for reference, a new method of
   label, that is time label and space label was brought forward. In
   this method, time label corresponds to signaling function, while
   space label corresponds to routing function which is also called
   addressing function, and consequently the binding of routing and
   signaling was achieved by time-space label switching. By running
   time-space label switching protocol in OBS Networks and building
   time-space label switched paths between a source node and an
   objective node, resource can be assigned effectively by time and
   space two dimensions. According to all network state information,
   routing table is computed by blurry forecasting arithmetic at the
   entrance of network.

  OBS Networks based on Time Space Label Switched Protocol adopt
   double-deck structure which includes controlling plane and transfer
   plane. The controlling group which assembles time label including the
   information of burst package occupation of bandwidth, space label
   including the information of routing and other relative information
   is forwarded on the controlling plane, it reserves resource for the

  
   
Nora Liao                                                       [Page 2]
Internet-Draft                TSL-SP                       November 2004

   corresponding data package which comes after a bias-time. Time-space
   label switching router deals with the controlling group, forwards
   the label and controls switching module.
   
   In this draft, first we introduce the backgrounds and basic concept 
   of time-space label switching, then based on the blurry forecasting
   of all network resource state we discuss the method of building
   time-space label switched paths and study how network synchronous 
   precision affects OBS Networks performance.


2. Backgrounds
   
   
   OBS Networks have the characteristics of short last time of linking
   and paroxysmal operation arrival velocity in time domain, namely,
   relative to other networks; ingress nodes can make more requests for
   linking in the same time slot, as illustrated in picture 1a). All
   call requests arrive at t1 time  , however node does not have
   adequate resources to be assigned., so part of the requests have to
   wait for an average waiting time Tw  until t2  they can be served,
   consequently the robability of network block becomes higher; at the
   same time, the cost of organizing networks is higher for needing
   buffering. If moving part of the requests to time t2 directly, namely,
   assigning serve slots of each node in routing paths to burst packages
   by PRI and other factors before source nodes send their requests, 
   not only buffering is no longer needed, but also the rate of request
   processing is increased, the probability of block is decreased.
   Time t1,t2,t3 .... when requesting for service should lap over the
   time when requests arrive at local nodes, so assigning time slot must
   synthetically consider two factors: first, the time when requests
   arrive; second, the time when nodes are free. This is the radical
   mind of time-space label. Define the time t1,t2,t3 .... as time 
   label (as illustrated in picture 1b). Time label assigns service
   time, flexibly attempers network resource and decreases the
   probability of network blocking by the requests which are going to
   arrive at nodes.
 
 
 
 
                           t1                        t2
                                
                            |     request call1       |                    
                            |                         |
    call1 call2 call3 (new) |   call4 (new)           |
    ----------------------->|  ---------------------->|------------>time
                            |   call2 call3 (blocked) |
               		    |                         |
              	            |                         |

   Figure 1: delay requests for service      
   
   
   
Nora Liao                                                       [Page 3]
Internet-Draft                TSL-SP                       November 2004  
   
     
    

                t1              t2              t3   
             
                 |               |               |
                 | request call1 | request call2 |
                 |               |               |
     call1 (new) |   call2 (new) |   call3 (new) |
    ------------>|  ------------>|  ------------>|----------------->time
                 |               |               | 
                 |               |               |

   Figure 2: time label requests for service


  In other words, the separation of routing and signaling is also the
   main reason for network blocking, because it results in resource
   assigned in one dimension but conflicting in the other dimension.
   Although we use fiber delay line to deal with the competitive
   conflicts breaking out in the middle nodes at present, the method
   is just a makeshift, further more the ameliorative effect is not
   distinct in high speed optical networks. Therefore, we can not make
   a radical improvement of network performance unless solve the
   separation of routing and signaling and achieve the statistical
   multiplexing of resource. Time-space label switching protocol
   writes time label - signaling and space label - routing into
   controlling groups, binds signaling and routing, assigns resource
   in time and space two dimensions, ends the history of separation of
   signaling and routing, decreases the probability of network
   blocking radically.


3. Label Related Formats

3.1 Time Label


   Define the precise time when burst data packages via routing paths
   arrive at each node in the link as " time label " T_ijnk , depicted
   in the following formula : T_ijnk=L_ijnk /v+T_ijni
  In the formula, T_ijnk(n=1,2,....m represents there are m paths)
   represents the time when burst packages via marginal network node I
   passing through the path n selected beforehand arrive at middle node
   k(k=1,2,...N represents there are N nodes on the path); L_ijnk
   represents the distance between source node I and the middle node K
   on the time-space label switched path n; v represents the velocity of
   light in the fiber, v=c/n, c represents the velocity of light
   in vacuum, n represents refractive index of fiber; TIJnI  represents
   the time when burst packages are sent from marginal nodes.





Nora Liao                                                       [Page 4]
Internet-Draft                TSL-SP                       November 2004  


   The time difference when burst packages and controlling group are
   sent from source nodes is ?T=Tc-Tb , it should be longer or equal
   to the "bias time" of source node in JET Protocol, namely, ?T=?di
   (i=1,‡N) (  represents the sum of time in which the ith middle node
   processes controlling group and the time in which optical-switch
   switches). On account of being lack of optical logic and optical
   buffering apparatus, once burst packages are sent from source node,
   the packages will transfer transparently without additive delay in
   the network (including every node) at velocity of light, hence as
   long as we confirm the time when burst packages are sent from source
   node, the "time label" of each node on the path can be exactly
   predicted.


3.2 Space Label 
  
  
   Similar to the method of GMPLS label, we make the nodes on the
   selected switched paths where burst packages are about to be
   transferred along with certain attribute of ports on the paths as
   space label, space label is denoted by Node ID and Port ID in the
   controlling group respectively. In the network, the input ports and
   output ports of one node itself are called local ports, while the
   input and output ports of nearby nodes are called forane ports. Port
   label can be any granularity port in the optics domain, it includes
   three essential information: the type of port switching, biggest
   bandwidth ( how many can be reserved ) and the type of digital
   coding. Space label makes use of routing information to felicitously
   distribute space resource.
   

3.3 Time Space Label


   The time label and space label of each node on the routing path are
   included in controlling group in the form of label stack; accordingly
   form the time-space label. Because of neglecting the time in which
   burst packages pass the inner of the middle nodes, each middle node
   in OBS Networks has the same time label of input port and output port.
   
  Substantially, time label is a signaling protocol of services
   assignment function, while space label has the function of routing.
   Consequently, time-space label has these characteristics:
  
   1. Time-space label must have unique mark in the whole network, so
      that label information can be distinguished anywhere in the net.
   2. The setting of space label requires the topology and state
      information of the whole network.
   3. In the OBS Networks running time-space label switching protocol,
      we must avoid using photonics storage apparatus, otherwise the
      function of time label can not be implemented.
      
      
      
Nora Liao                                                       [Page 5]
Internet-Draft                TSL-SP                       November 2004  

      
   4. Time label requires synchronous precision in the whole net.
      Compared with bit and package synchronization, because of the
      error of net synchronization has been decreased to lower than, all
      existing network synchronous precisions meet the need of time label.
   5. Time-space label can make stack operation.

 
4. Time Space Label Switched Paths

4.1 Resource Forecast Scheme


   As far as the marginal nodes of time-space label network are
   concerned, building time-space label switched paths for burst package
   switching depends on the state information of whole net. However, on
   account of the influences of rate of kernel node processing, distance
   of the transfer of state information and other factors, it is
   difficult to refresh state information in real-time, so the whole net
   state information recorded in the marginal nodes is lagged, it isn't
   synchronous with the information about occupancy of network resource.
   Hence, if we want to make OBS Networks which based on time-space
   label compatible with current networks, one of the pivotal problems
   is how to accurately reserve network resource by using lagged state
   information in initialization. We introduce blurry subject grade
   function to study the problem of how to predict resource in the
   time-space label network. For a blurry data, subject grade indicates
   the blurry grade of this data.Combined with the characteristics of
   TSL-SP Protocol, we analyze the factors about how the blurry subject
   grade of resource state's information can be influenced, these
   factors are shown as follows:
   
   1. Node's ability of information processing : Processing rate may not
      catch up with the change of dynamic call if processing ability is
      weak.
   2. Distance of the transfer of state information : the farther the
      distance between middle node and source node, the higher blurry
      grade of information is.
   3. The rate of refreshment of node's state information : the shorter
      the period of refreshment and faster of rate, the higher grade of
      dependence of information is.
   4. The historical information of each node stored in the marginal
      node's entire net state information base.
      
   The information on occupation of wavelength which every kernel node
   sends to the whole net state resource database has only two states,
   "0" and "1". We define "0" represent free, "1" represent occupied.
   Therefore according to the historical distribution of "0" and "1"
   state of each node's wavelength resource in the whole net resource
   database, we can estimate the busy grade of corresponding wavelength,
   the probability of going to be occupied.
 
 
 
 
Nora Liao                                                       [Page 6]
Internet-Draft                TSL-SP                       November 2004 

   
  According to the above analysis, we bring forward two strategies for
   resource prediction.

   1. Wavelength Prediction
  
   Make distance of the transfer of node state information L, period of
   refreshment T, busy grade of wavelength P as influencing factors of
   computing subject grade. The period of refreshment of node state is
   a random variable, the average period ?  and variance di of
   refreshment are computed by statistics. Compute the correctional 
   factor e (0<e<1) of state information by selecting suitable subject 
   grade function, such as united gauss function, along with the 
   original information of wavelengths ? (?=0,1)  we get the resource 
   information on computing time-space label switched paths, 
   i.e.  ?òe,(0+e,1-e) .
 

   2. Link Prediction
   
   
  Time-space label supports multiplicate switching granularity,
   therefore we introduce a forecasting scheme of link resource
   which based on fiber level. Also we can adopt the prediction of the
   actical wavelength arithmetic, change the node's wavelength resource
   into link resource is all right. Here, we introduce another scheme, 
   predict by the historical information in the database on the number 
   of wavelength being occupied. The more wavelengths on one link have    
   been occupied, the higher probability of releasing occupied 
   wavelengths whose service is done after several intervals of call 
   time, namely, the higher trend of decreasing the number of occupied 
   wavelengths, so the probability of link occupation is lower. Thus we 
   select the subject grade function of blurry number of wavelength 
   occupation to compute the information's correctional factor e (0<e<1).
   
  The existing routing arithmetic based on the probability of 
   practicable network resource is "1", when network resource can not be
   refreshed in time and the probability of practicable network resource
   P is in the range of  0=p=1, the routing and resource attemperation
   based on the existing routing arithmetic can not absolutely guarantee 
   the building of time-space label switched paths successfully.
   Consequently it is significant to introduce blurry function into 
   time-space label OBS Networks. Actually, there are many influencing 
   factors about blurry grade of database information, we are about to 
   do further research.    










Nora Liao                                                       [Page 7]
Internet-Draft                TSL-SP                       November 2004 


4.2 Router arithmetic


   In the OBS Networks based on time-space label, we introduce
   time-space routing (TSR) arithmetic. TSR, a confined routing 
   arithmetic, is used to detect the topology of network and assign 
   services. The radical principle is to find out the best switched 
   routing paths from time and space two dimensions. TSR arithmetic 
   is mainly divided into three steps :
                
   a) Controlling groups collect information of network state, build
      network state's database, select the shortest route from source
      node to objective node according to Dijkstra arithmetic, the 
      shortest-route arithmetic, and then get rid of this route, run 
      Dijkstra arithmetic again to select another shortest route.Thus 
      by circularly running Difkstra arithmetic we can gain many routes 
      between the source node and objective node. In these routes, the 
      shorter route has the higher PRI, namely, the routing aggregate 
      assembles different routes according to their PRI.The shortest 
      route has the highest PRI and sets on the top of the aggregate, 
      the rest may be deduced by analogy, the longest route sets at the 
      bottom of the aggregate. Consequently, the radical function of 
      routing protocol - addressing, is achieved in space domain;
      
   b) Comparing the time label of the best route setting on the top of 
      the routing aggregate with the time information stored in the 
      network state database, if there is no conflict, this route is 
      confirmed, otherwise go on to confirm the second best route in 
      the routing aggregate. The rest may be deduced by analogy, until 
      one route is confirmed. This confirmed route is the optimal route,
      i.e. service assignment is achieved in time domain.
      
   Actually, TSR is a scheme of space addressing which is confined in 
   time domain. The routing aggregate of time-space routing arithmetic 
   does not search for the shortest route unrestricted.There is a 
   threshold, if the threshold is exceeded, Dijkstra arithmetic should 
   be terminated.   


4.3 Path Processing


   Controlling groups contain the controlling information of time label
   stack and space label stack of the best route. In the distribution of
   controlling groups, time-space label is distributed on the optimal 
   route, reserve the bandwidth and slot of labeled node ports according 
   to the time label thereby build the time-space label switched paths 
   (TS-LSP) for burst data packages. The process of controlling 
   information is accomplished by time-space label router (TS-LR) of 
   kernel nodes, being different from GMPLS label router. TS-LR doesn't 
   need computation of routing in the kernel nodes, only does electrical 
   processing to the controlling groups, search in the local label 
   
   
Nora Liao                                                       [Page 8]
Internet-Draft                TSL-SP                       November 2004 

   
   information database for the routing information corresponding to the
   label which is on the top of space stack, controls the optical 
   switching modules to configure the bandwidth resource at predicted 
   time, resets the time-space label stack and forwards to the next step.
   

5. Architecture for OBS Networks based on TSL-SP

5.1 Logistic Configurations


  The configuration of OBS Networks based on time-space label protocol 
   is double-deck, data transfer plane and controlling plane.
 
   Data transfer plane consists of a series of transfer entities; it is
   the passage of operation transfer which provides monomial and 
   bidirectional point to point transfer for consumers' burst data 
   packages. Optical transfer nodes include optical switches, and other 
   apparatus. In addition, the structure of optical transfer plane is 
   layered, it contains optical passage layer, optical multiplexing 
   layer, optical transfer layer and supports multi-granularity OBS 
   (fiber level, wavelength level). Due to using time-space label 
   switching protocol to reserve resources, optical memory and OEO 
   conversion are no longer needed in the transfer layer, thereby 
   transparent all optical transfer is achieved in the transfer layer.
 
  Time-space label controlling plane (TSLCP) establishes swift and 
   effective time-space label switched paths (TS-LSP) and maintenance 
   in the transfer network. Controlling plane is the kernel part of 
   time-space label OBS Networks; it is composed of nodes distributed 
   in the network. Controlling network cells are mainly made up of 
   functional modules such as routing selection, controlling groups 
   forwarding, resource management and etc, the controlling cells 
   contact with each other and constitute the signaling network to 
   transfer the information of controlling groups. The functional 
   modules of controlling cells cooperate with each other by TSLS 
   signaling system, form a uniform body, achieve the intellective 
   connection, support switching and soft permanent connection, 
   rebuild or correct the established connections, actualize the 
   function of recovery.


5.2 Hysical Configurations


   Marginal nodes and kernel nodes build the structure of OBS Networks.
   Marginal nodes accomplish the functions of assembling data 
   operation, packing and attemperring burst packages, computing 
   routing paths and etc. Kernel nodes assign labels and reserve 
   bandwidth by processing the burst packages in the electricity 
   domain.



Nora Liao                                                       [Page 9]
Internet-Draft                TSL-SP                       November 2004 


   In the OBS Networks which is based on time-space label, an extrusive
   characteristic of marginal node is that most of the controlling 
   modules are marginal time-space label switching router 
   (Marginal TS-LSR). Marginal TS-LSR emplaces labels at the entrance of
   network, sets label stacks for the controlling groups corresponding 
   to the burst data packages (label contains the information on length 
   of the burst  packages, type, routing information, times when data 
   packages arrive at each node through optical paths). Compared with 
   traditional routers, TS-LSR assembles the IP packages of the same 
   type, the same path, the same mode of forwarding to a burst data 
   package (BDP) at the marginal nodes of OBS Networks, creates 
   controlling groups which includes the information of BDP in the form 
   of label stack. Be different from GMPLS, TSLS label not only contains 
   the routing information but also the signaling information of the time 
   when BDP arrives at each node. Marginal TS-LSR conserves two 
   databases : label information base (LIB) and all resource state base
   (ARSB). ARSB collects all the information sent by TS-LSR. Marginal 
   TS-LSR creates the routing table by ARSB.
  
   TS-LSR is the relay of kernel nodes, it does stack operation on the 
   controlling groups which come by time-space label switched paths 
   (TS-LSP), namely, does label processing. When BDP passes OBS 
   Networks, every TS-LSR only operates on the top label of the stack 
   and ignores other labels, TS-LSR reads the information of routing and
   signaling from the label on the top of the stack so as to configure 
   the optical switching modules. Here, every TS-LSR contains LIB and 
    
   LRSB. LIB is created by TS-LSR, it includes the label mapping table 
   (the label mapping table includes the information of IP address of 
   closed TS-LSR, port, wavelength and etc) of the routers which are 
   closed to the TS-LSR and adopts the label distribution protocol (LDP)
   to distribute mapping tables. TS-LSR searches for the next TS-LSR 
   address and port information which are corresponding to the label on 
   the top of the controlling groups' label stack according to label 
   mapping table, so that the optical switch can be switched to the 
   corresponding channel. LRSB collects the using information of local 
   wavelength, bandwidth, port and sends the message "Hello" to each 
   node at the entrance of the network by broadcasting.
  
   In the optical switching modules, we need to configure the optical 
   path for burst packages from one node to another node, namely, 
   inform all the middle nodes on the paths which burst packages are 
   going to pass to configure the micro-mirror to the data channel of 
   the same wavelength, to configure the starting time of switching 
   and the last time of switching. Switching time is within a 
   microsecond, this time may be reduced as the development of 
   technology. Any wavelength of the input port can be switched to the 
   any output port at same wavelength (no wavelength changing) or 
   switched to one output port at any wavelength (need partial or total 
   change of wavelength). A particular wavelength is used to transfer 
   signaling at each port.



Nora Liao                                                      [Page 10]
Internet-Draft                TSL-SP                       November 2004  


6. Next Steps


   In succession, we make a further study on the routing arithmetic, 
   network survival, attemperation arithmetic, format of the control 
   of signaling and other aspects of time-space label network.


7. Conventions 


   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL 
   NOT",   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and 
   "OPTIONAL" in this   document are to be interpreted as described in 
   RFC-2119.
   
   In addition, the reader is assumed to be familiar with the 
   terminology used in [GMPLS-ARCH], [RFC-3471], [RFC-3473] and 
   referenced as well as [TERM] and [FUNCT].
  
                                                                                                          Page 10 of 12                   
8. References


   [GMPLS-ARCH] E.Mannie (Editor), "Generalized Multi-Protocol Label
                Switching Architecture," Internet Draft, Work in
                progress, draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-architecture-07.txt,
                May 2003.

   [GMPLS-RTG]  K.Kompella (Editor), "Routing Extensions in Support of
                Generalized MPLS," Internet Draft, Work in Progress,
                draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-routing-09.txt, October 2003.

   [LMP]        J.Lang (Editor), "Link Management Protocol (LMP) v1.0,"                
                Internet Draft, Work in progress, 
                draft-ietf-ccamp-lmp-10, October 2003.

   [RFC-3471]   L.Berger (Editor) et al., "Generalized Multi-Protocol
                Label Switching (GMPLS) - Signaling Functional
                Description," 
                RFC 3471, January 2003.

   [RFC-3473]   L.Berger (Editor) et al., "Generalized Multi-Protocol
                Label Switching (GMPLS) Signaling - Resource
                Reservation Protocol - Traffic Engineering (RSVP-TE)
                Extensions," RFC 3473, January 2003.

   [RFC-3477]   K.Kompella, and Y.Rekhter, "Signaling Unnumbered Links
                in Resource Reservation Protocol - Traffic Engineering
                (RSVP-TE)," RFC 3477, January 2003.

   [RFC-2961]   L.Berger et al., "RSVP Refresh Overhead Reduction
                Extensions," RFC 2961, April 2001.
                
Nora Liao                                                      [Page 11]
Internet-Draft                TSL-SP                       November 2004                


   [RFC-3209]   D.Awduche et al., "RSVP-TE: Extensions to RSVP for
                LSP Tunnels," RFC 3209, December 2001.

   [RFC-2119]   S.Bradner, "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
                Requirement Levels," BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC-2026]   S.Bradner, "The Internet Standards Process - Revision3," 
   		BCP 9, RFC 2026,               October 1996.


9. Intellectual Property Considerations


   This section is taken from Section 10.4 of [RFC2026].
    The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
    intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to 
    pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in 
    this document or the extent to which any license under such rights 
    might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it 
    has made any effort to identify any such rights. Information on the 

   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and 
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11. Copies of  
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances 
   of licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to 
   obtain a general license or permission for the use of such 
   proprietary rights by implementers or users of this specification can
   be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.
     
   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights, which may cover technology that may be required to practice 
   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF Executive 
   Director.

                                                                                                   Page 11 of 12                   
10. Authors' Addresses


   This paper is written by the network group of "Local Optical 
   Communication Network and New Type of Optical Communication System",
   National Key Lab in Peking University. The information of authors 
   is as follows:
   
   Nora Liao 
   Phone:80-10-62755136
   Email: jjliao@pku.edu.cn 
     
   Li Wei .phd
   Phone:80-10-62755136
   Email: lw02@ele.pku.edu.cn
   

   
Nora Liao                                                      [Page 12]
Internet-Draft                TSL-SP                       November 2004 
       

   Shan Liang .phd
   Phone:80-10-62755136
   Email: kindness@ele.pku.edu.cn
 
   Li Zhengbin professor
   Phone:80-10-62754815
   mail: lizhb@ele.pku.edu.cn

   Xie Linzhen professor
   phone:80-10-62755832
   Email:tydxlz@pku.edu.cn

   Wu Deming professor
   phone:80-10-62754815

   Xu Anshi professor
   phone:80-10-62762822
   Email:lyxas@pku.edu.cn
 
  
11. Full Copyright Statement


   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78 and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE
   REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE
   INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR
   IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property


   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.






Nora Liao                                                      [Page 13]
Internet-Draft                TSL-SP                       November 2004 

   
   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.
   
   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.
   
   
Expires:  June 2005   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
     
Nora Liao                                                      [Page 14]
