Network Working Group                                        Pradeep Kumar Xplorer
Internet-Draft
Intended status: Standards Track                                  	Individual
Expires: Jun 17, 2016                            		      Dec 17, 2015
                                                      		
                                                          


                 Need for an httpi intelligent service
                         draft-httpi-10


Abstract

    This document describes the need for an httpi protocol similar to
    https used for intelligent surfing of information.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on Jun 17,2016.



Pradeep Kumar Xplorer     Expires Jun 17, 2016             [Page 1]
Internet-Draft    Need for an httpi intelligent service   Dec 17, 2015

Copyright Notice

Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents
   1. Introduction ............................................... 2
   2. Background ..................................................2
   3. General Information of the service ..........................2
   4. Authors Addresses ...........................................3
   5. Acknowledgements ............................................3


1. Introduction

    To implement an httpi:// service in browser similar to https

2. Background
     Right now URL's are hardcoded. I propose an httpi:// service
     that would allow dynamic links that can be updated by the httpi
     service in the text that you are viewing. So every time interval like
     a minute or so, the content you are viewing using the httpi:// service
     in your browser can show newer links that you can traverse or navigate
	
3. General Information of the service
	

      Having a parallel beowser realm, that allows intelligent updates of
      navigatable links from WWW intelligent computing realm. Instead of using
      http:// you just need to type httpi:// in your URL and the texts you view
      would not have any hardcoded navigatable links but those suggested by
      the WWW brain.

      A browser user should be able to type httpi:// in URL field and wait. 
      The cache could fill with those suggested by the WWW brain. 

      Please view draft-pkx-wwwogc-02. I have suggested a httpsso:// mode also.
      I am suggesting these modes for http for professional and it should be
      as a pulldown or Options menu as an interface for the user.

      httpssoi - single signon with intelligence
      httpauto - auto mode for browsing
      httpssoiauto - Using the browser like a TV channel
      httpiauto

      All Combinations of http httpi httpsso and httpauto could be implemented.

      So i launch my browser and type httpsso://www.service.com. In this mode
      for one session you hav to type your username and password only once. IT would
      let you relate multiple accounts in your first session or whenever you navigate
      to sites that need authentication.

	In httpsso mode i should be able to type httpsso://www.dhyanayoga.info/logs and
	see the sso identities of who is viewing my site. If there are millions of users,
	then i should be able to see some groups they belong to , some thing similar to
	twitter groups model can be used.. SO i should know if Sonoma YOgis are accesing my site
	by an Icon in my logs that point to that group.The Twitter model groups should be
	automatically created by httplogs of an user using some Servers that they pass through
	and an internet users sso identity should be part of those groups automatically

	Anything thats seen as a website to a User should have logs. To someone who
	does not program or have education in computer science a Twitter or facebook
	page is like an information site for some user group or subject. Such pages
	should know who accessed them by appending logs. So if i have a twitter page
	http://twitter.com/PradeepXplorer I should know who peeks into my page by
	typing http://twitter.com/Pradeepxplorer/logs. I object to facebook giving me
	free account and only they knowing who views my page and twitter also.

      If i launch and type httpi://www.site.info , it would be showing navigatable
      links that are not created manually. The WWW brain would suggest navigatable 
      links. Imagine having a tablet or laptop while you are relaxing and you can
      cruise the intelligently by httpiauto://

      If you type httpauto://www.site.info you can watch the site like a TV channel
      but manually directed by hardcoded URLs or URIs

	I publish a site with no hardcoded URL URI's. If i view the site 
     http://www.pradeepkumarxplorer.com it does not show any navigatable links.
     if i View using httpi://www.pradeepkumarxplorer.com or by using a USer interface
     switch or OPtion it should show me navigatable links suggested by WWW brain.
     It could change dynamically depending on whats available. ALso i shoould be 
     able to highlight a portion of text or whatever i am viewing and navigate
     and it should lead me to either one document suggested by INtelligent WWW brain
     or multiple documents. 

	I also propose a scribe version of httpd and smtpd or mail protocol
	daemon so pen interfaces can be used by browsers and email clients. 

	


Pradeep Kumar Xplorer     Expires JUn 17, 2016                [Page 2]
Internet-Draft    Need for an httpi intelligent service            Dec 17, 2015




4.Authors' Addresses

    Pradeep Kumar Xplorer
    EMail: pradeepan88@hotmail.com
    URI: http://www.explodingmoon.org
	 http://www.dhyanayoga.info



5.Acknowledgement
	I have not eaten food today because of i am a victim of cybercrime and i need
         that to be solved and does not have any one to acknowledge now. But i typed this
        remembering i suggested a re search mechanism for an Information retrieval tool
        in 1992 where the user highlights the text on the viewing pane and invoke
        a Re search.

	Again, i am victim of cybercrime and posting these for the WWW users and i need
	to be compensated if these projects can be marketed by WWW companies and i do not
	like this IETF drafts to be mixed with my information site on self exploration.
	I really have an interest in seeing these are implemented as evolution of WWW
	but not at the cost of my personal life or wealth that has been delayed for
	more than a decade because of cybercrime related to my domains.A WWW company
	should offer me a position and an income regardless of my other activities and
	finances. I have not been able to complete financial transfers to my bank and
	can contribute independently if i have my personal wealth if any company or organisation 
	starts these projects.

	I am really upset that i could not travel to Canada
       and present these on my own as i still do not have my money send to me by emails
       in my bank since probably early 90's. I am OK to use my own domain for 
       publishing this and ietf.org should not use any cash raised using my INtellectual
	property on self exploration to implement these or employ anyone from India.
	Again a group of financial criminals are preventing me from getting replies
	from w3.org and ietf.org.

    

Pradeep Kumar Xplorer     Expires Jun 17, 2016               [Page 3]
Internet-Draft    Need for an httpi intelligent service          Dec 17, 2015





