Network Working Group                                      J. H. Dunn
INTERNET-DRAFT                                             C. E. Martin
Expires: May, 2000                                         ANC, Inc.

                                                           November, 1999
                   Terminology for ATM ABR Benchmarking
                   <draft-ietf-bmwg-atm-term-abr-00.txt>

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with all 
   provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026. 
 
   This   document  is  an  Internet-Draft.   Internet-Drafts  are  working
   documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas,  and
   its  working groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute working
   documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum  of  six  months
   and  may  be  updated,  replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference  material
   or to cite them other than as work in progress.

     The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
     http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

     The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
     http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.    

   To  view  the  entire  list of current Internet-Drafts, please check the
   1id- abstracts.txt  listing  contained  in  the  Internet-Drafts  Shadow
   Directories  on  ftp.is.co.za (Africa), ftp.nordu.net (Northern Europe),
   ftp.nis.garr.it  (Southern   Europe),   munnari.oz.au   (Pacific   Rim),
   ftp.ietf.org (US East Coast), or ftp.isi.edu (US West Coast).

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (1999).  All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   This  memo  discusses  and  defines  terms  associated  with performance
   benchmarking tests and the results of these  tests  in  the  context  of
   Asynchronous Transfer Mode (ATM) based switching devices supporting ABR.
   The terms defined in this memo will be used in addition to terms defined
   in RFCs 1242, 2285, and 2544 and in ID Terminology for ATM Benchmarking.
   This memo is a product of the  Benchmarking  Methodology  Working  Group
   (BMWG) of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF).

1. Introduction.

   This  document provides terminology for benchmarking ATM based switching
   devices supporting ABR.  It  extends  terminology  already  defined  for
   benchmarking  network interconnect devices in RFC's 1242, 2285, and 2544
   and in ID Terminology  for  ATM  Benchmarking.   Although  some  of  the
   definitions in this memo may be applicable to a broader group of network
   interconnect devices, the primary focus of the terminology in this  memo



Dunn & Martin                                                      [Page 1]





INTERNET-DRAFT      Terminology for ATM ABR Benchmarking      November 1999


   is on ATM ABR.

   This  memo contains two major sections: Background and Definitions.  The
   background  section  provides  the  reader  with  an  overview  of   the
   technology  and  IETF formalisms.  The definitions section is split into
   two sub- sections.  The formal definitions sub-section is provided as  a
   courtesy   to  the  reader.   The  measurement  definitions  sub-section
   contains performance metrics with inherent units.

   This document assumes that necessary services are available and  active.
   For   example,  IP  connectivity  requires  SSCOP  connectivity  between
   signaling entities.  Further, it is assumed that the SUT has the ability
   to  configure  ATM  addresses  (via  hard  coded addresses, ILMI or PNNI
   neighbor discovery), has the ability to run SSCOP, and has  the  ability
   to  perform  signaled call setups (via UNI or PNNI signaling).  Finally,
   this document presents only the terminology associated with benchmarking
   IP  performance  over  ATM;  therefore,  it  does  not represent a total
   compilation of ATM test terminology.

   The  BMWG  produces  two  major  classes  of   documents:   Benchmarking
   Terminology  documents  and  Benchmarking  Methodology  documents.   The
   Terminology documents present the benchmarks and  other  related  terms.
   The  Methodology documents define the procedures required to collect the
   benchmarks cited in the corresponding Terminology documents.

2. Existing Definitions.

   RFC 1242 "Benchmarking Terminology  for  Network  Interconnect  Devices"
   should be consulted before attempting to make use of this document.  RFC
   2544  "Benchmarking  Methodology  for  Network   Interconnect   Devices"
   contains  discussions  of a number of terms relevant to the benchmarking
   of switching devices and should be consulted.   RFC  2285  "Benchmarking
   Terminology  for  LAN  Switching  Devices"  contains  a  number of terms
   pertaining to traffic distributions and datagram interarrival.  For  the
   sake  of  clarity  and  continuity,  this  RFC  adopts  the template for
   definitions set out in Section 2 of RFC 1242.

3. Requirements

   In this document, the words that are used to define the significance  of
   each particular requirement are capitalized. These words are:

   *  "MUST"  This  word, or the words "REQUIRED" and "SHALL" mean that the
   item is an absolute requirement of the specification.

   * "SHOULD" This word or the adjective "RECOMMENDED" means that there may
   exist valid reasons in particular circumstances to ignore this item, but
   the full implications  should  be  understood  and  the  case  carefully



Dunn & Martin                                                      [Page 2]





INTERNET-DRAFT      Terminology for ATM ABR Benchmarking      November 1999


   weighed before choosing a different course.

   *  "MAY"  This  word or the adjective "OPTIONAL" means that this item is
   truly optional.  One vendor may choose to include  the  item  because  a
   particular  marketplace  requires it or because it enhances the product,
   for example; another vendor may omit the same item.

   An implementation is not compliant if it fails to satisfy one or more of
   the   MUST   requirements   for   the   protocols   it  implements.   An
   implementation  that  satisfies  all  the  MUST  and  all   the   SHOULD
   requirements   for   its   protocols  is  said  to  be  "unconditionally
   compliant"; one that satisfies all the MUST requirements but not all the
   SHOULD  requirements  for  its  protocols  is  said to be "conditionally
   compliant".

II. Definitions

   The definitions presented in this section have  been  divided  into  two
   groups.   The  first  group is formal definitions, which are required in
   the definitions of  the  performance  metrics  but  are  not  themselves
   strictly  metrics.   These definitions are subsumed from other work done
   in other working groups both inside and  outside  the  IETF.   They  are
   provided as a courtesy to the reader.

1. Formal Definitions

   1.1. Definition Format (from RFC 1242)

   Term to be defined.

   Definition: The specific definition for the term.

   Discussion:  A  brief  discussion  of  the term, its application and any
   restrictions on measurement procedures.

   Specification: The working group and document in  which  the  terms  are
   specified and are listed in the references section.

   1.2.  Related Definitions.

   1.2.1.  Allowed Cell Rate (ACR)

   Definition:   An   ABR  service  parameter,  ACR  is  the  current  rate
   (cells/second) at which a source is allowed to send.

   Discussion:  For ABR traffic, ACR constitutes the actual data throughput
   for  a  particular  VC.  The time change of this value effects TCP round
   trip time calculations, which in turn effects TCP throughput.



Dunn & Martin                                                      [Page 3]





INTERNET-DRAFT      Terminology for ATM ABR Benchmarking      November 1999


   Specification: AF-TM4.0

   1.2.2. ACR Decrease Time Factor (ADTF)

   Definition: This is the time permitted between sending  RM-cells  before
   the  rate  is  decreased  to ICR (Initial Cell Rate). The time units are
             .01 to 10.23 seconds

   with a granularity of 10 ms.

   Discussion: For ABR traffic, ADTF constitutes the time rate of the  ACR.
   This  value  effects  TCP  round  trip  time calculations, which in turn
   effects TCP throughput.

   Specification: AF-TM4.0

   1.2.3. Additive Increase Rate (AIR)

   Definition: An ABR service parameter, AIR controls the rate at which the
   cell  transmission  rate  increases.  It  is  signaled  as  AIRF,  where
             AIRF = AIR*Nrm/PCR.

   Discussion: For ABR traffic, AIR effects the time rate of change of  the
   ACR.  This value effects TCP round trip time calculations, which in turn
   effects TCP throughput.

   Specification: AF-TM4.0

   1.2.4. Additive Increase Rate Factor (AIRF)

   Definition: Refer to AIR.

   Discussion: Refer to AIR.

   Specification: AF-TM4.0

   1.2.5. Available Bit Rate (ABR)

   Definition: ABR is an ATM layer service category for which the  limiting
   ATM  layer  transfer  characteristics provided by the network may change
   subsequent to connection establishment.  A  flow  control  mechanism  is
   specified which supports several types of feedback to control the source
   rate in response to changing ATM layer transfer characteristics.

   Discussion: It is expected that an end-system that adapts its traffic in
   accordance  with  the feedback will experience a low cell loss ratio and
   obtain a fair share of the available bandwidth according  to  a  network
   specific  allocation  policy.  Cell delay variation is not controlled in



Dunn & Martin                                                      [Page 4]





INTERNET-DRAFT      Terminology for ATM ABR Benchmarking      November 1999


   this service, although admitted cells are not delayed unnecessarily.

   Specification: AF-TM4.0

   1.2.6. Cutoff Decrease Factor (CDF)

   Definition: CDF  controls  the  decrease  in  ACR  (Allowed  Cell  Rate)
   associated with CRM (missing RM cell count).

   Discussion:  For ABR traffic, CDF effects the time rate of change of the
   ACR. This value effects TCP round trip time calculations, which in  turn
   effects TCP throughput.

   Specification: AF-TM4.0

   1.2.7. Initial Cell Rate (ICR)

   Definition:  An ABR service parameter, in cells/sec, that is the rate at
   which a source should send initially and after an idle period.

   Discussion: none.

   Specification: AF-TM4.0

   1.2.8. Minimum Cell Rate (MCR)

   Definition: An ABR service traffic descriptor, in cells/sec, that is the
   rate at which the source is always allowed to send.

   Discussion: none.

   Specification: AF-TM4.0

   1.2.9. Mrm

   Definition:  An  ABR  service  parameter  that  controls  allocation  of
   bandwidth between forward W-cells, backward RM-cells, and data cells.

   Discussion: none.

   Specification: AF-TM4.0

   1.2.10. Nrm

   Definition: An ABR service parameter, Nrm is the maximum number of cells
   a source may send for each forward RM-cell.

   Discussion: none.



Dunn & Martin                                                      [Page 5]





INTERNET-DRAFT      Terminology for ATM ABR Benchmarking      November 1999


   Specification: AF-TM4.0

   1.2.11. Rate Decrease Factor (RDF)

   Definition:  An  ABR service parameter, RDF controls the decrease in the
   cell transmission rate. RDF is a power of 2 from 1/32,768 to 1.

   Discussion: For ABR traffic, RDF effects the time rate of change of  the
   ACR.  This value effects TCP round trip time calculations, which in turn
   effects TCP throughput.

   Specification: AF-TM4.0

   1.2.12. Rate Increase Factor (RIF)

   Definition: This controls the amount by which the cell transmission rate
   may  increase  upon  receipt  of  a  RM-cell. The additive increase rate
   AIR=PCR*RIF. RIF is a power of 2, ranging from 1/32,768 to 1.

   Discussion: For ABR traffic, RIF effects the time rate of change of  the
   ACR.  This value effects TCP round trip time calculations, which in turn
   effects TCP throughput.

   Specification: AF-TM4.0

   1.2.13.  Resource Management (RM) Cells

   Definition: RM cells  are  used  to  convey  network  status  (available
   bandwidth,  congestion  levels)  and  request  peak  cell  rates for ATM
   blocks.  The RM cell has the following format:

   Header: 5 bytes, same as the ATM cell header
   Protocol ID: 3 bytes, value is ID1
   Function specific field: 45 bytes, data required for the specific protocol
   Rsvd: 6 bytes, reserved for future specification
   EDC: 10 bytes, CRC-10 error detection code computed over the cell payload
         (except the CRC-10 field) and used to check for data corruption

   Discussion: RM information can exist at the VP and/or VC level. VP level
   cells  are  identified  with  a  VCI  value  of  6.  VC  level cells are
   identified with a PT of 6.

   Specification: AF-TM4.0

   1.2.14. Tagged Cell Rate (TCR)

   Definition: An ABR service parameter, TCR limits the  rate  at  which  a
   source may send out-of-rate forward RM-cells. TCR is a constant fixed at



Dunn & Martin                                                      [Page 6]





INTERNET-DRAFT      Terminology for ATM ABR Benchmarking      November 1999


   10 cells/second.

   Discussion: none.

   Specification: AF-TM4.0

   1.2.15. TDF

   Definition: An ABR service parameter, TDF controls the decrease  in  ACR
   associated  with  TOF. TDF is signaled as TDFF, where TDF=TDFF/RDF times
   the smallest power of 2 greater or equal to PCR.  TDF  is  in  units  of
   1/seconds.

   Discussion:  For ABR traffic, TDF effects the time rate of change of the
   ACR. This value effects TCP round trip time calculations, which in  turn
   effects TCP throughput.

   Specification: AF-TM4.0

   1.2.16. TDFF

   Definition:  Refer  to TDF. TDFF is either zero or a power of two in the
   range 1/64 to 1 in units of 1 /cells.

   Discussion: Refer to TDF.

   Specification: AF-TM4.0

   1.2.17. Time Out Factor (TOF)

   Definition: An ABR service parameter,  TOF  controls  the  maximum  time
   permitted  between  sending  forward  RM-cells before a rate decrease is
   required. It is signaled as TOFF where TOF=TOFF+1.  TOFF is a power of 2
   in the range: 1/8 to 4,096.

   Discussion:  For ABR traffic, TOF effects the time rate of change of the
   ACR. This value effects TCP round trip time calculations, which in  turn
   effects TCP throughput.

   Specification: AF-TM4.0

   1.2.18. Time Out Factor (TOFF)

   Definition: Refer to TOF.

   Discussion: none.

   Specification: AF-TM4.0



Dunn & Martin                                                      [Page 7]





INTERNET-DRAFT      Terminology for ATM ABR Benchmarking      November 1999


   1.2.19. Trm

   Definition: An ABR service parameter that provides an upper bound on the
   time between forward RM-cells for an active source. It is  100  times  a
   power of two with a range of 100*2-7 to 100*20

   Discussion:  For ABR traffic, Trm effects the time rate of change of the
   ACR. This value effects TCP round trip time calculations, which in  turn
   effects TCP throughput.

   Specification: AF-TM4.0

   1.2.20. Virtual Source/Virtual Destination (VSND)

   Definition: An ABR connection may be divided into two or more separately
   controlled ABR segments. Each ABR control segment, except the first,  is
   sourced by a virtual source. A virtual source implements the behavior of
   an ABR source endpoint. Backward RM-cells received by a  virtual  source
   are  removed  from the connection.  Each ABR control segment, except the
   last, is terminated by a  virtual  destination.  A  virtual  destination
   assumes  the  behavior  of an ABR destination endpoint. Forward RM-cells
   received by a virtual destination are turned around and not forwarded to
   the next segment of the connection.

   Discussion: none.

   Specification: AF-TM4.0

   1.2.21. Xrm Decrease Factor (XDM)

   Definition:  An  ABR service parameter, XDF controls the decrease in ACR
   associated with Xrm. It is a power of two in range: [0, 1].

   Discussion: For ABR traffic, XDM effects the time rate of change of  the
   ACR.  This value effects TCP round trip time calculations, which in turn
   effects TCP throughput.

   Specification: AF-TM4.0

   1.2.22. Xrm

   Definition: An ABR service parameter, Xrm limits the number  of  forward
   RM-  cells  which  may  be  sent in the absence of received backward PM-
   cells. The range is 0-255.

   Discussion: For ABR traffic, Xrm effects the time rate of change of  the
   ACR.  This value effects TCP round trip time calculations, which in turn
   effects TCP throughput.



Dunn & Martin                                                      [Page 8]





INTERNET-DRAFT      Terminology for ATM ABR Benchmarking      November 1999


   Specification: AF-TM4.0

2. Performance Metrics

   2. 1. Definition Format (from RFC 1242)

   Metric to be defined.

   Definition: The specific definition for the metric.

   Discussion: A brief discussion of the metric, its  application  and  any
   restrictions on measurement procedures.

   Measurement  units:  Intrinsic  units used to quantify this metric. This
   includes subsidiary units; e.g.,  microseconds  are  acceptable  if  the
   intrinsic unit is seconds.

   2.2. Definitions

   2.2.1. ABR Rate Decrease Response Time (ARDRT)

   Definition:  The  amount  of  time  required  by  the  SUT to adjust its
   transmission rate based on an ABR rate decrease request.

   Discussion:  During the ARDRT, cells  transmitted  by  the  SUT  may  be
   dropped by the network due to traffic policing.  These dropped cells may
   contain a portion of an IP datagram.  This may cause IP and  TCP  packet
   loss.

   Measurement Units: seconds

   2.2.2. ABR Rate Increase Response Time (ARIRT)

   Definition:  The  amount  of  time  required  by  the  SUT to adjust its
   transmission rate based on an ABR rate increase request.

   Discussion:  During the ARIRT,  the  SUT  will  not  fully  utilize  the
   available bandwidth.  This will negatively impact IP and TCP throughput.

   Measurement Units: seconds

   2.2.3. RM Cell Loss Ratio (RM-CLR)

   Definition: The ratio of lost RM cells in a transmission in relation  to
   the  total  RM  cells  sent  in  a  transmission associated with a given
   traffic load, orientation and distribution, as well  as  an  integration
   period.




Dunn & Martin                                                      [Page 9]





INTERNET-DRAFT      Terminology for ATM ABR Benchmarking      November 1999


             RM-CLR = Lost RM Cells / Total RM Cells Transmitted.

   Discussion:   RM-CLR  may cause the SUT to transmit data cells at a rate
   larger than the available bandwidth. These data cells may be dropped  by
   the  network due to traffic policing.  These dropped cells may contain a
   portion of an IP datagram.  This may cause IP and TCP packet loss.

   It is expressed as an order of magnitude, having a  range  of  10^-1  to
   10^- 15 and unspecified.

   Measurement Units: dimensionless.

3. Security Considerations.

   As  this  document  is  solely  for  providing terminology and describes
   neither  a  protocol  nor  an  implementation,  there  are  no  security
   considerations associated with this document.

4. Notices

Internet Engineering Task Force

   The  IETF  takes  no  position  regarding  the  validity or scope of any
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to   pertain
   to  the  implementation  or  use  of  the  technology  described in this
   document or the extent to which any license under such rights  might  or
   might  not  be available; neither does it represent that it has made any
   effort to identify any such rights.  Information on the IETFs procedures
   with   respect   to  rights  in  standards-track  and  standards-related
   documentation can be found in BCP-11.  Copies of claims of  rights  made
   available  for  publication  and  any  assurances of licenses to be made
   available, or the result of an attempt made to obtain a general  license
   or  permission for the use of such proprietary rights by implementors or
   users of this specification can be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.

   The IETF invites any interested party to  bring  to  its  attention  any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary rights,
   which may cover  technology  that  may  be  required  to  practice  this
   standard.    Please  address  the  information  to  the  IETF  Executive
   Director.

5. Disclaimer

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (1999). All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may  be  copied  and  furnished  to
   others,  and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it or
   assist in its implementation may  be  prepared,  copied,  published  and



Dunn & Martin                                                     [Page 10]





INTERNET-DRAFT      Terminology for ATM ABR Benchmarking      November 1999


   distributed,  in  whole  or  in  part,  without restriction of any kind,
   provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are included
   on  all such copies and derivative works.  However, this document itself
   may not be modified in any way, such as by removing the copyright notice
   or  references  to the Internet Society or other Internet organizations,
   except as needed for the purpose of  developing  Internet  standards  in
   which  case  the  procedures  for  copyrights  defined  in  the Internet
   Standards process must be followed, or as required to translate it  into
   languages other than English.

   The  limited  permissions  granted  above  are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society  or  its  successors  or  assigns.  This
   document  and the information contained herein is provided on an "AS IS"
   basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING  TASK  FORCE
   DISCLAIMS  ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED
   TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE
   ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
   PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


6. References

   [AF-ILMI4.0] ATM Forum Integrated  Local  Management  Interface  Version
   4.0, af-ilmi-0065.000, September 1996.

   [AF-TEST-0022]  Introduction  to ATM Forum Test Specifications, af-test-
   0022.00, December 1994.

   [AF-TM4.0] ATM Forum, Traffic Management Specification Version 4.0,  af-
   tm- 0056.00, April 1996.

   [AF-TM4.1]  ATM  Forum,  Traffic  Management  Specification  Version 4.1
   (final ballot), btd-tm-01.02, July 1998.

   [AF-UNI3.1] ATM Forum, User Network Interface Specification Version 3.1,
   September 1994.

   [AF-UNI4.0] ATM Forum, User Network Interface Specification Version 4.0,
   July 1996.

7. Editors Addresses

   Jeffrey Dunn
   Advanced Network Consultants, Inc.
   4214 Crest Place, Ellicott City, MD 21043 USA
   Phone: +1 (410) 750-1700, E-mail: Jeffrey.Dunn@worldnet.att.net

   Cynthia Martin



Dunn & Martin                                                     [Page 11]





INTERNET-DRAFT      Terminology for ATM ABR Benchmarking      November 1999


   Advanced Network Consultants, Inc.
   4214 Crest Place, Ellicott City, MD 21043 USA
   Phone: +1 (410) 750-1700, E-mail: Cynthia.E.Martin@worldnet.att.net
















































Dunn & Martin                                                     [Page 12]


