





Internet Draft                                            Akber Qureshi
<draft-qureshi-mpls-shared-protection-00.txt>          Ramesh Nagarajan
Expires April 2003                                            Y.T. Wang
                                                        Sandy Goldfless
                                                    Lucent Technologies

                                                           October 2002

                    MPLS-TE Shared Mesh Protection

1. Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

2. Abstract

   This document discusses the shared mesh protection concept. Its aim
   is to provide fast, guaranteed recovery of service at significantly
   less cost of protection capacity compared to other schemes. In
   companion documents [1,2], extensions to RSVP-TE and OSPF-TE
   protocols are proposed that enable shared mesh protection. Those
   extensions, together with this document, first address global repair
   with path-based protection switching, as opposed to local repair of
   LSP failures and reroute. However, the concept can be extended
   straightforwardly to the local repair techniques being considered in
   the MPLS working group.

3. Purpose of This Document

   The purpose of this document is to introduce and discuss the concept
   of path-based shared mesh protection.  The document discusses this
   specific protection switching recovery scheme with shared-resource in
   terms of recovery path resource usage as outlined in the MPLS WG



shared-mesh-protection-Goldfless                            October 2002





draft-qureshi-mpls-shared-protection-00.txt                     [Page 2]


   draft on the framework for MPLS-based recovery [3].  It provides
   input to the MPLS Working Group for making recommendations to
   respective working groups for protocol extensions in supporting
   shared mesh protection [1],[2].

4. Introduction

   In [3], the framework for MPLS-based recovery was presented,
   including outlines of principles, methods, and comparison criteria
   for evaluating different recovery schemes. Some form of protection
   bandwidth sharing and signaling support have been previously
   discussed in [4],[5].

   In this document, the shared mesh protection concept is discussed
   which is applicable to the global repair topologically and to the 1-
   to-1, n-to-1 and n-to-m protections from path mapping perspective
   discussed in [3].

   To guarantee the recovery and to maintain the performance of the
   service, sufficient resource needs to be available at the setup time
   of the protection LSPs.  However it may or may not require
   reseravation for additional protection bandwidth.

   Indeed the key observation is that the need for reservation of
   protection bandwidth depends on whether there is already sufficient
   protection capacity set aside to protect other connections which do
   not belong to the same shared risk groups (SRGs)with the new primary
   connection. Thus the shared mesh protection scheme can significantly
   reduce the required network protection capacity.

   Once a failure of a primary path (in the path-based case), is
   identified, the protection LSP for the affected working LSP is
   activated with just enough reserved protection bandwidth to guarantee
   failure recovery.  Speed of recovery is supported by using fast
   failure notification schemes (which are beyond the scope of this
   document).

5. Shared Mesh Protection

   Path-based protection schemes such as 1-to-1 or n-to-1 consider the
   protection of service traffic between two particular nodes.  To
   provide protection of a working connection, guaranteed recovery with
   similar grade of service and sufficient amount of bandwidth must be
   set aside in the network. This can be achieved by computing and
   reserving required protection capacity at the same time that
   computation and activation of the working connection is performed.
   For path-based schemes, arrival of a request to establish shared mesh
   protection service between two nodes can prompt computation of a pair



shared-mesh-protection-Goldfless                            October 2002





draft-qureshi-mpls-shared-protection-00.txt                     [Page 3]


   of disjoint connections between them. The primary and protection
   connections would be set up, meeting the following two necessary
   requirements. First, sufficient bandwidth should be available along
   the route of the working connection to accommodate the requested
   load. Second, either of the following two conditions must hold:
   either whatever bandwidth for protection had previously been reserved
   along the protection path is already sufficient to guarantee recovery
   from any single link or node failure along the new working path, or
   there must be enough available bandwidth along the protection path to
   accommodate the additional reservation.

   From the point of view of the network, the degree to which the
   additional bandwidth for protection should be shared in this manner
   depends on the failure coverage objective for the particular LSP:
   whether the objective for the LSP is protection against failure of
   any single node, of any single link, or of an SRG.

6. Need for RSVP-TE Extensions

   The computation of the protection path can be done in several ways
   depending on the available information. The simplest way is to
   calculate a disjoint path using the same link weights as the ones
   used for calculation of the primary path. In this case each router
   along the protection path needs to know about the primary path for
   which it is requested to protect.  Further, knowing the primary path
   along each node of the protection path allows the admission
   controller of that node to determine, using locally maintained
   sharing information, the exact amount of bandwidth required and that
   which can be shared.  Outgoing interface ID's are required to be
   communicated in addition to the router ID's. Details regarding the
   proposed RSVP-TE extensions to support sharing of protection
   resources can be found in [1] which addresses the requirements
   brought forth first in [5].

7. Need for OSPF-TE Extensions

   While some sharing of protection bandwidth may be realized with the
   proposed extensions of RSVP-TE [1], the amount of bandwidth reserved
   for restoration is "best effort" and usually not minimized since the
   sharing potential on each of the links is not known before the
   protection path choice is made at the source router.  Additional
   protection resource and sharing information of the network would be
   required for the source router to compute more intelligently the
   desired protection path which was first discussed in [5]. The
   proposed extensions to OSPF-TE [2] addresses this need and allow the
   source router compute the primary and protection path combination
   that utilizes the network resources efficiently with minimum
   signaling/crankback load.



shared-mesh-protection-Goldfless                            October 2002





draft-qureshi-mpls-shared-protection-00.txt                     [Page 4]


8.0. References

   [1] Hua Autumn Liu, et al, "RSVP-TE Extension for Shared Mesh
   Protection", IETF draft-liu-rsvp-mpls-shared-protection-00.txt, Oct.
   2002

   [2] Ajay Sathyanath, et al, "OSPF-TE Extension for Shared Mesh
   Protection", IETF draft-sathyanath-ospf-mpls-shared-protection-
   00.txt, Oct. 2002

   [3] Vishal Sharma, Fiffi Hellstrand, (editors),
    "Framework for MPLS-based Recovery," IETF draft-ietf-mpls-recovery-
   frmwrk-08.txt, Oct.,2002

   [4] J-P Vasseur, et.al., "Traffic Engineering Fast Reroute: Backup
   tunnel path computation for bandwdith protection," IETF draft-
   vasseur-mpls-backup-computation-00.txt, June 2002

   [5] S. Kini, et.al., "Shared Backup Label Switched Path Restoration,"
   IETF draft-kini-restoration-shared-backup-01.txt, May 2001

9. Author Information

   Akber Qureshi
   Lucent Technologies
   101 Crawfords Corner Rd.
   Holmdel, NJ 07733
   e-mail: mqureshi@lucent.com
   phone: +1 732 949 4791

   Ramesh Nagarajan
   Lucent Technologies
   101 Crawfords Corner Rd.
   Holmdel, NJ 07733
   e-mail: rameshn@lucent.com
   phone: +1 732 949 2761

   Y.T. Wang
   Lucent Technologies
   101 Crawfords Corner Rd.
   Holmdel, NJ 07733
   e-mail: ytwang@lucent.com
   phone: +1 732 949 0676

   Sandy Goldfless
   Lucent Technologies
   1 Robbins Rd.
   Westford, MA 10886



shared-mesh-protection-Goldfless                            October 2002





draft-qureshi-mpls-shared-protection-00.txt                     [Page 5]


   e-mail: sgoldfless@lucent.com
   phone: +1 978 952 7512
   Full Copyright Statement

   "Copyright (C) The Internet Society (date). All Rights Reserved. This
   document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into followed, or as
   required to translate it into languages other than English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.























shared-mesh-protection-Goldfless                            October 2002


