


Network Working Group                                         F. Templin
Internet-Draft                                                     Nokia
Expires: December 17, 2003                                 June 18, 2003


       Requirements for Limited-Scope Unicast Addressing in IPv6
                     draft-templin-lsareqts-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at http://
   www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 17, 2003.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   The IPv6 addressing architecture specifies global and local-use
   unicast addressing schemes. Recent consensus call in the IPng working
   group has deprecated site-local addressing due in part to its
   inherent ambiguity. This document outlines requirements for use in
   evaluating candidate proposals for a replacement scheme.











Templin                Expires December 17, 2003                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft    Limited-Scope Addressing Requirements        June 2003


Table of Contents

   1. Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2. Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   3. Limited-Scope Addressing Requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   4. Scenarios Requiring Limited-Scope Addressing . . . . . . . . . . 5
   5. Conclusions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   6. IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   7. Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   8. Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
      Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
      Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
      Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
      Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . 8





































Templin                Expires December 17, 2003                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft    Limited-Scope Addressing Requirements        June 2003


1. Introduction

   The IPv6 addressing architecture [RFC3513] specifies global and
   local-use unicast address formats. Global addresses are understood to
   have unlimited scope and may be used as the source and destination
   addresses in packets that originate from any point on the connected
   global IPv6 Internet. Local-use addresses are assumed valid only
   within the scope of a single link/site, where the term site is
   understood to imply an administrative (rather than physical)
   boundary.

   Recent consensus call in the IPng working group has deprecated
   site-local addressing due in part to its inherent ambiguity. Many
   have suggested that an unambiguous replacement addressing scheme of
   limited-scope (i.e., not necessarily local-scope) is needed. This
   document outlines requirements for use in evaluating candidate
   proposals for a limited-scope addressing scheme to serve as a
   replacement for site-local.

2. Terminology

   The term "limited-scope" was introduced by [BC].

3. Limited-Scope Addressing Requirements

   Link-local addresses in IPv6: "are designed to be used for addressing
   on a single link for purposes such as automatic address
   configuration, neighbor discovery, or when no routers are present"
   ([RFC3513], section 2.5.6). By definition, link-local addressing has
   a single link scope of operation and is not intended for general
   purpose use. Therefore, sites comprising multiple links also need an
   addressing scheme that supports general-purpose operation within a
   limited scope. The following subsections present characteristics that
   must be supported by such a limited-scope addressing scheme:

3.1 Multiple link Support

   The limited-scope addressing scheme should support end-to-end
   operation of general-purpose applications over multiple links within
   an administratively-defined scope. Multiple link operation within the
   site may entail routing, bridging or some combination thereof. As
   such, the limited-scope addressing scheme should allow subnetting.

   For consistency with global-use address assignment policies, it is
   recommended that the limited-scope addressing scheme observe the
   recommendations in ([RFC3177], section 3), i.e., prefer /48 prefix
   delegation with 16 bits remaining for limited-scope subnetting.




Templin                Expires December 17, 2003                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft    Limited-Scope Addressing Requirements        June 2003


3.2 Unambiguous

   Limited-scope addresses must have a well-known leading token in the
   first N bits of the prefix that can be configured in filters at site
   borders. Moreover, prefixes must be globally-unique such that site
   mergers will not result in collisions. Global uniqueness is based on
   the statistical properties of the prefix assignment scheme, therefore
   a suitable random number generator must be specified. The length N of
   the well-known leading token should be as small as possible to allow
   maximal additional prefix bits for random number assignment.

   Since prefix duplication between sites may occur (e.g., due to
   configuration errors, etc.), the limited-scope addressing scheme
   should provide a means for conflict resolution when duplicate
   assignments are detected. Examples include a central registry,
   distributed database, etc.

3.3 Stable

   The limited-scope addressing scheme should provide applications with
   addresses that remain stable even during disruptive events such as
   site mergers, partitions, change to a new provider, etc. In
   particular, applications that cache limited-scope addresses (e.g., in
   protocol control blocks, etc.) should not be impacted by site-wide
   renumbering events. (See: [BAKER] for a discussion on the inherent
   complexity of site-wide renumbering and its impact on applications.)

3.4 Portable

   The limited-scope addressing scheme should support continuous
   operation of applications within sites that are mobile (i.e., in the
   geographical and/or topological sense). As the site moves to a
   different topological point of attachment or a different geographical
   location, any limited-scope address prefixes in use should remain
   stable.

3.5 Provider Independent

   Intermittently-connected sites and sites that move between different
   provider points of attachment require limited-scope addresses that
   are independent of provider assignments. In the case of
   intermittently-connected sites, provider aggregated prefixes may be
   unavailable for long periods but this must not disrupt limited scope
   communications within the site. In the case of movement to new
   providers, frequent site renumbering events may occur but, again,
   limited-scope communications must continue to make progress.





Templin                Expires December 17, 2003                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft    Limited-Scope Addressing Requirements        June 2003


3.6 Applicable in Managed/Unmanaged Environments

   Some sites (e.g., large enterprises) may have network management
   teams responsible for address planning while others (e.g., home
   networks and personal area networks) may require zero configuration
   operation with no network management support. The limited-scope
   addressing scheme must provide general applicability in any
   environment - be it managed or unmanaged.

3.7 Compatible with Site Naming System

   Addresses derived from the limited-scope addressing scheme must be
   compatible with the naming system used within scope. Examples include
   DNS, multicast name resolution, static configuration, etc. In
   practice, it is expected that limited-scope addresses will be
   resolved only within the scope of operation of the naming system.

3.8 Compatible with VPN

   The limited-scope addressing scheme should support VPN connections
   between multiple sites to form a geographically-extended
   organization. The limited-use prefixes delegations in effect at each
   constituent site must remain valid when connected via VPN.

4. Scenarios Requiring Limited-Scope Addressing

   Many anticipated IPv6 deployment scenarios require a limited-scope
   addressing scheme that meets the requirements outlined in Section 3.
   Some examples follow:

4.1 Mobile Router with Personal Area Network

   Multiaccess terminals that serve as routers between the operator and
   a personal area network (PAN) of the user's locally-connected devices
   are seen as a near-term deployment scenario. Access to the operator
   may be intermittent, yet local communications within the PAN must be
   supported through limited-scope addressing even when no connection to
   the global Internet is available. As mobile users travel about,
   multiple PANs may come together in a common space such that two or
   more PANs merge. As such, the limited-scope address prefixes active
   in each PAN should be globally unique to avoid collisions and provide
   a means for verifying ownership to resolve conflicts.

4.2 Mobile Ad-hoc Networks that Travel Together

   As with the mobile PAN Section 4.1, mobile ad-hoc networks that
   travel together as a group may have long periods of intermittent/
   disconnected access to the global Internet. Such applications as



Templin                Expires December 17, 2003                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft    Limited-Scope Addressing Requirements        June 2003


   disaster relief, coordinated missions, and expeditionary forces may
   comprise numerous ad-hoc networks that may merge, partition, or lose
   global connectivity from time to time. A limited-scope addressing
   scheme is needed for the continuous support of local communications
   in such mobile ad-hoc networks.

4.3 Vehicular Networks

   Vehicular networks may connect elements in an automobile to provide
   sensory and situational awareness data to the driver. Periodic
   contact with roadside Internet access points, other vehicles, etc.
   may entail sharing public information (e.g., road conditions
   encountered) while protecting private information (e.g., the
   vehicle's current speedometer reading). A limited-scope addressing
   scheme should provide a means for denoting both public and private
   components for filtering at site borders.

4.4 Asset Protection in Enterprise Networks

   Enterprise networks that protect private corporate assets (e.g.,
   printers, faxes, robotics, sensors, etc.) require a limited-scope
   addressing scheme that supports multiple-link operation. The
   addressing scheme must remain stable even when VPN connections from
   outside sites occur. Such VPN connections may arise from home users,
   corporate mergers and acquisitions, bridging together remote sites,
   etc.

4.5 Home Networks

   Home networks with intermittent access to a service provider require
   a limited-scope addressing scheme that supports local communications
   event when the server is unavailable. The limited-scope addressing
   scheme should also protect private assets from exposure to the global
   Internet and should allow continuous operation when VPN connections
   to the office or other extended sites are used.

5. Conclusions

   A limited-scope addressing scheme is needed to replace the
   now-deprecated site-local scheme from [RFC3513]. Candidate schemes
   must be evaluated against the requirements outlined in Section 3 to
   determine their applicability. The IETF should move quickly to
   identify the scheme that best satisfies the requirements and take
   action to adopt the scheme through the standardization process.

6. IANA Considerations

   This document introduces no IANA Considerations.



Templin                Expires December 17, 2003                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft    Limited-Scope Addressing Requirements        June 2003


7. Security Considerations

   This document introduces no Security Considerations.

8. Acknowledgements

   The author acknowledges the contributions of numerous authors through
   recent postings on the ipng mailing list [IPNG] that led to a fuller
   community understanding of the site-local addressing issues and the
   need for a replacement.

Normative References

   [RFC3513]  Hinden, R. and S. Deering, "Internet Protocol Version 6
              (IPv6) Addressing Architecture", RFC 3513, April 2003.

Informative References

   [BAKER]    Baker, F., "Procedures for Renumbering an IPv6 Network
              without a Flag Day",
              draft-baker-ipv6-renumber-procedure-00 (work in progress),
              April 2003.

   [BC]       "Message from Brian Carpenter to the ipng mailing list
              (message ID 3ECE1421.1B157C4D@hursley.ibm.com)", May 2003.

   [IPNG]     "IPng mailing list archive: ftp://playground.sun.com/pub/
              ipng/mail-archive".

   [RFC3177]  IAB and IESG, "IAB/IESG Recommendations on IPv6 Address",
              RFC 3177, September 2001.


Author's Address

   Fred Templin
   Nokia
   313 Fairchild Drive
   Mountain View, CA  94043
   USA

   Phone: +1 650 625 2331
   EMail: ftemplin@iprg.nokia.com








Templin                Expires December 17, 2003                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft    Limited-Scope Addressing Requirements        June 2003


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it
   has made any effort to identify any such rights. Information on the
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11. Copies of
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of
   licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to
   obtain a general license or permission for the use of such
   proprietary rights by implementors or users of this specification can
   be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice
   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF Executive
   Director.


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assignees.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION



Templin                Expires December 17, 2003                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft    Limited-Scope Addressing Requirements        June 2003


   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.











































Templin                Expires December 17, 2003                [Page 9]


