



Network Working Group                                           A. Roach
Internet-Draft                                                   Mozilla
Intended status: Standards Track                       September 7, 2018
Expires: March 26, 2019


                      A reply to a specific tweet
                       draft-abr-twitter-reply-00

Abstract

   This document is a response to a tweet.  It is of very limited
   interest.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on March 26, 2019.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2017 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.






Roach                   Expires January 27, 2018                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                 Tweet Reply                     July 2017


1.  Introduction

   The problem is that individual internet drafts are just about as easy
   to post as tweets, and receive just as much vetting.  Really, until
   they're adopted as a working group item, they're no more
   authoritative than a personal blog entry.

   Please also see [I-D.wkumari-not-a-draft]

2.  Security Considerations

   This document introduces no security issues.

3.  IANA Considerations

   This document requires no actions from IANA.

4.  Informative References

   [I-D.wkumari-not-a-draft]
              Kumari, W., "Just because it's an ID doesn't mean
              anything... at all...", draft-wkumari-not-a-draft-06 (work
              in progress), April 2014.

Author's Address

   Adam Roach
   Mozilla
   \
   Dallas, TX
   USA

   Phone: +1 650 903 0800 x863
   Email: adam@nostrum.com

















Roach                   Expires January 27, 2018                [Page 2]
