


Network Working Group                                             P. Kim
Internet-Draft                              Korea Polytechnic University
Intended status: Experimental                                     
Expires: January 1, 2019                                            
                                                           July 01, 2018


          A Bandwidth Aggregation Scheme on Mobile Network 
                   with Multi-Interfaced Router
              draft-pskim-banana-mobilenetwork-mir-00


Abstract

   This draft considers a packet distribution scheme for bandwidth
   aggregation on the mobile network with a multi-interfaced router
   (MIR). In the proposed scheme, the MIR with multiple heterogeneous 
   wireless network interfaces effectively and fairly distributes 
   packets over end-to-end multi-path through multiple network 
   interfaces. Each network interface is considered to have a 
   distribution counter associated with corresponding end-to-end path. 
   This distribution counter varied by both weighted capacity and 
   distributed packets is used to determine if a network interface has 
   enough credits to distribute incoming packets on corresponding 
   end-to-end path. As a useful design parameter, the capacity unit can 
   be shown to make the performance of the proposed scheme as good as 
   possible. 



Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 1, 2019.





Kim                      Expires January 2, 2019               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft         Bandwidth Aggregation Scheme           July 2018

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2018 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
   2.  Proposed Scheme . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.1 Design Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.2 Operation Procedure and Example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   2.3 Performance Indices and Useful Design Parameters. . . . . . . 5
   3.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   4.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
     4.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
     4.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7


1.  Introduction

   The BANdwidth Aggregation for Network Access (BANANA) BoF was 
   chartered to develop solution(s) to support dynamic path selection 
   on a per-packet basis in networks that have more than one point of 
   attachment to the Internet. Bandwidth Aggregation consists of 
   splitting local traffic across multiple Internet links on a 
   per-packet basis, including the ability to split a single flow 
   across multiple links when necessary[1][2].

   This draft considers the mobile network with a multi-interfaced 
   router (MIR)[3][4]. In addition, to consider the heterogeneous 
   wireless network environment, the MIR can be assumed to have 
   multiple heterogeneous wireless network interfaces. Therefore, the 
   MIR establishes simultaneously multiple paths to the Internet 
   through external wireless interfaces such as wireless local area 
   network (WLAN) and wireless wide area network (WWAN) with high 
   mobility and wide coverage. However, due to bandwidth constraints of 
   multi-path through external wireless interfaces, the MIR might 

   
Kim                      Expires January 1, 2019               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft         Bandwidth Aggregation Scheme           July 2018

   require a bandwidth aggregation to get sufficient bandwidth for MNs' 
   demanding inside a mobile network. As shown in [5], the bandwidth 
   aggregation requires generally several functions such as bandwidth 
   estimation, packet distribution, packet reordering, etc. Among them, 
   this draft focuses on the packet distribution scheme which 
   effectively and fairly distributes packets on the appropriate 
   end-to-end path through the corresponding network interface. 

   Therefore, this draft proposes a packet distribution scheme on the 
   MIR with heterogeneous wireless network interfaces for mobile 
   networks. Since the MIR is likely to have limited resources compared 
   with a general router, the proposed scheme adopts the frame-based 
   behavior that has lower complexity than the priority-based behavior. 
   In the proposed scheme, the MIR with multiple heterogeneous wireless 
   network interfaces effectively and fairly distributes packets over 
   end-to-end multi-path. Each network interface is considered to have 
   a distribution counter associated with the corresponding end-to-end 
   path. This distribution counter is used to determine if a network 
   interface has enough capacity to distribute packets on the 
   corresponding end-to-end path. The distribution counter can get 
   credits by the weighted capacity in bytes. The weighed capacity is 
   operated at the byte level and is added more to the distribution 
   counter with higher weight than that with less weight. On the other 
   hand, the distribution counter is decreased by the size of packets 
   being distributed. Thus, the distribution counter for each network 
   interface is varied by distributed packets as well as weighted 
   capacity.
   
   In the proposed scheme, performance indices can be defined by ratio 
   and amount of distributed packets, packet loss, and throughput. The 
   capacity unit is shown to be a useful design parameter to make the 
   performance of the proposed scheme as good as possible. 

2.  Proposed Scheme
   
   This draft considers the mobile network where the MIR has multiple 
   heterogeneous wireless network interfaces. The MIR establishes 
   multiple communication paths to the Internet through external 
   wireless interfaces such as WLAN and WWAN with high mobility and 
   wide coverage. In this mobile network environment, a fair packet 
   distribution scheme on the MIR with heterogeneous wireless network
   interfaces is proposed for mobile networks.

2.1  Design Parameters

   The MIR distributes packets effectively and fairly on the appropriate 
   end-to-end path through the corresponding network interface. Each 
   network interface is considered to have a distribution counter 
   associated with the corresponding end-to-end path. This distribution 


Kim                      Expires January 1, 2019               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft         Bandwidth Aggregation Scheme           July 2018

   counter is used to determine if a network interface has enough 
   capacity to distribute packets on the corresponding end-to-end path. 

   The distribution counter can get credits by the weighted capacity in 
   bytes. The weighted capacity is defined by Weighted capacity = 
   Capacity unit*Weight. The capacity unit in bytes is a useful design 
   parameter and thus can affect on the performance of the proposed 
   scheme. The weight is determined proportionately from the estimated 
   available bandwidth of end-to-end paths. The weighed capacity is 
   operated at the byte level and is added more to the distribution 
   counter with higher weight than that with less weight. On the other 
   hand, the distribution counter is also decreased by the size of 
   packets being distributed. Thus, the distribution counter for each 
   network interface is varied by distributed packets as well as 
   weighted capacity.

2.2  Operation Procedure and Example

   The operation procedure for each round is as follows. For the first 
   path, packets are distributed when the distribution counter is  
   greater than the incoming packet's size. If it is lower, the 
   distribution counter is increased by the weighted capacity and then 
   the incoming packet is distributed on the current path. Then the 
   distribution counter is decreased by the size of packet being 
   distributed. If the distribution counter is still lower than the 
   incoming packet's size, the incoming packet held back until the 
   proposed scheme moves on the next path. After visiting all paths, 
   the round is finished. The above operation procedure in next round 
   is repeated when there are incoming packets.

   As an example, the MIR is assumed to have three heterogeneous 
   wireless network interfaces and thus there are three communication 
   paths. These paths are called the Green (high bandwidth), Yellow 
   (medium bandwidth), Red (low bandwidth) paths, respectively. Since 
   this paper focuses on the packet distribution scheme, available 
   bandwidths for three paths through corresponding interfaces are 
   assumed to have fixed weight ratio 4:2:1. The capacity unit is set 
   by 256 bytes and thus these paths have weighted capacity 1024, 512, 
   256 bytes, respectively. All initial values of distribution counters, 
   denoted by DCg,y,r, and total amount of distributed packets, denoted 
   by ADPg,y,r, for three paths are set with 0. There are four kinds 
   of packet type with different sizes such as 256, 512, 768, 1024 
   bytes.
  
   Incoming packets are waiting to be distributed to the most 
   appropriate path. 
                                                          
   A(1024) <- B(256) <- C(768) <- D(512) <- E(768)
 


Kim                      Expires January 1, 2019               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft         Bandwidth Aggregation Scheme           July 2018

   The 1st round is operated. At Green path, the weighted capacity is 
   added and thus the distribution counter, DCg, is 1024. Then, since 
   the DCg is not less than the incoming packet's size (1024 bytes), the 
   incoming packet 'A' is distributed to Green path and thus DCg=0. 
   Currently, total amount of distributed packets to Green path, ADPg, 
   is 1024 bytes. At Yellow path, the weighted capacity is added and 
   thus DCy=512. Then, since the DCy is not less than the incoming 
   packet's size (256 bytes), the incoming packet 'B' is distributed to 
   Yellow path and thus DCy=256. Currently, ADPy=256. At Red path, the 
   weighted capacity is added and thus DCr=256. Then, since the DCr is 
   still less than the incoming packet's size (768 bytes), move to Green 
   path. Currently, ADPr=0. The 1st round is done. Then, the 2nd round 
   is operated. At Green path, since the DCg is less than the incoming 
   packet's size (768 bytes), the weighted capacity is added and thus 
   DCg=1024. Then, the incoming packet 'C' is distributed to Green path 
   and thus DCg=256. Currently, ADPg=1792. At Yellow path, since DCy is 
   less than the incoming packet's size (512 bytes), the weighted 
   capacity is added and thus DCy=768. Then, the incoming packet 'D' is 
   distributed to Yellow path and thus DCy=256. Currently, ADP =768. At 
   Red path, since DCr is less than the incoming packet's size (768 
   bytes), the weighted capacity is added and thus DCr=512. Then, the 
   incoming packet 'E' is distributed to Green path and thus DCg=0. 
   Currently, ADPr=512. The 2nd round is done. The operation procedure 
   in next round is repeated when there are incoming packets.

2.3  Performance Indices and Useful Design Parameters

    There can be four performance indices in the proposed scheme; ratio 
    of distributed packets, amount of distributed packets, packet loss 
    and throughput. Of course, the throughput can be improved as many 
    packets are distributed. However, the improvement of the throughput 
    does not have the meaning if the packet loss increases.


    Performance Index	             Objective
    --------------------------------------------------------------------
    Ratio of distributed packets	 Distributing packets fairly according 
                                   to the weight ratio of each 
                                   end-to-end path

    Amount of distributed packets	 Distributing packets as many as 
                                   possible over each end-to-end path

    Packet loss	                   Minimizing lost packets on each 
                                   end-to-end path

    Throughput	                   Maximizing the average rate of 
                                   successful packet delivery on each 
                                   end-to-end path
    --------------------------------------------------------------------

Kim                      Expires January 1, 2019               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft         Bandwidth Aggregation Scheme           July 2018

   As mentioned before, the capacity unit is a useful design parameter 
   to determine weighted capacity that affect on four performance 
   indices mentioned before. Too big value of the capacity unit can 
   introduce excessive credits for end-to-end paths, which means that 
   network paths have enough credits to distribute packets. Thus, 
   incoming packets are more likely to be distributed simultaneously on 
   every path each round, which cannot provide fair distribution 
   according to weights for network paths. Thus, the ratio of 
   distributed packets can be degraded. In addition, since packets can 
   be distributed too many over each end-to-end path, the performance 
   for packet loss can be degraded. Of course, since packets are 
   distributed too many over each end-to-end path, the throughput can 
   be improved. However, as mentioned before, the improvement of the 
   throughput does not have the meaning since the packet loss 
   increases. On the other hand, too small value of the capacity unit 
   can introduce deficient credits for end-to-end paths, which means 
   that end-to-end paths do not have enough credits to distribute 
   packets. Thus, incoming packets are less likely to be distributed on 
   every paths each round, which can thus degrade the amount of 
   distributed packets. In addition, since the amount of distributed 
   packets over each end-to-end path is not much, the throughput can be 
   degraded whereas the packet loss can decrease. Therefore, the 
   important issue here is how to choose an appropriate capacity unit 
   to make the performance of the proposed scheme as good as possible.  
   

3.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no IANA actions.


4.  References

4.1.  Normative References


   [1] N. Leymann, C. Heidemann, et al, "BANdwidth Aggregation for 
       interNet Access (BANANA) The Control Protocol of Bonding 
       Tunnels", draft-leymann-banana-signaling-02, work in progress.

   [2] N. Leymann, C. Heidemann, et al, "BANdwidth Aggregation for
       interNet Access (BANANA) The Data Plane of Bonding
       Tunnels", draft-leymann-banana-data-encap, work in progress.

   [3] M. Blanchet and P. Seite, "Multiple Interfaces and Provisioning 
       Domains Problem Statement", IETF RFC 6418,  November 2011.

   [4] M. Wasserman and P. Seite, "Current Practices for 
       Multiple-Interface Hosts", IETF RFC 6419, November 2011.


Kim                      Expires January 2, 2019               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft         Bandwidth Aggregation Scheme           July 2018

4.2.  Informative References

   [5] K. Habaka, K. A. Harras, M. Youssef, "Bandwidth aggregation 
       techniques in heterogeneous multi-homed devices : A survey", 
       Computer Networks, vol. 92, pp. 168~188, 2015.


Author's Address

   Pyungsoo Kim
   Department of Electronics Engineering,
   Korea Polytechnic University,
   2121 Jungwang-Dong, Shiheung City,
   Gyeonggi-Do  429-793
   KOREA

   Phone: +82 31 8041 0489
   EMail: pskim@kpu.ac.kr

   
   
   
   
   
   
   

























Kim                      Expires January 1, 2019               [Page 7]
