


Mobopts Research Group                                             C. Ng
Internet-Draft                                  Panasonic Singapore Labs
Expires: May 15, 2008                                             K. Aso
                                      Matsushita Electric Industrial Co.
                                                        Ltd. (Panasonic)
                                                       November 12, 2007


              On Mobile IPv6 Optimization and Multihoming
                    draft-ng-mobopts-multihoming-00

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on May 15, 2008.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

Abstract

   This memo explores the possible areas of extensions to MIPv6 route
   optimization in the considerations of multihomed nodes.  The
   intention is to raise awareness in the research community, leading to
   a possible extension to RFC 4651.





Ng & Aso                  Expires May 15, 2008                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft     MIPv6 Optimization and Multihoming      November 2007


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Multihomed Mobile Node  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   3.  Multihomed Anchor Node  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   4.  Multihomed Correspondent Node . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   5.  Conclusion  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   6.  Informative Reference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   Appendix A.  Change Log . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements  . . . . . . . . . . 8








































Ng & Aso                  Expires May 15, 2008                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft     MIPv6 Optimization and Multihoming      November 2007


1.  Introduction

   RFC 4651 [1] discussed and analyzed various techniques of optimizing
   the Route Optimization in Mobility Support in IPv6 (Mobile IPv6, or
   MIPv6) [2].  One area in which RFC 4651 had not considered, which was
   in fact mentioned as a future research area, is the consideration of
   multihomed nodes.

   As different access technologies continues to emerge, the likelihood
   of a node being multihomed increases.  Additionally, a node can enjoy
   various benefits, such as more resilience to link failures or network
   congestions, as documented in various literature (e.g. see [3], [4],
   [5]).  Thus, it could be expected that in future, a substantial
   portion of nodes involved in Mobile IPv6 signaling will be
   multihomed.

   Narayanan et. al provided a good analysis in the interaction of
   between various mobility and multihoming protocols in [6] from an
   architectural perspective.  The present memo is not meant to
   duplicate the work there.  Instead, it is our intention to analyze if
   there are opportunities for optimization when multihomed node is
   involved in Mobile IPv6 signaling.

   For this purpose, this memo first consider the case where the mobile
   node is multihomed in Section 2, and then the case where the anchor
   node (i.e. home agent, mobility anchor point, etc) is multihomed in
   Section 3.  Finaly, the case where the correspondent node is
   multihomed is considered in Section 4.

   [AUTHOR'S NOTE]: Due to time constraint, only Section 4 is completed.
   The remaining 2 sections will be added in subsequent versions.


2.  Multihomed Mobile Node

   TBD


3.  Multihomed Anchor Node

   TBD


4.  Multihomed Correspondent Node

   There are two main possibilities why a correspondent node can be
   multihomed.  Firstly, the correspondent node can be on a multihomed
   site.  Secondly, the correspondent node may be using multiple



Ng & Aso                  Expires May 15, 2008                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft     MIPv6 Optimization and Multihoming      November 2007


   interfaces.  In both cases, the correspondent node would configure
   multiple addresses, and may use more than one address when
   communicating with the mobile node.  Such communications may take the
   form of:

   o  Single Session: with the use of multihoming-capable protocols such
      as Stream Control Transmission Protocol (SCTP) [7], or Site
      Multihoming by Intermediation (Shim6) [8], the correspondent node
      and mobile node may be having only a single transport session,
      even though multiple addresses are used.

   o  Multiple Sessions: the correspondent node may wish to perform load
      balancing between its multiple addresses such that, for instance,
      audio streams would use one address while video stream uses
      another address when having a video conference session with the
      mobile node.

   In both of the forms, the packet data unit (PDU) received by the IP
   layer of the mobile node from the upper layers will be addressed to
   multiple addresses belonging to the correspondent node.  In the
   Single Session case, the SCTP or SHIM6 protocol layer will split the
   traffic stream into different PDUs to be sent to different addresses
   of the correspondent node.  In the Multiple Sessions case, the
   applications will open different sessions addressed to different
   addresses of the correspondent node.  Either way, the Mobile IP layer
   will not be aware of the fact that all these different addresses
   belong to the same physical node.  When route optimization is
   attempted, the mobile node will initiate return routability procedure
   with each and every of the correspondent node's addresses, oblivious
   to the fact that only one set of return routability procedure is
   needed to bind its care-of address to its home address at the
   correspondent node.

   Approaches to eliminate such redundant signalling would involve
   making the Mobile IP layer of the mobile node aware that the
   addresses all belongs to the same correspondent node.  In one
   approach, special application programming interface (API) is provided
   to allow upper layers to link a set of addresses as belonging to a
   single entity.  This will allow SCTP, Shim6 or other multihoming
   protocols to inform the Mobile IP layer that route optimization is
   enabled with all the addresses in the linked set as long as return
   routability procedure is successfully conducted with one of the
   addresses in the linked set.  The disadvantage of this approach is
   that it relies on upper layers to utilize the newly provided API.
   Old, unmaintained programs would not be able to do so, resulting in
   redundant signalling.

   Another approach is for the correspondent node to inform the mobile



Ng & Aso                  Expires May 15, 2008                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft     MIPv6 Optimization and Multihoming      November 2007


   node of all its addresses upon receiving the first signalling message
   from the mobile node.  This may be any one of the Home Test Init,
   Care-of Test Init or Binding Update messages.  Upon responding with
   the Home Test, Care-of Test or Binding Acknowledgement messages, the
   correspondent node may include the list of addresses it owns, so that
   the mobile node would know that it need not repeat the return
   routability procedure with these addresses.

   There are security threats that needs to be analyzed for the second
   approach.  Two aspects of the threat analysis should be covered:

   o  the threats on the mobile node

      This is generally the case where a malicious correspondent node
      sends back a list of fake addresses.  The impact of this seems
      minimal at first glance, since the worst damage this would do is
      caused mobile node to wrongly assume that route optimization is
      established when it is in fact not.

   o  the threats on the correspondent node

      This is generally the case where a malicious node initiate return
      routability procedure with a correspondent node, tricking it to
      revealing the list of addresses it owns.  This does not seems to
      be a serious threat at first glance, since if the correspondent
      node does not wish its list of addresses to be known, it can
      always be configured to not return the list of addresses.


5.  Conclusion

   This memo explores the use of multihoming and mobility protocols
   simultaneously, and investigates specifically if there are further
   enhancements that can be done in such situations.  We had analyzed
   the case the correspondent node is multihomed, leaving the cases
   where the mobile node and mobility anchor are multihomed as future
   work in subsequent versions.



6.  Informative Reference

   [1]  Vogt, C. and J. Arkko, "A Taxonomy and Analysis of Enhancements
        to Mobile IPv6 Route Optimization", RFC 4651, February 2007.

   [2]  Johnson, D., Perkins, C., and J. Arkko, "Mobility Support in
        IPv6", RFC 3775, June 2004.




Ng & Aso                  Expires May 15, 2008                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft     MIPv6 Optimization and Multihoming      November 2007


   [3]  Abley, J., Black, B., and V. Gill, "Goals for IPv6 Site-
        Multihoming Architectures", RFC 3582, August 2003.

   [4]  Bagnulo, M. and J. Abley, "Applicability Statement for the Level
        3 Multihoming Shim Protocol (Shim6)",
        draft-ietf-shim6-applicability-03 (work in progress), July 2007.

   [5]  Ernst, T., "Motivations and Scenarios for Using Multiple
        Interfaces and Global  Addresses",
        draft-ietf-monami6-multihoming-motivation-scenario-02 (work in
        progress), July 2007.

   [6]  Narayanan, V., Thaler, D., Bagnulo, M., and H. Soliman, "IP
        Mobility and Multi-homing Interactions and Architectural
        Considerations",
        draft-vidya-ip-mobility-multihoming-interactions-01 (work in
        progress), July 2007.

   [7]  Stewart, R., Xie, Q., Morneault, K., Sharp, C., Schwarzbauer,
        H., Taylor, T., Rytina, I., Kalla, M., Zhang, L., and V. Paxson,
        "Stream Control Transmission Protocol", RFC 2960, October 2000.

   [8]  Bagnulo, M. and E. Nordmark, "Shim6: Level 3 Multihoming Shim
        Protocol for IPv6", draft-ietf-shim6-proto-09 (work in
        progress), November 2007.


Appendix A.  Change Log

   o  draft-ng-mobopts-multihoming-00:

      *  Initial version.



















Ng & Aso                  Expires May 15, 2008                  [Page 6]

Internet-Draft     MIPv6 Optimization and Multihoming      November 2007


Authors' Addresses

   Chan-Wah Ng
   Panasonic Singapore Laboratories Pte Ltd
   Blk 1022 Tai Seng Ave #06-3530
   Tai Seng Industrial Estate
   Singapore  534415
   SG

   Phone: +65 65505420
   Email: chanwah.ng@sg.panasonic.com


   Keigo Aso
   Matsushita Electric Industrial Co. Ltd. (Panasonic)
   5-3 Hikarino-oka
   Yokosuka, Kanagawa  239-0847
   JP

   Phone: +81 46 840 5123
   Email: asou.keigo@jp.panasonic.com






























Ng & Aso                  Expires May 15, 2008                  [Page 7]

Internet-Draft     MIPv6 Optimization and Multihoming      November 2007


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Ng & Aso                  Expires May 15, 2008                  [Page 8]

