


Geopriv                                                        R. Barnes
Internet-Draft                                               M. Lepinski
Updates: 3693, 3694                                     BBN Technologies
(if approved)                                              H. Tschofenig
Intended status: Informational                    Nokia Siemens Networks
Expires: May 22, 2008                                     H. Schulzrinne
                                                     Columbia University
                                                       November 19, 2007


         Security Requirements for the Geopriv Location System
                     draft-barnes-geopriv-lo-sec-01

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on May 22, 2008.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

Abstract

   Internet protocols that deal with presence-based location objects
   support a wide variety of applications.  However, the dissemination
   of location objects from sources of location to consumers is a common
   feature of all location-based applications.  In order to enable the



Barnes, et al.            Expires May 22, 2008                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft       draft-barnes-geopriv-lo-sec-01        November 2007


   development of broadly-applicable security and privacy mechanisms for
   dissemination of location objects, this document describes an end-to-
   end architecture for policy-constrained location distribution.  In
   this architecture, location distribution is accomplished by a set of
   distribute actors.  Likewise, we describe the assurances that these
   actors require from the architecture, and derive more detailed
   security requirements based on these assurances.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  An End-to-end Location Architecture  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     3.1.  Structure of a Location Transmission . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     3.2.  The End-to-end Model and Global Roles  . . . . . . . . . .  7
     3.3.  Usage Scenarios for this Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
       3.3.1.  RFC 3693 model of transmission . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
       3.3.2.  Location configuration by "pull" . . . . . . . . . . .  9
       3.3.3.  Location configuration by "push" . . . . . . . . . . . 10
       3.3.4.  Location conveyance by value . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
       3.3.5.  Location conveyance by reference . . . . . . . . . . . 10
       3.3.6.  Presence server  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   4.  Required Assurances  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     4.1.  Location Transmission  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
       4.1.1.  Location Mover . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
       4.1.2.  Rule Maker . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
       4.1.3.  Location Server  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
       4.1.4.  Location Recipient . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     4.2.  End-to-end distribution  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
       4.2.1.  Location Generator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
       4.2.2.  Viewer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
       4.2.3.  Target . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   5.  Security Requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   6.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   7.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   8.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 17












Barnes, et al.            Expires May 22, 2008                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft       draft-barnes-geopriv-lo-sec-01        November 2007


1.  Introduction

   Demand for location-based Internet applications, especially location-
   based Internet calling [I.D-ietf-ecrit-framework], has driven the
   creation of Internet protocols for communicating information about
   the location of Internet end hosts or other entities.  Of interest,
   for example, are protocols for informing hosts of their own location
   (location configuration protocols), transmitting location information
   from one host to another (location conveyance protocols), and
   requesting location information from a server (location dereference
   protocols).

   The first goal of this document is to describe how location
   information is used by these protocols over its entire "life-cycle".
   This life-cycle begins when location information is introduced into
   an IP network via a location configuration protocol, continues
   through one or more transmission by way of location conveyance
   protocols (and dereference protocols, when conveyed by reference),
   and ultimately ends when the location is delivered to an application
   consumer.

   A model for the use of Internet protocols to transmit location
   information via a store-and-forward network of Location Servers has
   been described in RFC 3693 [RFC3693].  Privacy concerns and privacy-
   relevant security concerns are described in RFC 3694 [RFC3694].  This
   document extends the model of these previous documents to explicitly
   take into account the end-to-end properties of the system, and to
   address security mechanisms related to concerns other than privacy.

   The Location Objects (LO) described in RFC 3693 and RFC 3694 are
   usually encoded as XML documents in the Presence Information Data
   Format - Location Object (PIDF-LO) schema [RFC4119].  While the
   general trend in the IETF is to require that LOs be in this format,
   certain protocols do not use PIDF-LO, most notably the DHCP
   extensions to carry location in civic [RFC4776] or geospatial
   [RFC3825] format.  In this document, such formats for location
   information are also regarded as LO formats, even though they do not
   comply with the requirements for LO formats in RFC 3693.

   The remainder of this document is structured as follows: After
   relevant terminology is introduced in Section [ref], Section [ref]
   describes an architecture for the end-to-end distribution of location
   over the Internet.  In particular, this architecture describes a set
   of entities that work together to move location information from
   source to consumer.  Based on the roles they play in the
   architecture, these entities may require certain assurances, and
   these are described in Section [ref].  Finally, the technical
   properties and mechanisms required to enable these assurances are



Barnes, et al.            Expires May 22, 2008                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft       draft-barnes-geopriv-lo-sec-01        November 2007


   reflected in a set of requirements for Geopriv security mechanisms.


2.  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].

   Most of the terms used in this document are defined in RFC 3693.  New
   terms, and terms which have a different meaning than in RFC 3693, are
   described below.

   Location Mover:  An entity that causes a location transmission to
      occur.  It may do so by instructing a Location Server to transmit
      location to a Location Recipient (a "push"), or it may provide a
      Location Recipient a reference that it can use to request the
      location from a Location Server (a "pull").

   Location Server:  An entity that transmits location according to
      privacy policies.

   Location Generator:  The entity that introduces a Location Object to
      the Internet.  An LG may perform sighting (i.e., it may determine
      the location of a Target), or it may act as a relay from some non-
      Internet-connected location resource.

   Location by value:  Location is represented by value when it is
      represented directly, as a data object containing location
      information.  We say that a location object is represented by
      value even if the information it contains is encrypted.

   Location by reference:  Location is represented by reference when it
      is represented indirectly, as a reference to another location
      datum (possibly another reference).  For example, if a URL returns
      a PIDF-LO document when dereferenced, then that URL constitutes a
      representation of the PIDF-LO by reference.


3.  An End-to-end Location Architecture

   In this section, we present an architecture for the end-to-end
   communication of location information.  The overall pattern of
   transmissions involved in this communication is often complex and
   thus such systems are modeled as the composition of atomic building
   blocks.

   In Section 3.1 we describe a single location transmission, and the



Barnes, et al.            Expires May 22, 2008                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft       draft-barnes-geopriv-lo-sec-01        November 2007


   roles played by parties in such a transmission.  A location
   transmission is an atomic unit that models a single movement of
   location information.  In Section 3.2 we describe how multiple
   location transmissions can fit together within an end-to-end system
   and the global roles played by entities in such a composite system.
   Finally, in Section 3.3 we demonstrate how this model maps to common
   location use-cases such as location configuration and point-to-point
   location conveyance.

3.1.  Structure of a Location Transmission

   Location transmission is the basic building block for policy-
   constrained location distribution.  A single transmission occurs in
   three steps, illustrated in Figure 1:

   1.  A Rule Maker informs the Location Server about Privacy Rules
       governing the distribution of Location Objects.

   2.  A Location Mover requests that location be moved, either by
       directing the LS to transmit the location to the LR or by
       providing the LR with a reference by which it can request
       location from the LS.

   3.  The LS determines whether the transmission is permitted by the
       rules available to it, and if so, transmits location to the LR
       (possibly as the result of a request by the LR).

   Note that the location transmitted in step (3) may be represented
   directly, as an intelligible LO, or indirectly, as a reference to the
   LO.  When the LS provides a reference, it is also acting as an LM in
   a second transmission, in which the LR uses the reference to obtain
   an LO from another LS.  In the below, the distinction between these
   representations is not significant, and we refer to the transmitted
   datum as a Location Object regardless of whether it is directly or
   indirectly represented.
















Barnes, et al.            Expires May 22, 2008                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft       draft-barnes-geopriv-lo-sec-01        November 2007


                             +---------+
                             |   LM    |
                             +---------+
                                  |
                     +---(2)--either/or-------+
                     |                        |
                     V                        V
                +---------+              +---------+
                |   LS    |------(3)---->|   LR    |
                +---------+              +---------+
                     ^
                     |
                    (1)
                     |
                +---------+
                |   RM    |
                +---------+

                 Figure 1: A single location transmission

   There are four roles involved in this transaction, a Location Server
   (LS), a Location Recipient (LR), a Location Mover (LM) and a Rule
   Maker (RM).  A single entity will commonly play multiple of these
   roles within a single transaction (see Section Section 3.3 for
   examples).  The only two roles that are necessarily separate are that
   of the LS and the LR, for obvious reasons.

   Location Mover (LM)  The Location Mover is the party who causes the
      location transmission to occur.  The LM may accomplish this in one
      of two ways.  Either the LM tells the Location Recipient how to
      "pull" the LO, or else it tells the LS how to "push" the LO.  In
      the former case, the Location Mover would send the Location
      Recipient a reference to the Location Server and to the location
      information to be retrieved.  In the latter case, the Location
      Mover would send the Location Server an identifier for the
      Location Recipient and an identifier for of the location
      information to sent.

   Rule Maker  The Rule Maker is the party who produces the rules
      governing whether a Location Recipient is allowed to receive
      location information and what precision of location information a
      Location Recipient is allowed to receive.  (Such rules are
      described in [ref:RFC4745] and [ref:draft-ietf-Geopriv-policy].)
      The Rule Maker may send rules directly to the Location Server, or
      the Location Server may receive the rules as part of a location
      object as per [ref:RFC4119].  Note that some transmissions may
      occur without a Rule Maker, in which cases the transmission is
      constrained only by policy contained in the LO itself.



Barnes, et al.            Expires May 22, 2008                  [Page 6]

Internet-Draft       draft-barnes-geopriv-lo-sec-01        November 2007


   Location Server  The Location Server is the party who possesses the
      location information at the beginning of the transmission.  The
      Location Server receives rules governing the location information
      as received from the Rule Maker, as part of the location object
      containing the location information, or as part of its internal
      configuration.  The Location Server is responsible for applying
      these rules and as such he may need to reduce the precision of the
      location information or terminate the location transmission if the
      Location Recipient is not authorized to receive the location
      information.  After applying the appropriate rules, the Location
      Server sends the location information to the Location Recipient.

   Location Recipient  The Location Recipient receives the location from
      the Location Server.  If the Location Mover indicates that the
      location is to be pulled by the Location Recipient, then the
      Location Recipient may need to send a message to the Location
      Server requesting the location.

3.2.  The End-to-end Model and Global Roles

   The life-cycle of a Location Object typically consists of multiple
   location transmissions.  For example, location might first be
   acquired via a location configuration protocol (LCP) and then
   conveyed via a location conveyance protocol).  This end-to-end
   distribution process can be described as a "chaining together" of the
   individual transmissions described above; different transmissions are
   connected by an entity that acts as an LR in one transmission and an
   LS in the next.  This process is illustrated in Figure 2.  Note that
   although Figure 2 depicts a single "path", a single LS may transmit
   location to multiple LRs over time; grouping these paths together
   forms a logical distribution tree, with the LG as the root node and
   Viewers as leaf nodes.
          .    +----+    .    +----+    .    +----+
          .    | LM |    .    | LM |    .    | LM |
          .    +----+    .    +----+    .    +----+
          .    /    \    .    /    \    .    /    \
     +----+----+    +----+----+    +----+----+    +----+--------+
     | LG | LS |--->| LR | LS |--->| LR | LS |--->| LR | Viewer |
     +----+----+    +----+----+    +----+----+    +----+--------+
          .  |           .  |           .  |
          . +----+       . +----+       . +----+
          . | RM |       . | RM |       . | RM |
          . +----+       . +----+       . +----+

                Figure 2: End-to-end location distribution

   In addition to the roles within a particular location transmission,
   there are also three additional global roles within the larger



Barnes, et al.            Expires May 22, 2008                  [Page 7]

Internet-Draft       draft-barnes-geopriv-lo-sec-01        November 2007


   composite system.  As described in Section 3, a given party may need
   particular assurances based on the global role that it plays.

   Location Generator  The Location Generator is the party who initially
      introduces location information into the Internet.  The LG may be
      (but need not be) the entity that performs the sighting of the
      Target.  The LG may be the same as the target when mechanisms such
      as GPS are used, but in many settings the location generator is a
      separate entity within the access network.

   Viewer  The Viewer is the party who ultimately makes use of the
      location information; in particular, the Viewer does not transmit
      location further.  The Viewer is the Location Recipient in the
      final location transmission.

   Target  The Target is the party whose location is described by the
      location information.  Although not explicitly included in the
      model above, every LO has a Target, and the Target will frequently
      play multiple roles in the distribution of related LOs.

   It is common for a party to play different roles within the different
   transmissions.  For example, the Target might be the Location
   Recipient during location configuration, then act as Location Server
   when transmitting the LO to a presence server, then act as a Rule
   Maker by providing the presence server rules for further
   dissemination of the LO.  In some cases, the Target may be a Location
   Generator or a Viewer; obviously, we assume that the roles of the LG
   and the Viewer are played by different entities.

3.3.  Usage Scenarios for this Model

   In order to make the meaning of the above model clearer, this section
   desribes how several common use cases can be described using the
   model.  In addition, we describe how the transmission model described
   in RFC 3693 maps into the model described above.

3.3.1.  RFC 3693 model of transmission

   Section 4 of RFC 3693 depicts the relationships of the primary
   Geopriv entities, in which the Location Server acts as a relay
   between a Location Generator and a Location Recipient, with rules
   provided by a Rule Holder.  In this document, we take a more limited
   view of three of these roles: Here an Location Server is simply an
   entity that transmits location (relying on a separate associated
   Location Recipient for input), an Location Generator is simply a
   distinguished Location Server, and Rule Holders are omitted from the
   discussion because they simply act as intermediaries for Rule Makers.
   The omission of Rule Holders is not meant to claim that Rule Holders



Barnes, et al.            Expires May 22, 2008                  [Page 8]

Internet-Draft       draft-barnes-geopriv-lo-sec-01        November 2007


   do not exist (for instance, RMs may transmit rules to the LS via a
   store-and-forward network, in which the nodes would be RHs); however,
   they do not have application-level significance.

   In exchange for using these more limited roles, the single "T"-shaped
   diagram of RFC 3693 maps onto a chain of two transmissions, as
   illustrated in Figure 3 below.  The first transmission is from the LG
   (in this case, just another LS) to the LR that acts as the receiving
   component of the Location Server (as defined in RFC 3693).  The
   second transmission is from the LS acting as the sending component of
   the RFC 3693 Location Server to the LR, as dictated by rules supplied
   by the RM.  Note that in these transmissions, the role of the LM is
   undefined; RFC 3693 starts from the assumption that the given
   interfaces exist, without giving explicit consideration to how they
   are established.
                   ......     .     ......
                   . LM .     .     . LM .
                   ......     .     ......
                       +-------------+
                       |     LS      |
          +----+----+  | +----+----+ |  +----+
          | LG | LS |--->| LR | LS |--->| LR |
          +----+----+  | +----+----+ |  +----+
                 .     +--------|----+
                 .            . |
               ......         . +----+
               . RM .         . | RM |
               ......         . +----+
                              .

                Figure 3: The model of RFC 3693, Section 4

3.3.2.  Location configuration by "pull"

   Location configuration protocols, such as HELD
   [I.D-ietf-geopriv-http-location-delivery], that require a device to
   specifically "pull" location can be modeled as a location
   transmission as follows: The LIS discovery mechanism is the Location
   Mover.  The LIS discovery mechanism sends the endpoint the identity
   of the LIS, e.g. the HELD server.  (Note that in this case the
   Location Mover need not send the identity of the location information
   to the endpoint, because the identity of the location information is
   implicit in the identity of the endpoint.)  The endpoint is the
   Location Recipient and also the Target.  Upon receiving the identity
   of the LIS, the endpoint makes an LCP query to the LIS requesting
   location.  The LIS is the Location Server and in this case has
   previously been provisioned with rules by the Rule Maker.  The LIS
   applies the rules and returns a location object to the endpoint.



Barnes, et al.            Expires May 22, 2008                  [Page 9]

Internet-Draft       draft-barnes-geopriv-lo-sec-01        November 2007


3.3.3.  Location configuration by "push"

   Location configuration protocols, such as DHCP, that push location
   information to the endpoint can be modeled as a location transmission
   as follows.  The network (i.e. a lower layer protocol) tells the LIS,
   e.g. the DHCP server, that an endpoint has connected to the network
   and provides the LIS with an identifier for the endpoint.  (Note that
   again in this case the identity of the endpoint is implicitly the
   identity of the location information.)  The LIS is the Location
   Server and in this case has previously been provision with rules by
   the Rule Maker.  The endpoint is the Location Recipient and also the
   target.  Upon learning the identity of the endpoint the LIS then
   sends the location information to the endpoint.

3.3.4.  Location conveyance by value

   A protocol, such as SIP, that conveys a location object by value can
   be modeled as a location transmission as follows.  The calling device
   is both the Location Mover and the Location Server.  The calling
   device possesses a location object that contains the rules governing
   the location information.  The called device is the Location
   Recipient.  The calling device applies the rules within the location
   object and then sends the location object to the called device (e.g.
   in the body of a SIP INVITE).

3.3.5.  Location conveyance by reference

   A protocol, such as SIP, that conveys a location object by reference
   can be modeled as a location transmission as follows.  The calling
   device is the Location Mover and possesses a reference to location
   information stored on an LIS.  The calling device sends the location
   reference, containing both the identity of the LIS and the identity
   of the location information, to the called party (e.g. in the header
   of a SIP INVITE).  The called party is the Location Recipient.  Upon
   receiving the location reference, the called party sends a
   dereference request, containing the identity of the location
   information, to the LIS.  The LIS is the Location Server, and has
   been previously provisioned with rules by the Rule Maker.  The LIS
   applies the appropriate rules for the location information and
   returns a location object to the called party.

3.3.6.  Presence server

   The subscription to location information on a presence server can be
   modeled as a location transmission as follows.  The presence
   subscriber is the Location Mover and also the Location Recipient.
   Through some out of band mechanism (e.g. a business card) the
   presence subscriber learns the identity of a presence server and the



Barnes, et al.            Expires May 22, 2008                 [Page 10]

Internet-Draft       draft-barnes-geopriv-lo-sec-01        November 2007


   identity of a target whose presence is stored on the server.  The
   presence subscriber sends a subscription request, containing the
   identity of the target, to the presence server.  The presence server
   has previously been provisioned with rules by the Rule Maker (in this
   case, most likely the target).  The presence server applies the rules
   and constructs a location object which it then sends to the presence
   subscriber.


4.  Required Assurances

   Each of the entities in the above model has expectations about how
   the system works, which may or may not be valid in a given situation.
   Depending on the needs of the entities, they may require assurances
   that their expectations are valid in a given situation.  The goal of
   Geopriv security and privacy mechanisms is to provide such
   assurances.  In order to determine requirements for Geopriv security
   mechanisms, then, we need to understand the assurances required by
   participants in the architecture.

4.1.  Location Transmission

   As described above, there are generally four logical roles in a
   single location transmission.  In some cases, the same entity may
   play multiple roles within a transmission.  In that case, the set of
   assurances required by that entity is the union of the assurances
   required by the roles it fulfills.

4.1.1.  Location Mover

   The goal of the Location Mover is to effect the communication of an
   LO from the Location Server to the Location Recipient.  Conversely,
   the LM may not wish to disclose other LOs, or to disclose any
   information to other recipients.  Because the LM does not perform the
   transmission himself, he cannot receive direct assurances about these
   questions; he must trust the LS and the LR to carry out his
   instructions.  Thus, the only direct assurance of value to the LM is
   that his instructions are faithfully communicated to their recipient
   (the LS or the LR), and that those instructions unambiguously direct
   the recipient to perform the action desired by the LM (including the
   application of appropriate security measures on the transmission).
   In the "push" scenario, the instructions provided to the LS must
   clearly identify the LR, and in the "pull" scenario, the instructions
   provided to the LR must clearly identify LS.  In both cases, the
   instructions must clearly identify the LO to be transmitted and the
   manner in which it should be sent.  Not all of these indications need
   to be explicit in the instructions; for instance, an LS that only
   distributes location via HTTPS does not need to be instructed to use



Barnes, et al.            Expires May 22, 2008                 [Page 11]

Internet-Draft       draft-barnes-geopriv-lo-sec-01        November 2007


   HTTPS for every transmission.

4.1.2.  Rule Maker

   The goal of the Rule Maker is tell the LS policies to apply to
   transmissions, and to ensure that the rules clearly specify how the
   LS should execute them.  The first assurance of relevance to the RM
   is to assure that rules are faithfully transmitted to the correct
   destination: Since policy documents can themselves be sensitive, the
   RM must verify that they are delivered only to the LS it intends,
   i.e., it must authenticate the identity of the LS and verify that the
   authenticated identity belongs to the desired LS.  And since changes
   to a policy document can affect many subsequent transmissions, the RM
   requires assurance that rules are not modified en route to the LS.
   Second, in order to assure that policy is correctly executed, the
   transmitted rules must define an unambiguous mapping from LOs to
   actions that the LS must perform.  The RM is further assured that the
   rules will be executed when the LS can provide confirmation that it
   is able to process the supplied rules at the time that the RM
   transmits them.

4.1.3.  Location Server

   The goal of the Location Server is to transmit location in compliance
   with relevant policy.  Thus, the primary assurances the LS requires
   are related to the question of whether a given transmission is
   authorized by policy.  The LS must determine whether the LR is
   authorized to receive location; when a transmission is by "push", it
   must also determine whether the LM is authorized to initiate a
   transmission.  As a pre-requisite, the LS must also verify that
   policy is valid, i.e., that the Rule Maker is authorized to dictate
   policy.  All of these authorization decisions require that the server
   authenticate the identities of the parties requesting access (e.g.,
   to move or receive location, or to install policy).  Note that the
   manner in which these authorization policies are installed on the LS
   and applied to specific transmissions is a matter of local
   configuration.

4.1.4.  Location Recipient

   The goal of the Location Recipient is to acquire the LO intended by
   the LM.  In general, this assurance can be decomposed into assuring
   that the LS is the one intended to deliver the LO and that the LO is
   faithfully transmitted from the LM to the LR; the LS is trusted by
   the LR to deliver the LO specified by the LM.  In the "push" case,
   the LR may not have information about the LS prior to the
   transmission, so it must also trust that the LS delivering location
   was properly instructed to do so.  In the "pull" scenario, the LM has



Barnes, et al.            Expires May 22, 2008                 [Page 12]

Internet-Draft       draft-barnes-geopriv-lo-sec-01        November 2007


   told the LR which LS should be delivering the LO, so the LR can be
   assured that the LS that does transmit location is the proper one by
   authenticating the identity of the LS.  In both cases, the LR
   requires assurance that the LO is not modified while en route between
   the LS and the LR.

4.2.  End-to-end distribution

   In addition to the four transmission entities described above, we
   also consider three distinguished entities in an end-to-end
   distribution scenario.  They require assurances about the entire
   distribution chain, or the entire distribution tree.

4.2.1.  Location Generator

   The Location Generator is the Location Server at the root of the
   distribution tree.  The LG thus offers the valuable service of acting
   as an Internet-accessible source of location information, and its
   primary interest is in controlling the use of this service,
   especially controlling access to it.  In terms of the model, the LG
   is interested in controlling the set of Viewers that are able to
   interpret and use the LO.  There are two basic approaches to
   acheiving this control: First, the LG may distribute LOs that are
   encrypted in such a way that only the Viewers that are authorized to
   access the location encoded in the LO.  Second, the LG may distribute
   LOs in indirect representation, i.e., location references.  Because
   these references are not valuable by themselves, the LG can give
   allow them to be distributed by parties that may not be authorized to
   access the location they refer to.  In order for the Viewer to obtain
   the location referred to, it has to engage in a final transmission,
   in which the LG is the LS; as part of this transmission, the LG can
   verify that the Viewer is authorized to receive the location.

4.2.2.  Viewer

   The Viewer is the ultimate consumer of a Location Object.  As a
   consumer, the Viewer requires assurance that location information is
   available to it by value, and that that information be correct, in
   the sense that the location information describes the actual location
   of the indicated entity at the indicated time.  (In some cases, the
   entity and time may be implicit).  Viewers' access to location
   information by value is largely a deployment issue, related to
   Viewers' ability to provide authentication credentials to Location
   Servers, and to Location Servers' authorization policies.  In most
   situations, it is not possible to verify the correctness of location
   directly.  Rather, a Viewer can receive assurance that a location is
   correct by virtue of trust in the source of the location information.
   That is, Viewer can have more confidence in the correctness of an LO



Barnes, et al.            Expires May 22, 2008                 [Page 13]

Internet-Draft       draft-barnes-geopriv-lo-sec-01        November 2007


   when it can verify that the location was provided by a source that
   the it trusts to provide correct location.  As with LG access
   control, this verification can be done either through the object or
   through the LS that provides it.  If the LO itself provides a
   verifiable assertion as to its origin, then the Viewer receives
   assurance about its correctness even if it receives the LO via an
   untrusted channel.  On the other hand, if the LS that provides the LO
   is trusted to provide correct location, then the Viewer receives
   assurance about the LO's correctness even if the ultimate origin of
   the LO (i.e., the LG) remains unknown to the Viewer.

4.2.3.  Target

   The interests of the Target are discussed at length in RFC 3693 and
   RFC 3694.  The Target by itself has no technical involvement in the
   distribution process; in order to affect how its location is
   distributed, it must take on one of the roles described above.  For
   instance, the Target will commonly act as an LS to explicitly control
   how location is transmitted, or as a Rule Maker to control
   distribution by a third-party LS.  Much like the LG, the main concern
   of the Target is controlling access to its location.  If the Target
   acts as an LS, then the assurances and mechanisms available to it are
   essentially the same as those available to the LG.


5.  Security Requirements

   [RLB] In this section, we will define a taxonomy of location-relevant
   protocols, and set security requirements on them.  As for the
   taxonomy, I tend to classify protocols according to which arrow they
   correspond to in Figure 1:

   o  Policy Handling Protocols go between RMs and LSs (e.g., XCAP,
      common-policy)

   o  Location Control Protocols go between the LM and the LS/LR (to
      many to list, we probably can't do much here)

   o  Location Conveyance Protocols go between the LS and the LR (e.g.,
      SIP Geolocation, HELD, Location dereference protocols)


6.  Security Considerations

   The focus of this document is the security of location objects.  As
   such, security concerns are discussed throughout.





Barnes, et al.            Expires May 22, 2008                 [Page 14]

Internet-Draft       draft-barnes-geopriv-lo-sec-01        November 2007


7.  IANA Considerations

   This document makes no request of IANA.


8.  Informative References

   [I.D-ietf-ecrit-framework]
              Rosen, B., Schulzrinne, H., Polk, J., and A. Newton,
              "Framework for Emergency Calling using Internet
              Multimedia", September 2007.

   [I.D-ietf-geopriv-http-location-delivery]
              Barnes, M., "HTTP Enabled Location Delivery",
              September 2007.

   [RFC3693]  Cuellar, J., Morris, J., Mulligan, D., Peterson, J., and
              J. Polk, "Geopriv Requirements", February 2004.

   [RFC3694]  Danley, M., Mulligan, D., Morris, J., and J. Peterson,
              "Threat Analysis of the Geopriv Protocol", February 2004.

   [RFC3825]  Polk, J., Schnizlein, J., and M. Linsner, "Dynamic Host
              Configuration Protocol Option for Coordinate-based
              Location Configuration Information", July 2004.

   [RFC4119]  Peterson, J., "A Presence-based Geopriv Location Object
              Format", December 2005.

   [RFC4776]  Schulzrinne, H., "Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol
              (DHCPv4 and DHCPv6) Option for Civic Addresses
              Configuration Information", November 2006.


Authors' Addresses

   Richard Barnes
   BBN Technologies
   9861 Broken Land Pkwy, Suite 400
   Columbia, MD  21046
   USA

   Phone: +1 410 290 6169
   Email: rbarnes@bbn.com







Barnes, et al.            Expires May 22, 2008                 [Page 15]

Internet-Draft       draft-barnes-geopriv-lo-sec-01        November 2007


   Matt Lepinski
   BBN Technologies
   10 Moulton St
   Cambridge, MA  02138
   USA

   Phone: +1 617 873 5939
   Email: mlepinski@bbn.com


   Hannes Tschofenig
   Nokia Siemens Networks
   Otto-Hahn-Ring 6
   Munich, Bavaria  81739
   Germany

   Email: Hannes.Tschofenig@nsn.com
   URI:   http://www.tschofenig.com


   Henning Schulzrinne
   Columbia University
   Department of Computer Science
   450 Computer Science Building
   New York, NY  10027
   US

   Phone: +1 212 939 7004
   Email: hgs@cs.columbia.edu
   URI:   http://www.cs.columbia.edu





















Barnes, et al.            Expires May 22, 2008                 [Page 16]

Internet-Draft       draft-barnes-geopriv-lo-sec-01        November 2007


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Barnes, et al.            Expires May 22, 2008                 [Page 17]


