
Network Working Group                           B. Carpenter
Internet Draft                                           IBM
  draft-carpenter-solution-sirs-01.txt            D. Crocker
Expires: <12-03>                                 Brandenburg
                                                   June 2003
     
     
                              
        Careful Additional Review of Documents (CARD)
               by Senior IETF Reviewers (SIRS)

           (draft-carpenter-solution-sirs-01.txt)
                              
     
     
     
     COPYRIGHT NOTICE
     
     If published as an RFC this document will become
     Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003).  All Rights
     Reserved.
     
     
     
     ABSTRACT
     
     IETF specifications may not receive significant review,
     especially beyond a single working group, until they
     are submitted to the IESG. Hence, significant problems
     with a specification often are not detected until a
     problematic approach has been adopted and considerable
     effort has been spent developing and documenting this
     approach. Major changes to address problems identified
     late in the process take considerable effort and
     significantly delay a document that its authors
     believed to be ready for publication. The procedure
     described in this document is intended to solve, or
     palliate, a number of related problems that have been
     observed in the IETF process. The basic model is to
     create a team of Senior IETF Reviewers (SIRS), and have
     all documents receive a certain number of reviews by
     SIRs, prior to being submitted for publication. Review
     by SIRs at a very early stage is strongly encouraged.
     
     
     
     STATUS OF THIS MEMO
     
     This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full
     conformance with all provisions of Section 10 of
     RFC2026.
     
     Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet
     Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its
     working groups.  Note that other groups may also
     distribute working documents as Internet Drafts.
     
     Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum
     of six months and may be updated, replaced, or
     obsoleted by other documents at any time.  It is
     inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts as reference
     material or to cite them other than as "work in
     progress."
     
     The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
          
          http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html
     
     The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be
     accessed at
          
          http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.
     
     
     
     TABLE OF CONTENTS
     
     1.   Introduction
     2.   SIRs
          2.1. The Body of Senior Internet Reviewers
          2.2. Obtaining SIR Participation
     3.   Carding
          3.1. Reviewing in Public
          3.2. Spreading the load among SIRs
          3.3. Form of a Review
          3.4. Iterative Carding
     4.   Security considerations
     5.   Acknowledgements
     6.   Informative References
     7.   Authors' Addresses
     8.   Intellectual Property
     9.   Full Copyright Statement


1.   INTRODUCTION
     
     IETF specifications may not receive significant review,
     especially beyond a single working group, until they
     are submitted to the IESG or the RFC Editor. Hence,
     significant problems with a specification often are not
     detected until a problematic approach has been adopted
     and considerable effort has been spent developing and
     documenting this approach. Major changes to address
     problems identified late in the process take
     considerable effort and significantly delay a document
     that its authors believed to be ready for publication.
     We can speculate that this problem explains a large
     part of the long tail in the distribution of IESG
     document approval times, as well as a perception that
     the IESG has too much authority.
     
     The procedure described in this document is intended to
     solve, or palliate, a number of related problems that
     have been observed in the IETF process [PROBLEM]:
     
     *    perception that authority and influence in the IETF are
          concentrated in too few hands
     *    lack of explicit quality auditing throughout the
          standards development process.
     *    although there may be large attendances at many WG
          meetings, in many cases 5% or less of the participants have
          read the drafts which are under discussion or have a bearing
          on the decisions to be made.
     *    commitments to review a document are not carried out in
          a timely fashion
     *    little or no response is seen when a request for 'last-
          call' review is issued either at WG or IETF level.
     *    lack of recognition of review work as a valuable
          contribution
     *    submission of documents to the IESG that still have
          significant problems (leading to overload and delay)
     *    failure to detect fundamental problems and Internet-
          wide issues at an early stage; the IETF is not consistently
          effective at resolving issues that cross WG or area
          boundaries.
     
     Particularly because of the last point, it is
     impossible to resolve all these problems simply by
     giving additional responsibility to working groups
     themselves and relying on them for additional efforts.
     An additional procedure is needed.
     
     The procedure specified here calls for a team of 'SIRs'
     to 'CARD'.  The verb 'card' applies both to textiles
     and public establishments.  The former usage describes
     the removal of detritus from textiles and their
     preparation for weaving.  The latter describes the
     checking of  participants' credentials at the entrance.
     The term is also an acronym for 'Careful Additional
     Review of Documents.'
     
     The carding procedure initially makes no change to the
     formal process of IETF document development, review,
     approval, and publication. It is an additional
     procedure intended to tackle the problems listed above.
     If successful, it can be transformed into a formal
     process in due course. For the moment, it is not
     compulsory.
     
     The basic model is that the IETF will create a team of
     Senior IETF Reviewers (SIRs, who need be neither male
     nor knighted) chosen in a way designed to create trust,
     and that all documents should receive a certain number
     of reviews by SIRs, prior to being submitted to the
     IESG or the RFC Editor for publication. Furthermore,
     review at a very early stage is strongly encouraged.
     
     The model is not intended to replace existing
     mechanisms such as the various Directorates within the
     IETF and the MIB Doctor system. It will in fact build
     on them.
     
     The remainder of this document described how the team
     of SIRs is created and refreshed, how the review
     process works, and how it is used by document authors
     and working groups to achieve their objectives.



2.   SIRS


2.1. The Body of Senior Internet Reviewers
     
     2.1.1.    Initial Set of SIRs
     
     With approximately 200 RFCs published per year, and
     with most of them having existed in multiple Internet
     Drafts, a large team of SIRs is needed.
     
     An initial target of 100 people is suggested. It is
     recognized that this may be insufficient, so the number
     should be revised in the light of experience.
     
     Q.   Is this anything like the right number?
     A.   Assume we need 9 reviews per year (3 review cycles,
          3 reviewers each time) for each of 200 RFCs. That gives each
          SIR one review every 20 days, approximately. This seems
          high, and suggests that the final target should be 200
          people.
     
     The goal is to identify a team of people with adequate
     experience contributing to IETF technical work, who are
     likely to be trusted as a group to be both technically
     expert and unbiased.
     
     The initial set of candidates to be SIRS is defined by
     objective criteria, to avoid any bias in their
     selection. It will consist of:
     
     *    all current IAB members
     *    all former IAB and IESG members, and former WG Chairs
     *    all current MIB Doctors
     *    all members of existing IETF Directorates
     *    all authors of at least three RFCs
     *    (other suggestions???) 
     
     Candidates must, of course, agree to participate and
     agree to the terms of serving as a SIR.
     
     Current IESG Area Directors are excluded from the pool.
     Current WG Chairs are not explicitly included, but they
     may qualify under other criteria.
     
     Q:   Why are all IAB members automatically included?
     
     A:   Because the IAB is in any case supposed to carry
          out cross-area review. There should be no
          significant extra workload for an IAB member to
          act as a SIR.
     
     Q:   Why are MIB Doctors  automatically included?
     
     A:   They already do the SIR job today for MIBs. There
          is essentially no change for them.
     
     Q:   Why are current Directorates automatically
          included?
     
     A:   Because they have been identified as experts by
          Area Directors and their role normally includes
          review duties already.
     
     Q:   Should all types of RFC count, or should it be
          restricted to standards-track and BCP?
     
     A:   Some very valuable RFCs are Informational or
          Experimental. It would seem unreasonable to
          exclude their authors. On the other hand, not all
          such RFCs have lasting value. Suggestions on how
          to adjust this criterion are welcome.
     
     Q:   Why are ADs excluded?
     
     A:   Partly because they have to review all final
          drafts anyway, partly to avoid potential conflict
          of interest between reviewing and approving, and
          partly because they are already very busy with
          IESG work.
     
     Q:   Why are current WG Chairs not explicitly included?
     
     A:   Many of them will qualify
          under other criteria. But the authors are open to
          suggestions on this point - comments welcome.
     
     
     
     2.1.2.    Addition and Removal of SIRs
     
     The team of SIRs is increased at least once each year
     by a public nomination process and a voting procedure
     among the existing SIRs.
     
     Q.   Why, since we have pre-qualified a team already?
     
     A.   Undoubtedly people will drop out, so new ones will
          be needed. Renewal by open nomination seems the
          most appropriate mechanism to ensure trust.
     
     The nomination period will last one month, immediately
     after the completion of the IESG and IAB nomination
     cycle, i.e. it will start during the first IETF of each
     calendar year. Anybody can nominate a SIR candidate,
     and self-nominations are allowed. The list of nominees
     will be public (on the IETF web site).
     
     After the nomination period, a secret vote will be
     conducted among the existing SIRs. Each SIR can vote
     for none, some or all of the nominees. Nominees who
     receive at least ten votes are elected.
     
     Q:   Why ten?
     
     A:   The basic criterion for being a SIR is community
          agreement that one is, in fact, technically
          "senior"; so someone who isn't viewed positively
          by at least ten of his or her peers probably isn't
          suitable. If the total number of SIRs becomes too
          great, this rule would need to be revised.
     
     SIRs who have been inactive for a full year will be
     automatically retired from the team.
     
     Q.   Isn't this too tolerant? People may become SIRs
          just to get it on their resume.
     
     A.   It allows for people who need to take a sabbatical
          for whatever personal or professional reason. But
          certainly the criterion for automatic retirement
          should be reviewed when we have some experience.
     
     In extremis, SIR status may be removed by a simple
     majority vote of the team of SIRs. Such a vote will be
     triggered by a recall petition from at least ten SIRs.
     
     The nomination, voting, retirement and recall
     procedures will be managed by the IETF Executive
     Director. Any appeals under these procedures will be
     handled by the IAB.


2.2. Obtaining SIR Participation
     
     2.2.1.    Working Group documents
     
     For documents being processed by a Working Group (WG),
     the WG solicits the assistance of SIRs.  That is, the
     general IETF community controls who is authorized as a
     SIR, but WGs control which specific SIRs provides the
     formal review that is needed for a given document.
     However, SIRs may spontaneously and voluntarily review
     a draft.
     
     A primary goal of this proposal is to ensure that
     Working Groups benefit from broad experience in the
     design of Internet technology. Hence it is entirely
     reasonable that some SIRs reviewing a given document
     should be subject matter experts. However the full set
     of input from SIRs is substantially more useful when it
     includes SIRs from other areas.  In particular, cross-
     area review makes it more likely that architectural and
     operational impacts outside of the subject matter will
     be detected.  It is therefore strongly recommended that
     WGs seek a diverse set of SIRs to participate in
     evaluations, able to cover most if not all IETF Areas
     between them.
     
     Each WG will make its own decision about how its SIRs
     are selected (e.g. chosen by the WG Chairs, chosen by
     the document authors concerned, etc.).
     
     Q.   If a SIR is active in the same WG, isn't there a
          possible conflict of interest?
     
     A.   SIRs provide two benefits.  One is expertise and
          the other is independence. Expertise is always
          helpful. However, yes, it will be important for
          some of the SIR feedback to be independent of the
          working group. In addition,  reviewing will be a
          public activity, so that any conflict will be
          visible to the whole WG and can be dealt with
          openly. But...
     
     SIRs should not formally review documents in which they
     have a direct interest as a contributor, or as a
     contributor to a competing document.
     
     There is no fixed number of SIR reviews required prior
     to submission to the IESG. However, it is likely that
     drafts with at least three positive reviews from SIRs
     in different areas will experience much shorter IESG
     review cycles than drafts with fewer positive reviews.
     Other common sense rules will apply; for example a MIB
     that has not been reviewed by a MIB Doctor is unlikely
     to be published.
     
     In all likelihood, Drafts without SIR reviews will get
     worse IESG response time than today, whereas Drafts
     with strongly positive SIR reviews will be processed
     much more rapidly, especially as the IESG's confidence
     in the SIR procedure increases. However, since the SIR
     process does not change the formal document approval
     process, the IESG will still be obliged to weigh Last
     Call comments carefully, especially if they conflict
     with the SIR reviews.
     
     2.2.2.    Individual submissions
     
     For individual submissions, the document author(s)
     should solicit SIR reviews, according to the same
     principles applied to Working Group documents, and SIRs
     may spontaneously and voluntarily review a draft.. When
     a draft is submitted to the RFC Editor as an individual
     submission, the SIR reviews are available to the RFC
     Editor, and later to the IESG,  to assist the
     evaluation process.
     
     Again, in all likelihood, Drafts without reviews will
     get worse RFC Editor response time than today, whereas
     Drafts with reviews will be processed much more
     rapidly, especially as the RFC Editor's confidence in
     the SIR procedure increases.
     
     It should be clear that negative reviews do not
     automatically lead to rejection and positive reviews do
     not automatically lead to acceptance. The RFC Editor's
     independence is intended to ensure that startling and
     innovative ideas may be published if appropriate.



3.   CARDING


3.1. Reviewing in Public
     
     The current list of SIRs will be available on the IETF
     web site, along with information about their areas of
     expertise. All reviews will be published on the web
     site, with adequate tooling (linked to
     the ID Tracker) so that SIRs can publish reviews
     without adminstrative overhead, every review can be
     readily found, and all reviews will be automatically
     archived. In fact, a WG or document author in need of
     reviews should be able to request them through the web
     site.
     
     SIR reviews are not a formal part of the standards
     process and do not have formal authority, so they are
     not subject to formal appeal. However, since the
     reviews are public, authors are able to include
     rebuttals in subsequent drafts, or to issue rebuttals
     on the appropriate mailing list.
     
     SIR reviews are nevertheless contributions to the IETF
     in the sense of [TECHNO] and therefore fall under the
     relevant intellectual property rules of the IETF.


3.2. Spreading the load among SIRs

     
     No doubt  some SIRs will  be asked for too many
     reviews, and others will be asked for too few. SIRs are
     expected to manage their own workload by declining to
     commit to too many reviews.  The mechanism for
     requesting reviews should, if possible, display each
     SIR's current review backlog.


3.3. Form of a Review
     
     Each review must start with a summary statement chosen
     from or adapted from the following list:
     
     *    This draft is ready for publication as a [type] RFC,
          where [type] is Informational, Experimental, etc. (In some
          cases, the review might recommend publication as a different
          [type] than requested by the author.)
     *    This draft is on the right track but has open issues,
          described in the review.
     *    This draft has serious issues, described in the review,
          and needs to be rethought.
     *    This draft has very fundamental issues, described in
          the review, and further work is not recommended.
     *    Unfortunately, I don't have the expertise to review
          this draft.
     
     The length of a review will vary greatly according to
     circumstances, and it is acceptable for purely
     editorial comments to be sent privately. All
     substantive comments must be included in the public
     review. Wherever possible, they should be written as
     suggestions for improvement rather than as simple
     criticism. Explicit references to prior work and prior
     IETF discussion should be given.
     
     SIRs should review for all kinds of problems, from
     basic architectural or security issues, Internet-wide
     impact, technical nits, problems of form and format
     (such as IANA Considerations or incorrect references),
     and editorial issues. As a draft progresses from its
     initial, "-00" version towards one that is ready for
     submission, successive SIR reviews should progress from
     the general architectural level to the editorial level.
     
     The intention is that before a draft is submitted by a
     WG to the IESG, or by an individual to the RFC Editor,
     it has already benefited from a level of review
     equivalent to that traditionally applied by the IESG.
     In fact, SIRs should apply generally agreed IETF
     criteria, such as

     
     [RFC1958]      The Architectural Principles of the
                    Internet
     
     [RFC3426]      General Architectural and Policy
                    Considerations
     
     [RFC3439]      Some Internet Architectural Guidelines
                    and Philosophy
     
     [NITS]         The "ID Nits" document maintained by the
                    IESG
     
     [RFC2223]      Instructions to RFC Authors
     
     [BCP26]        Guidelines for Writing an IANA
                    Considerations Section in RFCs
     
     [SECCONS]      Guidelines for Writing RFC Text on
                    Security Considerations
     
     as well as any other applicable architectural or
     procedural documents. It is important that reviews give
     precise references to such criteria when relevant.
     
     Q:   Should we have a complete set of guidelines for
          reviewers?
     
     A:   Yes. Please start writing :-)
     
     Q:   Should a SIR engage actively in improving the
          document?
     
     A:   It's not forbidden, but then s/he probably morphs
          into a contributor and a new SIR will be needed.



3.4.  Iterative Carding
     
     The carding of textiles is an iterative process, and so
     is the carding of documents by SIRs. It is not expected
     that every version of an Internet Draft should be
     submitted for SIR review. However, it is advisable to
     request reviews at the very beginning (to check for
     fundamental issues), as major technical issues are
     resolved, and again just before the document is
     submitted for IESG approval (or to the RFC Editor).
     Thus three SIR review cycles per document may be
     considered the minimum. The document author should
     ensure that the SIRs reviewing a document understand
     what stage in its life cycle it has reached, so that
     they can review it appropriately.
     
     Both Working Groups and individual submitters should
     realise that carding should start early (to detect and
     hopefully fix fundamental problems) and be repeated as
     often as needed (to avoid submitting inadequate
     documents to the IESG). By these means, it should be
     possible to avoid most cases where a document spends a
     long time in IESG review or, worse, is fundamentally
     unacceptable to the IESG.
     
     The feedback from carding is intended to be helpful and
     beneficial to authors. Authors are encouraged to stay
     with the same SIRs if possible. SIRs are encouraged to
     stay with a given document as it evolves and to mentor
     its author(s), especially if the latter are new to the
     IETF process. Generally, SIRs are encouraged to
     participate in the education of less experienced IETF
     participants.



4.   SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS
     
     This document does not directly impact the operational
     security of the Internet.



5.   ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
     
     Valuable comments and ideas have come from many
     sources, especially an earlier draft by Ted Hardie and
     many members of the IETF 'problem' working group.
     Specific thanks go to Mark Allman, Senthilkumar
     Ayyasamy, Aaron Falk, Mike Heard, John Loughney, Jonne
     Soininen.
     
     Spencer Dawkins gets extra credit for having thoroughly
     carded the first draft of this document and is hereby
     appointed as the honorary First Sir.



6.   INFORMATIVE REFERENCES
     
     [PROBLEM]      IETF Problem Statement, E. Davies (ed.),
                    draft-ietf-problem-issue-statement-
                    01.txt, work in progress.
     
     [SECCONS]      Guidelines for Writing RFC Text on
                    Security Considerations, E.Rescorla,
                    B.Korver, work in progress.
     
     [TECHNO]       Intellectual Property Rights in IETF
                    Technology, S.Bradner, work in progress.
     
     [BCP26]        Guidelines for Writing an IANA
                    Considerations Section in RFCs, T.
                    Narten, H. Alvestrand, RFC 2434, 1998.
     
     [RFC1958]      Architectural Principles of the
                    Internet, IAB, RFC 1958, 1996.
     
     [RFC2223]      Instructions to RFC Authors. J. Postel,
                    J. Reynolds, RFC 2223, 1997.
     
     [RFC3426]      General Architectural and Policy
                    Considerations, IAB, RFC 3426, 2002
     
     [RFC3439]      Some Internet Architectural Guidelines
                    and Philosophy, R.Bush, D.Meyer, RFC
                    3439, 2002
     
     [NITS]         AD Review of I-Ds, IESG,
                    <http://www.ietf.org/ID-nits.html>



7.   AUTHORS' ADDRESSES
     Brian E. Carpenter
     IBM Zurich Research Laboratory
     Saeumerstrasse 4
     8803 Rueschlikon
     Switzerland

     Email: brian@hursley.ibm.com

     Dave Crocker
     Brandenburg InternetWorking
     675 Spruce Drive
     Sunnyvale, CA  94086  USA

     Tel: +1.408.246.8253
     dcrocker@brandenburg.com



8.   INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY
     
     PLACEHOLDER for full IETF IPR Statement if needed.



9.   FULL COPYRIGHT STATEMENT
     
     Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003).  All Rights
     Reserved.
     
     This document and translations of it may be copied and
     furnished to others, and derivative works that comment
     on or otherwise explain it or assist in its
     implementation may be prepared, copied, published and
     distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction
     of any kind, provided that the above copyright notice
     and this paragraph are included on all such copies and
     derivative works.  However, this document itself may
     not be modified in any way, such as by removing the
     copyright notice or references to the Internet Society
     or other Internet organizations, except as needed for
     the purpose of developing Internet standards in which
     case the procedures for copyrights defined in the
     Internet Standards process must be followed, or as
     required to translate it into languages other than
     English.
     
     The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and
     will not be revoked by the Internet Society or its
     successors or assigns.
     
     This document and the information contained herein is
     provided on an "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY
     AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL
     WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
     LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
     HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
     WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
     PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
