                                                                 M.Iyer
   Internet Draft                                              A.Jansen
   Document: draft-iyer-ipvpn-infomodel-req-00.txt              Alcatel
   Expires: August 2001                                   February 2001

            Requirements for an IP VPN Policy Information Model

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance
   with all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents
   at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

Abstract

   An IP VPN is a virtual private network used to deliver IP services
   implemented over an IP provider network. This document defines the
   requirements for a policy information model for provisioning IP
   VPNs. It identifies the network level capabilities that need to be
   represented in the policy information model.

Table of Contents

   1. Introduction
   2. Service Level Requirements
   3. Service Management Requirements
   4. Device Configuration Requirements
   5. Standardization Requirements
   6. References

1. Introduction

   The goal of IP VPN provisioning is to align the network elements to
   provide consistent treatment to selected pieces of IP traffic. The
   network elements will require a combination of capabilities

   depending largely on their location in the topology and the
   technology being used.
   The service provider needs to be protected from the differences
   between the different technologies that can be used to provide this
   capability. In addition the service provider needs to be protected
   from vendor specific implementation of the technology. The use of a
   standardized information model to represent the IP services is an
   effective means of mitigating these issues.
   The current service level definitions can offer a significant amount
   of cross technology, cross vendor interoperability at the service
   definition level. There is a need for a standardized network level
   definition, which maps to the IP services. This would significantly
   help the network element alignment issues associated with using
   different technologies and different vendors within the provider
   network.
   The following figure explains the positioning and role of the IP VPN
   policy information model in relation to the service level
   specifications and the device level specifications.

   -----------------
   | Service Level | --> SLS capture customer requirement/service goals
   -----------------
          <>--------->  Service goal to network policy translation
   -----------------
   | Network Level | --> IP VPN policies capture network requirements
   -----------------
          <>--------->  Network policy to devices level specifications
   -----------------
   | Device Level  | --> Device specific configuration
   -----------------

   This document is organized as follows:

   1. Section 2 provides a view of the IP service requirements and its
      mapping to IP network capabilities.
   2. Section 3 provides a view of the administrative requirements that
      need to be addressed.
   3. Section 4 provides a view of the related work that needs to be
      taken into account when creating a policy information model.

   The IP VPN Policy Information model should provide a standardized
   network level specification which helps translate service level
   specifications to device level configuration for IP VPN services.
   The IP VPN Policy Information model should reuse the policy
   information models being developed in parallel for specific IP
   network capabilities.
   The IP VPN Policy Information model may make references to
   standardized technologies where applicable to better describe the
   requirements on the IP network, e.g. IPSEC terms could be used to
   better describe encryption requirements which is a basic building
   block for security services.

2. Service Level Requirements

   The information model should be able to address the requirements of
   the IP Services to be provisioned. The IP services will be
   translated to corresponding and IP network capability. The
   information model should support modeling of the IP network
   capability. This section lists the broad categories of IP services
   and their corresponding IP network capability mapping.
   The IP Services to be offered by service providers can be divided
   into 3 service areas
   - End to End Connectivity
   - End to End Security
   - End to End QoS
   The service provider is looking to provide these services to the
   customer. The following sections describe these components in each
   of these service areas. It is important to note that there are
   dependencies that need to be recognized across these areas. The
   security requirements as well as QoS requirements are placed on the
   underlying connectivity. The information model needs to recognize
   the issues generated by this dependency.
   The purpose of the following section is not to provide a
   comprehensive list of all the services to be offered which is going
   to remain an ever-growing list. The objective is to provide a sample
   of the types of network capabilities that need to be represented in
   the IP VPN information model.

   2.1 End to End Connectivity

   The customers require that the service provider give the following
   types of connectivity:
   1. Site-Site: Routing of private network traffic over a shared
      network. The information model should support various possible
      topologies for site to site connectivity e.g. point to point, hub
      and spoke, full mesh, partial mesh etc.
   2. Site-Internet: Routing of private network traffic to and from a
      public network.
   This will require the site-site and site-internet routing
   capabilities to be represented in the information model.

   2.2 End to End Security

   The customers require that the service provider give them the
   following types of security
   1. Access control for Site-Internet traffic to and from the private
      network
   2. Encryption of Site-Site traffic as it travels over the shared
      network
   This will require the access control and encryption capabilities to
   be represented in the information model.
   If a customer requirement can be addressed by a topology choice then
   it should be addressed using connectivity rather security rules to
   for efficiency reasons both in configuration as well as
   implementation. For example, a requirement to allow all traffic
   between two LAN segments except for traffic origination from a
   specific (less secure) sub network is probably addressed using a
   security rule. If the LAN segment minus the sub network can be
   captured in a IP subnet definition it might be possible to address
   this requirement by appropriately defining the _site_ to the added
   to the VPN to be the corresponding IP subnet. The information model
   should support this level of flexibility.

   2.3 End to End QoS

   The customers require that the service provider give them the
   following types of QoS services:
   1. DiffServ marking of Site-Site traffic and Site-Internet traffic
      before it enters the provider network
   2. Bandwidth management: Control over the bandwidth utilization of
      the dedicated access links.
   The provider will need to rely on ..
   3. Traffic management to optimize the usage of bandwidth in the
      provider network. This would make it easier to deliver the end to
      end QoS and guarantee it.
   4. Constraint based routing of Site-Site traffic within the shared
      network to deliver requested QoS.
   5. Optimization of the traffic paths to handle planned and unplanned
      network loads
   This will require the marking, bandwidth management and traffic
   management capabilities to be represented in the information model.
   DiffServ has been accepted as the more scalable of the various QoS
   schemes and may be referenced when specifying the QoS requirements.
   The information model should provide an object-oriented
   representation of policy information associated with provisioning IP
   VPN services such as firewall, address translation, quality of
   service, encryption.

3. Service Management Requirements

   This section lists the service management requirements to be met by
   the information model.

   3.1 Service Provider Administrative Requirements

   The service provider administrative requirements include domain-
   based administration of policies, domain based distribution of
   policies, domain based functional partitioning of policies.

   The IP VPN policy information model should support the notion of
   administration domain. This domain decides the various intra
   provider and inter provider administrative boundaries.

   3.1.2 Distribution domain

   The IP VPN policy information model should support the domain based
   distribution of policies. The information model should enable
   efficient distribution of policies to policy consumers which will
   then update the network elements.

   3.1.3 Functional domain

   The IP VPN policy information model should support function based
   separation of policies to help the distribution process as well as
   the definition and inheritance of core functional attributes.
   3.2 OSS Interaction Requirements
   The information model would have to provide the OSS with the
   adequate hooks to correlate service level specifications with
   network traffic data generated by the network elements. There are no
   specific requirements coming out of this other than the need to
   ensure that there is a reversible mapping of the network level
   specifications to the service level specifications. This would be a
   basic requirement regardless of the OSS interaction requirements.
   This would require that the information model support references to
   the SLS entities used to generate the network level specifications.
   The use of policies includes rules that control the corrective
   actions taken by OSS components that are responsible for monitoring
   the network and ensuring that it meets the service requirements.
   These policies result in _corrective action_ configuration as
   opposed to device configuration. The component performing the
   function of translating the network policies into device level
   configuration may be called up to generate the _corrective actions_
   as well. The resulting _corrective actions_ may very well reuse the
   constructs on the IP VPN policy information model.

4. Device Configuration Requirements

   The IP VPN policy information model acts as the link between the
   service level specifications and the device level configuration. The
   information model should not be dependent on any specific device
   configuration mechanisms.
   The information model should reuse the standardized means of
   capturing network capabilities of physical devices defined in the
   IETF standardization groups. This information would be used to
   identify the policy enforcement points. The information model should
   support references to the policy targets. The device configuration
   layer should be provided with sufficient information to identify the
   devices that need to be configured to provision the service. The
   device configuration layer should be able to provide sufficient

   information within the framework of the information model so that it
   can be identified as a policy target.

5. Standardization Requirements

   The information model should conform to the standards being
   developed in the IETF and other standardization bodies. This section
   briefly describes the related work going on in the Policy Framework
   WG and what is currently a planned Service Level Specifications WG.
   The IP VPN policy information model should be based on the _Policy
   Framework Core Information Model_ [PCIM]. The core model should be
   extended to address the requirement that network elements understand
   their role in delivering the IP service to the customer. The network
   elements receive their configuration in the form of policies. The
   policy storage and distributed models should conform to the policy
   framework described in [PFRAME].
   The IP VPN policy information model should reuse the work done with
   regards to modeling the individual network capabilities such as the
   _QoS Policy Information Model_ [QOSIM] and the _IPSEC Configuration
   Policy Model_ [IPSECIM]. The corresponding LDAP implementations
   could be built based on the _Policy Framework LDAP Core Schema_
   [PCIM-LDAP] and _QoS Policy Schema_[QOSIM-LDAP] implementations. The
   IP VPN policy information model should interwork with the emerging
   MPLS related policy informational models wherever necessary.
   The IP VPN information model should interwork with the Service Level
   Specifications [SLS] being developed by interested parties within
   the IETF. The IETF representatives are holding BOF sessions to
   decide on the setting up of a working group for service level
   specifications. The IP VPN policy information model should be able
   to translate service level definitions generated on the basis of the
   service level specifications.
   The policy framework WG is also trying to standardize on information
   models that describe specific function mechanisms, which are common
   across devices such as [QDDIM] for QoS policy management. The IP VPN
   information model should provide a mechanism to extend the
   information model to leverage this work in future. The extensions
   would make references to the objects in the newly standardized
   models for specific functions.

6. References

   [PFRAME] W. Weiss, H. Mahon,  B. Moore, J. Strassner , G. Waters, A.
   Westerinen,  J. Wheeler, "Policy Framework",
   <draft-ietf-policy-framework-00.txt>, Sept 99.
   [PCIM] J. Strassner, E. Ellesson, B. Moore, "Policy Core Information
   Model _ Version 1 Specification", Internet Draft
   <draft-ietf-policy-core-info-model-08.txt>, Oct 2000
   [QPIM] Y. Snir, Y Ramberg, J. Strassner, R. Cohen, _Policy Framework
   QoS Information Model_, Internet Draft
   [QOSIM-LDAP] Y. Snir, Y Ramberg, J. Strassner, R. Cohen, _QoS Policy
   Schema_, Internet Draft
   <draft-ietf-policy-qos-schema-01.txt> , Feb 2000
   [IPSECIM] Jamie Jason, _IPsec Configuration Policy Model_, Internet
   Draft <draft-ietf-ipsp-config-policy-model-01.txt>, July 2000
   [SLS] Yves T' joens et all _Service Level Specification Semantics
   and Parameters_, Internet Draft
   <draft-tequila-diffserv-sls-00.txt>, Oct 2000
   [QDDIM] Strassner, et al.   _Information Model for Describing
   Network Device QoS Mechanisms for Differentiated Services_, Internet
   Draft <draft-ietf-policy-qos-device-info-model-02.txt>, Nov 2000

11. Author's Addresses

   Mahadevan Iyer
   Alcatel Inc
   595 Yosemite Blvd, Milpitas, CA
   Phone: 408 586 7687
   Email: mahadevan.iyer@ind.alcatel.com                                       

   Arnold Jansen
   Alcatel Inc
   595 Yosemite Blvd, Milpitas, CA
   Phone: 408 586 7687
   Email: arnold.jansen@ind.alcatel.com

Full Copyright Statement

   "Copyright (C) The Internet Society (date). All Rights Reserved.
   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implmentation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph
   are included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into.