Internet Draft  draft-bhatia-manral-crypto-req-ospf-00.txt    July 2006 
  
   Network Working Group                                   Manav Bhatia 
   Internet Draft                                   Lucent Technologies 
   Expires: January 2007                                 Vishwas Manral 
                                                            IP Infusion 
    
       Cryptographic Algorithm Implementations Requirements for OSPF 

                draft-bhatia-manral-crypto-req-ospf-00.txt 
                                      
Status of this Memo 
    
   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any  
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware  
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes  
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79. 
    
   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any  
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to  
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in  
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights  
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has  
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights. Information  
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be  
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 
    
   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any  
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an  
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use  
   of such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this  
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository  
   at http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 
    
   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at ietf-
   ipr@ietf.org. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference  
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at: 
   http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html 
 
 
Bhatia and Manral                                              [Page 1] 
Internet Draft  draft-bhatia-manral-crypto-req-ospf-00.txt    July 2006 
 
 
    
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at: 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html 
 
   This memo is a contribution to the IETF and is intended for future 
   standards-track publication to update RFC-2082 and RFC-2453. This 
   memo is not the product of any IETF working group. 
 
   Distribution of this memo is unlimited. 
    
Abstract 
    
   OSPF defines three different kinds of authentication schemes: Null 
   authentication, simple password and cryptographic authentication. The 
   cryptographic authentication scheme can make use of various 
   cryptographic algorithms in order to authenticate the OSPF packets. 
   To ensure interoperability between disparate implementations, it is 
   necessary to specify a set of mandatory-to-implement algorithms to 
   ensure that there is at least one algorithm that all implementations 
   will have available.   
    
   This document defines the current set of mandatory-to-implement 
   algorithms to be used for the cryptographic authentication for OSPF 
   as well as specifying the algorithms that should be implemented 
   because they may be promoted to mandatory at some future time. 
    
Conventions used in this document 
    
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED","MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this  
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [KEYWORDS] 
    
1. Introduction 
    
   OSPF as defined in [RFC 2328] includes three different types of 
   authentication schemes: Null authentication, simple password and 
   cryptographic authentication. NULL authentication is akin to having 
   no authentication at all. In the simple password scheme of 
   authentication, the passwords are exchanged in the cleartext on the 
   network and anyone with physical access to the network can learn the 
   password and compromise the security of the OSPF domain. 
    
   In the cryptographic authentication scheme, the OSPF routers on a 
   common network/subnet share a secret key which is used to generate a 
   keyed MD5 digest for each packet and a monotonically increasing 
   sequence number scheme is used to prevent replay attacks.  
    

 
 
Bhatia and Manral                                              [Page 2] 
Internet Draft  draft-bhatia-manral-crypto-req-ospf-00.txt    July 2006 
 
 
   This isn't good enough as there have recently been reports about 
   attacks on the collision resistance properties of MD5 [MD5-attack] 
   and SHA-1 [SHA-1-attack] hash functions. MD5CRK, was a distributed 
   computing project to break the MD5 hash algorithm in a short period 
   of time. The project closed down with the publication of the paper 
   [MD5-attack]. 
    
   It was discovered that collisions can be found in MD5 algorithm in 
   less than 24 hours, making MD5 very insecure. Further research has 
   verified this result and shown other ways to find collisions in MD5 
   hashes. We thus need to move away from MD5 towards more complex and 
   difficult to break hash algorithms.  
    
   The [OSPF-HMAC] document recently submitted in the IETF addresses 
   this. It is imperative that we move away from using Keyed MD5 to 
   something that’s cryptographically more stronger (like HMAC-SHA-1).  
    
   However, the nature of cryptography is that new algorithms surface   
   continuously and existing algorithms are continuously attacked. An   
   algorithm believed to be strong today may be demonstrated to be weak   
   tomorrow.  Given this, the choice of mandatory-to-implement algorithm   
   should be conservative so as to minimize the likelihood of it being   
   compromised quickly. 
    
   Also, we need to recognize that the mandatory-to-implement 
   algorithm(s) may need to change over time to adapt to the changing 
   world. For this reason, the selection of mandatory-to-implement 
   algorithms should not be included in the base OSPF specification. 
   This way it is only this document that needs to get updated, whenever 
   there is a need to update the status of mandatory-to-implement 
   authentication algorithms. 
    
    
2. Requirements Terminology 
 
   Keywords "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT" and   
   "MAY" that appear in this document are to be interpreted as described   
   in [RFC2119]. 
    
   We define some additional terms here: 
    
   SHOULD+     This term means the same as SHOULD.  However, it is 
               likely that an algorithm marked as SHOULD+ will be 
               promoted at some future time to be a MUST. 
   SHOULD-     This term means the same as SHOULD.  However, it is 
               likely that an algorithm marked as SHOULD- will be 
               deprecated to a MAY or worse in a future version of   
               this document. 
   MUST-       This term means the same as MUST.  However, we expect 
 
 
Bhatia and Manral                                              [Page 3] 
Internet Draft  draft-bhatia-manral-crypto-req-ospf-00.txt    July 2006 
 
 
               that at some point in the future this algorithm will no 
               longer be a MUST. 
    
3. Authentication Scheme Selection 
 
   For OSPF implementations to interoperate, they must support one or 
   more authentication schemes in common. This section specifies the 
   requirements for standards conformant OSPF implementations, which 
   desire to utilize the security feature. 
    
   Old   Old         New 
   Req.  RFC         Requirement  Authentication Scheme 
   ---   ------      -----------  ------------------------ 
   MUST  2328        SHOULD NOT   Null Authentication (1) 
   MUST  2328        SHOULD NOT   Simple Password (2) 
   MUST  2328        MUST         Cryptographic Authentication 
    
   The above is only true in case security is required, if there is no 
   requirement of security from an implementation, the above 
   requirements need not be followed 
    
   Notes: 
    
   (1)This is used when no authentication is required as there are 
      scenarios when the operator does not really require any sort of  
      authentication. However, this document lists down the requirements  
      that an implementation must support in order to authenticate the  
      OSPF packets. Clearly, NULL should not be used for that if the  
      operator has network security in mind. 
    
   (2)This is used when all the routers can “trust” one another but the  
      operator does not want an accidental introduction of a router in  
      the domain. Again the same logic applies. This scheme of  
      authentication is useful, but not when the operator wants to  
      “cryptographically” authenticate the OSPF packets. 
    
4. Authentication Algorithm Selection 
 
   For OSPF implementations to interoperate, they must support one or 
   more authentication algorithms in common that can be used in the 
   cryptographic scheme of authentication. 
    
   This section details the authentication algorithm requirements for 
   standards conformant OSPF implementations. 
    
    
    
    
    
 
 
Bhatia and Manral                                              [Page 4] 
Internet Draft  draft-bhatia-manral-crypto-req-ospf-00.txt    July 2006 
 
 
   Old   Old         New 
   Req.  RFC         Requirement  Authentication Algorithm 
   ---   ------      -----------  ------------------------ 
   MUST  2328        MUST-        Keyed MD5 
    -     -          SHOULD+      HMAC-SHA-1 [OSPF-HMAC] 
    -     -          MAY+         HMAC-SHA-256/HMAC-SHA-384/HMAC-SHA-512 
    
    
5. Security Considerations  
    
   TBD 
        
6. Acknowledgements  
     
   Much of the wording herein was adapted from RFC 4307, "Cryptographic   
   Algorithms for Use in the Internet Key Exchange Version 2", by 
   Jeffrey I. Schiller. 
    
7. IANA Considerations  
 
   This document places no requests to IANA. 
    
8. References 
 
8.1 Normative References 
    
   [KEYWORDS]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate  
               Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119 
    
   [RFC2328]   Moy, J., "OSPF Version 2", RFC 2328, April 1998 
    
   [OSPF-HMAC] Bhatia, M., Manral, V. and White, R.," OSPF HMAC  
               Cryptographic Authentication”, Work in Progress 
    
8.2 Informative References 
    
   [MD5-attack]   Wang, X. et al., "Collisions for Hash Functions MD4,   
                  MD5, HAVAL-128 and RIPEMD", August 2004,  
                  http://eprint.iacr.org/2004/199  
        
   [SHA-1-attack] Wang, X. et al., "Collision Search Attacks on SHA1",  
                  February 2005,  
                  http://theory.csail.mit.edu/~yiqun/shanote.pdf  
    
    
    
    
    

 
 
Bhatia and Manral                                              [Page 5] 
Internet Draft  draft-bhatia-manral-crypto-req-ospf-00.txt    July 2006 
 
 
9. Author's Addresses 
 
   Manav Bhatia  
   Lucent Technologies  
   Bangalore, India  
   Email: manav@lucent.com  
    
   Vishwas Manral  
   IP Infusion  
   Bangalore, India  
   Email: vishwas@ipinfusion.com  
    
10. Intellectual Property Notice 
    
   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any   
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to 
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in   
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights   
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it   
   as made any effort to identify any such rights.  Information on the 
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and   
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11.  Copies of   
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of   
   licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to   
   obtain a general license or permission for the use of such   
   proprietary rights by implementors or users of this specification can   
   be obtained from the IETF Secretariat. 
    
   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any   
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary   
   rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice   
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF Executive 
   Director. 
    
11. Full Copyright Notice 
 
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).  This document is subject 
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and 
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights. 
    
   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an  
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS  
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET  
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,  
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE  
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED  
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
    
 
 
 
Bhatia and Manral                                              [Page 6] 
Internet Draft  draft-bhatia-manral-crypto-req-ospf-00.txt    July 2006 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
    
    
    









































 
 
Bhatia and Manral                                              [Page 7] 
