

Internet Engineering Task Force      
Internet Draft                                             J. Palet 
                                                           A. Vives
                                                           Consulintel
Document: draft-palet-v6ops-ipv6security-00.txt            G. Martinez 
                                                           A. Gomez 
                                                           Univ. of Murcia 
Category:
Expires: August 2004                                       February 2004



                IPv6 distributed security requirements
                draft-palet-v6ops-ipv6security-00.txt 


Status of this Memo 

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 [i]. 

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other 
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts. 

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress". 

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 














 
       
draft-palet-v6ops-ipv6security-00.txt   Expires - August 2004  [Page 1] 
Internet Draft  IPv6 distributed security requirements   February 2004 
 
 
Abstract 

   The security policies currently applied in Internet with IPv4, 
   doesn∆t longer apply for end-to-end security models which IPv6 will 
   enable. 

   Today, each network is often secured by a unique device (i.e. 
   security gateway or firewall), that becomes a bottleneck for the end-
   to-end security model with IPv6. 

   In addition, users and devices start to be nomadic, moving between 
   different networks that could have different security policies. 

   A distributed and dynamic approach is consequently required. 



































 
 
draft-palet-v6ops-ipv6security-00.txt  Expires - August 2004  [Page 2] 
Internet Draft  IPv6 distributed security requirements   February 2004 
 
 
Conventions used in this document 

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [ii]. 












































 
 
draft-palet-v6ops-ipv6security-00.txt  Expires - August 2004  [Page 3] 
Internet Draft  IPv6 distributed security requirements   February 2004 
 
 
Table of Contents 

   1. Introduction...................................................4 

   2. Distributed security model.....................................5 

   3. Interior security..............................................6 

   4. The visiting node..............................................6 

   5. Default security...............................................6 

   6. The security policy server and protocol........................7 

   7. Single versus multiple point of attack.........................8 

   8. Non-security-capable nodes and security workload distribution..9 

   9. Location of the security policy server.........................9 

   10. Virus and spam................................................9 

   11. Security Considerations......................................10 

   12. References...................................................10 

   Acknowledgments..................................................10 

   Authors' Addresses...............................................10 

   Intellectual Property Statement..................................11 

   Full Copyright Statement.........................................11 

   Acknowledgement..................................................12 

    


1. 
   Introduction 

   The today∆s Internet paradigms for security need a revision with the 
   deployment of IPv6, offering end-to-end security capabilities. 

   Current security policies based on a centric approach with unique 
   border devices don∆t longer apply. Often they are based in a firewall 
   or security gateway and statically configured rules. 


 
 
draft-palet-v6ops-ipv6security-00.txt  Expires - August 2004  [Page 4] 
Internet Draft  IPv6 distributed security requirements   February 2004 
 
 
   Users and devices start to be nomadic. They often move from one 
   network to another and this needs to be taken in consideration to 
   keep the security of the complete visited network. 

   Keeping today∆s static security model is a wrong approach, which 
   disables the end-to-end features and advantages of IPv6. 

   Enforcing the nomadic users and devices to connect to Internet by 
   means of the security device, is almost equivalent to disable the 
   IPsec stack on each node, thus invalidating one of the key IPv6 
   advantages. 

   On the other hand, is also true and perfectly understandable that 
   there is a need to enforce security in the networks, in such way that 
   the network administrator has always the control over it. 


2. 
   Distributed security model 

   The paradigm is to keep or even being able to increase the security 
   in the network as a whole and keep the control of it under the 
   network administrator hands, while the individual nodes can take 
   advantage of end-to-end and secure end-to-end communications. 

   This can be achieved with a distributed model replacing the current 
   central one. 

   The distributed security model implies the use of node or personal 
   firewalls. 

   These node or personal firewalls must respect the security policy of 
   the network where they are attached. 

   The effect is simple to understand: instead of a single firewall, a 
   single point of failure for the complete network, that could be 
   easily attacked or fail, and create a single bottleneck for all the 
   communications, there will be a number of firewalls, configured 
   according a central policy, which increase the reliability, 
   efficiency and performance of the complete network. 

   This is possible in most of the situations because, even if IPsec and 
   encryption are enforced for most of the communications, nodes often 
   have powerful CPUs with unused cycles that will easily accommodate 
   the extra required workload. 

   On the other hand, the central firewalls will be able to dedicate CPU 
   cycles to new functions, or be able to protect bigger networks. 


 
 
draft-palet-v6ops-ipv6security-00.txt  Expires - August 2004  [Page 5] 
Internet Draft  IPv6 distributed security requirements   February 2004 
 
 
3. 
   Interior security 

   With this approach, the security of each node is not only towards 
   communications with Internet or other networks, but also with the 
   rest of the nodes in the same network. 

   This means an increase in the overall security and the possibility to 
   isolate individual nodes if required. 


4. 
   The visiting node 

   This distributed security model is valid not only for fixed nodes, 
   i.e. desktop computers, but specially interesting and important for 
   those nodes like laptops and PDAs, which keep moving among different 
   networks. Vice versa, this model is of key importance for those 
   networks that receive visits from nodes that are not under the 
   control of the network administrator. 

   Different visited networks have different security requirements. 
   Consequently is required that those nomadic nodes dynamically 
   accommodate their own security policy to the one defined in the 
   visited network. 

   Nodes attaching to a network via VPNs, RAS, directly attached modems 
   or other similar means can also be considered as visiting nodes, as 
   they can also create a path between the visited network and any other 
   network where they are actually connected. They must also be able to 
   dynamically configure their own security to match the one existing in 
   then visited network. 

   The alternative often used today to accomplish this, is by means of 
   manual changes in the configuration of the visiting node, but they 
   are always prone to errors and dangerous to be considered useful and 
   secure enough. 


5. 
   Default security 

   Implementing IPsec in the IPv6 stack of the nodes is only a first 
   step for a sophisticated security model. 

   A more complete approach is needed. These nodes can be attached to a 
   network which doesn∆t offer any protection means, not only against 
   external attacks, but also those coming from the same network. 

   This is the common case, for example, in hotspots, public networks, 
   ad-hoc networks or even networks temporarily setup for conferences. 

 
 
draft-palet-v6ops-ipv6security-00.txt  Expires - August 2004  [Page 6] 
Internet Draft  IPv6 distributed security requirements   February 2004 
 
 
   In order to keep the appropriate security level, each node should 
   incorporate a kind of personal or node firewall. 

   The node firewall must be configured by default with a very 
   restrictive set of rules. At this way, the node is self-defended, in 
   any circumstance. 

   The node firewall must act as a policy enforcer. 

   The node firewall should offer a simple user interface to facilitate 
   to relax the security restrictions, if required by certain 
   applications or services, assuming the lack of expertise of the user. 


6. 
   The security policy server and protocol 

   In order to achieve the benefits of the distributed security model, 
   and at the same time provide a mean for an adequate control of the 
   overall network security by the network administrator, a security 
   policy server is required. 

   The policy server(s) could replace the central firewall and 
   complement it. The network administrator will define the security 
   rules required by all the network and/or individual nodes. 

   The different nodes should query to the policy server to learn about 
   the network security policy and adapt themselves in order to match 
   it. 

   When a node is attached to a visited network and receives the visited 
   network security policy, basically there are two possible situations: 

   a) The network security policy is less or same restrictive than the 
   node configuration. In this case, the node will not change its 
   security policy configuration. 

   b) The network security policy is more restrictive than the node 
   configuration. In this case, the node will adapt its security 
   configuration to at least match the one indicated by the security 
   policy. 

   Until the node performs and acknowledge the required security policy 
   configuration update, it will not be allowed to transfer/receive data 
   to/from other nodes either in the network or other connected 
   networks. 

   The security policy server can also dynamically update the security 
   policy for the complete network or specific nodes. This can be done 
   in response to a network administrator decision, or other situations, 
 
 
draft-palet-v6ops-ipv6security-00.txt  Expires - August 2004  [Page 7] 
Internet Draft  IPv6 distributed security requirements   February 2004 
 
 
   like information received from an external or internal attack, 
   detected by an intrusion detection system, firewall or even by nodes 
   inside the network. 

   The security policy can be setup at a network level or individually 
   for every node, upon decision of the network administrator. 

   A single standard language or protocol for the signaling between the 
   nodes, security policy servers, firewalls (including node firewalls), 
   intrusion detections systems, honey pots, routers, and any other 
   elements implicated in the overall network and nodes security is 
   required. 

   For simplicity, the policy server could be integrated in the border 
   router, firewall, or other network elements (AAA, DHCP, COPS, ...). 

   A possible approach is to align this with the existing COPS [iii] and 
   COPS-PR [iv] standards. 

   According this, the network administrator will use a PMT (Policy 
   Management Tool), to edit the policies, distributed them via PMP 
   (Policy Decision Points), to the PEP (Policy Enforcement Points). 

   For the interaction with IPsec policies, it seems appropriate the 
   existing IPsecCPIM [v]. 

   To guarantee the self-security of this model, the security policy 
   being communicated to the nodes should be digitally signed, in order 
   to provide integrity, origin authentication and non-repudiate 
   authenticity of the source. 


7. 
   Single versus multiple point of attack 

   The single security gateway approach is a single point of failure and 
   consequently a bottleneck. 

   At the same time, is easier to attack a single device, so the 
   possibilities of a security threat are higher. 

   On the other hand, the distributed approach reduces the risk of a 
   single point of failure and increases the difficulties for potential 
   attackers to succeed (port scanning is more difficult). 

   The failure of the central firewall could completely disconnect the 
   network from Internet or other networks. In the case of a central 
   policy server fail, the nodes can be configured by the security 
   policy in such way that continue working, keeping the same security 
   restrictions imposed by the policy server. 
 
 
draft-palet-v6ops-ipv6security-00.txt  Expires - August 2004  [Page 8] 
Internet Draft  IPv6 distributed security requirements   February 2004 
 
 
8. 
   Non-security-capable nodes and security workload distribution 

   Increase in security often means increase in processing power. 

   Some nodes could not have the required CPU cycles to afford the 
   complete required security policy. 

   The firewalls or even other security-capable nodes with free 
   resources, could act as trusted security gateways for the non-
   security-capable nodes. 

   This seems only possible if minimum security verification can be done 
   by those nodes, i.e. digital signature verification. 

   It could be even considered a system to provide a kind of security 
   workload-balancing. 

   Some work is still required to define if the security level that can 
   be achieved by those nodes is good enough, and to avoid possible 
   attacks. 

   This section needs to be completed in further revisions of this 
   document. 


9. 
   Location of the security policy server 

   Firewalls and security gateways are expensive devices and they are 
   required to sit at the border of the network. They also require 
   qualified personal to manage them.  

   In the case of the distributed security model, the security policy 
   server isn∆t required to be collocated as a border device. 

   This provides the opportunity to have this device not only inside the 
   network, but also at any other point in Internet. 

   This opens the doors to new services and business models that provide 
   very sophisticated security services, especially for SOHO and SMEs. 

   Internet Exchanges, PoPs, ISPs, and other similar central Internet 
   locations seem to be ideal locations for the security policy servers. 


10. 
    Virus and spam 

   As part of the services offered by the distributed security model, it 
   should be considered means to alleviate the effects of virus and 
   spam. 
 
 
draft-palet-v6ops-ipv6security-00.txt  Expires - August 2004  [Page 9] 
Internet Draft  IPv6 distributed security requirements   February 2004 
 
 
   This could mean for example, extensions to protocols as SMTP. 

   To be completed in next versions of the document. 


11. 
    Security Considerations 

   To be completed in next versions of the document. 


12. 
    References 
      
   i  S. Bradner, "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3", BCP 9, 
      RFC 2026, October 1996. 
    
   ii S. Bradner, "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement 
      Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997. 
    
   iii D. Durham, Ed., "The COPS (Common Open Policy Service) Protocol", 
      RFC 2748, January 2000. 
    
   iv K. Chan et al, "COPS Usage for Policy Provisioning (COPS-PR)", RFC 
      3084, March 2001. 
    
   v  J. Jason et al, "IPsec Configuration Policy Information Model", 
      RFC 3585, August 2003. 


Acknowledgments 

   The authors would also like to acknowledge the inputs from Cesar 
   Olvera and the European Commission support in the co-funding of the 
   Euro6IX project, where this work is being developed. 


Authors' Addresses 

   Jordi Palet Martinez 
   Consulintel 
   San Jose Artesano, 1 
   28108 - Alcobendas (Madrid - Spain) 
   Phone: +34 91 151 81 99 
   Fax:   +34 91 151 81 98 
   Email: jordi.palet@consulintel.es 

   Alvaro Vives 
   Consulintel 
   San Jose Artesano, 1 

 
 
draft-palet-v6ops-ipv6security-00.txt  Expires - August 2004  [Page 10] 
Internet Draft  IPv6 distributed security requirements   February 2004 
 
 
   28108 - Alcobendas (Madrid - Spain) 
   Phone: +34 91 151 81 99 
   Fax:   +34 91 151 81 98 
   Email: alvaro.vives@consulintel.es 
    
   Gregorio Martinez 
   University of Murcia (UMU) 
   Campus de Espinardo s/n 
   30071 - Murcia (Spain)  
   Phone: +34  
   Fax:   +34  
   Email: gregorio@dif.um.es 

   Antonio Gomez Skarmeta 
   Consulintel 
   Campus de Espinardo s/n 
   30071 - Murcia (Madrid - Spain) 
   Phone: +34  
   Fax:   +34  
   Email: skarmeta@dif.um.es 


Intellectual Property Statement 

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to 
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in 
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights 
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it 
   has made any effort to identify any such rights. Information on the 
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and 
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11. Copies of 
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of 
   licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to 
   obtain a general license or permission for the use of such 
   proprietary rights by implementors or users of this specification can 
   be obtained from the IETF Secretariat. 

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice 
   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF Executive 
   Director. 


Full Copyright Statement 

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved. 

 
 
draft-palet-v6ops-ipv6security-00.txt  Expires - August 2004  [Page 11] 
Internet Draft  IPv6 distributed security requirements   February 2004 
 
 
   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published 
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any 
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are 
   included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this 
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for 
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be 
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than 
   English. 

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be 
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assignees. 

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an 
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING 
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING 
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION 
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF 
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 


Acknowledgement 

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the 
   Internet Society. 




















 
 
draft-palet-v6ops-ipv6security-00.txt  Expires - August 2004  [Page 12] 
