INTERNET-DRAFT                                                A. Costanzo
draft-costanzo-dns-gl-05.txt                   AKC Computer Services Corp.
Expires: Feburary 2002                                       August  2001



                   Definition of the DNS GL Resource Record
                     used to encode Geographic Locations





 1. Status of this Memo

This document is an Internet-Draft and is  in full conformance  with all
provisions  of Section 10 of  RFC2026 except that  the right to  produce
derivative works is not granted.

Internet-Drafts are  working  documents of the Internet Engineering Task
Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that other groups
may  also  distribute  working documents as Internet-Drafts.

Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum  of  six  months
and  may  be  updated,  replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
time.  It is inappropriate to use  Internet-Drafts as reference material
or to cite them other than as "work in progress."


     The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
     http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

     The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
     http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.


To learn the current status of  any  Internet-Draft,  please  check  the
"1id-abstracts.txt"  listing  contained  in  the Internet- Drafts Shadow
Directories   on   ftp.is.co.za   (Africa),   nic.nordu.net    (Europe),
munnari.oz.au (Pacific Rim), ftp.ietf.org (US East Coast, or ftp.isi.edu
(US West Coast).

Distribution of this memo is unlimited.


2. Abstract

This document defines the format of a new Experimental Resource Record (RR)
namely GL for the Domain Naming System (DNS), and reserves a corresponding
DNS type mnemonic and numerical code <tba> (decimal). This definition deals
with associating geographical host location mappings to host names within
a domain within a geopolitical area (a country).  


The key words "MUST", "MUST  NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL  NOT",
"SHOULD", "SHOULD  NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY"  and "OPTIONAL" in this
document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119.



Costanzo                                                          [Page  1]

EXPIRES IN SIX MONTHS                                            August 2001

3. Introduction

   [NOTE: This draft has been modified from its previous draft version 
          specifically for use with Internet Telepony applications and 
          specifically at the request of a number of people including members
          of the working group & the RFC Editor - all of whom had a number of 
          concerns with the previous version(s) of the draft. Whilst ALL of the
          concerns have been addressed in version 5, it is the authors hope
          that the draft may be reconsidered by the working group for publication.
          The GL resource records usage has been simplified as well.
          The author welcomes all comments.                               ]

   The ideal way to manage and maintain a database of information, such as
   a geograpic location of an Internet host, is to delegate responsibility
   to local domain administrators.

   This document resolves the problem of relating host information within
   the DNS to geographical locations. This definition has been designed to 
   be easy for the person who administrates DNS for a domain. NOT requiring
   longitude, latitude and elevation information and merely being able to 
   enter address information, as you would address a postal letter, will 
   mean broad acceptance and use of the GL resource record.  By making the 
   location geopolitical, the addressing mechinism should be received well
   globally.

   There is a growing demand for postal address information to be listed within
   a DNS record.  Specifically, with the growing use of the public Internet to
   complete Long Distance telephone calls, there is now a need to know the physical
   locations of the hops with the final destinations locations position most important
   to agencies such as police and fire departments for 911 information.

   The availability of geographical location information will immediately be
   able to benefit applications in network management, which would enhance
   and supplement various network tools which currently exist.

   The Domain Name System is ideally suited to provide geographic location
   information.  The information we desire to make available globally needs
   to be maintained and updated locally (perfect for DNS).

   Although there are other location resourse records defined, that attempt to
   allow location information on host to be stored and distributed, such as LOC
   and GPOS, none have either gained acceptance on a wide scale or made allowance
   for location information that is not within the confines of the planet Earth.

4. The GL format

   GL has the following format:

      <owner> <ttl> <class> GL <Rdata>


4.1 Rdata Format

  Rdata has the following format:

   <string> <string>

   The format of the RDATA field is two varying length strings separated by
   a space character. The first, the hierarchical locator, then an address 
   string. Each is quoted (like all strings) only when it has spaces in it,
   which will never be true for the first string, and almost always for the
   second.








Costanzo                                                          [Page  2]

EXPIRES IN SIX MONTHS                                            August 2001


4.1.1 The Hierarchical Locator

The Hierarchical Locator contains the following components (each separated
by a period "."):

  
  Country Code -                                    (REQUIRED)

          The country code specifies the country the host computer resides
          in, or in the case of an astronomical location other than "S3" (Earth),
          the country which owns the device and/or machine. The code 
          is a two character fixed length string.  These codes are defined 
          in document ISO 3166-1. "US" for United States for example. 
  
          

   Postal Zone -                                    (OPTIONAL)

          This rdata component supplies the postal code (Zip Code) for the
          location the host computer resides. For countries that have a
          multi-segmented postal coding system, the segments should be
          separated by period(s) ".".

          This field may be omitted only if the country in which the host
          machine resides does not use a postal coding system otherwise the
          data MUST be supplied.

          When all three Hierarchical Locator components exist for an DNS 
          entry, the position being defined is considered to be a "precise 
          position".


 4.2 The Visual Address String

  This string should be entered as you would enter an address on
  a postal letter within the country specified by the Hierarchical
  Locator. The country code information MUST NOT be included within
  the quoted string. This string is always required and must be
  present in the RDATA field.

  The visual address string may be used for both visual reference of 
  the physical address as well as by a software application to help
  determine a more precise location of the host machine (if the
  Hierarchical Locator lacks sufficient precision).



Costanzo                                                          [Page  3]

EXPIRES IN SIX MONTHS                                           August 2001


  The only instance in which any application should attempt to
  interpret the visual address string is in a case where the country
  code defines a country that does not use, or has not implemented
  a postal code system.

  No software or application should attempt to override a precise
  position defined by the Hierarchical Locator with information
  defined within the quoted string data.


 5. Example(s)

     Example 1 (with a postal zone defined):

            donuts A 192.188.192.1
               GL US.45420.1910 "1425 Arbor Avenue, Dayton OH"

        Example 2 (no postal zone):

           lorinda A 129.122.1.1
               GL SR "Marthastrasse 64, Shawproject, Uitvlug, Parimaribo"

     Example 3

; Authoritative data for akc.net.
;
; note in this example:
;    uspring, diana and martha (even though the complete postal code was
;    not entered) are precisely defined
;
;    lorinda, resides in the country of SURINAME, which has not implemented
;    a postal coding system.
;
;    THIS IS ONLY AN EXAMPLE
;
@     IN    SOA     forme.akc.net. postmaster.akc.net.
                (
                        99071100        ; Serial (yymmddnn)
                        10800           ; Refresh (3 hours)
                        3600            ; Retry (1 hour)
                        3600000         ; Expire (1000 hours)
                        86400           ; Minimum (24 hours)
                )

                IN      NS      ns.akc.net.

uspring         IN      A       192.188.192.2
                IN      MX      5       mail
                IN      HINFO   Vax VMS
                IN      GL US.45420.1910 "1425 Arbor Avenue, Dayton OH"
ftp             IN      CNAME   uspring



Costanzo                                                          [Page  4]

EXPIRES IN SIX MONTHS                                            August 2001



diana           IN      A       192.188.192.3
                IN      MX      5       mail
                IN      HINFO   Vax VMS
                IN      GL US.07204.1367 "808 Chestnut Street, Roselle
Park, NJ"
www             IN      CNAME   diana

martha          IN      A       192.188.192.4
                IN      MX      5       mail
                IN      HINFO   Vax VMS
                IN      GL US.07204 "815 Chestnut Willis Place, Roselle
Park, NJ"

lorinda         IN      A       129.122.1.1
                IN      GL SR "Marthastrasse 64, Shawproject, Uitvlug,
Parimaribo"





6. Why in in the DNS specifically? It serves no useful purpose!

  It has been mentioned to the Author over and over again for the need of this 
  resource record for internet telephone applications and how the use of other
  Internet Directory style services are not appropriate.  DNS is standardized
  and a required application for ISPs, other directory services are not.

  It has also been mentioned that since the there is a one-to-one relationship
  between the host and the GL data it is appropriate for inclusion as a DNS
  resource record.

  As already mentioned in the draft, the physical location of a computer is becomming
  extremely important for government agencies such as police and fire.

  

7. Other possible uses for GL

  It has been mentioned to the Author over and over again for the need of this 
  resource record for internet telephone applications and how the use of other
  Internet Directory style services are not appropriate.

  The use of postal codes also is exactly what is needed for credit card address
  authentication. Sites could (quietly) compare GL info provided on entries from 
  ISPs to what someone enters for additional verification purposes.

  We also were told that this resource record would be helpful in tracking down 
  hackers. (although the use of DHCP and dynamic addressing may limit its usefulness
  if ISPs did not maintain the GL record properly.

8 Why GL and not TXT records?

  TXT records do not have a specific order to them. It would be extremely unwise to 
  to entrust 911 emergency calls to TXT records.

  Other resource records  such as LOC and GPOS are not appropriate for use with emergency
  service units as police and fire departments

9. Security Consideration

  Since this resource record is not required in the DNS there are no security consideration.
  If someone such as the Department of Defense did not want the whereabouts of there computer
  system to be know, they would merely omit it.




  

































Costanzo                                                          [Page  6]

EXPIRES IN SIX MONTHS                                            August 2001






10. Author's Address

Al Costanzo
AKC Computer Services Corp.
 P.O. Box 4031, Roselle Park, NJ 07204-0531
 www.AKC.com
Phone: +1 908 298 9000
Email: AL@AKC.COM

Costanzo                                                          [Page 7]