Internet Engineering Task Force                              Haitao Tang
Internet Draft                                                     Nokia
Document: draft-tang-spatial-payload-reqs-00.txt           James M. Polk
Expires: May 2001                                          Cisco Systems
                                                         Mari Korkea-aho
                                                                   Nokia
                                                         Kenji Takahashi
                                                                     NTT

                                                               Nov. 2000



  Spatial Location Payload Requirements with Protocol Recommendations




Status of This Memo

This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with all
provisions of Section 10 of RFC 2026. Internet-Drafts are working
documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas,
and its working groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute
working documents as Internet-Drafts.

Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt
The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.



1. Abstract

This document describes the requirements placed on the Spatial Location
Payload (SLO), as well as its specific protocol recommendations,
regardless of the Protocol utilized.

Internet Draft      draft-tang-spatial-payload-reqs-00.txt      Nov.2000




2. Conventions used in this document

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
"SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [2].

3. Definition of Terms

Although the following terms cannot be IANA registered (because we are
not defining a Protocol), they are included here for clarification
purposes.

Target: The entity whose location is known by the server and desired by
the client. The protocol does not specify how the server learns the
location of the target.

Server: Entity that supplies the location of the target to the client.
One end of the protocol.

Client: The entity that desired to learn the location of the target. One
end of the protocol.

Coordinate: An ordered set of N numbers designating the position of a
point in an N-dimensional space.

Geodetic Datum: A set of parameters describing the size and shape of the
earth and the origin and orientation of the coordinate systems used to
map the earth.

Location Accuracy: The measurement is correct to within this maximum
expected error.

Time: Real time of the measurement/fix of the target location.

Speed: Ground speed and Vertical speed of the target.

Direction: The direction of the target movement, expressed in a 2-
dimensional (horizontal) frame indicated by the magnetic (or true)
North.

Course: The direction from the current position of the target to a
defined destination, expressed in a 2-dimensional (horizontal) frame
indicated by the magnetic (or true) North.

Orientation: The orientation of the target, expressed in a 2-dimensional
(horizontal) frame indicated by the magnetic (or true) North, and a
vertical element expressed by the angle between the horizontal plane and
the main axis of the object.


4. Location Representation

A location representation is an instantiation of the location of a
target. In SLO, location representations shall be determined through two
levels of abstraction: schema and format.



Tang, Polk, Korkea-aho, and Takahashi                           [Page 2]

Internet Draft      draft-tang-spatial-payload-reqs-00.txt      Nov.2000


"Schema" defines the logical scheme which the location representations
are based on. For example, location is expressed with latitude,
longitude, and altitude using WGS-84 as reference system. Velocity is
expressed as horizontal and vertical elements. "Format" defines how a
given schema is represented. For example, a location determined by
longitude, latitude, and altitude can be represented by degrees,
minutes, and seconds with arbitrary decimal fractions. The velocity can
be represented in meters per second with arbitrary decimal fractions.


The payload must:
a. Define one default location representation that must be supported
by all SLO entities.
    _ The scheme for the default location representation must specify an
    absolute location on the earth, using WGS-84 geodetic datum as
    reference system.
    - The format for the default location representation must specify
    the location in longitude, latitude, and altitude parameters.
    Altitude is a recommended (must be provided if available) parameter.
b. Support other location representations than the default, including
existing schemes and formats widely used in other contexts.
c. Specify an IANA registration process for additional representations.
d. Permit at a minimum, the following values to be included in a
payload, providing that the entities have such capability to specify:

   (1)  Used Coordinate (e.g., long, lat., alt. in degrees) and datum
        (e.g., WGS-84)
   (2)  Geocentric Position
   (3)  Location Accuracy
   (4)  Time (date, time, time zone)
   (5)  Speed (ground speed, vertical speed)
   (6)  Direction
   (7)  Course
   (8)  Orientation
   (9)  Other un-specified attributes, such as descriptive location.

e. Permit multiple scheme/format representations in a single payload.
f. Be extendable to support new location representations.

5. Security Methods

Operations on SLO payloads, such as retrieval of a particular element of
a payload, must be defined and implemented to enforce security
(including privacy) protection. Such operations MUST:

a. Provide a mandatory-to-implement, optional-to-use method for an
entity to retrieve encrypted elements inside the payload. The method
should allow a choice in the algorithm(s) used.
b. The method SHALL work according to the policy attributes set to the
elements, as well as other (possibly multiple) attributes such as the
identity (or anonymity) of the target/client and its class-of-user.
c. Provide a mandatory-to-implement, optional-to-use data integrity
and data origin authentication method for the payload. The method
should allow a choice in the algorithm(s) used.
d. Not degrade a target/client's expectations of privacy.


6. Identity and Policy Attributes


Tang, Polk, Korkea-aho, and Takahashi                           [Page 3]

Internet Draft      draft-tang-spatial-payload-reqs-00.txt      Nov.2000


The payload MUST:
a. Specify the mandatory-to-implement, optional-to-use target identifier
and policy attributes for an entity to retrieve the encrypted elements
inside the payload, and for an entity to identify/name the target of the
payload.
b. Specify the way that the policy attributes and client identity/class-
of-user are used to restrict location information (e.g., location
accuracy and locatability) retrieved by interpreting policy selected for
class-of-user.
c. Protocols SHALL use the target identifier in any target-related
actions (e.g., Server Discovery).
d. Target identifier SHALL be given according to 8.2.c.


7. Payload Encoding

The payload encoding:

a. MUST support multiple formats. Each format must be registered
with IANA.
b. MUST support a simple format for the values in Sec 4., 5., and 6.
c. SHOULD have a provision to specify the location accuracy.
d. MUST be able to infer the IANA type and the beginning and end of
each format without parsing the entire message (as in TLV).
e. MUST allow formats to contain UTF-8 (mandatory) and the optional (raw
binary, local character sets, UTF-16, and UTF-32) content.
f. Must support formats that contain human-readable text. Such text
SHOULD specify the language to be used.
g. MUST be extensible/flexible enough to support a future descriptive
location format.


8. Protocol Recommendations

A SLO can be used/carried by various relevant protocols. Due to the
nature of location information, the following recommendations are made
to those protocols for the proper usage:

8.1 Representation Negotiation

The protocol must:
a. Provide a mechanism for a client to indicate which additional
representations it prefers.
b. Provide a mechanism for the client to select which of said
representations it prefers.
c. Provide the capability to provide reports in any representation
d. Provide that, following such selection, server reports in the format
chosen by the client.

8.2. Server Discovery

a. There SHALL be a server discovery mechanism for a client to find
the appropriate server for a given target.
b. The discovery mechanism SHALL work across domains. It SHOULD use
widely deployed mechanisms such as DNS. It SHALL permit server
locations to be changed with TTL's ranging from minutes to months.
c. Targets SHALL be identified with an identifier. The target identifier
SHALL be unique within the domain of the server.
d. Servers SHALL be identified by an identifier. Server names SHALL

Tang, Polk, Korkea-aho, and Takahashi                           [Page 4]

Internet Draft      draft-tang-spatial-payload-reqs-00.txt      Nov.2000


be globally unique. For example, a URI of the form "protocol:haitao-
tangs-phone@airtouch.com" would be an appropriate way to identify a
target. DNS is then used to find the server.
e. Clients MUST be able to perform DNS A, A6, AAAA, and SRV lookups, and
may support manual configuration and/or other methods to resolve the IP
address of a suitable server in an unqualified domain.
f. Translator services should be distinguishable from other servers
during discovery.
g. It is desirable that translator capabilities (supported formats)
can be determined during discovery.

8.3. Protocol Security

The protocol must:
a. Provide a mandatory-to-implement, optional-to-use authentication
mechanism from client to server and from server to client. The
mechanism should allow a choice in the algorithm(s) used.
b. Specify how such a mechanism shall be used in the presence of
firewalls and Network Address Translation (NAT) between client
and server.
c. Include mechanisms to allow subsequent location policy decisions
to be based on (possibly multiple) factors in addition to the identity
(or anonymity) of the target/client, e.g., authentication mechanism,
group membership(s), and class-of-user.
d. Support a mandatory-to-implement, optional-to-use data integrity
and data origin authentication mechanism for all data. The mechanism
should allow a choice in the algorithm(s) used.
e. Provide a mandatory-to-implement, optional-to-use data
confidentiality mechanism. The mechanism should allow a choice in
the algorithm(s) used.
f. Not degrade a target/client's expectations of privacy.
g. Support anonymous use, authenticated use, as well as the combined use
of the both. Anonymous use MAY require the server(s) to be able to
associate location with the same (anonymous) target/client over time.
The anonymous party MAY want to authenticate the other parties (i.e.,
who gets/provides the location). In addition, the legitimacy of the
anonymous party MAY need to be authenticated.
h. Specify a mechanism for extending the security mechanism for
additional capability.
i. Not dictate the ways how a target should communicate relevant
information with a server, or/and a client, given such communication is
needed. The ways MUST NOT degrade a target/client/server's expectations
of privacy.


8.4. Protocol Policy

To direct the proper dealing with the target/client's information, the
protocol must:

a. Specify a Policy Information Base (PIB), as well as classes of user
for spatial location server.
b. Specify the way that the PIB and classes of user are used to control
the access of a client by the location server.
c. Provide a mandatory-to-implement, optional-to-use Policy Enforcement
Point_mechanism.
d. Provide an optional Policy Decision Point_mechanism.
e. Specify how servers obtain policy from a policy storage facility if
the Policy Decision Point mechanism is implemented.

Tang, Polk, Korkea-aho, and Takahashi                           [Page 5]

Internet Draft      draft-tang-spatial-payload-reqs-00.txt      Nov.2000


f. Provide a mechanism to direct the server's protection of the location
information from any unwanted party by:
   1. Locatability control
   2. Security mechanisms.


9. References

[1] Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3", BCP 9,
RFC 2026, October 1996.

[2] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFC's to Indicate Requirement
Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

[3] B. Rosen, J. Costa-Requena, M. Korkea-aho, M. Ylianttila, R. Mahy,
K. Takahashi, and S. Farrell, "Spatial Location Protocol Requirements",
Internet Draft draft-rosen-spatial-requirements-00.txt, July 2000.


10. Author's Addresses

Haitao Tang
Nokia Research Center
P.O. BOX 407
FIN-00045 Nokia Group
Finland
Phone: +358 40 749 9256
Email: haitao.tang@nokia.com

James M. Polk
Office of the CTO
Cisco Systems, Inc.
18581 North Dallas Parkway
Dallas, TX 75287 USA
Phone: +1 972 813 5208
Email: jmpolk@cisco.com

Mari Korkea-aho
Nokia Research Center
P.O. Box 407
FIN-00045 Nokia Group
Finland
Phone: +358 40 733 9693
Email: mari.korkea-aho@nokia.com

Kenji Takahashi
Information Sharing Platform Laboratories
NTT
3-9-11 Midoricho
Musashino, Tokyo 180-8585 Japan
Phone: +81 422 59 6668
Email: kt@nttlabs.com


Copyright Statement

Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2000).  All Rights Reserved.



Tang, Polk, Korkea-aho, and Takahashi                           [Page 6]

Internet Draft      draft-tang-spatial-payload-reqs-00.txt      Nov.2000


This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it or
assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published and
distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any kind,
provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are included
on all such copies and derivative works. However, this document itself
may not be modified in any way, such as by removing the copyright notice
or references to the Internet Society or other Internet organizations,
except as needed for the purpose of developing Internet standards in
which case the procedures for copyrights defined in the Internet
Standards process must be followed, or as required to translate it into
languages other than English. The limited permissions granted above are
perpetual and will not be revoked by the Internet Society or its
successors or assigns. This document and the information contained
herein is provided on an "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE
INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR
IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE."









































Tang, Polk, Korkea-aho, and Takahashi                           [Page 7]