



                                                                        
  Internet Draft                                                        
  Document: <draft-ietf-psamp-sample-tech-10.txt>              T. Zseby 
  Intended status: Proposed Standard                   Fraunhofer FOKUS 
  Expires: December 2007                                      M. Molina 
                                                                  DANTE 
                                                            N. Duffield 
                                                     AT&T Labs-Research 
                                                           S. Niccolini 
                                                        NEC Europe Ltd. 
                                                             F. Raspall 
                                                               EPSC-UPC 
                                                                        
                                                              June 2007 
   
     Sampling and Filtering Techniques for IP Packet Selection 
   
  Status of this Memo 
      
     By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that 
     any applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is 
     aware have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she 
     becomes aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of 
     BCP 79. 
      
     Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet 
     Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working 
     groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute working 
     documents as Internet-Drafts. 
         
     Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
     months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
     documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-
     Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as "work 
     in progress." 
      
     The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
     http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt. 
         
     The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
     http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
         
     This Internet-Draft will expire on December, 2007. 
         
  Copyright Notice 
         
     Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007). 
         



   
  Zseby, Molina, Duffield, Niccolini, Raspall               [Page 1] 
  Internet Draft  Techniques for IP Packet Selection   June 2007 



  Abstract 
      
     This document describes Sampling and Filtering techniques for IP 
     packet selection. It provides a categorization of schemes and 
     defines what parameters are needed to describe the most common 
     selection schemes. Furthermore it shows how techniques can be 
     combined to build more elaborate packet Selectors. The document 
     provides the basis for the definition of information models for 
     configuring selection techniques in Metering Processes and for 
     reporting the technique in use to a Collector. 
   
  Conventions used in this document 
      
     The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL 
     NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and 
     "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described 
     in RFC 2119 [RFC2119]. 
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      




  Zseby, Molina, Duffield, Niccolini, Raspall              [Page 2] 
  Internet Draft  Techniques for IP Packet Selection   June 2007 



      
  Table of Contents 
   
     1.   Introduction.................................................4 
     2.   PSAMP Documents Overview.....................................4 
     3.   Terminology..................................................5 
     3.1     Observation Points, Packet Streams and Packet Content.....5 
     3.2     Selection Process.........................................6 
     3.3     Reporting.................................................7 
     3.4     Metering Process..........................................8 
     3.5     Exporting Process.........................................8 
     3.6     PSAMP Device..............................................8 
     3.7     Collector.................................................9 
     3.8     Selection Methods.........................................9 
     4.   Categorization of Packet Selection Techniques...............11 
     5.   Sampling....................................................13 
     5.1     Systematic Sampling......................................14 
     5.2     Random Sampling..........................................15 
     5.2.1   n-out-of-N Sampling......................................15 
     5.2.2   Probabilistic Sampling...................................15 
     5.2.2.1 Uniform Probabilistic Sampling...........................15 
     5.2.2.2 Non-Uniform Probabilistic Sampling.......................16 
     5.2.2.3 Non-Uniform Flow State Dependent Sampling................16 
     5.2.2.4 Configuration of non-uniform probabilistic and flow-
              state Sampling..........................................17 
     6.   Filtering...................................................17 
     6.1     Property Match Filtering.................................17 
     6.2     Hash-based Filtering.....................................19 
     6.2.1   Application Examples for Hash-based Selection............20 
     6.2.1.1 Approximation of Random Sampling.........................20 
     6.2.1.2 Trajectory Sampling and Consistent Packet Selection......20 
     6.2.2   Security Considerations for Hash Functions...............21 
     6.2.2.1 Vulnerabilities of Hash-based selection without 
              knowledge of selection outcomes.........................22 
     6.2.2.2 Vulnerabilities of Hash-based selection using knowledge 
              of selection outcomes...................................23 
     6.2.2.3 Vulnerabilities to Replay Attacks........................24 
     6.2.3   Choice of Hash-Function..................................25 
     6.2.3.1 Properties of some hash functions........................25 
     6.2.3.2 Hash Functions for Packet Selection......................26 
     6.2.3.3 Hash Functions Suitable for Packet Digesting.............27 
     7.   Parameters for the Description of Selection Techniques......27 
     7.1     Description of Sampling Techniques.......................28 
     7.2     Description of Filtering Techniques......................29 
     8.   Composite Techniques........................................31 
     8.1     Cascaded Filtering->Sampling or Sampling->Filtering......31 
     8.2     Stratified Sampling......................................32 
     9.   Security Considerations.....................................32 




  Zseby, Molina, Duffield, Niccolini, Raspall              [Page 3] 
  Internet Draft  Techniques for IP Packet Selection   June 2007 



     10.  Acknowledgements............................................33 
     11.  IANA Considerations.........................................33 
     12.  Normative References........................................33 
     13.  Informative References......................................33 
     Authors' Addresses...............................................36 
     Intellectual Property Statement..................................37 
     Copyright Statement..............................................37 
     Appendix A: Hash Functions.......................................38 
     A.1 IP Shift-XOR (IPSX) Hash Function............................38 
     A.2 BOB Hash Function............................................39 
   
  1. Introduction 
      
     There are two main drivers for the growth in measurement 
     infrastructures and their underlying technology. First, network 
     data rates are increasing, with a concomitant growth in 
     measurement data. Secondly, the growth is compounded by the 
     demand by measurement-based applications for increasingly fine 
     grained traffic measurements. Devices such as routers, which 
     perform the measurements, require increasingly sophisticated and 
     resource intensive measurement capabilities, including the 
     capture of packet headers or even parts of the payload, and 
     classification for flow analysis. All these factors can lead to 
     an overwhelming amount of measurement data, resulting in high 
     demands on resources for measurement, storage, transport and 
     post processing. 
      
     The sustained capture of network traffic at line rate can be 
     performed by specialized measurement hardware. However, the cost 
     of the hardware and the measurement infrastructure required to 
     accommodate the measurements preclude this as a ubiquitous 
     approach. Instead some form of data reduction at the point of 
     measurement is necessary. This can be achieved by an intelligent 
     packet selection through Sampling, Filtering, or aggregation. 
     The motivation for Sampling is to select a representative subset 
     of packets that allow accurate estimates of properties of the 
     unsampled traffic to be formed. The motivation for Filtering is 
     to remove all packets that are not of interest. Aggregation 
     combines data and allows compact pre-defined views of the 
     traffic. Examples of applications that benefit from packet 
     selection are given in [PSAMP-FW]. Aggregation techniques are 
     out of scope of this document. 
      
  2. PSAMP Documents Overview 
      
     [PSAMP-FW]:   "A Framework for Packet Selection and Reporting" 
                    describes the PSAMP framework for network elements 
                    to select subsets of packets by statistical and 




  Zseby, Molina, Duffield, Niccolini, Raspall              [Page 4] 
  Internet Draft  Techniques for IP Packet Selection   June 2007 



                    other methods, and to export a stream of reports 
                    on the selected packets to a Collector. 
      
     [PSAMP-TECH]: "Sampling and Filtering Techniques for IP Packet 
                    Selection" (this document) describes the set of 
                    packet selection techniques supported by PSAMP. 
      
     [PSAMP-PROTO]: "Packet Sampling (PSAMP) Protocol Specifications" 
                    specifies the export of packet information from a 
                    PSAMP Exporting Process to a PSAMP Colleting 
                    Process. 
      
     [PSAMP-INFO]: "Information Model for Packet Sampling Exports" 
                    defines an information and data model for PSAMP. 
      
  3. Terminology 
      
     The PSAMP terminology defined here is fully consistent with all 
     terms listed in [PSAMP-FW] but includes additional terms 
     required for the description of packet selection methods. An 
     architecture overview and possible configurations of PSAMP 
     elements can be found in [PSAMP-FW]. PSAMP terminology also aims 
     at consistency with terms used in [RFC3917]. The relationship 
     between PSAMP and IPFIX terms is described in [PSAMP-FW]. 
   
  3.1 Observation Points, Packet Streams and Packet Content  
      
     * Observation Point 
      
        An Observation Point is a location in the network where 
        packets can be observed. Examples include: 
         
          (i)  a line to which a probe is attached; 
           
          (ii) a shared medium, such as an Ethernet-based LAN; 
           
          (iii) a single port of a router, or set of interfaces 
                (physical or logical) of a router; 
           
          (iv) an embedded measurement subsystem within an interface. 
           
        Note that one Observation Point may be a superset of several 
        other Observation Points.  For example one Observation Point 
        can be an entire line card.  This would be the superset of the 
        individual Observation Points at the line card's interfaces. 
      
     * Observed Packet Stream 
      




  Zseby, Molina, Duffield, Niccolini, Raspall              [Page 5] 
  Internet Draft  Techniques for IP Packet Selection   June 2007 



        The Observed Packet Stream is the set of all packets observed 
        at the Observation Point. 
   
     * Packet Stream 
      
        A packet stream denotes a set of packets that flows past some 
        specified point within the metering process. An example of a 
        Packet Stream is the output of the selection process. 
        Note that packets selected from a stream, e.g. by Sampling, do 
        not necessarily possess a property by which they can be 
        distinguished from packets that have not been selected. For 
        this reason the term "stream" is favored over "flow", which is 
        defined as set of packets with common properties [RFC3917].  
      
     * Packet Content 
      
        The packet content denotes the union of the packet header  
        (which includes link layer, network layer and other 
        encapsulation headers) and the packet payload.  
         
  3.2 Selection Process 
      
     * Selection Process  
      
        A Selection Process takes the Observed Packet Stream as its 
        input and selects a subset of that stream as its output.  
         
     * Selection State 
      
        A Selection Process may maintain state information for use by 
        the Selection Process. At a given time, the Selection State 
        may depend on packets observed at and before that time, and 
        other variables. Examples include:  
         
          (i)  sequence numbers of packets at the input of Selectors;  
           
          (ii) a timestamp of observation of the packet at the 
                Observation Point; 
           
          (iii) iterators for pseudorandom number generators;  
           
          (iv) hash values calculated during selection;  
           
          (v)  indicators of whether the packet was selected by a 
                given Selector;  
           






  Zseby, Molina, Duffield, Niccolini, Raspall              [Page 6] 
  Internet Draft  Techniques for IP Packet Selection   June 2007 



        Selection Processes may change portions of the Selection State 
        as a result of processing a packet. Selection state for a 
        packet is to reflect the state after processing the packet.  
      
     * Selector 
      
        A Selector defines the action of a Selection Process on a 
        single packet of its input. If selected, the packet becomes an 
        element of the output Packet Stream. 
         
        The Selector can make use of the following information in 
        determining whether a packet is selected:  
         
          (i)  the packet's content; 
           
          (ii) information derived from the packet's treatment at the 
                Observation Point; 
           
          (iii) any selection state that may be maintained by the 
                Selection Process. 
           
     * Composite Selector 
      
        A Composite Selector is an ordered composition of Selectors, 
        in which the output Packet Stream issuing from one Selector 
        forms the input Packet Stream to the succeeding Selector. 
      
     * Primitive Selector 
      
        A Selector is primitive if it is not a Composite Selector. 
         
     * Selection Sequence 
   
        From all the packets observed at an Observation Point, only a 
        few packets are selected by one or more Selectors.  The 
        Selection Sequence is a unique value per Observation Domain 
        describing the Observation Point and the Selector IDs through 
        which the packets are selected. 
         
  3.3 Reporting 
   
     * Packet Reports 
      
        Packet Reports comprise a configurable subset of a packet's 
        input to the Selection Process, including the packet's 
        content, information relating to its treatment (for example, 
        the output interface), and its associated selection state (for 
        example, a hash of the packet's content) 




  Zseby, Molina, Duffield, Niccolini, Raspall              [Page 7] 
  Internet Draft  Techniques for IP Packet Selection   June 2007 



         
     * Report Interpretation: 
      
        Report Interpretation comprises subsidiary information, 
        relating to one or more packets, that is used for 
        interpretation of their packet reports. Examples include 
        configuration parameters of the Selection Process.  
      
     * Report Stream:  
      
        The Report Stream is the output of a Metering Process, 
        comprising two distinguished types of information: Packet 
        Reports, and Report Interpretation. 
   
  3.4 Metering Process 
   
        A Metering Process selects packets from the Observed Packet 
        Stream using a Selection Process, and produces as output a 
        Report Stream concerning the selected packets. The PSAMP 
        Metering Process can be viewed as analogous to the IPFIX 
        metering process [IPFIX-PROTO], which produces flow records as 
        its output.  While the Metering Process definition in this 
        document specifies the PSAMP definition, the PSAMP protocol 
        specifications [PSAMP-PROTO] will use the IPFIX Metering 
        Process definition, which also suits the PSAMP requirements.   
        The relationship between PSAMP and IPFIX is described more in 
        [PSAMP-INFO] and [PSAMP-PROTO]. 
         
  3.5 Exporting Process 
      
     * Exporting Process: 
      
        An Exporting Process sends, in the form of Export Packet, the 
        output of one or more Metering Processes to one or more 
        Collectors. 
      
     * Export Packet: 
      
        An Export Packet is a combination of Report Interpretation 
        and/or one or more Packet Reports are bundled by the Exporting 
        Process into an Export Packet for exporting to a Collector.  
         
  3.6 PSAMP Device 
      
     * PSAMP Device  
      
        A PSAMP Device is a device hosting at least an Observation 
        Point, a Metering Process and an Exporting Process. Typically, 




  Zseby, Molina, Duffield, Niccolini, Raspall              [Page 8] 
  Internet Draft  Techniques for IP Packet Selection   June 2007 



        corresponding Observation Point(s), Metering Process(es) and 
        Exporting Process(es) are co-located at this device, for 
        example at a router. 
      
  3.7 Collector 
   
     * Collector  
      
        A Collector receives a Report Stream exported by one or more 
        Exporting Processes. In some cases, the host of the Metering 
        and/or Exporting Processes may also serve as the Collector. 
      
  3.8 Selection Methods 
      
     * Filtering 
        A filter is a Selector that selects a packet deterministically 
        based on the Packet Content, or its treatment, or functions of 
        these occurring in the Selection State.  Two examples are: 
      
          (i) Property match filtering: a packet is selected if a 
                specific field in the packet equals a predefined 
                value. 
           
          (ii) Hash-based selection: a hash function is applied to 
                the Packet Content, and the packet is selected if the 
                result falls in a specified range. 
              
     * Sampling  
         
        A selector that is not a filter is called a sampling 
        operation.  This reflects the intuitive notion that if the 
        selection of a packet cannot be determined from its content 
        alone, there must be some type of sampling taking place. 
        Sampling operations can be divided into two subtypes: 
         
           (i) Content-independent sampling, which does not use 
                Packet Content in reaching sampling decisions.  
                Examples include systematic sampling, and uniform 
                pseudorandom sampling driven by a pseudorandom number 
                whose generation is independent of Packet Content.  
                Note that in Content-independent Sampling it is not 
                necessary to access the Packet Content in order to 
                make the selection decision. 
           
          (ii) Content-dependent sampling, in which the Packet 
                Content is used in reaching selection decisions.  An 
                application is pseudorandom selection according to a 
                probability that depends on the contents of a packet 




  Zseby, Molina, Duffield, Niccolini, Raspall              [Page 9] 
  Internet Draft  Techniques for IP Packet Selection   June 2007 



                field, e.g., sampling packets with a probability 
                dependent on their TCP/UDP port numbers.  Note that 
                this is not a Filter. 
   
     * Hash Domain 
   
        A subset of the Packet Content and the packet treatment, 
        viewed as an N-bit string for some positive integer N. 
         
     * Hash Range 
   
        A set of M-bit strings for some positive integer M that define 
        the range of values the result of the hash operation can take. 
      
     * Hash Function 
   
        A deterministic map from the Hash Domain into the Hash Range. 
         
     * Hash Selection Range 
   
        A subset of the Hash Range. The packet is selected if the 
        action of the Hash Function on the Hash Domain for the packet 
        yields a result in the Hash Selection Range. 
         
     * Hash-based Selection 
   
        Filtering specified by a Hash Domain, a Hash Function, and 
        Hash Range and a Hash Selection Range. 
         
         
     * Approximative Selection 
   
        Selectors in any of the above categories may be approximated 
        by operations in the same or another category for the purposes 
        of implementation. For example, uniform pseudorandom Sampling 
        may be approximated by Hash-based Selection, using a suitable 
        Hash Function and Hash Domain. In this case, the closeness of 
        the approximation depends on the choice of Hash Function and 
        Hash Domain. 
         
     * Population 
      
        A Population is a Packet Stream, or a subset of a Packet 
        Stream. A Population can be considered as a base set from 
        which packets are selected. An example is all packets in the 
        Observed Packet Stream that are observed within some specified 
        time interval. 
         




  Zseby, Molina, Duffield, Niccolini, Raspall              [Page 10] 
  Internet Draft  Techniques for IP Packet Selection   June 2007 



     * Population Size 
   
        The Population Size is the number of all packets in the 
        Population. 
         
     * Sample Size 
   
        The number of packets selected from the Population by a 
        Selector. 
   
     * Configured Selection Fraction 
         
        The Configured Selection Fraction is the ratio of the number 
        of packets selected by a Selector from an input Population, to 
        the Population Size, as based on the configured selection 
        parameters. 
         
     * Attained Selection Fraction 
         
        The Attained Selection Fraction is the actual ratio of the 
        number of packets selected by a Selector from an input 
        Population, to the Population Size.  
         
     For some sampling methods the Attained Selection Fraction can 
     differ from the Configured Selection Fraction due to, for 
     example, the inherent statistical variability in sampling 
     decisions of probabilistic Sampling and Hash-based Selection. 
     Nevertheless, for large Population Sizes and properly configured 
     Selectors, the Attained Selection Fraction usually approaches 
     the Configured Selection Fraction. 
      
  4. Categorization of Packet Selection Techniques 
   
     Packet selection techniques generate a subset of packets from an 
     Observed Packet Stream at an Observation Point. We distinguish 
     between Sampling and Filtering. 
   
     Sampling is targeted at the selection of a representative subset 
     of packets. The subset is used to infer knowledge about the 
     whole set of observed packets without processing them all. The 
     selection can depend on packet position, and/or on packet 
     content, and/or on (pseudo) random decisions.  
   
     Filtering selects a subset with common properties. This is used 
     if only a subset of packets is of interest. The properties can 
     be directly derived from the packet content, or depend on the 
     treatment given by the router to the packet. Filtering is a 
     deterministic operation. It depends on packet content or router 




  Zseby, Molina, Duffield, Niccolini, Raspall              [Page 11] 
  Internet Draft  Techniques for IP Packet Selection   June 2007 



     treatment. It never depends on packet position or on (pseudo) 
     random decisions. 
      
     Note that a common technique to select packets is to compute a 
     Hash Function on some bits of the packet header and/or content 
     and to select it if the Hash Value falls in the Hash Selection 
     Range. Since hashing is a deterministic operation on the packet 
     content, it is a Filtering technique according to our 
     categorization. Nevertheless, Hash Functions are sometimes used 
     to emulate random Sampling. Depending on the chosen input bits, 
     the Hash Function and the Hash Selection Range, this technique 
     can be used to emulate the random selection of packets with a 
     given probability p. It is also a powerful technique to 
     consistently select the same packet subset at multiple 
     Observation Points [DuGr00] 
      
     The following table gives an overview of the schemes described 
     in this document and their categorization. An X in brackets (X) 
     denotes schemes for which also content-independent variants 
     exist. It easily can be seen that only schemes with both 
     properties, content dependence and deterministic selection, are 
     considered as filters. 
      
   
            Selection Scheme   | Deterministic | Content- | Category 
                               |  Selection    | dependent|           
       ------------------------+---------------+----------+---------- 
        Systematic             |       X       |     _    | Sampling  
        Count-based            |               |          | 
       ------------------------+---------------+----------+---------- 
        Systematic             |       X       |     -    | Sampling 
        Time-based             |               |          | 
       ------------------------+---------------+----------+---------- 
        Random                 |       -       |     -    | Sampling 
        n-out-of-N             |               |          | 
       ------------------------+---------------+----------+---------- 
        Random                 |       -       |     -    | Sampling 
        Uniform probabilistic  |               |          | 
       ------------------------+---------------+----------+---------- 
        Random                 |       -       |    (X)   | Sampling 
        Non-uniform probabil.  |               |          | 
       ------------------------+---------------+----------+---------- 
        Random                 |       -       |    (X)   | Sampling 
        Non-uniform flow-state |               |          | 
       ------------------------+---------------+----------+---------- 




  Zseby, Molina, Duffield, Niccolini, Raspall              [Page 12] 
  Internet Draft  Techniques for IP Packet Selection   June 2007 




        Property Match         |       X       |    (X)   | Filtering 
        Filtering              |               |          | 
       ------------------------+---------------+----------+---------- 
        Hash Function          |       X       |     X    | Filtering 
       ------------------------+---------------+----------+---------- 
      
     The categorization just introduced is mainly useful for the 
     definition of an information model describing Primitive 
     Selectors. More complex selection techniques can be described 
     through the composition of cascaded Sampling and Filtering 
     operations. For example, a packet selection that weights the 
     selection probability on the basis of the packet length can be 
     described as a cascade of a Filtering and a Sampling scheme. 
     However, this descriptive approach is not intended to be rigid: 
     if a common and consolidated selection practice turns out to be 
     too complex to be described as a composition of the mentioned 
     building blocks, an ad hoc description can be specified instead 
     and added as a new scheme to the information model. 
   
  5. Sampling 
   
     The deployment of Sampling techniques aims at the provisioning 
     of information about a specific characteristic of the parent 
     population at a lower cost than a full census would demand. In 
     order to plan a suitable Sampling strategy it is therefore 
     crucial to determine the needed type of information and the 
     desired degree of accuracy in advance. 
   
     First of all it is important to know the type of metric that 
     should be estimated. The metric of interest can range from 
     simple packet counts [JePP92] up to the estimation of whole 
     distributions of flow characteristics (e.g. packet 
     sizes)[ClPB93]. 
   
     Secondly, the required accuracy of the information and with 
     this, the confidence that is aimed at, should be known in 
     advance. For instance for usage-based accounting the required 
     confidence for the estimation of packet counters can depend on 
     the monetary value that corresponds to the transfer of one 
     packet. That means that a higher confidence could be required 
     for expensive packet flows (e.g. premium IP service) than for 
     cheaper flows (e.g. best effort). The accuracy requirements for 
     validating a previously agreed quality can also vary extremely 
     with the customer demands. These requirements are usually 
     determined by the service level agreement (SLA). 
   





  Zseby, Molina, Duffield, Niccolini, Raspall              [Page 13] 
  Internet Draft  Techniques for IP Packet Selection   June 2007 



     The Sampling method and the parameters in use must be clearly 
     communicated to all applications that use the measurement data. 
     Only with this knowledge a correct interpretation of the 
     measurement results can be ensured.  
   
     Sampling methods can be characterized by the Sampling algorithm, 
     the trigger type used for starting a Sampling interval and the 
     length of the Sampling interval. These parameters are described 
     here in detail. The Sampling algorithm describes the basic 
     process for selection of samples. In accordance to [AmCa89] and 
     [ClPB93] we define the following basic Sampling processes: 
   
  5.1 Systematic Sampling 
   
     Systematic Sampling describes the process of selecting the start 
     points and the duration of the selection intervals according to 
     a deterministic function. This can be for instance the periodic 
     selection of every k-th element of a trace but also the 
     selection of all packets that arrive at pre-defined points in 
     time. Even if the selection process does not follow a periodic 
     function (e.g. if the time between the Sampling intervals varies 
     over time) we consider this as systematic Sampling as long as 
     the selection is deterministic. 
   
     The use of systematic Sampling always involves the risk of 
     biasing the results. If the systematics in the Sampling process 
     resemble systematics in the observed stochastic process 
     (occurrence of the characteristic of interest in the network), 
     there is a high probability that the estimation will be biased. 
     Systematics in the observed process might not be known in 
     advance. 
   
     Here only equally spaced schemes are considered, where triggers 
     for Sampling are periodic, either in time or in packet count. 
     All packets occurring in a selection interval (either in time or 
     packet count) beyond the trigger are selected. 
   
     Systematic count-based 
     In systematic count-based Sampling the start and stop triggers 
     for the Sampling interval are defined in accordance to the 
     spatial packet position (packet count). 
   
     Systematic time-based 
     In systematic time-based Sampling time-based start and stop 
     triggers are used to define the Sampling intervals. All packets 
     are selected that arrive at the Observation Point within the 
     time-intervals defined by the start and stop triggers (i.e. 





  Zseby, Molina, Duffield, Niccolini, Raspall              [Page 14] 
  Internet Draft  Techniques for IP Packet Selection   June 2007 



     arrival time of the packet is larger than the start time and 
     smaller than the stop time). 
   
     Both schemes are content-independent selection schemes. Content 
     dependent deterministic Selectors are categorized as filter. 
      
  5.2 Random Sampling 
      
     Random Sampling selects the starting points of the Sampling 
     intervals in accordance to a random process. The selection of 
     elements are independent experiments. With this, unbiased 
     estimations can be achieved. In contrast to systematic Sampling, 
     random Sampling requires the generation of random numbers. One 
     can differentiate two methods of random Sampling: 
      
  5.2.1   n-out-of-N Sampling 
   
     In n-out-of-N Sampling n elements are selected out of the parent 
     population that consists of N elements. One example would be to 
     generate n different random numbers in the range [1,N] and 
     select all packets which have a packet position equal to one of 
     the random numbers. For this kind of Sampling the Sample Size n 
     is fixed.  
      
  5.2.2   Probabilistic Sampling 
      
     In probabilistic Sampling the decision whether an element is 
     selected or not is made in accordance to a pre-defined selection 
     probability. An example would be to flip a coin for each packet 
     and select all packets for which the coin showed the head. For 
     this kind of Sampling the Sample Size can vary for different 
     trials. The selection probability does not necessarily has to be 
     the same for each packet. Therefore we distinguish between 
     uniform probabilistic Sampling (with the same selection 
     probability for all packets) and non-uniform probabilistic 
     Sampling (where the selection probability can vary for different 
     packets). 
      
  5.2.2.1 Uniform Probabilistic Sampling 
      
     For Uniform Probabilistic Sampling packets are selected 
     independently with a uniform probability p. This Sampling can be 
     count-driven, and is sometimes referred to as geometric random 
     Sampling, since the difference in count between successive 
     selected packets are independent random variables with a 
     geometric distribution of mean 1/p. A time-driven analog, 
     exponential random Sampling, has the time between triggers 
     exponentially distributed. 




  Zseby, Molina, Duffield, Niccolini, Raspall              [Page 15] 
  Internet Draft  Techniques for IP Packet Selection   June 2007 



     Both geometric and exponential random Sampling are examples of 
     what is known as additive random Sampling, defined as Sampling 
     where the intervals or counts between successive samples are 
     independent identically distributed random variable. 
      
  5.2.2.2 Non-Uniform Probabilistic Sampling 
      
     This is a variant of Probabilistic Sampling in which the 
     Sampling probabilities can depend on the selection process 
     input. This can be used to weight Sampling probabilities in 
     order e.g. to boost the chance of Sampling packets that are rare 
     but are deemed important. Unbiased estimators for quantitative 
     statistics are recovered by renormalization of sample values; 
     see [HT52]. 
      
  5.2.2.3 Non-Uniform Flow State Dependent Sampling  
   
     Another type of Sampling that can be classified as probabilistic 
     Non-Uniform is closely related to the flow concept as defined in 
     [RFC3917], and it is only used jointly with a flow monitoring 
     function (IPFIX metering process). Packets are selected, 
     dependent on a selection state. The point, here, is that the 
     selection state is determined also by the state of the flow the 
     packet belongs to and/or by the state of the other flows 
     currently being monitored by the associated flow monitoring 
     function. An example for such an algorithm is the "sample and 
     hold" method described in [EsVa01]: 
      
     - If a packet accounts for a flow record that already exists in 
        the IPFIX flow recording process, it is selected (i.e. the 
        flow record is updated) 
     - If a packet doesn't account to any existing flow record, it is 
        selected with probability p. If it has been selected a new 
        flow record has to be created. 
      
     A further algorithm that fits into the category of non-uniform 
     flow state dependent Sampling is described in [Moli03]. 
      
     This type of Sampling is content dependent because the 
     identification of the flow the packet belongs to requires 
     analyzing part of the packet content. If the packet is selected, 
     then it is passed as an input to the IPFIX monitoring function 
     (this is called "Local Export" in [PSAMP-FW]. Selecting the 
     packet depending on the state of a flow cache is useful when 
     memory resources of the flow monitoring function are scarce 
     (i.e. there is no room to keep all the flows that have been 
     scheduled for monitoring). 
      




  Zseby, Molina, Duffield, Niccolini, Raspall              [Page 16] 
  Internet Draft  Techniques for IP Packet Selection   June 2007 



  5.2.2.4 Configuration of non-uniform probabilistic and flow-state 
        Sampling 
      
     Many different specific methods can be grouped under the terms 
     non-uniform probabilistic and flow state Sampling. Dependent on 
     the Sampling goal and the implemented scheme, a different number 
     and type of input parameters is required to configure such 
     scheme. 
      
     Some concrete proposals for such methods exist from the research 
     community (e.g. [EsVa01],[DuLT01],[Moli03]). Some of these 
     proposals are still in an early stage and need further 
     investigations to prove their usefulness and applicability. It 
     is not our aim to indicate preference amongst these methods. 
     Instead, we only describe here the basic methods and leave the 
     specification of explicit schemes and their parameters up to 
     vendors (e.g. as extension of the information model). 
      
  6. Filtering  
      
     Filtering is the deterministic selection of packets based on the 
     packet content, the treatment of the packet at the Observation 
     Point, or deterministic functions of these occurring in the 
     selection state. The packet is selected if these quantities fall 
     into a specified range. The role of Filtering, as the word 
     itself suggest, is to separate all the packets having a certain 
     property from those not having it. A distinguishing 
     characteristic from Sampling is that the selection decision does 
     not depend on the packet position in time or in the space, or on 
     a random process. 
     We identify and describe in the following two Filtering 
     techniques.  
      
  6.1 Property Match Filtering 
   
     With this Filtering method a packet is selected if specific 
     fields within the packet and/or properties of the router state 
     equal a predefined value. Possible filter fields are all IPFIX 
     flow attributes specified in [IPFIX-INFO]. Further fields can be 
     defined by vendor specific extensions. 
         
     A packet is selected if Field=Value. Masks and ranges are only 
     supported to the extent to which [IPFIX-INFO] allows them e.g. 
     by providing explicit fields like the netmasks for source and 
     destination addresses. 
      
     AND operations are possible by concatenating filters, thus 
     producing a composite selection operation.  In this case, the 




  Zseby, Molina, Duffield, Niccolini, Raspall              [Page 17] 
  Internet Draft  Techniques for IP Packet Selection   June 2007 



     ordering in which the filtering happens is implicitly defined 
     (outer filters come after inner filters).  However, as long as 
     the concatenation is on filters only, the result of the cascaded 
     filter is independent from the order, but the order may be 
     important for implementation purposes, as the first filter will 
     have to work at a higher rate.  In any case, an implementation 
     is not constrained to respect the filter ordering, as long as 
     the result is the same, and it may even implement the composite 
     filtering in filtering in one single step. 
   
     OR operations are not supported with this basic model.  More 
     sophisticated filters (e.g. supporting bitmasks, ranges or OR 
     operations etc.) can be realized as vendor specific schemes. 
   
     Property match operations should be available for different 
     protocol portions of the packet header: 
      
           (i) the IP header (excluding options in IPv4, stacked 
                headers in IPv6) 
           
          (ii) transport header 
         
          (iii) encapsulation headers (e.g. the MPLS label stack, if 
                present) 
         
     When the PSAMP Device offers property match filtering, and, in 
     its usual capacity other than in performing PSAMP functions, 
     identifies or processes information from IP, transport or 
     encapsulation protocols, then the information should be made 
     available for filtering.  For example, when a PSAMP Device 
     routes based on destination IP address, that field should be 
     made available for filtering.  Conversely, a PSAMP Device that 
     does not route is not expected to be able to locate an IP 
     address within a packet, or make it available for Filtering, 
     although it may do so. 
         
     Since packet encryption conceals the real values of encrypted 
     fields, property match filtering must be configurable to ignore 
     encrypted packets, when detected. 
      
     The Selection Process may support filtering based on the 
     properties of the router state: 
         
          (i)  Ingress interface at which packet arrives equals a 
                specified value 
           
          (ii) Egress interface to which packet is routed to equals a 
                specified value 




  Zseby, Molina, Duffield, Niccolini, Raspall              [Page 18] 
  Internet Draft  Techniques for IP Packet Selection   June 2007 



           
          (iii) Packet violated Access Control List (ACL) on the 
                router 
           
          (iv)  Failed Reverse Path Forwarding (RPF) 
           
          (v)  Failed Resource Reservation (RSVP) 
           
          (vi)  No route found for the packet 
           
          (vii) Origin Border Gateway Protocol (BGP) Autonomous System 
                (AS) [RFC4271] equals a specified value or lies within 
                a given range 
          (viii)Destination BGP AS equals a specified value or lies 
                within a given range 
         
     Router architectural considerations may preclude some 
     information concerning the packet treatment being available at 
     line rate for selection of packets.  For example, the Selection 
     Process may not be implemented in the fast path that is able to 
     access routing state at line rate.  However, when filtering 
     follows sampling (or some other selection operation) in a 
     Composite Selector, the rate of the Packet Stream output from 
     the sampler and input to the filter may be sufficiently slow 
     that the filter could select based on routing state. 
      
  6.2 Hash-based Filtering 
      
     A Hash Function h maps the Packet Content c, or some portion of 
     it, onto a Hash Range R. The packet is selected if h(c) is an 
     element of S, which is a subset of R called the Hash Selection 
     Range. Thus Hash-based Selection is indeed a particular case of 
     Filtering: the object is selected if c is in inv(h(S)). But for 
     desirable Hash Functions the inverse image inv(h(S)) will be 
     extremely complex, and hence h would not be expressible as, say, 
     a Property Match Filter or a simple combination of these. 
      
     Hash-based selection has mainly two types of usage: it offers a 
     way to approximate random Sampling by using packet content to 
     generate pseudorandom variates, and a way to consistently select 
     subsets of packets that share a common property (e.g. at 
     different Observation Points). 
      
     In the following subsections we give more details about them. 
     However, both usages require that the Hash Functions has two 
     statistical properties. 
      





  Zseby, Molina, Duffield, Niccolini, Raspall              [Page 19] 
  Internet Draft  Techniques for IP Packet Selection   June 2007 



     First, the Hash Function h must have good mixing properties, in 
     the sense that small changes in the input (e.g. the flipping of 
     a single bit) cause large changes in the output (many bits 
     change). Then any local clump of values of c is spread widely 
     over R by h, and so the distribution of h(c) is fairly uniform 
     even if the distribution of c is not. Then the Sampling Fraction 
     is #S/#R, which can be tuned by choice of S.  
      
     The second desirable property depends more closely on the 
     statistics of the content c. In applications, the content c 
     comprises a number of distinct fields, c1 ... cm, e.g. source 
     and destination IP Address, IP identification, and TCP/UDP port 
     numbers (if present) for a packet. With a Hash Function 
     satisfying the first properties above, selection decisions will 
     appear uncorrelated with the contents of any individual field, 
     if the complementary fields are (i) sufficiently variable 
     themselves, and (ii) sufficiently uncorrelated with cj. 
      
  6.2.1   Application Examples for Hash-based Selection 
      
  6.2.1.1 Approximation of Random Sampling 
      
     Although pseudorandom number generators with well understood 
     properties have been developed, they may not be the method of 
     choice in settings where computational resources are scarce. A 
     convenient alternative is to use Hash Functions of packet 
     content as a source of randomness. The hash (suitably 
     renormalized) is a pseudorandom variate in the interval [0,1]. 
     Other schemes may use packet fields in iterators for 
     pseudorandom numbers. However, the statistical properties of an 
     ideal packet selection law (such as independent Sampling for 
     different packets, or independence on packet content) may not be 
     exactly rendered by an implementation, but only approximately 
     so. 
      
     Use of packet content to generate pseudorandom variates shares 
     with Non-uniform Probabilistic Sampling (see Section 3.1.2.2.2 
     above) the property that selection decisions depend on Packet 
     Content. However, there is a fundamental difference between the 
     two. In the former case the content determines pseudorandom 
     variates. In the latter case the content only determines the 
     selection probabilities: selection could then proceed e.g by use 
     of random variates obtained by an independent pseudorandom 
     number generator.  
      
  6.2.1.2 Trajectory Sampling and Consistent Packet Selection. 
      





  Zseby, Molina, Duffield, Niccolini, Raspall              [Page 20] 
  Internet Draft  Techniques for IP Packet Selection   June 2007 



     Trajectory Sampling is the consistent selection of a subset of 
     packets at either all of a set of Observation Points or none of 
     them. Trajectory Sampling is realized by Hash-based Selection if 
     all Observation Points in the set use a common Hash Function, 
     Hash Domain and selection range. The Hash Domain comprises all 
     or part of the packet content that is invariant along the packet 
     path. Fields such as Time-to-Live, which is decremented per hop, 
     and header CRC, which is recalculated per hop, are thus excluded 
     from the Hash Domain. The Hash Domain needs to be wider than 
     just a flow key, if packets are to be selected quasirandomly 
     within flows. 
   
     The trajectory (or path) followed by a packet is reconstructed 
     from PSAMP reports on it that reach a Collector. Reports on a 
     given packet originating from different observations points are 
     associated by matching a label from the reports. The label may 
     comprise that portion invariant packet content that is reported, 
     or possibly some digest of the invariant packet content that is 
     inserted into the packet report at the Observation Point. Such a 
     digest may be constructed by applying a second Hash Function 
     (distinct from that used for selection) to the invariant packet 
     content. The reconstruction of trajectories, and methods for 
     dealing with possible ambiguities due to label collisions 
     (identical labels reported for different packets) and potential 
     loss of reports in transmission, are dealt with in [DuGr00], 
     [DuGG02] and [DuGr04]. 
   
     Applications of trajectory Sampling include (i) estimation of 
     the network path matrix, i.e., the traffic intensities according 
     to network path, broken down by flow key; (ii) detection of 
     routing loops, as indicated by self-intersecting trajectories; 
     (iii) passive performance measurement: prematurely terminating 
     trajectories indicate packet loss, packet one way delay can be 
     determined if reports include (synchronized) timestamps of 
     packet arrival at the Observation Point; (iv) network attack 
     tracing, of the actual paths taken by attack packets with 
     spoofed source addresses. 
   
  6.2.2   Security Considerations for Hash Functions 
   
     A concern for Hash-based Selection is whether some large set of 
     related packets could be disproportionately sampled, i.e., have 
     an Attained Sampling Fraction significantly different from the 
     Configured Sampling Fraction, either (i) through unanticipated 
     behavior in the Hash Function, or (ii) because the packets had 
     been deliberately crafted to have this property.  
           





  Zseby, Molina, Duffield, Niccolini, Raspall              [Page 21] 
  Internet Draft  Techniques for IP Packet Selection   June 2007 



     The first point underlines the importance of using a Hash 
     Function with good mixing properties. The statistical properties 
     of candidate Hash Functions need to be evaluated, preferably on 
     packet traces before adoption for hash-based Sampling. However, 
     hash functions which perform well on typical traffic may not be 
     sufficiently strong to withstand attacks specifically targeted 
     against them. As detailed in the following section, only 
     cryptographic hash functions employing a private parameter 
     operating in pseudo-random function mode are sufficiently strong 
     to 
     withstand the range of conceivable attacks.   For example, fixed 
     or 
     variable length inputs could be hashed using a block cipher 
     (like AES) in cipher-block-chaining mode.  Fixed length inputs 
     could also be hashed using an iterated cryptographic hash 
     function (like MD5 or SHA1), with a private initial vector.  For 
     variable length inputs, iterated cryptographic hash function 
     (like MD5 or SHA1) should employ private string post-pended to 
     the data in addition to a private initial vector. For more 
     details, see the "append-cascade" construction of [BeCK96]. 
      
     The following assumes that the hash function is public and hence 
     known to an attacker. An attacker uses its knowledge of the hash 
     function to craft packets which are then dispatched, either as 
     the attack itself, or to elicit further information which can be 
     used to refine the attack. Thus two scenarios are considered. In 
     the first scenario, the attacker has no knowledge about whether 
     the crafted packets are selected or not. In the second scenario 
     the attacker uses some knowledge of sampling outcomes; the means 
     by which this might be acquired is discussed below. Some attacks 
     that involve tampering with export packets in transit, as 
     opposed to attacking the PSAMP device, are discussed in 
     [GoRe07]. 
   
  6.2.2.1 Vulnerabilities of Hash-based selection without knowledge 
        of selection outcomes. 
   
     (i) The hash function does not use a private parameter.  
      
     If the selection range is public, an attacker can craft packets 
     whose selection properties are known in advance. If the 
     selection range is private, an attacker cannot determine whether 
     a crafted packet is selected. However by computing the hash on 
     different trial crafted packets, and selecting those yielding a 
     given hash value, the attacker can construct an arbitrarily 
     large set of distinct packets with a common selection 
     properties, i.e., packets that will be either all selected or 





  Zseby, Molina, Duffield, Niccolini, Raspall              [Page 22] 
  Internet Draft  Techniques for IP Packet Selection   June 2007 



     all not selected. This can be done whatever the strength of the 
     hash function.  
      
     (ii) The hash function is not cryptographically strong. 
      
     If the hash function is not cryptographically strong, it may 
     still be possible to construct sequences of distinct packets 
     with the common selection property. An example is the standard 
     CRC-32 hash function used with a private modulus (but without a 
     private string post-pended to the input). It has weak mixing 
     properties for low order bits. Consequently, simply by 
     incrementing the hash input, one obtains distinct packets whose 
     hashes mostly fall in a narrow range, and hence are likely 
     commonly selected; see [GoRe07] 
      
     Suitable parameterization of the hash function can make such 
     attacks more difficult. For example, post-pending a private 
     string to the input before hashing with CRC-32 will give 
     stronger mixing properties over all bits of the input. However, 
     with a hash function, such as CRC-32, that is not 
     cryptographically strong, the possibility of discovering a 
     method to construct packet sets with the common selected 
     property cannot be ruled out, even when a private modulus or 
     post-pended string is used.  
      
  6.2.2.2 Vulnerabilities of Hash-based selection using knowledge of 
        selection outcomes. 
      
     Knowledge of the selection outcomes of crafted packets can by 
     used by an attacker to more easily construct sets of packets 
     which are disproportionately sampled and/or are commonly 
     selected. There are several ways an attacker might acquire this 
     knowledge: 
      
     (i) Billing Reports: if samples are used for billing purposes, 
     then the selection outcomes of packets may be able to be 
     inferred by correlating a crafted packet stream with the billing 
     reports that it generates. However, the rate at knowledge of 
     selection outcomes can be acquired depends on the temporal and 
     spatial granularity of the billing reports, being slower the 
     more aggregated the reports are. 
      
     (ii) Feedback from an Intrusion Detection System: e.g., a 
     botmaster adversary learns if his packets were detected by the 
     intrusion detection system by seeing if one of his bots is 
     blocked by the network. 
      





  Zseby, Molina, Duffield, Niccolini, Raspall              [Page 23] 
  Internet Draft  Techniques for IP Packet Selection   June 2007 



     (iii) Observation of the Report Stream: export packets sent 
     across a public network may be eavesdropped on by an adversary. 
     Encryption of the export packets provides only a partial 
     defense, since it may be possible to infer the selection 
     outcomes of packets by correlating a crafted packet stream with 
     the occurrence (not the content) of packets in the export stream 
     that it generates. The rate at which such knowledge could be 
     acquired is limited by the temporal resolution at which reports 
     can be associated with packets, e.g. due to processing and 
     propagation variability, and difficulty in distinguishing report 
     on attack packets from those of background traffic, if present. 
     The association between packets and their reports on which this 
     depends could be removed by padding export packets to a constant 
     length and sending them at a constant rate. 
      
     We now turn to attacks that can exploit knowledge of selection 
     outcomes. Firstly, with a non-cryptographic hash function, 
     knowledge of selection outcomes for a trial stream may be used 
     to further craft a packet set with the common selection 
     property. This has been demonstrated for the modular hash f(x) = 
     a x + b mod k, for private parameters a, b, and k. With sampling 
     rate p, knowledge of the sampling outcomes of roughly 2/p is 
     sufficient for the attack to succeed, independent of the values 
     of a, b and k. With knowledge of the selection outcomes of a 
     larger number of packets, the parameters a b and k can be 
     determined; see [GoRe07]. 
      
     A cryptographic hash function employing a private parameter and 
     operating in one of the pseudo-random function modes specified 
     above is not vulnerable to these attacks, even if the selection 
     range is known. 
      
  6.2.2.3 Vulnerabilities to Replay Attacks 
      
     Since hash-based selection is deterministic, any packet or set 
     of packets with known selection properties can be replayed into 
     a network and experience the same selection outcomes provide the 
     hash function and its parameters are not changed. Repetition of 
     a single packet may be noticeable to other measurement methods 
     if employed (e.g. collection of flow statistics), whereas a set 
     of distinct packets that appears statistically similar to 
     regular traffic may be less noticeable.  
      
     Replay attacks may be mitigated by repeated changing of hash 
     function parameters. This also prevents attacks that exploit 
     knowledge of sampling outcomes, at least if the parameters are 
     changed at least as fast as the knowledge can be acquired by an 
     attacker. In order to preserve the ability to perform Trajectory 




  Zseby, Molina, Duffield, Niccolini, Raspall              [Page 24] 
  Internet Draft  Techniques for IP Packet Selection   June 2007 



     Sampling, parameter changed would have to be simultaneous (or 
     approximately so) across all observation point. 
   
  6.2.3   Choice of Hash-Function 
   
     The specific choice of hash function represents a trade-off 
     between complexity and ease of implementation. Ideally, a 
     cryptographically strong hash function employing a private 
     parameter and operating in pseudorandom function mode as 
     specified above would be used, yielding a good emulation a 
     random packet selection at a target sampling rate, and giving 
     maximal robustness against the attacks described in the previous 
     section. However, it is not assumed that all PSAMP devices will 
     be capable of applying a cryptographically strong hash function 
     to every packet at line rate. For this reason, the hash 
     functions listed in this section will be of a weaker variety. 
     Future protocol extensions that employ stronger hash functions 
     are not precluded. 
      
  6.2.3.1 Properties of some hash functions. 
   
     This document recommends 3 hash functions: IPSX, BOB and CRC-32. 
     Specifications of IPSX and BOB are in the appendix; the CRC-32 
     function is described in [RFC1071]. None of these hash functions 
     is recommended for cryptographic purposes. A comparison of hash-
     functions with regard to execution speed, collision probability, 
     uniformity of the distribution of values in the Hash 
     Range and the speed of the functions is described in [MoND05].  
      
     (i) Speed: IPSX is simple to implement and was correspondingly 
     about an order of magnitude faster to execute per packet than 
     BOB or CRC-32. 
      
     (ii) Uniformity: All three hash functions evaluated showed 
     relatively poor uniformity with 16 byte input that was drawn 
     from only invariant fields in the IP and TCP/UDP headers (i.e. 
     header fields that do not change from hop to hop). IPSX is 
     inherently limited to 16 bytes. BOB and 
     CRC-32 exhibits noticeably better uniformity when 4 or more 
     bytes from the payload are also included in the input. Although 
     the uniformity has been checked for different traffic traces, 
     results cannot be generalized to arbitrary traffic. Since hash-
     based selection is a deterministic function on the packet 
     content, it can always be biased towards packets with specific 
     attributes. Furthermore, it should be noted that all Hash 
     Functions were evaluated only for IPv4.  
        





  Zseby, Molina, Duffield, Niccolini, Raspall              [Page 25] 
  Internet Draft  Techniques for IP Packet Selection   June 2007 



  6.2.3.2 Hash Functions for Packet Selection 
   
     The BOB function SHOULD be used for packet selection operations. 
     Both the parameter (the init value) and the selection range 
     should be kept private. Other functions, such as CRC-32 and IPSX 
     MAY be used. If CRC-32 is used, the input should first be post-
     pended with a private string that acts as a parameter, and the 
     modulus of the CRC should also be kept private. 
   
     Input bytes for the Hash Function need to be invariant along the 
     path the packet is traveling. Only with this it is ensured that 
     the same packets are selected at different observation points. 
     Furthermore they should have a high variability between 
     different packets to generate a high variation in the Hash 
     Range.  
      
     If a hash-based selection with the BOB function is used with 
     IPv4 traffic, the following input bytes MUST be used. 
     - IP identification field 
     - Flags field 
     - Fragment offset 
     - Source IP address  
     - Destination IP address 
     - A configurable number of bytes from the IP payload, starting 
        at a configurable offset.  
      
     All investigated Hash Functions were evaluated only for IPv4. 
     Due to the IPv6 header fields and address structure it is 
     expected that there is less randomness in IPv6 packet headers 
     than in IPv4 headers. Nevertheless, the randomness of IPv6 
     traffic was not evaluated in the tests mentioned above. In 
     addition to this, IPv6 traffic profiles may change significantly 
     in future when IPv6 is used by a broader community. If a hash-
     based selection with the BOB function is used with IPv6 traffic, 
     the following input bytes MUST be used. 
     - Payload length (2 bytes)  
     - Byte number 10,11,14,15,16 of the IPv6 source address 
     - Byte number 10,11,14,15,16 of the IPv6 destination address 
     - A configurable number of bytes from the IP payload, starting 
        at a configurable offset. It is recommended to use at least 4 
        bytes from the IP payload. 
   
     The payload itself is not changing during the path. Even if some 
     routers process some extension headers they are not going to 
     strip them from the packet. Therefore the payload length is 
     invariant along the path. Furthermore it usually differs for 
     different packets. The IPv6 address has 16 bytes. The first part 
     is the network part and it contains low variation. The second 




  Zseby, Molina, Duffield, Niccolini, Raspall              [Page 26] 
  Internet Draft  Techniques for IP Packet Selection   June 2007 



     part is the host part and contains higher variation. Therefore 
     the second part of the address is used. Nevertheless, the 
     uniformity has not been checked for IPv6 traffic. 
   
  6.2.3.3 Hash Functions Suitable for Packet Digesting 
   
     For digesting Packet Content for inclusion in a reported label, 
     the most important property is a low collision frequency. A 
     secondary requirement is the ability to accept variable length 
     input, in order to allow inclusion of maximal amount of packet 
     as input. Execution speed is of secondary importance, since the 
     digest need only be formed from selected packets.  
      
     For this purpose also the BOB function is recommended. Other 
     functions (such as CRC-32) MAY be used. Among the functions 
     capable of operating with variable length input BOB and CRC-32 
     have the fastest execution, BOB being slightly faster. IPSX is 
     not recommended for digesting because it has a significantly 
     higher collision rate and takes only a fixed length input. 
   
  7. Parameters for the Description of Selection Techniques 
   
     This section gives an overview of different alternative 
     selection schemes and their required parameters. In order to be 
     compliant with PSAMP at least one of proposed schemes MUST be 
     implemented. 
      
     The decision whether to select a packet or not is based on a 
     function which is performed when the packet arrives at the 
     selection process. Packet selection schemes differ in the input 
     parameters for the selection process and the functions they 
     require to do the packet selection. The following table gives an 
     overview. 
   
          Scheme       |   input parameters     |     functions  
        ---------------+------------------------+------------------- 
         systematic    |    packet position     |  packet counter  
         count-based   |    Sampling pattern    |  
        ---------------+------------------------+------------------- 
         systematic    |      arrival time      |  clock or timer 
         time-based    |     Sampling pattern   | 
        ---------------+------------------------+------------------- 
         random        |  packet position       |  packet counter, 
         n-out-of-N    |  Sampling pattern      |  random numbers 
                       | (random number list)   | 
        ---------------+------------------------+------------------- 
         uniform       |        Sampling        |  random function 
         probabilistic |      probability       |    




  Zseby, Molina, Duffield, Niccolini, Raspall              [Page 27] 
  Internet Draft  Techniques for IP Packet Selection   June 2007 



        ---------------+------------------------+------------------- 
         non-uniform   |e.g. packet position,   | selection function, 
         probabilistic |  packet content(parts) |  probability calc. 
        ---------------+------------------------+------------------- 
         non-uniform   |e.g. flow state,        | selection function, 
         flow-state    |  packet content(parts) |  probability calc. 
        ---------------+------------------------+------------------- 
         property      | packet content(parts)  |  filter function or 
         match         | or router state        |  state discovery 
        ---------------+------------------------+------------------- 
         hash-based    |  packet content(parts) |  Hash Function 
        ---------------+------------------------+------------------- 
      
  7.1 Description of Sampling Techniques 
      
     In this section we define what elements are needed to describe 
     the most common Sampling techniques. Here the selection function 
     is pre-defined and given by the Selector ID.  
      
     Sampler Description: 
          SELECTOR_ID 
          SELECTOR_TYPE 
          SELECTOR_PARAMETERS 
   
     Where: 
      
     SELECTOR_ID: 
     Unique ID for the packet sampler. 
   
     SELECTOR_TYPE 
     For Sampling processes the SELECTOR TYPE defines what Sampling 
     algorithm is used. 
     Values: Systematic Count-based | Systematic Time-based | Random 
     n-out-of-N | Uniform Probabilistic | Non-uniform Probabilistic | 
     Non-uniform Flow-state 
   
     SELECTOR_PARAMETERS 
     For Sampling processes the SELECTOR PARAMETERS define the input 
     parameters for the process. Interval length in systematic 
     Sampling means, that all packets that arrive in this interval 
     are selected. The spacing parameter defines the spacing in time 
     or number of packets between the end of one Sampling interval 
     and the start of the next succeeding interval. 
   
     Case n out of N: 
        - Population size N, Sample size n 
      
     Case Systematic Time Based: 




  Zseby, Molina, Duffield, Niccolini, Raspall              [Page 28] 
  Internet Draft  Techniques for IP Packet Selection   June 2007 



        - Interval length (in usec), Spacing (in usec) 
      
     Case Systematic Count Based: 
        - Interval length(in packets), Spacing (in packets) 
      
     Case Uniform Probabilistic (with equal probability per packet): 
        - Sampling probability p 
         
     Case Non-uniform Probabilistic: 
        - Calculation function for Sampling probability p (see also 
           section .                   5.2.2.4) 
      
     Case flow state: 
        - Information reported for flow state sampling are not 
           defined in this document (see also section 5.2.2.4) 
         
  7.2 Description of Filtering Techniques 
      
     In this section we define what elements are needed to describe 
     the most common Filtering techniques. The structure closely 
     parallels the one presented for the Sampling techniques. 
      
     Filter Description: 
          SELECTOR_ID 
          SELECTOR_TYPE 
          SELECTOR_PARAMETERS 
   
     Where: 
      
     SELECTOR_ID: 
     Unique ID for the packet filter. The ID can be calculated under 
     consideration of the SELECTION SEQUENCE and a local ID. 
      
     SELECTOR_TYPE 
     For Filtering processes the SELECTOR TYPE defines what Filtering 
     type is used. 
     Values: Matching | Hashing | Router_state 
      
     SELECTOR_PARAMETERS 
     For Filtering processes the SELECTOR PARAMETERS define formally 
     the common property of the packet being filtered. For the 
     filters of type Matching and Hashing the definitions have a lot 
     of points in common. 
      
     Values: 
      
     Case Matching 
        - Information Element (from [IPFIX-INFO]) 




  Zseby, Molina, Duffield, Niccolini, Raspall              [Page 29] 
  Internet Draft  Techniques for IP Packet Selection   June 2007 



        - Value (type in accordance to [IPFIX-INFO]) 
   
     In case of multiple match criteria, multiple "case matching" 
     have to be bound by a logical AND. 
   
     Case Hashing: 
        - Hash Domain (Input bits from packet) 
             - <Header type = ipv4> 
             - <Input bit specification, header part> 
             - <Header type =  ipv6> 
             - <Input bit specification, header part> 
             - <payload byte number N> 
             - <Input bit specification, payload part> 
        - Hash Function  
             - Hash function name  
             - Length of input key (eliminate 0x bytes) 
             - Output value (length M and bitmask) 
             - Hash Selection Range, as a list of non overlapping 
               intervals [start value, end value] where value is in 
               [0,2^M-1] 
             - Additional parameters dependent on specific Hash 
               Function (e.g. hash input bits (seed)) 
      
     Notes to input bits for Case Hashing: 
        - Input bits can be from header part only, from the payload 
           part only or from both. 
        - The bit specification, for the header part, can be 
           specified for ipv4 or ipv6 only, or both 
        - In case of ipv4, the bit specification is a sequence of 20 
           Hexadecimal numbers [00,FF] specifying a 20 bytes bitmask 
           to be applied to the header. 
        - In case of ipv6, it is a sequence of 40 Hexadecimal numbers 
           [00,FF] specifying a 40 bytes bitmask to be applied to the 
           header 
        - The bit specification, for the payload part, is a sequence 
           of Hexadecimal numbers [00,FF] specifying the bitmask to be 
           applied to the first N bytes of the payload, as specified 
           by the previous field. In case the Hexadecimal number 
           sequence is longer then N, only the first N numbers are 
           considered. 
        - In case the payload is shorter than N, the Hash Function 
           cannot be applied. Other options, like padding with zeros, 
           may be considered in the future. 
        - A Hash Function cannot be defined on the options field of 
           the ipv4 header, neither on stacked headers of ipv6. 
        - The Hash Selection Range defines a range of hash-values 
           (out of all possible results of the Hash-Operation). If the 
           hash result for a specific packet falls in this range, the 




  Zseby, Molina, Duffield, Niccolini, Raspall              [Page 30] 
  Internet Draft  Techniques for IP Packet Selection   June 2007 



           packet is selected. If the value is outside the range, the 
           packet is not selected. E.g. if the selection interval 
           specification is [1:3], [6:9] all packets are selected for 
           which the hash result is 1,2,3,6,7,8, or 9. In all other 
           cases the packet is not selected. 
   
     Case Router State: 
   
        - Ingress interface at which the packet arrives equals a 
           specified value 
        - Egress interface to which the packet is routed equals a 
           specified value 
        - Packet violated Access Control List (ACL) on the router 
        - Reverse Path Forwarding (RPF) failed for the packet 
        - Resource Reservation is insufficient for the packet 
        - No route found for the packet 
        - Origin AS equals a specified value or lies within a given  
           range 
        - Destination AS equals a specified value or lies within a 
           given range 
   
     Note to Case Router State: 
        - All Router state entries can be linked by AND operators 
   
  8. Composite Techniques  
      
     Composite schemes are realized by combining the selector IDs 
     into a Selection Sequence. The Selection Sequence contains all 
     selector IDs that are applied to the packet stream subsequently. 
     Some examples of composite schemes are reported below. 
      
  8.1 Cascaded Filtering->Sampling or Sampling->Filtering 
   
     If a filter precedes a Sampling process the role of Filtering is 
     to create a set of "parent populations" from a single stream 
     that can then be fed independently to different Sampling 
     functions, with different parameters tuned for the population 
     itself (e.g. if streams of different intensity result from 
     Filtering, it may be good to have different Sampling rates). If 
     Filtering follows a Sampling process, the same Sampling Fraction 
     and type is applied to the whole stream, independently of the 
     relative size of the streams resulting from the Filtering 
     function. Moreover, also packets not destined to be selected in 
     the Filtering operation will "load" the Sampling function. So, 
     in principle, Filtering before Sampling allows a more accurate 
     tuning of the Sampling procedure, but if filters are too complex 
     to work at full line rate (e.g. because they have to access 





  Zseby, Molina, Duffield, Niccolini, Raspall              [Page 31] 
  Internet Draft  Techniques for IP Packet Selection   June 2007 



     router state information), Sampling before Filtering may be a 
     need. 
      
  8.2 Stratified Sampling 
      
     Stratified Sampling is one example for using a composite 
     technique. The basic idea behind stratified Sampling is to 
     increase the estimation accuracy by using a-priori information 
     about correlations of the investigated characteristic with some 
     other characteristic that is easier to obtain. The a-priori 
     information is used to perform an intelligent grouping of the 
     elements of the parent population. In this manner, a higher 
     estimation accuracy can be achieved with the same Sample Size or 
     the Sample Size can be reduced without reducing the estimation 
     accuracy. 
      
     Stratified Sampling divides the Sampling process into multiple 
     steps. First, the elements of the parent population are grouped 
     into subsets in accordance to a given characteristic. This 
     grouping can be done in multiple steps. Then samples are taken 
     from each subset.  
      
     The stronger the correlation between the characteristic used to 
     divide the parent population (stratification variable) and the 
     characteristic of interest (for which an estimate is sought 
     after), the easier is the consecutive Sampling process and the 
     higher is the stratification gain. For instance, if the dividing 
     characteristic were equal to the investigated characteristic, 
     each element of the sub-group would be a perfect representative 
     of that characteristic. In this case it would be sufficient to 
     take one arbitrary element out of each subgroup to get the 
     actual distribution of the characteristic in the parent 
     population. Therefore stratified Sampling can reduce the costs 
     for the Sampling process (i.e. the number of samples needed to 
     achieve a given level of confidence). 
   
     For stratified Sampling one has to specify classification rules 
     for grouping the elements into subgroups and the Sampling scheme 
     that is used within the subgroups. The classification rules can 
     be expressed by multiple filters. For the Sampling scheme within 
     the subgroups the parameters have to be specified as described 
     above. The use of stratified Sampling methods for measurement 
     purposes is described for instance in [ClPB93] and [Zseb03]. 
      
  9. Security Considerations 
   
     Security considerations concerning the choice of sampling hash 
     function have been discussed in Section 6.2.2. That section 




  Zseby, Molina, Duffield, Niccolini, Raspall              [Page 32] 
  Internet Draft  Techniques for IP Packet Selection   June 2007 



     discussed a number of potential attacks to craft packet streams 
     which are disproportionately detected and/or discover the hash 
     function parameters, the vulnerabilities of different hash 
     functions to these attacks, and practices to minimize these 
     vulnerabilities. In addition to this a user can gains knowledge 
     about the start and stop triggers in time-based systematic 
     sampling e.g. by sending test packets. This knowledge might 
     allow users to modify their send schedule in a way that their 
     packets are disproportionately selected or not selected 
     [GoRe07]. 
      
     Further security threats can occur if the configuration of 
     Sampling parameters or the communication of Sampling parameters 
     to the application is corrupted. This document only describes 
     Sampling schemes that can be used for packet selection. It 
     neither describes a mechanism how those parameters are 
     configured nor how these parameters are communicated to the 
     application. Therefore the security threats that originate from 
     this kind of communication cannot be assessed with the 
     information given in this document. 
  10. Acknowledgements 
      
     We would like to thank the PSAMP group, especially Benoit Claise 
     and Stewart Bryant, for fruitful discussions and for 
     proofreading the document. We thank Sharon Goldberg for her 
     input on security issues concerning hash-based selection. 
   
  11. IANA Considerations
   
     This document has no actions for IANA. 
   
  12. Normative References
   
     [RFC2119]   Bradner, S., Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate 
                  Requirement Levels, BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997 
   
  13. Informative References
   
     [AmCa89]    Paul D. Amer, Lillian N. Cassel, "Management of 
                  Sampled Real-Time Network Measurements", 14th 
                  Conference on Local Computer Networks, October 
                  1989, Minneapolis, pages 62-68, IEEE, 1989. 
   
     [BeCK96]    M. Bellare, R. Canetti and H. Krawczyk, 
                  "Pseudorandom Functions Revisited: The Cascade 
                  Construction and its Concrete Security", Symposium 
                  on Foundations of Computer Science, 1996. 
   



  Zseby, Molina, Duffield, Niccolini, Raspall              [Page 33] 
  Internet Draft  Techniques for IP Packet Selection   June 2007 



     [ClPB93]    K.C. Claffy, George C. Polyzos, Hans-Werner Braun, 
                  "Application of Sampling Methodologies to Network 
                  Traffic Characterization", Proceedings of ACM 
                  SIGCOMM'93, San Francisco, CA, USA, September 13 - 
                  17, 1993. 
   
     [DuGG02]    N.G. Duffield, A. Gerber, M. Grossglauser, 
                  "Trajectory Engine: A Backend for Trajectory 
                  Sampling", IEEE Network Operations and Management 
                  Symposium 2002, Florence, Italy, April 15-19, 2002. 
      
     [DuGr00]    N.G. Duffield, M. Grossglauser, "Trajectory 
                  Sampling for Direct Traffic Observation", 
                  Proceedings of ACM SIGCOMM 2000, Stockholm, Sweden, 
                  August 28 - September 1, 2000. 
      
     [DuGr04]    N. G. Duffield and M. Grossglauser "Trajectory 
                  Sampling with Unreliable Reporting", Proc IEEE 
                  Infocom 2004, Hong Kong, March 2004. 
      
     [DuLT01]    N.G. Duffield, C. Lund, and M. Thorup, "Charging 
                  from Sampled Network Usage", ACM Internet 
                  Measurement Workshop IMW 2001, San Francisco, USA, 
                  November 1-2, 2001. 
      
     [EsVa01]    C. Estan and G. Varghese, "New Directions in 
                  Traffic Measurement and Accounting", ACM SIGCOMM 
                  Internet Measurement Workshop 2001, San Francisco 
                  (CA) Nov. 2001. 
      
     [GoRe07]    S. Goldberg, J. Rexford, "Security Vulnerabilities 
                  and Solutions for Packet Sampling", IEEE Sarnoff 
                  Symposium, Princeton, NJ, May 2007. 
      
     [HT52]      D.G. Horvitz and D.J. Thompson, "A Generalization 
                  of Sampling without replacement from a Finite 
                  Universe" J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. Vol. 47, pp. 
                  663-685, 1952. 
      
     [IPFIX-INFO] J. Meyer, J. Quittek, S. Bryant "Information Model 
                  for IP Flow Information Export", RFC XXXX 
                  [Currently Internet Draft, draft-ietf-ipfix-info-
                  15, February 2007]. 
      
     [IPFIX-PROTO]B. Claise (Editor) "Specification of the IPFIX 
                  Protocol for the Exchange of IP Traffic Flow 
                  Information", RFC XXXX. [Currently Internet Draft,  
                  draft-ietf-ipfix-protocol-24.txt, November 2006]. 




  Zseby, Molina, Duffield, Niccolini, Raspall              [Page 34] 
  Internet Draft  Techniques for IP Packet Selection   June 2007 



      
     [Jenk97]    B. Jenkins, "Algorithm Alley", Dr. Dobb's Journal, 
                  September 1997. 
                  http://burtleburtle.net/bob/hash/doobs.html  
      
     [JePP92]    Jonathan Jedwab, Peter Phaal, Bob Pinna, "Traffic 
                  Estimation for the Largest Sources on a Network, 
                  Using Packet Sampling with Limited Storage", HP 
                  technical report, Managemenr, Mathematics and 
                  Security Department, HP Laboratories, Bristol, 
                  March 1992, 
                  http://www.hpl.hp.com/techreports/92/HPL-92-35.html 
      
     [Moli03]    M.Molina, "A scalable and efficient methodology for 
                  flow monitoring in the Internet", International 
                  Teletraffic Congress (ITC-18), Berlin, Sep. 2003 
      
     [MoND05]    M. Molina, S.Niccolini, N.G.Duffield "A Comparative 
                  Experimental Study of Hash Functions Applied to 
                  Packet Sampling" International Teletraffic Congress 
                  (ITC-19), Beijing, August 2005. 
      
     [PSAMP-FW]  Nick Duffield (Ed.), "A Framework for Packet 
                  Selection and Reporting", RFC XXXX [currently 
                  Internet Draft draft-ietf-psamp-framework-11, work 
                  in progress, May 2007]. 
      
     [PSAMP-INFO] T. Dietz, F. Dressler, G. Carle, B. Claise, 
                  "Information Model for Packet Sampling Exports", 
                  RFC XXXX. [Currently Internet Draft, draft-ietf-
                  psamp-info-06, June 2007] 
      
     [PSAMP-PROTO] B. Claise (Ed.), "Packet Sampling (PSAMP) Protocol 
                  Specifications", RFC XXXX. [Currently Internet 
                  Draft draft-ietf-psamp-protocol-07.txt, work in 
                  progress, October 2006]. 
      
     [RFC1071]   R. Braden, D. Borman, C. Partridge, "Computing the 
                  Internet Checksum", RFC 1071, Sep. 1988 (updated by 
                  RFCs1141 and RFC1624). 
      
     [RFC3917]   J. Quittek, T. Zseby, B. Claise, S. Zander, 
                  "Requirements for IP Flow Information Export", RFC 
                  3917, October 2004. 
      
     [RFC4271]   Y. Rekhter, T. Li, S. Hares, "A Border Gateway 
                  Protocol 4 (BGP-4)", RFC 4271, January 2006. 
      




  Zseby, Molina, Duffield, Niccolini, Raspall              [Page 35] 
  Internet Draft  Techniques for IP Packet Selection   June 2007 



     [Zseb03]    T. Zseby, "Stratification Strategies for Sampling-
                  based Non-intrusive Measurement of One-way Delay", 
                  Proceedings of Passive and Active Measurement 
                  Workshop (PAM 20003), La Jolla, CA, USA, pp. 171-
                  179, April 2003. 
      
  Authors' Addresses 
      
     Tanja Zseby 
     Fraunhofer Institute for Open Communication Systems 
     Kaiserin-Augusta-Allee 31 
     10589 Berlin 
     Germany 
     Phone: +49-30-34 63 7153 
     Email: tanja.zseby@fokus.fraunhofer.de 
   
     Maurizio Molina  
     DANTE  
     City House  
     126-130 Hills Road 
     Cambridge CB21PQ     
     United Kingdom 
     Phone: +44 1223 371 300 
     Email: maurizio.molina@dante.org.uk 
   
     Nick Duffield 
     AT&T Labs - Research 
     Room B-139 
     180 Park Ave 
     Florham Park NJ 07932, USA 
     Phone: +1 973-360-8726 
     Email: duffield@research.att.com 
      
     Saverio Niccolini 
     Network Laboratories, NEC Europe Ltd.  
     Kurfuerstenanlage 36  
     69115 Heidelberg  
     Germany  
     Phone: +49-6221-9051118  
     Email:  saverio.niccolini@netlab.nec.de 
       
     Fredric Raspall 
     EPSC-UPC  
     Dept. of Telematics  
     Av. del Canal Olimpic, s/n  
     Edifici C4  
     E-08860 Castelldefels, Barcelona  





  Zseby, Molina, Duffield, Niccolini, Raspall              [Page 36] 
  Internet Draft  Techniques for IP Packet Selection   June 2007 



     Spain  
     Email: fredi@entel.upc.es 
      
  Intellectual Property Statement 
      
     The IETF has been notified of intellectual property rights 
     claimed in regard to some or all of the specification contained 
     in this document. For more information consult the online list 
     of claimed rights. 
      
     The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of 
     any Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be 
     claimed to pertain to the implementation or use of the 
     technology described in this document or the extent to which any 
     license under such rights might or might not be available; nor 
     does it represent that it has made any independent effort to 
     identify any such rights.  Information on the procedures with 
     respect to rights in RFC documents can be found in BCP 78 and 
     BCP 79.  
      
     Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
     assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
     attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the 
     use of such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
     specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR 
     repository at http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 
      
     The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention 
     any copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other 
     proprietary rights that may cover technology that may be 
     required to implement this standard. Please address the 
     information to the IETF at ietf-ipr@ietf.org. 
      
  Copyright Statement 
      
     Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007). 
      
     This document is subject to the rights, licenses and 
     restrictions contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth 
     therein, the authors retain all their rights. 
      
  Disclaimer 
         
     This document and the information contained herein are provided 
     on an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE 
     REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, 
     THE IETF TRUST AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM 
     ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO 




  Zseby, Molina, Duffield, Niccolini, Raspall              [Page 37] 
  Internet Draft  Techniques for IP Packet Selection   June 2007 



     ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT 
     INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY 
     OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
      
  Appendix A: Hash Functions 
      
  A.1 IP Shift-XOR (IPSX) Hash Function 
      
     The IPSX Hash Function is tailored for acting on IP version 4 
     packets. It exploits the structure of IP packet and in 
     particular the variability expected to be exhibited within 
     different fields of the IP packet in order to furnish a hash 
     value with little apparent correlation with individual packet 
     fields. Fields from the IPv4 and TCP/UDP headers are used as 
     input. The IPSX Hash Function uses a small number of simple 
     instructions. 
      
     Input parameters: None 
      
     Built-in parameters: None 
      
     Output: The output of the IPSX is a 16 bit number 
      
     Functioning:  
     The functioning can be divided into two parts: input selection, 
     which forms are composite input from various portions of the IP 
     packet, followed by computation of the hash on the composite. 
      
     Input Selection: 
     The raw input is drawn from the first 20 bytes of the IP packet 
     header and the first 8 bytes of the IP payload. If IP options 
     are not used, the IP header has 20 bytes, and hence the two 
     portions adjoin and comprise the first 28 bytes of the IP 
     packet. We now use the raw input as 4 32-bit subportions of 
     these 28 bytes. We specify the input by bit offsets from the 
     start of IP header or payload. 
      
     f1 = bits 32 to 63 of the IP header, comprising the IP     
          identification field, flags, and fragment offset. 
         
     f2 = bits 96 to 127 of the IP header, the source IP address. 
         
     f3 = bits 128 to 159 of the IP header, the destination IP  
          address. 
      
     f4 = bits 32 to 63 of the IP payload. For a TCP packet, f4  
          comprises the TCP sequence number followed by the message 
          length. For a UDP packet f4 comprises the UDP checksum. 




  Zseby, Molina, Duffield, Niccolini, Raspall              [Page 38] 
  Internet Draft  Techniques for IP Packet Selection   June 2007 



      
     Hash Computation: 
     The hash is computed from f1, f2, f3 and f4 by a combination of 
     XOR (^), right shift (>>) and left shift (<<) operations. The 
     intermediate quantities h1, v1, v2 are 32-bit numbers. 
      
            1.    v1 = f1 ^ f2; 
            2.    v2 = f3 ^ f4;   
            3.    h1 = v1 << 8; 
            4.    h1 ^= v1 >> 4; 
            5.    h1 ^= v1 >> 12;  
            6.    h1 ^= v1 >> 16; 
            7.    h1 ^= v2 << 6; 
            8.    h1 ^= v2 << 10; 
            9.    h1 ^= v2 << 14; 
            10.   h1 ^= v2 >> 7; 
      
     The output of the hash is the least significant 16 bits of h1. 
      
  A.2 BOB Hash Function  
      
     The BOB Hash Function is a Hash Function designed for having 
     each bit of the input affecting every bit of the return value 
     and using both 1-bit and 2-bit deltas to achieve the so called 
     avalanche effect [Jenk97]. This function was originally built 
     for hash table lookup with fast software implementation.  
            
     Input Parameters:  
     The input parameters of such a function are:  
     - the length of the input string (key) to be hashed, in bytes. 
     The elementary input blocks of Bob hash are the single bytes, 
     therefore no padding is needed.  
     - an init value (an arbitrary 32-bit number).  
      
     Built in parameters:  
     The Bob Hash uses the following built-in parameter:        
     - the golden ratio (an arbitrary 32-bit number used in the hash  
     function computation: its purpose is to avoid mapping all zeros 
     to all zeros);  
      
     Note: the mix sub-function (see mix (a,b,c) macro in the 
     reference code in 3.2.4) has a number of parameters governing 
     the shifts in the registers. The one presented is not the only 
     possible choice.  
      
     It is an open point whether these may be considered additional  
     built-in parameters to specify at function configuration.  
      




  Zseby, Molina, Duffield, Niccolini, Raspall              [Page 39] 
  Internet Draft  Techniques for IP Packet Selection   June 2007 



     Output.  
     The output of the BOB function is a 32-bit number. It should be 
     specified:  
     - A 32 bit mask to apply to the output  
     - The selection range as a list of non overlapping intervals 
     [start value, end value] where value is in [0,2^32]  
            
     Functioning:  
     The hash value is obtained computing first an initialization of 
     an internal state (composed of 3 32-bit numbers, called a, b, c 
     in the reference code below), then, for each input byte of the 
     key the internal state is combined by addition and mixed using 
     the mix sub-function. Finally, the internal state mixed one last 
     time and the third number of the state (c) is chosen as the 
     return value.  
      
     typedef unsigned long int  ub4;   /* unsigned 4-byte quantities 
     */  
     typedef unsigned      char ub1;   /* unsigned 1-byte quantities 
     */  
      
     #define hashsize(n) ((ub4)1<<(n))  
     #define hashmask(n) (hashsize(n)-1)  
      
     /* ------------------------------------------------------ 
       mix -- mix 3 32-bit values reversibly.  
       For every delta with one or two bits set, and the deltas of 
     all three high bits or all three low bits, whether the original 
     value of a,b,c is almost all zero or is uniformly distributed,  
       * If mix() is run forward or backward, at least 32 bits in 
     a,b,c have at least 1/4 probability of changing.  
       * If mix() is run forward, every bit of c will change between 
     1/3 and 2/3 of the time.  (Well, 22/100 and 78/100 for some 2-
     bit deltas.) mix() was built out of 36 single-cycle latency 
     instructions in a structure that could supported 2x parallelism, 
     like so:  
             a -= b;  
             a -= c; x = (c>>13);  
             b -= c; a ^= x;  
             b -= a; x = (a<<8);  
             c -= a; b ^= x;  
             c -= b; x = (b>>13);  
             ...  
     Unfortunately, superscalar Pentiums and Sparcs can't take 
     advantage of that parallelism.  They've also turned some of 
     those single-cycle latency instructions into multi-cycle latency 
     instructions  
      




  Zseby, Molina, Duffield, Niccolini, Raspall              [Page 40] 
  Internet Draft  Techniques for IP Packet Selection   June 2007 



     ------------------------------------------------------------*/  
      
       #define mix(a,b,c)  \  
       { \  
         a -= b; a -= c; a ^= (c>>13); \  
         b -= c; b -= a; b ^= (a<<8); \  
         c -= a; c -= b; c ^= (b>>13); \  
         a -= b; a -= c; a ^= (c>>12);  \  
         b -= c; b -= a; b ^= (a<<16); \  
         c -= a; c -= b; c ^= (b>>5); \  
         a -= b; a -= c; a ^= (c>>3);  \  
         b -= c; b -= a; b ^= (a<<10); \  
         c -= a; c -= b; c ^= (b>>15); \  
       }  
         
       /* -----------------------------------------------------------  
     hash() -- hash a variable-length key into a 32-bit value  
     k       : the key (the unaligned variable-length array of bytes)  
     len     : the length of the key, counting by bytes  
     initval : can be any 4-byte value  
     Returns a 32-bit value.  Every bit of the key affects every bit 
     of the return value.  Every 1-bit and 2-bit delta achieves 
     avalanche. About 6*len+35 instructions.  
         
     The best hash table sizes are powers of 2.  There is no need to 
     do mod a prime (mod is sooo slow!).  If you need less than 32 
     bits, use a bitmask.  For example, if you need only 10 bits, do  
     h = (h & hashmask(10));  
     In which case, the hash table should have hashsize(10) elements.  
      
     If you are hashing n strings (ub1 **)k, do it like this:  
     for (i=0, h=0; i<n; ++i) h = hash( k[i], len[i], h);  
      
     By Bob Jenkins, 1996.  bob_jenkins@burtleburtle.net.  You may 
     use this code any way you wish, private, educational, or 
     commercial.  It's free. See 
     http://burtleburtle.net/bob/hash/evahash.html  
     Use for hash table lookup, or anything where one collision in 
     2^^32 is acceptable.  Do NOT use for cryptographic purposes.  
      ----------------------------------------------------------- */  
         
       ub4 bob_hash(k, length, initval)  
       register ub1 *k;        /* the key */  
       register ub4  length;   /* the length of the key */  
       register ub4  initval;  /* an arbitrary value */  
       {  
          register ub4 a,b,c,len;  
         




  Zseby, Molina, Duffield, Niccolini, Raspall              [Page 41] 
  Internet Draft  Techniques for IP Packet Selection   June 2007 



          /* Set up the internal state */  
          len = length;  
          a = b = 0x9e3779b9; /*the golden ratio; an arbitrary value 
     */ 
          c = initval;         /* another arbitrary value */  
         
     /*------------------------------------ handle most of the key */  
         
          while (len >= 12)  
          {  
             a += (k[0] +((ub4)k[1]<<8) +((ub4)k[2]<<16)  
     +((ub4)k[3]<<24));  
             b += (k[4] +((ub4)k[5]<<8) +((ub4)k[6]<<16) 
     +((ub4)k[7]<<24));  
             c += (k[8] +((ub4)k[9]<<8) 
     +((ub4)k[10]<<16)+((ub4)k[11]<<24));  
             mix(a,b,c);  
             k += 12; len -= 12;  
          }  
         
          /*---------------------------- handle the last 11 bytes */  
          c += length;  
          switch(len)       /* all the case statements fall through*/  
          {  
          case 11: c+=((ub4)k[10]<<24);  
          case 10: c+=((ub4)k[9]<<16);  
          case 9 : c+=((ub4)k[8]<<8);  
             /* the first byte of c is reserved for the length */  
          case 8 : b+=((ub4)k[7]<<24);  
          case 7 : b+=((ub4)k[6]<<16);  
          case 6 : b+=((ub4)k[5]<<8);  
          case 5 : b+=k[4];  
          case 4 : a+=((ub4)k[3]<<24);  
          case 3 : a+=((ub4)k[2]<<16);  
          case 2 : a+=((ub4)k[1]<<8);  
          case 1 : a+=k[0];  
            /* case 0: nothing left to add */  
          }  
          mix(a,b,c);  
          /*-------------------------------- report the result */  
          return c;  
       } 
   









  Zseby, Molina, Duffield, Niccolini, Raspall              [Page 42] 
