               
                
                
                                                                                       
                  Internet Draft                                 Jiankang Yao,  Editor 
                  Draft-Lee-JET-IMA-00.txt                                 CNNIC       
                  June 27, 2005                                    Jeff Yeh    Editor 
                  Expires: December 27,2005                                TWNIC 
                   
                   
                                   Internationalized eMail Address (IMA)  
                                       < draft-lee-jet-ima-00.txt > 
                   
               
               Status of this Memo  
                 
                  By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any 
                  applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware 
                  have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes 
                  aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79. 
                   
                  Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
                  Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
                  other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts. 
                   
                  Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months   
                  and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any   
                  time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
                  material or to cite them other than as "work in progress". 
                   
                  The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
                  http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html 
                   
                  The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
                  http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html 
                   
                  This Internet-Draft expires on December 27, 2005. 
                    
                    
                    
                  Abstract  
                    
                  An email address has two parts - local part and domain part - 
                  separated by "@" sign. This document describes a basic solution to 
                  internationalized email address (IMA) and includes some preliminary 
                  survey results. The proposed solution enables SMTP servers to support 
                  IMA. The solution discussed in this document is immediately 
                  deployable by interested parties without affecting or breaking any 
                  other existing systems.  
                    
                  Document Conventions  

                
                
               JET                    Expires - December 2005               [Page 1] 
               Internet draft                   IMA                        June 2005 
                
                
                    
                   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",  
                  "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
                  document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].  
                   
               1. Introduction to IMA  
                    
                  In order to use internationalized email addresses, we need to 
                  internationalize both domain part and local part of email address. 
                  Domain part of email addresses had been internationalized through 
                  IDNA [RFC3490]. But the local part of email address still remains as 
                  non internationalized. 
                   
                  At present, the use of Internet email address is restricted to a 
                  subset of 7-bit ASCII [RFC2821][RFC2822]. The MIME extensions 
                  provides a mechanism for the transmission of non-ASCII data that were 
                  previously unsupported in Internet mail. But it does not provide the 
                  mechanism for internationalized email address. [RFC2047] defines the 
                  message header extension for non ASCII 8-bit MIME messages. However, 
                  it does not address the issue if email addresses include non-ASCII 
                  characters. Anticipating the need to use the internationalized email 
                  address, the SMTP protocol should be extended to provide the 
                  transport mechanism for the internationalized email address. The 
                  length restrict to the local part in the section of RFC 2822 may need 
                  to be updated. 
                   
               2. Problem statement 
                   
                  Internationalized Domain Name (IDN) was standardized 2 years ago 
                  (2003) and several registries started to accept IDN registrations and 
                  the name resolutions. While the take-up of IDN varies, there is a 
                  strong demand for IDN in the regions where English is not their 
                  native language. 
                    
                  Particularly in the CJK community, we noticed that registrants of IDN 
                  often enquired about if they could use Internationalized eMail 
                  Address (IMA) too. Unfortunately, while the domain name portion of 
                  the Email address could use IDN standards, there are no standards to 
                  internationalize the local-part (left hand side of the "@" mark). 
                    
                  On the other hand, we envisage strong demands for IMA when IDN 
                  becomes popular. IMA will also promote the deployment of IDN.  
                   
                  Several solutions for IMA have been deployed, e.g.,in China (35.com, 
                  zzy.cn, bizcn.com, ce.net.cn, dns.com.cn and topbiz.cn), but the lack 
                  of open and interoperable standards means that users of one system 
                  could not (reliably) communicate with users of another system. 
                  Therefore, the Internet community would benefit from the development 
                  of an open and interoperable IETF IMA standard. 
                
                
               JET                    Expires - December 2005               [Page 2] 
               Internet draft                   IMA                        June 2005 
                
                
                   
               3. Requirements 
                
                  Any IMA solution should qualify the following requirements: 
                   
                  3.1 Short term (2-5 years) solution 
                   
                  The solution should not extend too long, so that IMA can be adopted 
                  as soon as possible by interested companies. The solution also should 
                  be easily deployable, so that IMA can be easily deployed by most 
                  interested organizations during 2-5 years if they wish to. 
                   
                  3.2 Backward compatible with the existing standards 
                   
                  The email service is one of the most important Internet services. Any 
                  updating to Internet protocols should not interfere with the 
                  operation of the Internet. The IMA solution should not break the base 
                  of the email service and be backward with the existing email 
                  standards. 
                   
                  3.3 Internationalized solution (over localized solution) 
                   
                  The solution should be an internationalized one rather than localized 
                  one.      
                   
               4. Architecture 
                
                  Solving the problem of IMA is not easy. We should divide it into two 
                  phases. In the first phase, we consider the ACE@ACE solution, which 
                  is easy to implement, backward compatible, short-term and 
                  internationalized solution. In the next phase, we may consider other 
                  mechanisms such as UTF-8@ACE. In the ACE@ACE solution, the local part 
                  of the IMA will be converted to ASCII Compatible Encoding; IDNA 
                  (RFC3490) will be applied to the domain part of the IMA. In this 
                  draft, we mainly focus on the ACE@ACE solution. 
                   
                  4.1 Encoding 
                   
                  A good ACE converting algorithm should be considered according to the 
                  following criteria: 
                       Popularity 
                       Length of the encoded name 
                       Implementation easiness 
                       Produce valid email address 
                       Case sensitivity 
                       Impact on existing protocol 
                   
                  4.2 Normalization (IMAprep) 
                   
                
                
               JET                    Expires - December 2005               [Page 3] 
               Internet draft                   IMA                        June 2005 
                
                
                  There are profiles for Stringprep such as Nameprep[RFC3491] dealing 
                  with the IDN preparation and Nodeprep[RFC3920] for internationalized 
                  node identifiers. IMAprep is introduced to prepare the local part of 
                  IMA. IMAprep is a profile of Stringprep [RFC3454]. IMAprep [Appendix 
                  A] is used to process only the local part of IMA, not the whole email 
                  address. In IMAprep, no normalization and no case folding are needed. 
                  And there must be a prohibited list, but we will not discuss details 
                  of IMAprep in this draft. 
                   
                  4.3 Mail Delivery Agent (MDA)  
                   
                  MDA is a part of mail servers, which are responsible for delivery of 
                  mails to local mail spool or sending out to another mail server. 
                  Usually, IMA is represented in the format of UTF-8 in a host while it 
                  should be converted into ACE format while being transported over the 
                  wire. There are various unofficial conventions for structured local 
                  parts, like owner-listname, user+tag, sublocal.local, path!user, etc. 
                  When internationalized local part being converted into ACE format, it 
                  actually causes some problems. Therefore, MDA may need to convert 
                  internationalized local part back to UTF8 (or original encoding) for 
                  further mailing processing. 
                   
                   4.4 Prefix 
                   
                  Since the prefix "xn--" had been used for IDNA, it is better that 
                  other prefix such as "bq--" is used for the local part of IMA to 
                  avoid of potential confusion.  
                   
               5. Deployment 
                
                  Email is an important and popular internet service. Any new 
                  deployments of SMTP servers which support IMA should not disturb the 
                  running of current email system. Since all the SMTP servers around 
                  the world can not support IMA immediately, ACE@ACE solution would be 
                  the most harmless solution to implement and deploy. 
                   
               6. Potential problems 
                
                   6.1 Impact to IRI 
                  The mailto: schema in IRI [RFC3987] may need to be modified when IMA 
                  is standardlized. 
                   
                   6.2 POP and IMAP 
                   
                   While SMTP takes care of the transportation of messages and the 
                  header fields correspond to the display management by the clients, 
                  POP essentially handles the retrieval of mail objects from the server 
                  by a client. In order to use internationalized user names based on 
                  IMA for the retrieval of messages from a mail server using the POP 
                
                
               JET                    Expires - December 2005               [Page 4] 
               Internet draft                   IMA                        June 2005 
                
                
                  protocol, a new capability should be introduced following the POP3 
                  extension mechanism [RFC 2449]. 
                  IMAP uses the traditional user name which is based on ASCII. IMAP 
                  should be updated to support the internationalized user names based 
                  on IMA for the retrieval of messages from a mail server 
                   
               7. Security Considerations  
                   
                  There have been discussions on so called "IDN-spoofing". IDN 
                  homograph attacks allow an attacker/phisher to spoof the domain/URLs 
                  of businesses. The same kind of attack is also possible on the local 
                  part of internationalized email addresses.  
                   
                  IMA can also introduce new email spamming. Many local parts of IMA 
                  will be the names of the person or company, which could easily be 
                  used by email spammer to guess the email address to produce the 
                  rubbish emails.  
                   
                  Email spamming may combine with email spoofing and homograph attacks, 
                  making it more difficult to determine who actually sent the email. 
                   
                  Any solution that meets the requirements in this document must not be 
                  less secure than the current Email Service. Specifying requirements 
                  for internationalized email addresses does not itself raise any new 
                  security issues. However, any change to the email service may affect 
                  the security of any protocol that uses the email address. A thorough 
                  evaluation of those protocols for security concerns will be needed 
                  when they are developed.  
                   
               8. References  
                   
                  [RFC1869] Klensin,J., Freed, N., Rose, M., Stefferud, E., Crocker, D., 
                  "SMTP Service Extensions", RFC 1869, November 1995. 
                  [RFC2047] Moore, K., "MIME (Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions) 
                  Part Three: Message Header Extensions for Non-ASCII Text", RFC 2047, 
                  November 1996. 
                  [RFC2449] R. Gellens, C. Newman, L. Lundblade, "POP3 Extension 
                  Mechanism" RFC2449 November 1998 
                  [RFC2821] Klensin, J., "Simple Mail Transfer Protocol", RFC 2821, 
                  April 2001. 
                  [RFC2822] Resnick, P., "Internet Message Format", RFC 2822, April 
                  2001. 
                  [RFC3454] P. Hoffman, M. Blanchet, "Preparation of Internationalized 
                  Strings ("stringprep")" RFC3454 December 2002 
                  [RFC3490] Faltstrom, P., Hoffman, P. and A. Costello, 
                  "Internationalizing Domain Names in Applications (IDNA)",RFC 3490, 
                  March 2003. 
                  [RFC3491] P. Hoffman , M. Blanchet, "Nameprep: A Stringprep Profile 
                  for Internationalized Domain Names" RFC3491 March 2003 
                
                
               JET                    Expires - December 2005               [Page 5] 
               Internet draft                   IMA                        June 2005 
                
                
                  [RFC3492] Costello, A., "Punycode: A Bootstring encoding of Unicode 
                  for Internationalized Domain Names in Applications (IDNA)", RFC 3492, 
                  March 2003. 
                  [RFC3629] Yergeau, F.,"UTF-8, a transformation format of ISO 10646", 
                  RFC 3629, November 2003. 
                  [RFC3920] P. Saint-Andre, "Extensible Messaging and Presence Protocol 
                  (XMPP): Core", RFC3920 October 2004 
                  [RFC3987] M. Duerst, M. Suignard, "Internationalized Resource 
                  Identifiers (IRIs)", RFC3987 January 2005 
                   
                   
                   
               9. Authors  
                   
                  Xiaodong LEE (lee@cnnic.cn) 
                  China Internet Network Information Center (CNNIC) 
                   
                  Nai-Wen Hsu (snw@twnic.net.tw)               
                  Taiwan Network Information Center (TWNIC) 
                   
                  Yoshiro YONEYA  yone@jprs.co.jp  
                  Japan Registry Services, Co. Ltd 
                   
                  YangWoo Ko (yw@mrko.pe.kr) 
                  Korea Network Information Center 
                   
                  James Seng (james@seng.cc) 
                  Former co-chair of IETF IDN Working Group 
                   
                  Editors 
                   
                  Jiankang YAO  (yaojk@cnnic.cn) 
                  China Internet Network Information Center (CNNIC) 
                   
                  Jeff Yeh      (jeff@twnic.net.tw) 
                  Taiwan Network Information Center (TWNIC) 
                   
                   
               10. Acknowledgments 
                   
                  Authors gratefully acknowledge the contributions of: 
                   
                  * John C Klensin for his discussion with us in 62nd IETF meeting and 
                  his internet draft about IMA 
                  * Paul Hoffman and Adam M. Costello for their internet draft about 
                  IMA 
                   


                
                
               JET                    Expires - December 2005               [Page 6] 
               Internet draft                   IMA                        June 2005 
                
                
                  Appendix A: IMAprep 
                   
                   
                  Conclusion: no normalization, but there still prep needed, define our 
                  own prep for the email local part 
                   
                     our own prep:  
                        no normalization 
                        no case folding 
                        prohibited list - .....  (discussed later after meeting ) 
                   
                     local part ??problem: 
                        No RFC standards define this part 
                        The MDA must support internationalized local part, anyway 
                        No use of ACE deals the mail processing, so it should be 
                  converted back to UTF8, then be dealt with the mail processing 
                   
































                
                
               JET                    Expires - December 2005               [Page 7] 
               Internet draft                   IMA                        June 2005 
                
                
                  Intellectual Property Statement 
                   
                     The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any   
                  Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to   
                  pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in   
                  this document or the extent to which any license under such rights   
                  might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has   
                  made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information   
                  on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be   
                  found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 
                     Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any   
                  assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an   
                  attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of   
                  such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this   
                  specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at 
                  http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 
                     The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention 
                  any copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary   
                  rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement   
                  this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at ietf-
                  ipr@ietf.org. 
                   
                   
                  Disclaimer of Validity 
                   
                     This document and the information contained herein are provided on 
                  an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE 
                  REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE 
                  INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR 
                  IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF 
                  THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED   
                  WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
                   
                   
                  Copyright Statement 
                   
                     Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).  This document is 
                  subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, 
                  and except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights. 
                   
                   








                
                
               JET                    Expires - December 2005               [Page 8] 
