

Network Working Group               Jonathan P. Lang (Calient Networks) 
Internet Draft                            John Drake (Calient Networks) 
Expiration Date: August 2001           Yakov Rekhter (Juniper Networks) 
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                          February 2001 
 
    
                  Generalized MPLS Recovery Mechanisms 
    
                    draft-lang-ccamp-recovery-00.txt 
 
 
 Status of this Memo 
    
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 [RFC2026]. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
   at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts as 
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
    
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
 Abstract 
    
   This draft discusses protection and restoration mechanisms for fault 
   management within the GMPLS framework [GMPLS]. 









 
Lang, J., Drake, J., Rekhter, Y.                              [Page 1] 

Internet Draft     draft-lang-ccamp-recovery-00.txt      February 2001 

1. Introduction 
    
   A key requirement for the development of a common control plane for 
   both optical and electronic networks is that there must be features 
   in the signaling, routing, and link management protocols to enable 
   intelligent fault management.  Fault management requires four steps: 
   fault detection, fault localization, fault notification, and fault 
   recovery.  Fault detection should be handled at the layer closest to 
   the failure; for optical networks, this is the physical (optical) 
   layer.  One measure of fault detection at the physical layer is 
   detecting loss of light (LOL); other techniques based on, for 
   example, OSNR, BER, dispersion, crosstalk, and attenuation are still 
   being investigated (see, for example, [OLCP] and [LMP-DWDM]).  Fault 
   localization requires communication between nodes to determine where 
   the failure has occurred (for example, SONET AIS is used to localize 
   failures between SONET terminating devices).  One interesting 
   consequence of using LOL to detect failures in optical networks is 
   that LOL propagates downstream along the connectionÆs path.  The 
   Link Management Protocol (LMP) [LMP] includes a fault localization 
   procedure that is designed to localize failures in both transparent 
   (all-optical) and opaque (opto-electrical) networks, and is 
   independent of the data encoding scheme.  Fault notification is the 
   Communication of a failure between the node detecting it and a node 
   equipped to deal with the failure.  Fast fault notification is 
   essential for rapid recovery.  The Notify mechanism of [RSVP-GEN] is 
   designed to support fast notification of non-adjacent nodes. 
    
   Once a failure has been detected and localized, and the responsible 
   node has been notified, protection and restoration can be used to 
   recover from the failure. We make the distinction between protection 
   and restoration by the time scales in which they operate.  
   Protection is designed to react to failures rapidly (say, in less 
   than a couple hundred milliseconds) and often involves 100% resource 
   redundancy.  For example, SONET automatic protection switching (APS) 
   is designed to switch the traffic from a primary (working) path to a 
   secondary (protection) path in less than 50ms.  This requires 
   simultaneous transmission along both the primary and secondary paths 
   (called 1+1 protection) with a selector at the receiving node, and 
   uses twice as many network resources as a non-APS protected path.  
   Restoration, on the other hand, is designed to react to failures 
   quickly, but it typically takes an order of magnitude longer to 
   restore the connection compared to protection switching.  This is 
   because restoration typically utilizes pools of shared resources 
   that are more efficient in terms of the network utilization.  In 
   addition, restoration may involve rerouting connections, which can 
   be computationally expensive if the paths are not pre-calculated or 
   if the pre-calculated resources are no longer available. 
    
   Protection and restoration methods have traditionally been addressed 
   using two techniques:  path-level recovery, where the failure is 
   addressed at the end nodes (i.e., the initiating and terminating 
   nodes of the path); and span-level recovery, where the failure is 
 
Lang, J., Drake, J., Rekhter, Y.                              [Page 2] 

Internet Draft     draft-lang-ccamp-recovery-00.txt      February 2001 

   addressed at an intermediate or transit node.  Path-level recovery 
   can be further subdivided into path protection, where secondary (or 
   protection) paths are pre-allocated, and path restoration, where 
   connections are rerouted, either dynamically or using pre-calculated 
   (but not pre-allocated) paths.  Span-level recovery can be 
   subdivided into span protection, where traffic is switched to an 
   alternate channel or link connecting the same two nodes, and span 
   restoration, where traffic is switched to an alternate route between 
   the two nodes (this involves passing through additional intermediate 
   nodes). 
    
   To effectively use protection, there must be mechanisms to configure 
   protected links on a span between nodes, advertise the protection 
   bandwidth of a link so that it may be used by a class of traffic 
   that has different availability requirements, establish secondary 
   (protection) LSPs to protect primary LSPs, allow the resources of 
   secondary LSPs to be used by lower priority traffic until a 
   switchover occurs, and signal protection switchover when necessary.  
   In this draft, we discuss protection and restoration in the context 
   of GMPLS signaling.  Specifically, we address these issues in the 
   context of RSVP signaling and OSPF and IS-IS routing. 
    
2. Protection Mechanisms 
    
   Protection is designed to react to failures at the fastest timescale 
   and typically involves pre-provisioning protection resources.  In 
   this section we discuss both span and path protection and present 
   mechanisms within GMPLS to implement both protection schemes. 
    
2.1 Span Protection 
    
   A span consists of a number of channels between two adjacent nodes 
   that are bundled into a single link called a TE link (see [LMP]).  
   Span protection involves switching to a protection channel when a 
   failure occurs on a working channel.  At the span level, both 
   dedicated (1+1, 1:1) and shared (M:N) protection may be implemented.  
   The protection type supported by a TE link (LPT) will be advertised 
   throughout the network using an IGP so that intelligent routing 
   decisions can be made (see Section 4).  The desired protection for a 
   path is signaled as part of the Generalized Label Request in GMPLS 
   signaling.  This is needed in signaling if a link supports multiple 
   protection types or if loose routing is used. 
    
   For dedicated 1+1 span protection, each node must replicate the data 
   onto two separate channels (possibly using separate component links 
   of a bundled link or separate ports of a TE link) and the adjacent 
   node must select the data from only one channel based on the signal 
   integrity.  This is the fastest protection mechanism, however, it 
   requires using twice the LSP bandwidth between each pair of nodes 
   and the ability to replicate the data on two separate channels. 
    

 
Lang, J., Drake, J., Rekhter, Y.                              [Page 3] 

Internet Draft     draft-lang-ccamp-recovery-00.txt      February 2001 

   For shared M:N protection, M protection links are shared between N 
   primary links.  Since data is not replicated on both the primary and 
   secondary links, failures must first be isolated before the 
   switchover can occur.  LMP can be used for fault isolation, and the 
   upstream node (upstream in terms of the direction an RSVP Path 
   message traverses) will initiate the local span protection.  To 
   initiate span protection, the upstream node SHOULD send an RSVP Path 
   message with a Label Set object including the labels for the 
   available secondary links.  If more than one label is included in 
   the Label Set object, the Suggested Label object should be used to 
   indicate the preferred secondary label.  If the failure affected a 
   bi-directional LSP, a new Upstream Label may also need to be 
   transmitted.  In addition, new LinkId, PHOP, and modified ERO may 
   also need to be included based on the shared protection 
   configuration.  Note that the benefit of exchanging the shared 
   protection configuration in advance using LMP is that it minimizes 
   the potential label conflict when protection switching.  When the 
   downstream node receives the Path message with the new objects, it 
   MUST verify the parameters, update the RSVP Path state, and respond 
   with either an RSVP Resv message with a new label or it should 
   generate a PathError message if the resources are not available. 
    
2.2 Path Protection 
    
   Path protection is addressed at the end nodes of an LSP (i.e., LSP 
   initiator and terminator) and requires switching to an alternate 
   path when a failure occurs.  For 1+1 path protection, a signal is 
   transmitted simultaneously over two disjoint paths and a selector is 
   used at the receiving node to choose the better signal.  For M:N 
   path protection, N primary signals are transmitted along disjoint 
   paths, and M secondary paths are pre-established for shared 
   protection switching among the N primary paths. 
    
2.2.1 1+1 Path Protection 
    
   There are a number of 1+1 path protection variations that may be 
   implemented that provide different levels of protection.  The most 
   common notion of 1+1 path protection is to select two disjoint 
   paths, one primary and one secondary, where each link along both 
   paths is unprotected.  This protects against a single link or node 
   failure, depending on how the two paths are disjoint.  One variation 
   of 1+1 path protection is to select a single path where each link 
   individually supports 1+1 span protection as discussed in Subsection 
   2.1.  This protects against a single link failure, but not a node 
   failure.  One may also combine the two approaches by ensuring that 
   for every contiguous segment of the path that includes only the 
   links that don't support 1+1 span protection, the head-end LSR has 
   to compute a link-disjoint segment, with the constraint that none of 
   the links in the newly computed segments have 1+1 protection. 
    
   After the two paths are computed, the head-end LSR will originate 
   two LSPs with dedicated 1+1 and unprotected bits set in the LPT. The 
 
Lang, J., Drake, J., Rekhter, Y.                              [Page 4] 

Internet Draft     draft-lang-ccamp-recovery-00.txt      February 2001 

   setup will indicate that these two paths request Shared-Explicit 
   reservations (see [TUNNEL]).  At each node where the two paths 
   branch out, the node must replicate the data into both branches.  At 
   each node where the two paths merge, the node must select the data 
   from only one path based on the integrity of the signal. 
    
   For SONET/SDH, LSPs are bi-directional and each branching point is 
   also a merging point and vice versa. 
    
   As an example consider the following: 
    
                                     M 
                                    / \ 
                              A---B   C----D 
                                    \ / 
                                     N 
    
   Only links A-B and C-D support 1+1 protection. Node A wants to 
   establish a 1+1 protected path to D.  In this case, A computes a 
   primary path, A, B, M, C, D where the segment B, M, C has links that 
   do not support 1+1 protection. Therefore, A computes a link-disjoint 
   segment, B, N, C, and uses it to construct a secondary path, A, B, 
   N, C, D.  A initiates a setup of two LSPs indicating the desire for 
   Shared Explicit (SE) reservations - the first path is routed along 
   A, B, M, C, D, and the second path is routed along A, B, N, C, D. 
    
   Since the two LSPs branch out at node B, B sends the data it 
   receives from A to both M and N.  At node C, the two LSPs merge and 
   C selects the data received over one of these LSPs (based on the 
   integrity of the signal), and forwards this data to D. 
    
   When the LSP from A to D is bi-directional, then C must also send 
   the data it receives from D to both M and N, and B must select the 
   data received from either M or N, and forward it the to A. 
    
2.2.2. M:N Path Protection 
    
   There are a number of M:N path protection variations that may be 
   implemented to provide different levels of protection and to address 
   different network configurations.  The most common notion of M:N 
   path protection is to route N node-disjoint primary paths and pre-
   establish M backup paths that are node disjoint from the primary 
   paths.  This protects against M path failures.  Another variation of 
   M:N path protection is to select a single path where each link 
   individually supports M:N span protection.  This protects against M 
   link failures over each span, but is not robust to node failures.  
   One may also combine the two approaches by ensuring that for every 
   contiguous segment of the path that includes only the links that 
   donÆt support M:N span protection, the head-end node has to compute 
   a node- or link-disjoint segment, with the constraint that none of 
   the links in the newly computed segments need to be protected. 
    
 
Lang, J., Drake, J., Rekhter, Y.                              [Page 5] 

Internet Draft     draft-lang-ccamp-recovery-00.txt      February 2001 

   An important feature of the GMPLS work is that it allows pre-
   configuring secondary (backup) LSPs to protect primary LSPs.  This 
   is done by indicating the LSP is of type Secondary in the protection 
   field of the Generalized Label Request.  Secondary LSPs are used for 
   fast switchover when primary LSPs fail.  Although the resources for 
   the secondary LSPs are pre-allocated, lower priority traffic may use 
   the resources with the caveat that the lower priority traffic will 
   be preempted if the primary LSP fails.  If lower priority traffic is 
   using resources along the secondary LSPs, the end nodes may need to 
   be notified of the failure in order to complete the switchover. 
    
   The setup of the primary LSP SHOULD indicate that the LSP initiator 
   and terminator wish to receive Notify messages using the Notify 
   Request object.  If a failure occurs, LMP can be used to isolate the 
   failure.  Once the failure is isolated, the upstream node (upstream 
   in terms of the direction an RSVP Path message traverses) SHOULD 
   send an RSVP Notify message to the LSP initiator, and the downstream 
   node SHOULD send an RSVP Notify message to the LSP terminator.  Upon 
   receipt of the Notify messages, the source and destination nodes 
   MUST switch the traffic from the primary LSP to the pre-configured 
   secondary LSP.  Note that if a common initiator-terminator is used 
   for all N primary paths sharing the secondary path (assuming 1:N 
   protection), no further notification is required to indicate that 
   the N primary LSPs are no longer protected. 
    
   As an example consider the following: 
    
                            A---B       E---F 
                           /     \     /     \ 
                       I---       C----D       ---T 
                           \     /     \     / 
                            J---K       L---M 
    
   Two node-disjoint routes from initiator I to terminator T cannot be 
   found; however, two node-disjoint routes can be found from node I to 
   node C and from node D to node T.  Furthermore, the link from node C 
   to node D is protected using dedicated 1:1 protection.  In this 
   case, I computes the primary route R1={I,A,B,C,D,E,F,T} and 
   secondary route R2={I,J,K,C,D,L,M,T} where the segment {C,D} 
   supports 1:1 span protection.  A initiates a setup of two LSPs 
   indicating the desire for Shared Explicit reservations; the primary 
   LSP is routed along R1 and the secondary LSP is routed along R2. 
    
3. Restoration Mechanisms 
    
   Restoration is designed to react to failures quickly and use 
   bandwidth efficiently, but typically involves dynamic resource 
   establishment and route calculation, and therefore, takes more time 
   to switch to an alternate path than protection techniques.  
   Restoration can be implemented at the intiator node or at an 
   intermediate node once the responsible node has been notified.  
   Failure notification can be done using the Notify procedures of 
 
Lang, J., Drake, J., Rekhter, Y.                              [Page 6] 

Internet Draft     draft-lang-ccamp-recovery-00.txt      February 2001 

   [GMPLS] or using the standard RSVP PathError messages.  In the 
   section, we briefly discuss span and path restoration and highlight 
   the RSVP mechanisms that can be used to implement them. 
    
   To support span restoration, where traffic is switched to an 
   alternate route around a failure, a new LSP is established at an 
   intermediate node that involves passing through additional 
   intermediate nodes.  Span restoration may be beneficial for LSPs 
   that span multiple hops and/or large distances because the latency 
   incurred for failure notification may be significantly reduced and 
   only segments of the LSP are rerouted instead of the entire path.  
   The RSVP Notify Request object can be used by an intermediate node 
   to request that it be the target of an RSVP Notify message.  Span 
   restoration may break traffic-engineering (TE) requirements if a 
   strict-hop route is defined for the connection.  Furthermore, the 
   constraints used for routing the connection must be forwarded so 
   that an intermediate node doing span restoration is able to 
   calculate an appropriate alternate route; this is similar to the 
   problems when establishing/maintaining TE requirements that span 
   mult-areas (see [MULTI] for a proposed mechanism). 
    
   Path restoration, on the other hand, switches traffic to an 
   alternate route around a failure, where the new route is selected at 
   the LSP initiator and may reuse intermediate nodes used by the 
   original LSP and it may include additional intermediate nodes.  For 
   strict-hop routing, TE requirements can be directly applied to the 
   route calculation, and the filed node or link can be avoided.  
   However, if the failure occurred within a loose-routed hop, the 
   source node may not have enough information to reroute the 
   connection around the failure. 
    
   Restoration (span or path) will be initiated by the node that has 
   isolated the failure or by the node that has received either an RSVP 
   Notify message or an RSVP Path Error message indicating that a 
   failure has occurred.  The new resources can be established in a 
   make-before-break fashion, where the new LSP is setup before the old 
   LSP is torn down, using the mechanisms of the LSP_Tunnel Session 
   object (see [TUNNEL]) and the Shared-Explicit reservation style.  
   Both the new and old LSPs share resources at nodes common to both 
   LSPs.  The Tunnel end point addresses, Tunnel Id, Extended Tunnel 
   Id, Tunnel sender address, and LSP Id are all used to uniquely 
   identify both the old and new LSPs; this ensures new resources are 
   established without double counting resource requirements along 
   common segments. 
    
4. Routing Enhancements 
    
   The GMPLS extensions to OSPF [OSPF-GE] and IS-IS [ISIS-GE] include 
   the advertisement of the LPT.  The LPT field is a bit vector that 
   indicates the protection capabilities that are supported for the 
   link.  The LPT field may be configured with Dedicated 1+1, Dedicated 
   1:1, Shared M:N, and Enhanced protection, as well as Unprotected.  
 
Lang, J., Drake, J., Rekhter, Y.                              [Page 7] 

Internet Draft     draft-lang-ccamp-recovery-00.txt      February 2001 

   For a link that has dedicated 1+1 protection or is unprotected, this 
   advertisement provides a complete description of the link 
   capabilities and the usable bandwidth.  However, a key argument for 
   using dedicated 1:1 or shared M:N is the efficiency gained by 
   reusing the protection bandwidth for lower priority traffic when the 
   bandwidth would otherwise be idle. 
    
   To advertise the protection bandwidth for a link that has dedicated 
   1:1 or shared M:N protection, a link with LPT field Extra Traffic 
   should be advertised.  This indicates that bandwidth can be used by 
   LSPs, with the caveat that any LSPs routed over this link will be 
   preempted if the resources are needed as a result of a failure over 
   the primary link. 
    
   When a failure occurs on a dedicated 1:1 or shared M:N link, the 
   LSPs routed over the link will automatically be switched to the 
   Extra Traffic link that is protecting it. 
    
   To support the routing of Secondary LSPs for M:N path protection (as 
   described in Section 2.2.2), new extensions must be added to the 
   current GMPLS routing extensions.  In particular, there must be a 
   mechanism to advertise secondary bandwidth and processing rules must 
   be defined for bandwidth accounting when LSP requests arrive at a 
   node.  See [BWAcct] for a proposal addressing these issues. 
    
 
5. Acknowledgments 
    
   We would like to thank Kireeti Kompella and Ayan Banerjee for their 
   comments and fruitful discussions. 
    
6. References
 
   [RFC2026] Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 
             3," BCP 9, RFC 2026, October 1996. 
   [GMPLS]   Ashwood-Smith, P., Banerjee, A., Berger, L., et al, 
             "Generalized MPLS - signaling functional description," 
             Internet Draft, draft-ietf-mpls-generalized-mpls-
             signaling-01.txt, (work in progress). 
   [OLCP]    Chiu, A., Strand, J., Tkach, R., ôUnique Features and 
             Requirements for The Optical Layer Control Plane, Internet 
             Draft, draft-chiu--strand-unique-OLCP-01.txt, (work in 
             progress). 
   [LMP-DWDM] Fredette, A., Snyder, E., Shantigram, J., et al, ôLink 
             Management Protocol (LMP) for WDM Transmission Systems,ö 
             Internet Draft, draft-fredette-lmp-wdm-00.txt, (work in 
             progress). 
   [LMP]     Lang, J. P., Mitra, K., Drake, J., Kompella, K., et al, 
             ôLink Management Protocol (LMP),ö Internet Draft, draft-
             ietf-mpls-lmp-01.txt, (work in progress). 
 

 
Lang, J., Drake, J., Rekhter, Y.                              [Page 8] 

Internet Draft     draft-lang-ccamp-recovery-00.txt      February 2001 

 
   [RSVP-GEN] Ashwood-Smith, P., Banerjee, A., Berger, L., et al, " 
             Generalized MPLS Signaling - RSVP-TE Extensions," Internet 
             Draft, draft-ietf-mpls-generalized-rsvp-te-00.txt, (work 
             in progress). 
   [TUNNEL]  Awduche, D., Berger, L., Gan, D-H., Li. T., Srinivasan, 
             V., Swallow, G., ôRSVP-TE: Extensions to RSVP for LSP 
             Tunnels,ö Internet Draft, draft-ietf-mpls-rsvp-lsp-tunnel-
             07.txt, (work in progress). 
   [MULTI]   Kompella, K., Rekhter, Y., ôMulti-area MPLS Traffic 
             Engineering,ö Internet Draft, draft-kompella-mpls-
             multiarea-te-00.txt, (work in progress). 
   [OSPF-GE] Kompella, K., Rekhter, Y., Banerjee, A., Drake, J., et al, 
             ôOSPF Extensions in Support of MPL(ambda)S," Internet 
             Draft, draft-kompella-ospf-ompls-extensions-00.txt, (work 
             in progress). 
   [ISIS-GE] Kompella, K., Rekhter, Y., Banerjee, A., Drake, J., et al, 
             ôIS-IS Extensions in Support of Generalized MPLS,ö 
             Internet Draft, draft-ietf-isis-gmpls-extensions-01.txt, 
             (work in progress). 
   [BWAcct]  Kompella, K., Lang, J.P., Drake, J., ôBandwidth Accouting 
             in Support of Secondary LSPs,ö  Internet Draft, (work in 
             progress). 





























 
Lang, J., Drake, J., Rekhter, Y.                              [Page 9] 


7. Author's Addresses 
    
   Jonathan P. Lang                        John Drake 
   Calient Networks                        Calient Networks 
   25 Castilian Drive                      5853 Rue Ferrari 
   Goleta, CA 93117                        San Jose, CA 95138 
   email: jplang@calient.net               email: jdrake@calient.net 
    
   Yakov Rekhter 
   Juniper Networks 
   1194 N. Mathilda Avenue 
   Sunnyvale, CA 94089 
   email: yakov@juniper.net 







































 
Lang, J., Drake, J., Rekhter, Y.                             [Page 10] 
