





Network Working Group                               G. Malkin / Xylogics
Internet Draft                                        T. Parker / UTexas

                        Internet Users' Glossary

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet Draft.  Internet Drafts are working
   documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its Areas,
   and its Working Groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet Drafts).

   Internet Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months. Internet Drafts may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by
   other documents at any time.  It is not appropriate to use Internet
   Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as a "working
   draft" or "work in progress."

   Please check the I-D abstract listing contained in each Internet
   Draft directory to learn the current status of this or any other
   Internet Draft.

   Distribution of this document is unlimited.

Abstract

   There are many networking glossaries in existence.  This glossary
   concentrates on terms which are specific to the Internet.  Naturally,
   there are entries for some basic terms and acronyms because they are
   referenced by other entries.

Acknowledgements

   This document is the work of the User Glossary Working Group of the
   User Services Area of the Internet Engineering Task Force.  Special
   thanks go to Jon Postel for his definitive definition of "datagram".
   Portions of this glossary have been reprinted with permission from
   "Analyzing Sun Networks" by Carl Malamud [MALAMUD].

Table of Contents

   non-letter  . .  3      I . . . . . . . 23      R . . . . . . . 39
   A . . . . . . .  3      J . . . . . . .         S . . . . . . . 41
   B . . . . . . .  7      K . . . . . . . 28      T . . . . . . . 44
   C . . . . . . . 10      L . . . . . . . 28      U . . . . . . . 46
   D . . . . . . . 13      M . . . . . . . 29      V . . . . . . . 47
   E . . . . . . . 17      N . . . . . . . 32      W . . . . . . . 47
   F . . . . . . . 19      O . . . . . . . 35      X . . . . . . . 48



Expiration: April 1, 1993                                       [Page 1]

Internet Draft             Internet Glossary                 August 1992


   G . . . . . . . 21      P . . . . . . . 36      Y . . . . . . . 49
   H . . . . . . . 21      Q . . . . . . .         Z . . . . . . .

   References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
   Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
   Editors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51

   <Editor's Note: When the I-D "Status" section is replaced with the
    RFC "Status" section, the TOC will fit on the first page.  All
    page numbers will need to be decremented by one.>









































Expiration: April 1, 1993                                       [Page 2]

Internet Draft             Internet Glossary                 August 1992


Glossary

   10BaseT
      A variant of Ethernet which allows stations to be attached via
      twisted pair cable.  See also: Ethernet, twisted pair.

   802.x
      The set of IEEE standards for the definition of LAN protocols.
      See also: IEEE.

   822
      See: RFC 822

   :-)
      This odd symbol is one of the ways a person can portray "mood" in
      the very flat medium of computers--by using "smiles".  This is
      `metacommunication', and there are literally hundreds of them,
      from the obvious to the obscure.  This particular example
      expresses "happiness".  Don't see it?  Tilt your head to the left
      90 degrees.  Smiles are also used to denote sarcasm.
      [Source: ZEN]

   abstract syntax
      A description of a data structure that is independent of machine-
      oriented structures and encodings.
      [Source: RFC1208]

   Abstract Syntax Notation One (ASN.1)
      The language used by the OSI protocols for describing abstract
      syntax.  This language is also used to encode SNMP packets.  ASN.1
      is defined in ISO documents 8824.2 and 8825.2.  See also: Basic
      Encoding Rules.

   Access Control List (ACL)
      Most network security systems operate by allowing selective use of
      services.  An Access Control List is the usual means by which
      access to, and denial of, services is controlled.  It is simply a
      list of the services available, each with a list of the hosts
      permitted to use the service.

   ACK
      See: Acknowledgment

   acknowledgment (ACK)
      A type of message sent to indicate that a block of data arrived at
      its destination without error.  See also: Negative
      Acknowledgement.
      [Source: NNSC]



Expiration: April 1, 1993                                       [Page 3]

Internet Draft             Internet Glossary                 August 1992


   ACL
      See: Access Control List

   AD
      See: Administrative Domain

   address
      There are three types of address in common use within the
      Internet.  They are email address; IP, internet or Internet
      address; and hardware or MAC address.  See also: email address, IP
      address, internet address, MAC address.

   address mask
      A bit mask used to identify which bits in an IP address correspond
      to the network and subnet portions of the address.  This mask is
      often referred to as the subnet mask because the network portion
      of the address can be determined by the encoding inherent in an IP
      address.

   address resolution
      Conversion of an internet address into the corresponding physical
      address.

   Address Resolution Protocol (ARP)
      Used to dynamically discover the lowlevel physical network
      hardware address that corresponds to the high level IP address for
      a given host.  ARP is limited to physical network systems that
      support broadcast packets that can be heard by all hosts on the
      network.  See also: proxy ARP.

   address space
      A collection of addresses that form a unified collection, such as
      an internetwork.
      [Source: MALAMUD]

   Administrative Domain (AD)
      A collection of hosts and routers, and the interconnecting
      network(s), managed by a single administrative authority.

   Advanced Research Projects Agency Network (ARPANET)
      A pioneering long haul network funded by ARPA (now DARPA).  It
      served as the basis for early networking research as well as a
      central backbone during the development of the Internet.  The
      ARPANET consisted of individual packet switching computers
      interconnected by leased lines.  See also: Defense Advanced
      Research Projects Agency.
      [Source: FYI4]




Expiration: April 1, 1993                                       [Page 4]

Internet Draft             Internet Glossary                 August 1992


   agent
      In the client-server model, the part of the system that performs
      information preparation and exchange on behalf of a client or
      server application.
      [Source: RFC1208]

   alias
      A name, usually short and easy to remember, that is translated
      into another name, usually long and difficult to remember.

   American National Standards Institute (ANSI)
      This organization is responsible for approving U.S. standards in
      many areas, including computers and communications.  Standards
      approved by this organization are often called ANSI standards
      (e.g., ANSI C is the version of the C language approved by ANSI).
      ANSI is a member of ISO.  See also: International Organization for
      Standardization.
      [Source: NNSC]

   American Standard Code for Information Interchange (ASCII)
      A standard character-to-number encoding widely used in the
      computer industry.  See also: EBCDIC.

   anonymous FTP
      Anonymous FTP allows a user to retrieve documents, files,
      programs, and other archived data from anywhere in the Internet
      without having to establish a userid and password.  By using the
      special userid of "anonymous" the network user will bypass local
      security checks and will have access to publicly accessible files
      on the remote system.  See also: archive site, File Transfer
      Protocol.

   ANSI
      See: American National Standards Institute

   API
      See: Application Program Interface

   Appletalk
      A networking protocol developed by Apple Computer for
      communication between Apple Computer products and other computers.
      This protocol is independent of the network layer on which it is
      run.  Current implementations exist for Localtalk, a 235Kb/s local
      area network; and Ethertalk, a 10Mb/s local area network.
      [Source: NNSC]

   application
      A program that performs a function for a user.  FTP, mail and



Expiration: April 1, 1993                                       [Page 5]

Internet Draft             Internet Glossary                 August 1992


      Telnet clients are examples of network applications.

   application layer
      The top layer of the network protocol stack.  The application
      layer is concerned with the semantics of work.  For example,
      getting a certain record from a file by key value on a foreign
      node is an application layer concern.  How to represent that data
      and how to reach the foreign node are issues for lower layers of
      the network.
      [Source: MALAMUD]

   Application Program Interface (API)
      A set of calling conventions defining how a service is invoked
      through a software package.
      [Source: RFC1208]

   archie
      A system to automatically gather, index and serve information on
      the Internet.  The initial implementation of archie provided an
      indexed directory of filenames from all anonymous FTP archives on
      the Internet.  Later versions provide other collections of
      information.  See also: archive site, Gopher, Prospero, Wide Area
      Information Servers.

   archive site
      A machine that provides access to a collection of information
      across the Internet.  An "anonymous FTP archive site", for
      example, provides access to this material via the FTP protocol.
      See also: anonymous FTP, archie, Gopher, Prospero, Wide Area
      Information Servers.

   ARP
      See: Address Resolution Protocol

   ARPA
      See: Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency

   ARPANET
      See: Advanced Research Projects Agency Network

   AS
      See: Autonomous System

   ASCII
      See: American Standard Code for Information Interchange

   ASN.1
      See: Abstract Syntax Notation One



Expiration: April 1, 1993                                       [Page 6]

Internet Draft             Internet Glossary                 August 1992


   assigned numbers
      The RFC [STD2] which documents the currently assigned values from
      several series of numbers used in network protocol
      implementations.  This RFC is updated periodically and, in any
      case, current information can be obtained from the Internet
      Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA).  If you are developing a
      protocol or application that will require the use of a link,
      socket, port, protocol, etc., please contact the IANA to receive a
      number assignment.  See also: Internet Assigned Numbers Authority,
      STD.
      [Source: STD2]

   Asynchronous Transfer Mode (ATM)
      A method for the dynamic allocation of bandwidth using a fixed-
      size packet (called a cell).  ATM is also known as fast packet.

   ATM
      See: Asynchronous Transfer Mode

   authentication
      The verification of the identity of a person or process.
      [Source: MALAMUD]

   Autonomous System (AS)
      A collection of routers under a single administrative authority
      using a common Interior Gateway Protocol for routing packets.

   backbone
      The top level in a hierarchical network.  Stub and transit
      networks which connect to the same backbone are guaranteed to be
      interconnected.  See also: stub network, transit network.

   bandwidth
      Technically, the difference, in Hertz (Hz), between the highest
      and lowest frequencies of a transmission channel.  However, as
      typically used, the amount of data that can be sent through a
      given communications circuit.

   bang path
      A series of machine names used to direct electronic mail from one
      user to another, typically by specifying an explicit UUCP path
      through which the mail is to be routed.  See also: email address,
      mail path, UNIX-to-UNIX CoPy.

   baseband
      A transmission medium through which digital signals are sent
      without complicated frequency shifting.  In general, only one
      communication channel is available at any given time.  Ethernet is



Expiration: April 1, 1993                                       [Page 7]

Internet Draft             Internet Glossary                 August 1992


      an example of a baseband network.  See also: broadband, Ethernet.
      [Source: NNSC]

   Basic Encoding Rules (BER)
      Standard rules for encoding data units described in ASN.1.
      Sometimes incorrectly lumped under the term ASN.1, which properly
      refers only to the abstract syntax description language, not the
      encoding technique.  See also: Abstract Syntax Notation One.
      [Source: NNSC]

   BBS
      See: Bulletin Board System

   BER
      See: Basic Encoding Rules

   Berkeley Source Distribution (BSD)
      This acronym is used to describe the versions of the UNIX
      operating system and its utilities developed and distributed by
      the University of California at Berkeley.  "BSD" is usually
      preceded by the version number of the distribution, e.g., "4.3
      BSD" is version 4.3 of the Berkeley UNIX distribution.  Many
      Internet hosts run BSD software, and it has been the ancestor of
      many commercial UNIX implementations.
      [Source: NNSC]

   BGP
      See: Border Gateway Protocol

   big-endian
      A format for storage or transmission of binary data in which the
      most significant bit (or byte) comes first.  The term comes from
      "Gulliver's Travels" by Jonathan Swift.  The Lilliputians, being
      very small, had correspondingly small political problems.  The
      Big-Endian and Little-Endian parties debated over whether soft-
      boiled eggs should be opened at the big end or the little end.
      See also: little-endian.
      [Source: RFC1208]

   Birds Of a Feather (BOF)
      A Birds Of a Feather (flocking together) is an informal discussion
      group.  It is formed, often ad hoc, to consider a specific issue
      and, therefore, has a narrow focus.

   Bitnet
      An academic computer network that provides interactive electronic
      mail and file transfer services, using a store-and-forward
      protocol, based on IBM Network Job Entry protocols.  Bitnet-II



Expiration: April 1, 1993                                       [Page 8]

Internet Draft             Internet Glossary                 August 1992


      encapsulates the Bitnet protocol within IP packets and depends on
      the Internet to route them.

   BOF
      See: Birds Of a Feather

   BOOTP
      The Bootstrap Protocol, described in RFC 951, is used for booting
      diskless nodes.  See also: Reverse Address Resolution Protocol.

   Border Gateway Protocol (BGP)
      The Border Gateway Protocol is an exterior gateway protocol
      defined in RFC 1163.  It's design is based on experience gained
      with EGP, as defined in RFC 904, and EGP usage in the NSFNET
      Backbone, as described in RFCs 1092 and 1093.  See also: Exterior
      Gateway Protocol.

   bounce
      The return of a piece of mail because of an error in its delivery.
      [Source: ZEN]

   bridge
      A device which forwards traffic between network segments based on
      datalink layer information.  These segments would have a common
      network layer address.  See also: gateway, router.

   broadband
      A transmission medium capable of supporting a wide range of
      frequencies.  It can carry multiple signals by dividing the total
      capacity of the medium into multiple, independent bandwidth
      channels, where each channel operates only on a specific range of
      frequencies.  See also: baseband.

   broadcast
      A special type of multicast packet which all nodes on the network
      are always willing to receive.  See also: multicast.

   broadcast storm
      An incorrect packet broadcast onto a network that causes multiple
      hosts to respond all at once, typically with equally incorrect
      packets which causes the storm to grow exponentially in severity.

   brouter
      A device which bridges some packets (i.e. forwards based on
      datalink layer information) and routes other packets (i.e.
      forwards based on network layer information).  The bridge/route
      decision is based on configuration information.  See also: bridge,
      router.



Expiration: April 1, 1993                                       [Page 9]

Internet Draft             Internet Glossary                 August 1992


   BSD
      See: Berkeley Software Distribution

   BTW
      By The Way

   Bulletin Board System (BBS)
      An electronic bulletin board system is a message database where
      people can log in and leave messages for others.  The bulletin
      board is typically divided into topic groups.  Thousands of local
      BBS systems are in operation throughout the U.S., typically run by
      amateurs, for fun, out of their homes.  Fans of USENET and the
      Internet, or the commercial timesharing bulletin boards such as
      CompuServe and GEnie, tend to consider local BBSes the low-rent
      district of the hacker culture, but they serve a valuable function
      by knitting together a lot of users in the PC/micro world who
      would otherwise be unable to exchange information.

   Campus Wide Information System (CWIS)
      A CWIS makes information and services publicly available on campus
      via kiosks, and makes interactive computing available via kiosks,
      interactive computing systems and campus networks. Services
      routinely include directory information, calendars, bulletin
      boards, databases.

   CCIRN
      See: Coordinating Committee for Intercontinental Research Networks

   CCITT
      See: Comite Consultatif International de Telegraphique et
      Telephonique

   CERT
      See: Computer Emergency Response Team

   checksum
      A computed value which is dependent upon the contents of a packet.
      This value is sent along with the packet when it is transmitted.
      The receiving system computes a new checksum based upon the
      received data and compares this value with the one sent with the
      packet.  If the two values are the same, the receiver has a high
      degree of confidence that the data was received correctly.
      [Source: NNSC]

   circuit switching
      A communications paradigm in which a dedicated communication path
      is established between two hosts, and on which all packets travel.
      The telephone system is an example of a circuit switched network.



Expiration: April 1, 1993                                      [Page 10]

Internet Draft             Internet Glossary                 August 1992


      See also: connection-oriented, connectionless, packet switching.

   client
      A computer system or process that requests a service of another
      computer system or process.  A workstation requesting the contents
      of a file from a file server is a client of the file server.  See
      also: client-server model, server.
      [Source: NNSC]

   client-server model
      A common way to describe the paradigm of many network protocols.
      Examples include the name-server/name-resolver relationship in DNS
      and the file-server/file-client relationship in NFS.  See also:
      client, server, Domain Name System, Network File System.

   CNI
      See: Coalition for Networked Information

   Coalition for Networked Information (CNI)
      A consortium formed by American Research Libraries, CAUSE, and
      EDUCOM to promote the creation of and access to information
      resources in networked environments in order to enrich scholarship
      and to enhance intellectual productivity.

   Comite Consultatif International de Telegraphique et Telephonique
      (CCITT)
      This organization is part of the United National International
      Telecommunications Union (ITU) and is responsible for making
      technical recommendations about telephone and data communications
      systems.  X.25 is an example of a CCITT recommendation.  Every
      four years CCITT holds plenary sessions where they adopt new
      standards; a session is planned for 1992.
      [Source: NNSC]

   Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT)
      The CERT was formed by DARPA in November 1988 in response to the
      needs exhibited during the Internet worm incident.  The CERT
      charter is to work with the Internet community to facilitate its
      response to computer security events involving Internet hosts, to
      take proactive steps to raise the community's awareness of
      computer security issues, and to conduct research targeted at
      improving the security of existing systems.  CERT products and
      services include 24-hour technical assistance for responding to
      computer security incidents, product vulnerability assistance,
      technical documents, and tutorials.  In addition, the team
      maintains a number of mailing lists (including one for CERT
      Advisories), and provides an anonymous FTP server, at "cert.org",
      where security-related documents and tools are archived.  The CERT



Expiration: April 1, 1993                                      [Page 11]

Internet Draft             Internet Glossary                 August 1992


      may be reached by email at "cert@cert.org" and by telephone at
      +1-412-268-7090 (24-hour hotline).  See also: Defense Advanced
      Research Projects Agency, worm.

   congestion
      Congestion occurs when the offered load exceeds the capacity of a
      data communication path.

   connection-oriented
      The data communication method in which communication proceeds
      through three well-defined phases: connection establishment, data
      transfer, connection release.  TCP is a connection-oriented
      protocol.  See also: circuit switching, connectionless, packet
      switching, Transmission Control Protocol.

   connectionless
      The data communication method in which communication occurs
      between hosts with no previous setup.  Packets between two hosts
      may take different route, as each is independent of the other.
      UDP is a connectionless protocol.  See also: circuit switching,
      connection-oriented, packet switching, User Datagram Protocol.

   Coordinating Committee for Intercontinental Research Networks (CCIRN)
      A committee that includes the United States FNC and its
      counterparts in North America and Europe.  Co-chaired by the
      executive directors of the FNC and the European Association of
      Research Networks (RARE), the CCIRN provides a forum for
      cooperative planning among the principal North American and
      European research networking bodies.  See also: Federal Networking
      Council, RARE.
      [Source: MALAMUD]

   core gateway
      Historically, one of a set of gateways (routers) operated by the
      Internet Network Operations Center at Bolt, Beranek and Newman
      (BBN).  The core gateway system formed a central part of Internet
      routing in that all groups must advertise paths to their networks
      from a core gateway.
      [Source: MALAMUD]

   Corporation for Research and Educational Networking (CREN)
      This organization was formed in October 1989, when Bitnet and
      CSNET (Computer & Science NETwork) were combined under one
      administrative authority.  See also: Bitnet.
      [Source: NNSC]

   cracker
      A cracker is an individual who attempts to access computer systems



Expiration: April 1, 1993                                      [Page 12]

Internet Draft             Internet Glossary                 August 1992


      without authorization.  These individuals are often malicious, as
      opposed to hackers, and have many means at their disposal for
      breaking into a system.  See also: hacker, Computer Emergency
      Response Team, Trojan Horse, virus, worm.

   CRC
      See: cyclic redundancy check

   CREN
      See: Corporation for Research and Educational Networking

   CWIS
      See: Campus Wide Information system

   Cyberspace
      A term coined by William Gibson in his fantasy novel Neuromancer
      to describe the "world" of computers, and the society that gathers
      around them.
      [Source: ZEN]

   Cyclic Redundancy Check (CRC)
      A number derived from a set of data that will be transmitted.  By
      recalculating the CRC at the remote end and comparing it to the
      value originally transmitted, the receiving node can detect some
      types of transmission errors.
      [Source: MALAMUD]

   DARPA
      See: Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency

   Data Encryption Key (DEK)
      Used for the encryption of message text and for the computation of
      message integrity checks (signatures).  See also: encryption.

   Data Encryption Standard (DES)
      A popular, standard encryption scheme.  See also: encryption.

   datagram
      A self-contained, independent entity of data carrying sufficient
      information to be routed from the source to the destination
      computer without reliance on earlier exchanges between this source
      and destination computer and the transporting network.  See also:
      frame, packet.
      [Source: J. Postel]

   DCE
      Data Circuit-terminating Equipment




Expiration: April 1, 1993                                      [Page 13]

Internet Draft             Internet Glossary                 August 1992


   DCE
      See: Distributed Computing Environment

   DDN
      See: Defense Data Network

   DDN NIC
      See: Defense Data Network Network Information Center

   DECnet
      A proprietary network protocol designed by Digital Equipment
      Corporation.  The functionality of each Phase of the
      implementation, such as Phase IV and Phase V, is different.

   default route
      A routing table entry which is used to direct packets addressed to
      networks not explicitly listed in the routing table.
      [Source: MALAMUD]

   Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA)
      An agency of the U.S. Department of Defense responsible for the
      development of new technology for use by the military.  DARPA
      (formerly known as ARPA) was responsible for funding much of the
      development of the Internet we know today, including the Berkeley
      version of Unix and TCP/IP.  The New York Times business section
      called DARPA "America's answer to Japan's MITI."
      [Source: NNSC]

   Defense Data Network (DDN)
      A global communications network serving the US Department of
      Defense composed of MILNET and other portions of the Internet.
      The DDN is used to connect military installations and is managed
      by the Defense Information Systems Agency.  See also: Defense
      Information Systems Agency.

   Defense Data Network Network Information Center (DDN NIC)
      The DDN NIC's (often called "The NIC") primary responsibility is
      the assignment of Internet network addresses and Autonomous System
      numbers.  It is also a primary repository for RFCs.  See also:
      Autonomous System, network address, Internet Registry, Network
      Information Center, Request For Comments.

   Defense Information Systems Agency (DISA)
      Formerly called the Defense Communications Agency (DCA), this is
      the government agency responsible for managing the DDN portion of
      the Internet, including the MILNET.  Currently, DISA administers
      the DDN, and supports the user assistance services of the DDN NIC.
      See also: Defense Data Network.



Expiration: April 1, 1993                                      [Page 14]

Internet Draft             Internet Glossary                 August 1992


   DEK
      See: Data Encryption Key

   DES
      See: Data Encryption Standard

   dialup
      A temporary, as opposed to dedicated, connection between machines,
      usually established over a standard phone line.

   Directory Access Protocol
      X.500 protocol used for communication between a Directory User
      Agent and a Directory System Agent.
      [Source: MALAMUD]

   Directory System Agent (DSA)
      The software that provides the X.500 Directory Service for a
      portion of the directory information base.  Generally, each DSA is
      responsible for the directory information for a single
      organization or organizational unit.
      [Source: RFC1208]

   Directory User Agent (DUA)
      The software that accesses the X.500 Directory Service on behalf
      of the directory user.  The directory user may be a person or
      another software element.
      [Source: RFC1208]

   DISA
      See: Defense Information Systems Agency

   Distributed Computing Environment (DCE)
      An architecture of standard programming interfaces, conventions,
      and server functionalities (e.g., naming, distributed file system,
      remote procedure call) for distributing applications transparently
      across networks of heterogeneous computers.  Promoted and
      controlled by the Open Software Foundation (OSF), a consortium led
      by Digital, IBM and Hewlett Packard.
      [Source: RFC1208]

   distributed database
      Looks to the user like a single database but is in fact a
      collection of several different data repositories.
      [Source: MALAMUD]

   DIX Ethernet
      See: Ethernet




Expiration: April 1, 1993                                      [Page 15]

Internet Draft             Internet Glossary                 August 1992


   DNS
      See: Domain Name System

   domain
      "Domain" is a heavily overused term in the Internet.  It can be
      used in the Administrative Domain context, or the Domain Name
      context.  See also: Administrative Domain, Domain Name System.

   Domain Name System (DNS)
      The DNS is a general purpose distributed, replicated, data query
      service.  The principal use is the look up of host IP addresses
      based on host names.  The style of host names now used in the
      Internet is called "domain name", because they are the style of
      names used to look up anything in the DNS.  Some important domains
      are: .COM (commercial), .EDU (educational), .NET (network
      operations), .GOV (U.S. government), and .MIL (U.S. military).
      Most countries also have a domain.  For example, .US (United
      States), .UK (united Kingdom), .AU (Australia).  See also: Fully
      Qualified Domain Name.

   dot address (dotted decimal notation)
      Dot address refers to the common notation for IP addresses of the
      form A.B.C.D; where each letter represents, in decimal, one byte
      of a four byte IP address.  See also: IP address.
      [Source: FYI4]

   DS1
      A framing specification for T-1 synchronous lines.  See also: T1

   DS3
      A framing specification for T-3 synchronous lines.  See also: T3

   DSA
      See: Directory System Agent

   DTE
      Data Terminal Equipment

   DUA
      See: Directory User Agent

   dynamic adaptive routing
      Automatic rerouting of traffic based on a sensing and analysis of
      current actual network conditions.  NOTE: this does not include
      cases of routing decisions taken on predefined information.
      [Source: J. Postel]





Expiration: April 1, 1993                                      [Page 16]

Internet Draft             Internet Glossary                 August 1992


   EARN
      See: European Academic and Research Network

   EBCDIC
      See: Extended Binary Coded Decimal Interchange Code

   Ebone
      A pan-European backbone service.

   EFF
      See: Electronic Frontier Foundation

   EFLA
      See: Extended Four Letter Acronym

   EGP
      See: Exterior Gateway Protocol

   Electronic Frontier Foundation (EFF)
      A foundation established to address social and legal issues
      arising from the impact on society of the increasingly pervasive
      use of computers as a means of communication and information
      distribution.

   Electronic Mail (email)
      A system whereby a computer user can exchange messages with other
      computer users (or groups of users) via a communications network.
      Electronic mail is one of the most popular uses of the Internet.
      [Source: NNSC]

   email
      See: Electronic mail

   email address
      The domain-based or UUCP address that is used to send electronic
      mail to a specified destination.  For example an editor's address
      is "gmalkin@xylogics.com".  See also: bang path, mail path, UNIX-
      to-UNIX CoPy.
      [Source: ZEN]

   encapsulation
      The technique used by layered protocols in which a layer adds
      header information to the protocol data unit (PDU) from the layer
      above.  As an example, in Internet terminology, a packet would
      contain a header from the physical layer, followed by a header
      from the network layer (IP), followed by a header from the
      transport layer (TCP), followed by the application protocol data.
      [Source: RFC1208]



Expiration: April 1, 1993                                      [Page 17]

Internet Draft             Internet Glossary                 August 1992


   encryption
      Encryption is the manipulation of a packet's data in order to
      prevent any but the intended recipient from reading that data.
      There are many type of data encryption, and they are the basis of
      network security.  See also: Data Encryption Standard.

   Ethernet
      A 10-Mb/s standard for LANs, initially developed by Xerox, and
      later refined by Digital, Intel and Xerox (DIX).  All hosts are
      connected to a coaxial cable where they contend for network access
      using a Carrier Sense Multiple Access with Collision Detection
      (CSMA/CD) paradigm.  See also: 802.x, Local Area Network, token
      ring.

   Ethernet meltdown
      An event that causes saturation, or near saturation, on an
      Ethernet.  It usually results from illegal or misrouted packets
      and typically lasts only a short time.
      [Source: COMER]

   European Academic and Research Network (EARN)
      A network connecting European academic and research institutions
      with electronic mail and file transfer services using the Bitnet
      protocol.  See also: Bitnet

   Extended Binary Coded Decimal Interchange Code (EBCDIC)
      A standard character-to-number encoding used primarily by IBM
      computer systems.  See also: ASCII.

   Extended Four Letter Acronym (EFLA)
      A recognition of the fact that there are far too many TLAs.  See
      also: Three Letter Acronym.
      [Source: K. Morgan]

   Exterior Gateway Protocol (EGP)
      A protocol which distributes routing information to the routers
      which connect autonomous systems.  The term "gateway" is
      historical, as "router" is currently the preferred term.  There is
      also a routing protocol called EGP defined in RFC 904.  See also:
      Autonomous System, Border Gateway Protocol, Interior Gateway
      Protocol.

   eXternal Data Representation (XDR)
      A standard for machine independent data structures developed by
      Sun Microsystems and defined in RFC 1014.  It is similar to ASN.1.
      See also: Abstract Syntax Notation One.
      [Source: RFC1208]




Expiration: April 1, 1993                                      [Page 18]

Internet Draft             Internet Glossary                 August 1992


   FAQ
      Frequently Asked Question

   FARNET
      See: Federation of American Research NETworks

   FDDI
      See: Fiber Distributed Data Interface

   Federal Information Exchange (FIX)
      One of the connection points between the American governmental
      internets and the Internet.
      [Source: SURA]

   Federal Networking Council (FNC)
      The coordinating group of representatives from those federal
      agencies involved in the development and use of federal
      networking, especially those networks using TCP/IP and the
      Internet.  Current members include representatives from DOD, DOE,
      DARPA, NSF, NASA, and HHS.  See also: Defense Advanced Research
      Projects Agency, National Science Foundation.

   Federation of American Research NETworks (FARNET)
      FARNET is a non-profit corporation, established in 1987, whose
      mission is to advance the use of computer networks to improve
      research and education.

   Fiber Distributed Data Interface (FDDI)
      An emerging high-speed (100Mb/s) LAN standard.  The underlying
      medium is fiber optics, and the topology is a dual-attached,
      counter-rotating token ring.  See also: 802.x, Local Area Network,
      token ring.
      [Source: RFC1208]

   File Transfer Protocol (FTP)
      A protocol which allows a user on one host to access, and transfer
      files to and from, another host over a network.  Also, FTP is
      usually the name of the program the user invokes to execute the
      protocol.

   finger
      A program that displays information about a particular user, or
      all users, logged on the local system or on a remote system.  It
      typically shows full name, last login time, idle time, terminal
      line, and terminal location (where applicable).  It may also
      display plan and project files left by the user.





Expiration: April 1, 1993                                      [Page 19]

Internet Draft             Internet Glossary                 August 1992


   FIX
      See: Federal Information Exchange

   flame
      A strong opinion and/or criticism of something, usually as a frank
      inflammatory statement, in an electronic mail message.  It is
      common to precede a flame with an indication of pending fire (i.e.
      FLAME ON!).  See also: Electronic Mail

   FNC
      See: Federal Networking Council

   For Your Information (FYI)
      A subseries of RFCs that are not technical standards or
      descriptions of protocols.  FYIs convey general information about
      topics related to TCP/IP or the Internet.  See also: Request For
      Comments, STD.

   FQDN
      See: Fully Qualified Domain Name

   fragment
      A piece of a packet.  When a router is forwarding an IP packet to
      a network that has a maximum packet size smaller than the packet
      size, it is forced to break up that packet into multiple
      fragments.  These fragments will be reassembled by the IP layer at
      the destination host.

   fragmentation
      The IP process in which a packet is broken into smaller pieces to
      fit the requirements of a physical network over which the packet
      must pass.  See also: reassembly.

   frame
      A frame is a datalink layer "packet" which contains the header and
      trailer information required by the physical medium.  That is,
      network layer packets are encapsulated to become frames.  See
      also: datagram, encapsulation, packet.

   FTP
      See: File Transfer Protocol

   Fully Qualified Domain Name (FQDN)
      The FQDN is the full name of a system, rather than just its
      hostname.  For example, "venera" is a hostname and
      "venera.isi.edu" is an FQDN.  See also: hostname, Domain Name
      System.




Expiration: April 1, 1993                                      [Page 20]

Internet Draft             Internet Glossary                 August 1992


   FYI
      See: For Your Information

   gross
      A dozen dozen (144).

   gated
      Gatedaemon.  A program which supports multiple routing protocols
      and protocol families.  It may be used for routing, and makes an
      effective platform for routing protocol research.  The software is
      freely available by anonymous FTP from "gated.cornell.edu".
      Pronounced "gate-dee".  See also: Exterior Gateway Protocol, Open
      Shortest Path First..., Routing Information Protocol, routed.

   gateway
      The term "router" is now used in place of the original definition
      of "gateway".  Currently, a gateway is a communications
      device/program which passes data between networks having similar
      functions but dissimilar implementations.  This should not be
      confused with a protocol converter.  By this definition, a router
      is a layer 3 (network layer) gateway, and a mail gateway is a
      layer 7 (application layer) gateway.  See also: mail gateway,
      router, protocol converter.

   Gopher
      A distributed information service that makes available
      hierarchical collections of information across the Internet.
      Gopher uses a simple protocol that allows a single Gopher client
      to access information from any accessible Gopher server, providing
      the user with a single "Gopher space" of information.  Public
      domain versions of the client and server are available.  See also:
      archie, archive site, Prospero, Wide Area Information Servers.

   GOSIP
      See: Government OSI Profile

   Government OSI Profile
      A subset of OSI standards specific to U.S. Government
      procurements, designed to maximize interoperability in areas where
      plain OSI standards are ambiguous or allow excessive options.
      [Source: BIG-LAN]

   hacker
      An individual who wanders into computers systems scattered
      throughout the Internet.  A hacker is breaks into systems because
      of curiosity, not maliciousness.  See also: cracker.





Expiration: April 1, 1993                                      [Page 21]

Internet Draft             Internet Glossary                 August 1992


   header
      The portion of a packet, preceding the actual data, containing
      source and destination addresses, and error checking and other
      fields.  A header is also the part of a message that precedes the
      body of a message and contains, among other things, the message
      originator, date and time.  See also: Electronic Mail, packet.

   heterogeneous network
      A network running multiple network layer protocols.  See also:
      DECnet, IP, IPX, XNS.

   hierarchical routing
      The complex problem of routing on large networks can be simplified
      by reducing the size of the networks.  This is accomplished by
      breaking a network into a hierarchy of networks, where each level
      is responsible for its own routing.  The Internet has, basically,
      three levels: the backbones, the mid-levels, and the stub
      networks.  The backbones know how to route between the mid-levels,
      the mid-levels know how to route between the sites, and each site
      (being an autonomous system) knows how to route internally.  See
      also: Autonomous System, Exterior Gateway Protocol, Interior
      Gateway Protocol, stub network, transit network.

   High Performance Parallel Interface (HIPPI)
      An emerging ANSI standard which extends the computer bus over
      fairly short distances at speeds of 800 and 1600 Mb/s.  HIPPI is
      often used in a computer room to connect a supercomputer to
      routers, frame buffers, mass-storage peripherals, and other
      computers.  See also: American National Standards Institute
      [Source: MALAMUD]

   HIPPI
      See: High Performance Parallel Interface

   hop
      A term used in routing.  A path to a destination on a network is a
      series of hops, through routers, away from the origin.

   host
      A computer that allows users to communicate with other host
      computers on a network.  Individual users communicate by using
      application programs, such as electronic mail, Telnet and FTP.
      [Source: NNSC]

   host address
      The host portion of an IP address.  It uniquely identifies a host
      within a network.  See also: IP address, network address, subnet
      address.



Expiration: April 1, 1993                                      [Page 22]

Internet Draft             Internet Glossary                 August 1992


   hostname
      The name given to a machine.  See also: Fully Qualified Domain
      Name.
      [Source: ZEN]

   host number
      See: host address

   hub
      A device connected to several other devices.  In ARCnet, a hub is
      used to connect several computers together.  In a message handling
      service, a hub is used for the transfer of messages across the
      network.
      [Source: MALAMUD]

   I-D
      See: Internet-Draft

   IAB
      See: Internet Architecture Board

   IANA
      See: Internet Assigned Numbers Authority

   ICMP
      See: Internet Control Message Protocol

   IEEE
      Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers

   IEEE 802
      See: 802.x

   IEN
      See: Internet Experiment Note

   IESG
      See: Internet Engineering Steering Group

   IETF
      See: Internet Engineering Task Force

   IGP
      See: Interior Gateway Protocol.

   IMHO
      In My Humble Opinion




Expiration: April 1, 1993                                      [Page 23]

Internet Draft             Internet Glossary                 August 1992


   IMR
      See: Internet Monthly Report

   Integrated Services Digital Network (ISDN)
      An emerging technology which is beginning to be offered by the
      telephone carriers of the world.  ISDN combines voice and digital
      network services in a single medium, making it possible to offer
      customers digital data services as well as voice connections
      through a single "wire."  The standards that define ISDN are
      specified by CCITT.  See also: CCITT.
      [Source: RFC1208]

   Interior Gateway Protocol (IGP)
      A protocol which distributes routing information to the routers
      within an autonomous system.  The term "gateway" is historical, as
      "router" is currently the preferred term.  See also: Autonomous
      System, Exterior Gateway Protocol, Open Shortest Path First...,
      Routing Information Protocol.

   Intermediate System (IS)
      An OSI system which performs network layer forwarding.  It is
      analogous to an IP router.  See also: Open Systems
      Interconnection, router.

   Intermediate System-Intermediate System (IS-IS)
      The OSI IGP.  See also: Open Systems Interconnection, Interior
      Gateway Protocol.

   International Organization for Standardization (ISO)
      A voluntary, nontreaty organization founded in 1946.  Its members
      are the national standards organizations of the 89 member
      countries, including ANSI for the U.S.  See also: American
      National Standards Institute.
      [Source: TAN]

   internet
      While an internet is a network, the term "internet" is usually
      used to refer to a collection of networks interconnected with
      routers.  See also: network.

   Internet
      (note the capital "I") The Internet is the largest internet in the
      world.  Is a three level hierarchy composed of backbone networks
      (e.g. NSFNET, MILNET, CREN), mid-level networks, and stub
      networks.  While the Internet is beginning to become a
      multiprotocol internet, it will always be based on IP.  See
      also:backbone, mid-level network, stub network, transit network,
      Internet Protocol, Corporation for Research and Educational



Expiration: April 1, 1993                                      [Page 24]

Internet Draft             Internet Glossary                 August 1992


      Networks, National Science Foundation.

   internet address
      A IP address that uniquely identifies a node on an internet.  An
      Internet address (capital "I"), uniquely identifies a node on the
      Internet.  See also: internet, Internet, IP address.

   Internet Architecture Board (IAB)
      The technical body that oversees the development of the Internet
      suite of protocols.  It has two task forces: the IETF and the
      IRTF.  "IAB" previously stood for Internet Activities Board.  See
      also: Internet Engineering Task Force, Internet Research Task
      Force.

   Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA)
      The IANA is the central registry for various Internet protocol
      parameters, such as port, protocol and enterprise numbers, and
      options, codes and types.  The currently assigned values are
      listed in the "Assigned Numbers" document [STD2].  To request an
      number assignment, contact the IANA at "iana@isi.edu".  See also:
      assigned numbers, STD.

   Internet Control Message Protocol (ICMP)
      ICMP is an extension to the Internet Protocol.  It allows for the
      generation of error messages, test packets and informational
      messages related to IP.
      [Source: FYI4]

   Internet-Draft (I-D)
      Internet-Drafts are working documents of the IETF, its Areas, and
      its Working Groups.   As the name implies, Internet-Drafts are
      draft documents.  They are valid for a maximum of six months and
      may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
      time.  Very often, I-Ds are precursors to RFCs.  See also:
      Internet Engineering Task Force, Request For Comments.

   Internet Engineering Steering Group (IESG)
      The IESG is composed of the IETF Area Directors and the IETF
      Chair.  It provides the first technical review of Internet
      standards and is responsible for day-to-day "management" of the
      IETF.  See also: Internet Engineering Task Force.

   Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF)
      The IETF is a large, open community of network designers,
      operators, vendors, and researchers whose purpose is to coordinate
      the operation, management and evolution of the Internet, and to
      resolve short-range and mid-range protocol and architectural
      issues.  It is a major source of proposals for protocol standards



Expiration: April 1, 1993                                      [Page 25]

Internet Draft             Internet Glossary                 August 1992


      which are submitted to the IAB for final approval.  The IETF meets
      three times a year and extensive minutes are included in the IETF
      Proceedings.  See also: Internet, Internet Architecture Board.
      [Source: FYI4]

   Internet Experiment Note (IEN)
      A series of reports pertinent to the Internet.  IENs were
      published in parallel to RFCs and are no longer active.  See also:
      Internet-Draft, Request For Comments.

   Internet Monthly Report (IMR)
      Published monthly, the purpose of the Internet Monthly Reports is
      to communicate to the Internet Research Group the accomplishments,
      milestones reached, or problems discovered by the participating
      organizations.

   internet number
      See: internet address

   Internet Protocol (IP)
      The Internet Protocol, defined in RFC 791, is the network layer
      for the TCP/IP Protocol Suite.  It is a connectionless, best-
      effort packet switching protocol.  See also: packet switching,
      Request For Comments, TCP/IP Protocol Suite.

   Internet Registry (IR)
      The IANA has the discretionary authority to delegate portions of
      its responsibility and, with respect to network address and
      Autonomous System identifiers, has lodged this responsibility with
      an IR.  The IR function is performed by the DDN NIC.  See also:
      Autonomous System, network address, Defense Data Network...,
      Internet Assigned Numbers Authority.

   Internet Relay Chat (IRC)
      A world-wide "party line" protocol that allows one to converse
      with others in real time.  IRC is structured as a network of
      servers, each of which accepts connections from client programs,
      one per user.
      [Source: HACKER]

   Internet Research Steering Group (IRSG)
      The "governing body" of the Internet Research Task Force.
      [Source: MALAMUD]

   Internet Research Task Force (IRTF)
      The IRTF is chartered by the IAB to consider long-term Internet
      issues from a theoretical point of view.  See also: Internet
      Architecture Board, Internet Engineering Task Force.



Expiration: April 1, 1993                                      [Page 26]

Internet Draft             Internet Glossary                 August 1992


   Internet Society (ISOC)
      The Internet Society is a non-profit, professional membership
      organization which facilitates and supports the technical
      evolution of the Internet, stimulates interest in and educates the
      scientific and academic communities, industry and the public about
      the technology, uses and applications of the Internet, and
      promotes the development of new applications for the system.  The
      Society provides a forum for discussion and collaboration in the
      operation and use of the global Internet infrastructure.  The
      Internet Society publishes a quarterly newsletter, the Internet
      Society News, and holds an annual conference, INET.  The
      development of Internet technical standards takes place under the
      auspices of the Internet Society with substantial support from the
      Corporation for National Research Initiatives under a cooperative
      agreement with the US Federal Government.
      [Source: V. Cerf]

   Internetwork Packet eXchange (IPX)
      Novell's protocol used by Netware.  A router with IPX routing can
      interconnect LANs so that Novell Netware clients and servers can
      communicate.  See also: Local Area Network.

   interoperability
      The ability of software and hardware on multiple machines from
      multiple vendors to communicate meaningfully.

   IP
      See: Internet Protocol

   IP address
      The 32-bit address defined by the Internet Protocol in RFC 791.
      It is usually represented in dotted decimal notation.  See also:
      dot address, internet address, Internet Protocol, network address,
      subnet address, host address.

   IP datagram
      See: datagram

   IPX
      See: Internetwork Packet eXchange

   IR
      See: Internet Registry

   IRC
      See: Internet Relay Chat





Expiration: April 1, 1993                                      [Page 27]

Internet Draft             Internet Glossary                 August 1992


   IRSG
      See: Internet Research Task Force Steering Group

   IRTF
      See: Internet Research Task Force

   IS
      See: Intermediate System

   IS-IS
      See: Intermediate System-Intermediate System

   ISDN
      See: Integrated Services Digital Network

   ISO
      See: International Organization for Standardization

   ISO Development Environment (ISODE)
      Software that allows OSI services to use a TCP/IP network.
      Pronounced eye-so-dee-eee.  See also: Open Systems
      Interconnection, TCP/IP Protocol Suite.

   ISOC
      See: Internet Society

   ISODE
      See: ISO Development Environment

   KA9Q
      A popular implementation of TCP/IP and associated protocols for
      amateur packet radio systems.  See also: TCP/IP Protocol Suite.
      [Source: RFC1208]

   Kerberos
      Kerberos is the security system of MIT's Project Athena.  It is
      based on symmetric key cryptography.  See also: encryption.

   Kermit
      A popular file transfer protocol developed by Columbia University.
      Because Kermit runs in most operating environments, it provides an
      easy method of file transfer.
      [Source: MALAMUD]

   LAN
      See: Local Area Network





Expiration: April 1, 1993                                      [Page 28]

Internet Draft             Internet Glossary                 August 1992


   layer
      Communication networks for computers may be organized as a set of,
      more or less, independent protocols, each in a different layer
      (also called level).  The lowest layer governs direct host-to-host
      communication between the hardware at different hosts; the highest
      consists of user applications.  Each layer builds on the layer
      beneath it.  For each layer, programs at different hosts use
      protocols appropriate to the layer to communicate with each other.
      TCP/IP has five layers of protocols; OSI has seven.  The
      advantages of different layers of protocols is that the methods of
      passing information from one layer to another is specified clearly
      as part of the protocol suite, and changes within a protocol layer
      are prevented from affecting the other layers.  This greatly
      simplifies the task of designing and maintaining communication
      programs.  See also: Open Systems Interconnection, TCP/IP Protocol
      Suite.

   listserv
      An automated mailing list distribution system originally designed
      for the Bitnet/EARN network.  See also: Bitnet, European Academic
      Research Network, mailing list.

   little-endian
      A format for storage or transmission of binary data in which the
      least significant byte (bit) comes first.  See also: big-endian.
      [Source: RFC1208]

   LLC
      See: Logical Link Control

   Local Area Network (LAN)
      A data network intended to serve an area of only a few square
      kilometers or less.  Because the network is known to cover only a
      small area, optimizations can be made in the network signal
      protocols that permit data rates up to 100Mb/s.  See also:
      Ethernet, Fiber Distributed Data Interface, token ring, Wide Area
      Network.
      [Source: NNSC]

   Logical Link Control (LLC)
      The upper portion of the datalink layer, as defined in IEEE 802.2.
      The LLC sublayer presents a uniform interface to the user of the
      datalink service, usually the network layer.  Beneath the LLC
      sublayer is the MAC sublayer.  See also: 802.x, layer, Media
      Access Control.

   MAC
      See: Media Access Control



Expiration: April 1, 1993                                      [Page 29]

Internet Draft             Internet Glossary                 August 1992


   MAC address
      The hardware address of a device connected to a shared media.  See
      also: Ethernet, token ring.
      [Source: MALAMUD]

   mail bridge
      A mail gateway that forwards electronic mail between two or more
      networks while ensuring that the messages it forwards meet certain
      administrative criteria.  A mail bridge is simply a specialized
      form of mail gateway that enforces an administrative policy with
      regard to what mail it forwards.  See also: Electronic Mail, mail
      gateway.
      [Source: NNSC]

   Mail Exchange Record (MX Record)
      A DNS resource record type indicating which host can handle mail
      for a particular domain.  See also: Domain Name System, Electronic
      Mail.
      [Source: MALAMUD]

   mail exploder
      Part of an electronic mail delivery system which allows a message
      to be delivered to a list of addresses.  Mail exploders are used
      to implement mailing lists.  Users send messages to a single
      address and the mail exploder takes care of delivery to the
      individual mailboxes in the list.  See also: Electronic Mail,
      email address, mailing list.
      [Source: RFC1208]

   mail gateway
      A machine that connects two or more electronic mail systems
      (including dissimilar mail systems) and transfers messages between
      them.  Sometimes the mapping and translation can be quite complex,
      and it generally requires a store-and-forward scheme whereby the
      message is received from one system completely before it is
      transmitted to the next system, after suitable translations.  See
      also: Electronic Mail.
      [Source: RFC1208]

   mail path
      A series of machine names used to direct electronic mail from one
      user to another.  This system of email addressing has been used
      primarily in UUCP networks which are trying to eliminate its use
      altogether.  See also: bang path, email address, UNIX-to-UNIX
      CoPy.

   mailing list
      A list of email addresses, used by a mail exploder, to forward



Expiration: April 1, 1993                                      [Page 30]

Internet Draft             Internet Glossary                 August 1992


      messages to groups of people.  Generally, a mailing list is used
      to discuss certain set of topics, and different mailing lists
      discuss different topics.  A mailing list may be moderated.  This
      means that messages sent to the list are actually set to a
      moderator(s) who determines whether or not to send the messages on
      to everyone else.  See also: Electronic Mail, mail exploder.

   MAN
      See: Metropolitan Area Network

   Management Information Base (MIB)
      The set of parameters an SNMP management station can query or set
      in the SNMP agent of a network device (e.g. router).  Standard,
      minimal MIBs have been defined, and vendors often Private
      enterprise MIBs.  In theory, any SNMP manager can talk to any SNMP
      agent with a properly defined MIB.  See also: client-server model,
      Simple Network Management Protocol.
      [Source: BIG-LAN]

   Martian
      A humorous term applied to packets that turn up unexpectedly on
      the wrong network because of bogus routing entries.  Also used as
      a name for a packet which has an altogether bogus (non-registered
      or ill-formed) internet address.
      [Source: RFC1208]

   Maximum Transmission Unit (MTU)
      The largest frame length which may be sent on a physical medium.
      See also: fragmentation, frame.

   Media Access Control (MAC)
      The lower portion of the datalink layer.  The MAC differs for
      various physical media.  See also: Ethernet, Logical Link Control,
      token ring.

   message switching
      See: packet switching

   Metropolitan Area Network (MAN)
      A data network intended to serve an area approximating that of a
      large city.  Such networks are being implemented by innovative
      techniques, such as running fiber cables through subway tunnels.
      A popular example of a MAN is SMDS.  See also: Local Area Network,
      Switched Multimegabit Data Service, Wide Area Network.
      [Source: NNSC]

   MIB
      See: Management Information Base



Expiration: April 1, 1993                                      [Page 31]

Internet Draft             Internet Glossary                 August 1992


   mid-level network
      Mid-level networks (a.k.a. regionals) make up the second level of
      the Internet hierarchy.  They are the transit networks which
      connect the stub networks to the backbone networks.  See also:
      backbone, Internet, stub network, transit network.

   MIME
      See: Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions

   MTU
      See: Maximum Transmission Unit

   multicast
      A packet with a special destination address which multiple nodes
      on the network may be willing to receive.  See also: broadcast.

   multihomed host
      A host which has more than one connection to a network.  The host
      may send and receive data over any of the links but will not route
      traffic for other nodes.  See also: host, router.
      [Source: MALAMUD]

   Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions (MIME)
      An extension to Internet email which provides the ability to
      transfer non-textual data, such as graphics, audio and fax.  See
      also: Electronic Mail

   MX Record
      See: Mail Exchange Record

   NAK
      See: Negative Acknowledgment

   name resolution
      The process of mapping a name into the corresponding address.  See
      also: Domain Name System.
      [Source: RFC1208]

   namespace
      A commonly distributed set of names in which all names are unique.
      [Source: MALAMUD]

   National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)
      United States governmental body that provides assistance for
      standards-making.  Formerly the National Bureau of Standards.
      [Source: MALAMUD]





Expiration: April 1, 1993                                      [Page 32]

Internet Draft             Internet Glossary                 August 1992


   National Research and Education Network (NREN)
      The planned successor to the connected Internet that will provide
      high-speed access to scientific and educational institutions.
      [Source: COMER]

   National Science Foundation (NSF)
      A government agency whose purpose is to promote the advancement of
      science.  NSF funds science researchers, scientific projects, and
      infrastructure to improve the quality of scientific research.  The
      NSFNET, funded by NSF, is an essential part of academic and
      research communications.  It is a highspeed "network of networks"
      which is hierarchical in nature.  At the highest level, it is a
      backbone network currently comprising 16 nodes connected to a
      45Mb/s facility which spans the continental United States.
      Attached to that are mid-level networks and attached to the mid-
      levels are campus and local networks.  NSFNET also has connections
      out of the U.S. to Canada, Mexico, Europe, and the Pacific Rim.
      The NSFNET is part of the Internet.

   Negative Acknowledgment (NAK)
      Response to receipt of a corrupted packet of information.  See
      also: Acknowledgement.

   netiquette
      A pun on "etiquette" referring to proper behavior on a network.

   Netnews
      See: USENET

   network
      A computer network is a data communications system which
      interconnects computer systems at various different sites.  A
      network may be composed of any combination of LANs, MANs or WANs.
      See also: Local Area Network, Metropolitan Area Network, Wide Area
      Network, internet.

   network address
      The network portion of an IP address.  For a class A network, the
      network address is the first byte the IP address.  For a class B
      network, the network address is the first two bytes of the IP
      address.  For a class C network, the network address is the first
      three bytes of the IP address.  In each case, the remainder is the
      host address.  In the Internet, assigned network addresses are
      globally unique.  See also: Internet, IP address, subnet address,
      host address, Internet Registry.

   Network File System (NFS)
      A protocol developed by Sun Microsystems, and defined in RFC 1094,



Expiration: April 1, 1993                                      [Page 33]

Internet Draft             Internet Glossary                 August 1992


      which allows a computer system to access files over a network as
      if they were on its local disks.  This protocol has been
      incorporated in products by more than two hundred companies, and
      is now a de facto Internet standard.
      [Source: NNSC]

   Network Information Center (NIC)
      A NIC provides information, assistance and services to network
      users.  See also: Network Operations Center.

   Network Information Services (NIS)
      A set of services, generally provided by a NIC, to assist users in
      using the network.  See also: Network Information Center.

   Network News Transfer Protocol (NNTP)
      A protocol, defined in RFC 977, for the distribution, inquiry,
      retrieval, and posting of news articles using a reliable, stream-
      based transmission of news among the Internet community.

   network number
      See: network address

   Network Operations Center (NOC)
      A location from which the operation of a network or internet is
      monitored.  This center also usually serves as a clearinghouse for
      problems and efforts to resolve those problems.  See also: Network
      Information Center.
      [Source: NNSC]

   Network Time Protocol (NTP)
      A protocol that assures accurate local timekeeping with reference
      to radio and atomic clocks located on the Internet.  This protocol
      is capable of synchronizing distributed clocks within milliseconds
      over long time periods.  See also: Internet.
      [Source: NNSC]

   NFS
      See: Network File System

   NIC
      See: Network Information Center

   NIC.DDN.MIL
      This is the domain name of the DDN NIC.  See also: Defense Data
      Network..., Domain Name System, Network Information Center.

   NIS
      See: Network Information Services



Expiration: April 1, 1993                                      [Page 34]

Internet Draft             Internet Glossary                 August 1992


   NIST
      See: National Institute of Standards and Technology

   NNTP
      See: Network News Transfer Protocol

   NOC
      See: Network Operations Center

   Nodal Switching System (NSS)
      Main routing nodes in the NSFnet backbone.  See also: backbone,
      National Science Foundation.
      [Source: MALAMUD]

   node
      An addressable device attached to a computer network.  See also:
      host, router.

   NREN
      See: National Research and Education Network

   NSF
      See: National Science Foundation

   NSS
      See: Nodal Switching System

   NTP
      See: Network Time Protocol

   OCLC
      See: Online Computer Library Catalog

   octet
      An octet is 8 bits.  This term is used in networking, rather than
      byte, because some systems have bytes that are not 8 bits long.

   Online Computer Library Catalog
      OCLC is a nonprofit membership organization offering computer-
      based services to libraries, educational organizations, and their
      users.  The OCLC library information network has more than 10,000
      libraries worldwide.  Libraries use the OCLC System for
      cataloging, interlibrary loan, collection development,
      bibliographic verification, and reference searching.
      [Source: OCLC]

   Open Shortest-Path First Interior Gateway Protocol (OSPF)
      A link state, as opposed to distance vector, routing protocol.  It



Expiration: April 1, 1993                                      [Page 35]

Internet Draft             Internet Glossary                 August 1992


      is an Internet standard IGP defined in RFC 1247.  See also:
      Interior Gateway Protocol, Routing Information Protocol.

   Open Systems Interconnection (OSI)
      A suite of protocols, designed by ISO committees, to be the
      international standard computer network architecture.  See also:
      International Organization for Standardization.

   OSI
      See: Open Systems Interconnection

   OSI Reference Model
      A seven-layer structure designed to describe computer network
      architectures and the way that data passes through them.  This
      model was developed by the ISO in 1978 to clearly define the
      interfaces in multivendor networks, and to provide users of those
      networks with conceptual guidelines in the construction of such
      networks.  See also: International Organization for
      Standardization.
      [Source: NNSC]

   OSPF
      See: Open Shortest-Path First Interior Gateway Protocol

   packet
      The unit of data sent across a network.  "Packet" a generic term
      used to describe unit of data at all levels of the protocol stack,
      but it is most correctly used to describe application data units.
      See also: datagram, frame.

   Packet INternet Groper (PING)
      A program used to test reachability of destinations by sending
      them an ICMP echo request and waiting for a reply.  The term is
      used as a verb: "Ping host X to see if it is up!"
      [Source: RFC1208]

   Packet Switch Node (PSN)
      A dedicated computer whose purpose is to accept, route and forward
      packets in a packet switched network.  See also: packet switching,
      router.
      [Source: NNSC]

   packet switching
      A communications paradigm in which packets (messages) are
      individually routed between hosts, with no previously established
      communication path.  See also: circuit switching, connection-
      oriented, connectionless.




Expiration: April 1, 1993                                      [Page 36]

Internet Draft             Internet Glossary                 August 1992


   PD
      See: Public Domain

   PDU
      See: Protocol Data Unit

   PEM
      See: Privacy Enhanced Mail

   PING
      See: Packet INternet Groper

   Point Of Presence (POP)
      A site where there exists a collection of telecommunications
      equipment, usually digital leased lines and multi-protocol
      routers.

   Point-to-Point Protocol (PPP)
      The Point-to-Point Protocol, defined in RFC 1171, provides a
      method for transmitting packets over serial point-to-point links.
      See also: Serial Line IP.
      [Source: FYI4]

   POP
      See: Post Office Protocol and Point Of Presence

   port
      A port is a transport layer demultiplexing value.  Each
      application has a unique port number associated with it.  See
      also: Transmission Control Protocol, User Datagram Protocol.

   Post Office Protocol (POP)
      A protocol designed to allow single user hosts to read mail from a
      server.  There are three versions: POP, POP2, and POP3.  Latter
      versions are NOT compatible with earlier versions.  See also:
      Electronic Mail.

   Postal, Telegraph and Telephone (PTT)
      Outside the USA, PTT refers to a telephone service provider, that
      is usually a monopoly, in a particular country.

   postmaster
      The person responsible for taking care of mail problems, answering
      queries about users, and other related work at a site.
      [Source: ZEN]

   PPP
      See: Point-to-Point Protocol



Expiration: April 1, 1993                                      [Page 37]

Internet Draft             Internet Glossary                 August 1992


   Privacy Enhanced Mail (PEM)
      Internet email which provides confidentiality, authentication and
      message integrity using various encryption methods.  See also:
      Electronic Mail, encryption.

   Prospero
      A distributed filesystem which provides the user with the ability
      to create multiple views onto a single collection of files
      distributed across the Internet.  Prospero provides a file naming
      system, file access is provided by existing access methods (e.g.
      anonymous FTP and NFS).  The Prospero protocol is also used for
      communication between clients and servers in the archie system.
      See also: anonymous FTP, archie, archive site, Gopher, Network
      File System, Wide Area Information Servers.

   protocol
      A formal description of message formats and the rules two
      computers must follow to exchange those messages.  Protocols can
      describe low-level details of machine-to-machine interfaces (e.g.,
      the order in which bits and bytes are sent across a wire) or
      high-level exchanges between allocation programs (e.g., the way in
      which two programs transfer a file across the Internet).
      [Source: MALAMUD]

   protocol converter
      A device/program which translates between different protocols
      which serve similar functions (e.g. TCP and TP4).

   Protocol Data Unit (PDU)
      "PDU" is internationalstandardscomitteespeak for packet.  See
      also: packet.

   protocol stack
      A set of functions, one at each layer of the protocol stack, that
      work together to provide a set of network services.  Each layer of
      the protocol stack uses the services of the module beneath it and
      builds on that service.
      [Source: MALAMUD]

   proxy ARP
      The technique in which one machine, usually a router, answers ARP
      requests intended for another machine.  By "faking" its identity,
      the router accepts responsibility for routing packets to the
      "real" destination.  Proxy ARP allows a site to use a single IP
      address with two physical networks.  Subnetting would normally be
      a better solution.  See also: Address Resolution Protocol
      [Source: RFC1208]




Expiration: April 1, 1993                                      [Page 38]

Internet Draft             Internet Glossary                 August 1992


   PSN
      See: Packet Switch Node.

   PTT
      See: Postal, Telegraph and Telephone

   Public Domain (PD)
      Intellectual property available to people without paying a fee.
      Most computer software developed at universities is in the public
      domain.
      [Source: MALAMUD]

   RARE
      See: Reseaux Associes pour la Recherche Europeenne

   RARP
      See: Reverse Address Resolution Protocol

   RBOC
      Regional Bell Operating Company

   RCP
      See: Remote copy program

   Read the F*cking Manual (RTFM)
      This acronym is often used when someone asks a simple or common
      question.

   reassembly
      The IP process in which a previously fragmented packet is
      reassembled before being passed to the transport layer.  See also:
      fragmentation.

   regional
      See: mid-level network

   Remote Procedure Call (RPC)
      An easy and popular paradigm for implementing the client-server
      model of distributed computing.  In general, a request is sent to
      a remote system to execute a designated procedure, using arguments
      supplied, and the result returned to the caller.  There are many
      variations and subtleties in various implementations, resulting in
      a variety of different (incompatible) RPC protocols.
      [Source: RFC1208]

   repeater
      A device which propagates electrical signals from one cable to
      another.  See also: bridge, gateway, router.



Expiration: April 1, 1993                                      [Page 39]

Internet Draft             Internet Glossary                 August 1992


   Request For Comments (RFC)
      The document series, begun in 1969, which describes the Internet
      suite of protocols and related experiments.  Not all (in fact very
      few) RFCs describe Internet standards, but all Internet standards
      are written up as RFCs.  The RFC series of documents are unusual
      in that the proposed protocols are forwarded by the Internet
      research and development community, acting on their own behalf, as
      opposed to the formally reviewed and standardized protocols that
      are promoted by organizations such as CCITT and ANSI.  See also:
      For Your Information, STD.
      [Source: HACKER]

   Reseaux Associes pour la Recherche Europeenne (RARE)
      European association of research networks.
      [Source: RFC1208]

   Reseaux IP Europeenne (RIPE)
      A collaboration between networks in Europe which use the TCP/IP
      protocol suite.

   Reverse Address Resolution Protocol (RARP)
      A protocol, defined in RFC 903, which provides the reverse
      function of ARP.  RARP maps a hardware (MAC) address to an
      internet address.  It is used primarily by diskless nodes, when
      they first initialize, to find their internet address.  See also:
      Address Resolution Protocol, BOOTP, internet address, MAC address.

   RFC
      See: Request For Comments

   RFC 822
      The Internet standard format for electronic mail message headers.
      Mail experts often refer to "822 messages."  The name comes from
      RFC 822, which contains the specification.  822 format was
      previously known as 733 format.  See also: Electronic Mail.
      [Source: COMER]

   RIP
      See: Routing Information Protocol

   RIPE
      See: Reseaux IP Europeenne

   Round-Trip Time (RTT)
      A measure of the current delay on a network.
      [Source: MALAMUD]





Expiration: April 1, 1993                                      [Page 40]

Internet Draft             Internet Glossary                 August 1992


   route
      The path that network traffic takes from its source to its
      destination.  Also, a possible path from a given host to another
      host or destination.

   routed
      Route Daemon.  A program which runs under 4.2BSD/4.3BSD UNIX
      systems (and derived operating systems) to propagate routes among
      machines on a local area network, using the RIP protocol.
      Pronounced "route-dee".  See also: Routing Information Protocol,
      gated.

   router
      A device which forwards traffic between networks based on network
      layer information and routing tables, often constructed by routing
      protocols.  See also: bridge, gateway, Exterior Gateway Protocol,
      Interior Gateway Protocol.

   routing
      The process of selecting the correct interface and next hop for a
      packet being forwarded.  See also: router, Exterior Gateway
      Protocol, Interior Gateway Protocol.

   routing domain
      A set of routers exchanging routing information within an
      administrative domain.  See also: Administrative Domain, router.

   Routing Information Protocol (RIP)
      A distance vector, as opposed to link state, routing protocol.  It
      is an Internet standard IGP defined in RFC 1058.  See also:
      Interior Gateway Protocol, Open Shortest Path First....

   RPC
      See: Remote Procedure Call

   RTFM
      See: Read the F*cking Manual

   RTT
      See: Round-Trip Time

   Serial Line IP (SLIP)
      A protocol used to run IP over serial lines, such as telephone
      circuits or RS-232 cables, interconnecting two systems.  SLIP is
      defined in RFC 1055, but is not an Internet Standard.  It is being
      replaced by PPP.  See also: Point-to-Point Protocol.





Expiration: April 1, 1993                                      [Page 41]

Internet Draft             Internet Glossary                 August 1992


   server
      A provider of resources (e.g. file servers and name servers).  See
      also: client, Domain Name System, Network File System.

   SIG
      Special Interest Group

   signature
      The three or four line message at the bottom of a piece of email
      or a Usenet article which identifies the sender.  Large signatures
      (over five lines) are generally frowned upon.  See also:
      Electronic Mail, Usenet.

   Simple Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP)
      A protocol, defined in RFC 821, used to transfer electronic mail
      between computers.  It is a server to server protocol, so other
      protocols are used to access the messages.  See also: Electronic
      Mail, Post Office Protocol, RFC 822.

   Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMP)
      The Internet standard protocol, defined in RFC 1157, developed to
      manage nodes on an IP network.  It is currently possible to manage
      wiring hubs, toasters, jukeboxes, etc.  See also: Management
      Information Base.

   SLIP
      See: Serial Line IP

   SMDS
      See: Switched Multimegabit Data Service

   SMI
      See: Structure of Management Information

   SMTP
      See: Simple Mail Transfer Protocol

   SNA
      See: Systems Network Architecture

   snail mail
      A pejorative term referring to the U.S. postal service.

   SNMP
      See: Simple Network Management Protocol

   STD
      A subseries of RFCs that specify Internet standards.  The official



Expiration: April 1, 1993                                      [Page 42]

Internet Draft             Internet Glossary                 August 1992


      list of Internet standards is in STD 1.  See also: For Your
      Information, Request For Comments.

   stream-oriented
      A type of transport service that allows its client to send data in
      a continuous stream.  The transport service will guarantee that
      all data will be delivered to the other end in the same order as
      sent and without duplicates.  See also: Transmission Control
      Protocol.
      [Source: MALAMUD]

   Structure of Management Information (SMI)
      The rules used to define the objects that can be accessed via a
      network management protocol.  This protocol is defined in RFC
      1155.  See also: Management Information Base.
      [Source: RFC1208]

   stub network
      A stub network only carries packets to and from local hosts.  Even
      if it has paths to more than one other network, it does not carry
      traffic for other networks.  See also: backbone, transit network.

   subnet
      A portion of a network, which may be a physically independent
      network segment, which shares a network address with other
      portions of the network and is distinguished by a subnet number.
      A subnet is to a network what a network is to an internet.  See
      also: internet, network.
      [Source: FYI4]

   subnet address
      The subnet portion of an IP address.  In a subnetted network, the
      host portion of an IP address is split into a subnet portion and a
      host portion using an address (subnet) mask.  See also: address
      mask, IP address, network address, host address.

   subnet mask
      See: address mask

   subnet number
      See: subnet address

   Switched Multimegabit Data Service (SMDS)
      An emerging high-speed datagram-based public data network service
      developed by Bellcore and expected to be widely used by telephone
      companies as the basis for their data networks.  See also:
      Metropolitan Area Network.
      [Source: RFC1208]



Expiration: April 1, 1993                                      [Page 43]

Internet Draft             Internet Glossary                 August 1992


   Systems Network Architecture (SNA)
      A proprietary networking architecture used by IBM and IBM-
      compatible mainframe computers.
      [Source: NNSC]

   T1
      An AT&T term for a digital carrier facility used to transmit a
      DS-1 formatted digital signal at 1.544 megabits per second.

   T3
      A term for a digital carrier facility used to transmit a DS-3
      formatted digital signal at 44.746 megabits per second.
      [Source: FYI4]

   TAC
      See: Terminal Access Controller (TAC)

   TCP
      See: Transmission Control Protocol

   TCP/IP Protocol Suite
      Transmission Control Protocol over Internet Protocol.  This is a
      common shorthand which refers to the suite of transport and
      application protocols which run over IP.  See also: IP, ICMP, TCP,
      UDP, FTP, Telnet, SMTP, SNMP.

   TELENET
      A public packet switched network using the CCITT X.25 protocols.
      It should not be confused with Telnet.

   Telnet
      Telnet is the Internet standard protocol for remote terminal
      connection service.  It is defined in RFC 854 and extended with
      options by many other RFCs.

   Terminal Access Controller (TAC)
      A device which connects terminals to the Internet, usually using
      dialup modem connections and the TACACS protocol.

   terminal emulator
      A program that allows a computer to emulate a terminal.  The
      workstation thus appears as a terminal to the remote host.
      [Source: MALAMUD]

   terminal server
      A device which connects many terminals to a LAN through one
      network connection.  A terminal server can also connect many
      network users to its asynchronous ports for dial-out capabilities



Expiration: April 1, 1993                                      [Page 44]

Internet Draft             Internet Glossary                 August 1992


      and printer access.  See also: Local Area Network.

   Three Letter Acronym (TLA)
      A tribute to the use of acronyms in the computer field.  See also:
      Extended Four Letter Acronym.

   Time to Live (TTL)
      A field in the IP header which indicates how long this packet
      should be allowed to survive before being discarded.  It is
      primarily used as a hop count.  See also: Internet Protocol.
      [Source: MALAMUD]

   TLA
      See: Three Letter Acronym

   TN3270
      A variant of the Telnet program that allows one to attach to IBM
      mainframes and use the mainframe as if you had a 3270 or similar
      terminal.
      [Source: BIG-LAN]

   token ring
      A token ring is a type of LAN with nodes wired into a ring.  Each
      node constantly passes a control message (token) on to the next;
      whichever node has the token can send a message.  Often, "Token
      Ring" is used to refer to the IEEE 802.5 token ring standard,
      which is the most common type of token ring.  See also: 802.x,
      Local Area Network.

   topology
      A network topology shows the computers and the links between them.
      A network layer must stay abreast of the current network topology
      to be able to route packets to their final destination.
      [Source: MALAMUD]

   transceiver
      Transmitter-receiver.  The physical device that connects a host
      interface to a local area network, such as Ethernet.  Ethernet
      transceivers contain electronics that apply signals to the cable
      and sense collisions.
      [Source: RFC1208]

   transit network
      A transit network passes traffic between networks in addition to
      carrying traffic for its own hosts.  It must have at paths to at
      least two other networks.  See also: backbone, stub network.





Expiration: April 1, 1993                                      [Page 45]

Internet Draft             Internet Glossary                 August 1992


   Transmission Control Protocol (TCP)
      An Internet Standard transport layer protocol defined in RFC 793.
      It is connection-oriented and stream-oriented, as opposed to UDP.
      See also: connection-oriented, stream-oriented, User Datagram
      Protocol.

   Trojan Horse
      A computer program which carries within itself a means to allow
      the creator of the program access to the system using it.  See
      also: virus, worm.

   TTFN
      Ta-Ta For Now

   TTL
      See: Time to Live

   tunnelling
      Tunnelling refers to encapsulation of protocol A within protocol
      B, such that A treats B as though it were a datalink layer.
      Tunnelling is used to get data between administrative domains
      which use a protocol that is not supported by the internet
      connecting those domains.  See also: Administrative Domain.

   twisted pair
      A type of cable in which pairs of conductors are twisted together
      to produce certain electrical properties.

   UDP
      See: User Datagram Protocol

   Universal Time Coordinated (UTC)
      This is Greenwich Mean Time.
      [Source: MALAMUD]

   UNIX-to-UNIX CoPy (UUCP)
      This was initially a program run under the UNIX operating system
      that allowed one UNIX system to send files to another UNIX system
      via dial-up phone lines.  Today, the term is more commonly used to
      describe the large international network which uses the UUCP
      protocol to pass news and electronic mail.  See also: Electronic
      Mail, Usenet.

   Usenet
      Network of Unix users.  This is a loosely coupled network which
      allows exchange information via electronic mail and newsgroups.
      See also: Electronic Mail.




Expiration: April 1, 1993                                      [Page 46]

Internet Draft             Internet Glossary                 August 1992


   User Datagram Protocol (UDP)
      An Internet Standard transport layer protocol defined in RFC 768.
      It is a connectionless protocol which adds a level of reliability
      and multiplexing to IP.  See also: connectionless, Transmission
      Control Protocol.

   UTC
      See: Universal Time Coordinated

   UUCP
      See: UNIX-to-UNIX CoPy

   virtual circuit
      A network service which provides connection-oriented service
      regardless of the underlying network structure.  See also:
      connection-oriented.

   virus
      A program which replicates itself on computers systems by
      incorporating itself into other programs which are shared among
      computer systems.  See also: Trojan Horse, worm.

   W3
      See: World Wide Web

   WAIS
      See: Wide Area Information Servers

   WAN
      See: Wide area network

   WG
      Working Group

   white pages
      The Internet supports several databases that contain basic
      information about users, such as e-mail addresses, telephone
      numbers, and postal addresses.  These databases can be searched to
      get information about particular individuals.  Because they serve
      a function akin to the telephone book, these databases are often
      referred to as "white pages.

   whois
      An Internet program which allows users to query a database of
      people and other Internet entities, such as domains, networks, and
      hosts, kept at the DDN NIC.  The information for people shows a
      person's company name, address, phone number and email address.
      See also: Defense Data Network Network Information Center.



Expiration: April 1, 1993                                      [Page 47]

Internet Draft             Internet Glossary                 August 1992


      [Source: FYI4]

   Wide Area Information Servers (WAIS)
      A distributed information service which offers simple natural
      language input, indexed searching for fast retrieval, and a
      "relevance feedback" mechanism which allows the results of initial
      searches to influence future searches.  Public domain
      implementations are available.  See also: archie, Gopher,
      Prospero.

   Wide Area Network (WAN)
      A network, usually constructed with serial lines, which covers
      large geographic areas.  See also: Local Area Network,
      Metropolitan Area Network.

   World Wide Web (WWW)
      A hypertext-based, distributed information system created by
      researchers at CERN in Switzerland.  Users may create, edit or
      browse hypertext documents.  The clients and servers are freely
      available.

   worm
      A computer program which replicates itself and is self-
      propagating.  Worms, as opposed to viruses, are meant to spawn in
      network environments.  Network worms were first defined by Shoch &
      Hupp of Xerox in ACM Communications (March 1982).  The Internet
      worm of November 1988 is perhaps the most famous; it successfully
      propagated itself on over 6,000 systems across the Internet.  See
      also: Trojan Horse, virus.

   WRT
      With Respect To

   WWW
      See: World Wide Web

   WYSIWYG
      What You See is What You Get

   X
      X is the name for TCP/IP based network-oriented window systems.
      Network window systems allow a program to use a display on a
      different computer.   The most widely-implemented window system is
      X11 - a component of MIT's Project Athena.

   X.25
      A data communications interface specification developed to
      describe how data passes into and out of public data



Expiration: April 1, 1993                                      [Page 48]

Internet Draft             Internet Glossary                 August 1992


      communications networks.  The CCITT and ISO approved protocol
      suite defines protocol layers 1 through 3.

   X.400
      The CCITT and ISO standard for electronic mail.  It is widely used
      in Europe and Canada.

   X.500
      The CCITT and ISO standard for electronic directory services.

   XDR
      See: eXternal Data Representation

   Xerox Network System (XNS)
      A network developed by Xerox corporation.  Implementations exist
      for both 4.3BSD derived systems, as well as the Xerox Star
      computers.

   XNS
      See: Xerox Network System

   Yellow Pages (YP)
      A service used by UNIX administrators to manage databases
      distributed across a network.

   YP
      See: Yellow Pages
























Expiration: April 1, 1993                                      [Page 49]

Internet Draft             Internet Glossary                 August 1992


References

   BIG-LAN "BIG-LAN Frequently Asked Questions Memo", BIG-LAN DIGEST
           V4:I8, February 14, 1992.

   COMER   Comer, Douglas, "Internetworking with TCP/IP: Principles,
           Protocols and Architecture", Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs,
           NJ, 1991.

   FYI4    Malkin, G., A. Marine, "FYI on Questions and Answers: Answers
           to Commonly asked "New Internet User" Questions", FYI 4
           (currently RFC 1325), Xylogics, SRI, May 1992.

   HACKER  "THIS IS THE JARGON FILE", Version 2.9.8, January 1992.

   MALAMUD Malamud, Carl, "Analyzing Sun Networks", Van Nostrand
           Reinhold, New York, NY, 1992.

   NNSC    "NNSC's Hypercard Tour of the Internet".

   RFC1208 Jacobsen, O., D. Lynch, "A Glossary of Networking Terms", RFC
           1208, Interop, Inc., March 1991.

   STD1    Postel, J., "IAB Official Protocol Standards", STD 1
           (currently RFC 1360), Internet Architecture Board, September
           1992.

   STD2    Reynolds, J., J. Postel, "Assigned Numbers", STD 2 (currently
           RFC 1340), ISI, July 1992.

   TAN     Tanenbaum, Andrew S., "Computer Networks; 2nd ed.", Prentice
           Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1989.

   ZEN     Kehoe, Brendan P., "Zen and the Art of the Internet",
           February 1992.


Security Considerations

   While security is not explicitly discussed in this document, some of
   the glossasy's entries are security related.  See the entries for
   Access Control List (ACL), Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT),
   cracker, Data Encryption Key (DEK), Data Encryption Standard (DES),
   encryption, Kerberos, Privacy Enhanced Mail (PEM), Trojan Horse,
   virus, and worm.






Expiration: April 1, 1993                                      [Page 50]

Internet Draft             Internet Glossary                 August 1992


Editors' Addresses

   Gary Scott Malkin
   Xylogics, Inc.
   53 Third Avenue
   Burlington, MA 01803

   Phone:  (617) 272-8140
   EMail:  gmalkin@Xylogics.COM


   Tracy LaQuey Parker
   University of Texas at Austin
   Computation Center
   Austin, TX 78712

   Phone: (512) 471-2444
   EMail: tracy@utexas.edu

































Expiration: April 1, 1993                                      [Page 51]
