
Internet Draft                                         Dae-Gun Kim (KT)
Document: draft-kim-ccamp-gmpls-mgoxc-0`.txt             Gyu Myoung Lee 
                                                                  (ICU)
Expiration Date: August 2004                        Jun Kyun Choi (ICU)
                                                           Jin Woo Park 
                                                     (Korea University)
                                                          Chul-Hee Kang
                                                     (Korea University)
                                                          February 2004
                                       
   GMPLS Extensions to support Multi-Granularity Optical Cross-Connect 
                  with Heterogeneous Optical Interfaces 
                                     
                     draft-kim-ccamp-gmpls-mgoxc-01.txt 
     
 Status of this Memo 
     
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of [RFC2026].  
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering   
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that   
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-   
   Drafts. Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of   
   six months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other   
   documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts   
   as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in   
   progress". 
    
   The  list  of  current  Internet-Drafts  can  be  accessed  at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt  
    
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
     
     
 Abstract 
     
    The concept of waveband has been recently introduced as a means to 
    reduce OXC complexity and cost. The waveband is formed by grouping 
    several wavelengths and is routed as a single channel. This 
    document describes the major carrier’s requirements for Multi-
    Granularity Optical Cross-Connect (MG-OXC) when using the waveband 
    technology in GMPLS networks. The requirements of multiple optical 
    layers (wavelength, waveband, fiber) and protection for MG-OXC are 
    described. Also, extensions of signaling and routing for MG-OXC are 
    considered. 
     
     
 
Kim et al.               Expires - August 2004                [Page  1] 

draft-kim-ccamp-gmpls-mgoxc-01.txt                      February 2004 
 
 Conventions 
     
    The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
    "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in 
    this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119]. 
     
     
 Table of Contents 
 
   1. Introduction....................................................2 
   1.1. Terminology and Definitions...................................3 
   1.2. Network Hierarchy of MG-OXC in GMPLS Networks.................4 
   1.3. Node Architecture of MG-OXC in GMPLS Networks.................4 
   2. Requirements of MG-OXC in GMPLS networks........................6 
   2.1. Signaling Aspects for MG-OXC..................................7 
   2.2. Routing Aspects for MG-OXC....................................7 
   2.3. Requirements for lightpath selection..........................8 
   2.4. Requirements on Protection of MG-OXC..........................8 
   3. Security Considerations.........................................9 
   References.........................................................9 
   Author's Addresses................................................10 
    
   
   1. Introduction  
    
   According to the recent rapid increasing of IP traffic, there is no 
   doubt that in the near future data communications will be based on 
   optical networking. Wavelength Division Multiplexing (WDM) technology 
   is becoming a technology-of-choice to meet the tremendous bandwidth 
   demand of IP traffic. WDM networks using wavelength routing by 
   optical  cross-connect  (OXC)  have  emerged  as  the  most  feasible 
   architecture solution for next generation optical networks. OXC 
   facilitate the switching of individual wavelengths at the nodes of a 
   WDM-based network. However, increase in the number of wavelength 
   channels results in increased complexity of OXCs and increased 
   difficulty in implementing and maintaining OXCs.  
    
   The concept of multi-granularity OXC (MG-OXC) has been recently 
   introduced  as  a  means  to  reduce  OXC  complexity  and  cost 
   [WAVEBAND][HCROSS]. MG-OXC can not only switch traffic at multiple 
   granularities such as fiber, waveband, and wavelength, but also add 
   and  drop  traffic  at  multiple  granularities.  Note  that  multi-
   granularity of MG-OXC means the waveband with multiple granularities 
   of wavelength optical interfaces in MG-OXC and does not mean the 
   granularity of traffic bandwidth in network resources. The waveband 
   is formed by grouping several wavelengths and is routed as a single 
   channel. Also the fiber channel is formed by grouping several 
   wavebands and is routed as a single channel.  
    


 
 
Kim et al.              Expires - August 2004                 [Page  2] 

draft-kim-ccamp-gmpls-mgoxc-01.txt                      February 2004 
 
   GMPLS (Generalized MPLS) extends the MPLS control plane to include 
   packet, layer2, TDM, wavelength, waveband, and fiber switching. 
   Furthermore GMPLS networks need to evolve so as to drastically reduce 
   both deployment costs and operating expenses. In a multiple optical 
   layer environment, carriers require that GMPLS technology will create 
   tremendous  convenience  for  the  network  operators  and  service 
   providers to offer smooth interoperability with legacy system and 
   easy operation, and in the long run to reduce the their operating 
   cost  (OpEx  saving),  and  to  improve  their  network  utilization 
   efficiency (CapEx saving). 
    
   The MG-OXC system will provide the reduction of operating cost 
   because of reduction of port count as increasing demand of traffic 
   when compared with single-granularity OXC. 
    
   This document describes the major carrier’s requirements for Multi-
   Granularity   Optical   Cross-Connect   (MG-OXC)   from   operator’s 
   perspectives. Also, the optical service-related function requirements 
   for MG-OXC in GMPLS networks are described 
    
    
   1.1. Terminology and Definitions 
    
   The reader is assumed to be familiar with the GMPLS terminology as 
   defined in [GMPLS-ARCH]. The following abbreviations are used in this 
   document: 
    
   OXC (Optical Cross-Connect): is to switch only several wavelengths 
   traffic and add or drop traffic at single granularity 
    
   MG-OXC  (Multi-Granularity  OXC):  several  wavelengths  are  grouped 
   together as a waveband and switched as a single port whenever 
   possible. A waveband is demultiplexed into individual wavelengths if 
   and only if necessary when the waveband carries at least one 
   lightpath that needs to be dropped or added. Multi-granularity OXCs 
   not only switch traffic at multiple layers such as wavelength, 
   waveband, and fiber, but also add and drop traffic at multiple 
   granularities. 
    
   WXC (Wavelength Cross-Connect): is to switch lightpaths by wavelength 
   unit. 
    
   BXC (Waveband Cross-Connect): is to switch lightpaths by waveband 
   unit. The waveband is formed by grouping several wavelengths and is 
   routed as a single channel.  
    
   FXC (Fiber Cross-Connect): is to switch lightpaths by fiber unit.  
   The fiber channel is formed by grouping several wavebands and is 
   routed as a single channel.  
    
   Optical LSP (Label Switched Path): include the W-LSP, B-LSP, F-LSP 
    
 
 
Kim et al.              Expires - August 2004                 [Page  3] 

draft-kim-ccamp-gmpls-mgoxc-01.txt                      February 2004 
 
   W-LSP (Wavelength Label Switched Path) 
   WB-LSP (Waveband Label Switched Path) 
   F-LSP (Fiber Label Switched Path) 
    
   Network Hierarchy: is an abstraction of a part of a network’s 
   topology, routing and signaling mechanisms. Abstraction may be used 
   as a mechanism to build large networks or as a technique for 
   enforcing administrative, topological, or geographic boundaries. For 
   example, network hierarchy might be used to separate the regional and 
   backbone sections of a network, or to interconnect service provider 
   networks (with BGP which reduces a network to an Autonomous System). 
     
   Vertical Hierarchy: is oriented between two network technology layers. 
    
   Horizontal Hierarchy: is oriented between two areas or administrative 
   subdivisions within the same network technology layer. 
     
   Wavelength granularity: the number of wavelength in a waveband 
    
    
   1.2. Network Hierarchy of MG-OXC in GMPLS Networks 
    
   In GMPLS networks, the network hierarchy is established by dividing 
   wavelength  layer,  waveband  layer,  and  fiber  layer.  Vertical 
   hierarchical network is between each optical layer and Horizontal 
   hierarchical network is between two areas within the same optical 
   layer [RFC3386]. 
    
   This hierarchical LSP is created to allow designated MG-OXCs to 
   exchange information with one another and act as border MG-OXCs to a 
   large area of GMPLS networks and other MG-OXCs. The aggregation of 
   optical LSP is carried out by aggregating smaller optical LSPs. The 
   larger optical LSP traverses through the GMPLS networks. For example, 
   optical hierarchical LSP has following relations: F-LSP > B-LSP > W-
   LSP. At the end of the larger optical LSP, the smaller optical LSPs 
   are separated.  
    
   1.3. Node Architecture of MG-OXC in GMPLS Networks 
    
   In GMPLS networks, an Optical Cross-Connect (OXC) consists of three 
   major parts: demultiplexer, optical switch matrix, and multiplexer. 
   OXC complexity can be characterized by the size of optical switch 
   matrix. Note that intermediate traffic dominates over end-to-end 
   traffic  in  GMPLS  networks.  Since  many  lightpath  conveying 
   intermediate might have the same route, the size of the optical 
   switch matrix would be largely reduced if they were dealt with as a 
   single channel or port. In single-granularity OXCs, OXC switches 
   traffic  only  at  the  wavelength  layer,  and  wavelengths  either 
   terminate at or transparently pass through a node, each requiring a 
   port. However, in multi-granularity OXCs several wavelengths are 
   grouped together as a waveband and switched as a single port whenever 

 
 
Kim et al.              Expires - August 2004                 [Page  4] 

draft-kim-ccamp-gmpls-mgoxc-01.txt                      February 2004 
 
   possible. A waveband is demultiplexed into individual wavelengths if 
   and only if necessary when the waveband carries at least one 
   lightpath that needs to be dropped or added. Multi-granularity OXCs 
   not only switch traffic at multiple layers such as wavelength, 
   waveband, and fiber, but also add and drop traffic at multiple 
   granularities. Traffic can be transported from one layer to another 
   via multiplexers and demultiplexers within the MG-OXC. 
   The  multilayer  MG-OXC  is  shown  in  Fig.1,  which  includes  the 
   wavelength cross-connect (WXC) layer, waveband cross-connect (BXC) 
   layer, and fiber cross-connect (FXC) layer. The WXC and BXC layers 
   consist of cross-connects and multiplexers/demultiplexers. The WXC 
   layer includes a WXC switch that is used to switch wavelength 
   lightpaths. To add/drop wavelengths from the WXC layer, we need 
   wavelength  add/drop  ports.  In  addition,  waveband  to  wavelength 
   demultiplxers are used to demultiplex wavebands to wavelengths, and 
   wavelength to waveband multiplexers are used to multiplex wavelengths 
   to wavebands. At the BXC layer, the waveband cross-connect, waveband 
   add/drop ports are used for bypass and add/drop wavebands. Fiber to 
   waveband demultiplexers are used to demultiplex fibers to wavebands. 
   Waveband to fiber multiplexers are used to multiplex wavebands to 
   form fibers. Similarly, fiber cross-connect and fiber add/drop ports 
   are used to switch and add/drop fibers at FXC layer. In order to 
   reduce the number of ports, the MG-OXC switches a fiber using one 
   port at the fiber cross-connect if none of its wavelength is used to 
   add and to drop a lightpath. Otherwise, it will demultiplex the fiber 
   into wavebands, and switch an entire wavebands using one port at the 
   waveband cross-connect if none of its wavelength is used to add and 
   to drop a lightpath. In other words, only the wavebands whose 
   wavelengths are needed to be added or dropped will be demultiplexed, 
   and only the wavelengths in those wavebands that carry bypass traffic 
   needed to be switched using the WXC. With this architecture, it is 
   possible to dynamically select fibers for multiplexing/demultilexing 
   from   the   FXC   to   the   BXC   layer,   and   wavebands   for 
   multiplexing/demultiplexing from the BXC to the WXC layer. 
   GMPLS networks in conjunction with MG-OXCs can be bring about 
   tremendous benefits in terms of reducing the number of ports of OXCs, 
   which in turn reduces the size of the OEO (optical-electrical-
   optical)  grooming  switch,  as  well  as  the  cost  and  difficulty 
   associated with controlling them. In addition to reducing the port 
   count, the use of wavebands reduces the number of entities that have 
   to be managed in the system, and enables hierarchical and independent 
   management of the information relevant to fibers, wavebands and 
   wavelengths.  Moreover,  relatively  small-scale  modular  switching 
   matrices are now sufficient to construct large-capacity optical 
   cross-connects, making the system more scalable. Finally all of these 
   also result in reduced complexity of controlling the switch matrix, 
   provisioning, and providing recovery. Note that wavelength conversion 
   is allowed only at the wavelength crossconnect because of significant 
   technical difficulty waveband conversion. 
    
    
    
 
 
Kim et al.              Expires - August 2004                 [Page  5] 

draft-kim-ccamp-gmpls-mgoxc-01.txt                      February 2004 
 
                       +-------------+                  
              ------>  |    WXC      |------> W-LSP  
                       +-------------+ 
                          |       | 
                       +----+  +-----+      
                       |mux |  |demux|      
                       +----+  +-----+      
                           |       | 
                       +-------------+                 
              ------>  |    BXC      |------> B-LSP  
                       +-------------+ 
                           |       | 
                       +----+  +-----+      
                       |mux |  |demux|      
                       +----+  +-----+      
                          |       | 
                       +-------------+                 
              ------>  |    FXC      |------> F-LSP  
                       +-------------+ 
    
   [FIGURE 1] The Architecture of three layer Multi-Granularity Optical 
                          Cross-connect (MG-OXC) 
     
    
   2. Requirements of MG-OXC in GMPLS networks 
    
   This  section  discusses  the  requirements  of  MG-OXC  for  network 
   operation. 
    
   For the interoperability with these legacy systems, wavelength-
   switching layer of MG-OXC is required to coexist with these legacy 
   systems for the major interface services. 
    
   - SONET/SDH, with different degree of transparency 
   - DWDM, optical wavelength services, transparent or opaque 
   - Ethernet 
    
   In waveband switching layer, the wavelength granularity has a large 
   effect on the performance of MG-OXC in GMPLS networks because 
   optimal wavelength granularity leads to a maximum reduction gain of 
   MG-OXC size. Also, optimal wavelength granularity may depend on 
   network topology, traffic demand, and traffic pattern. Waveband 
   switching schemes are classified into two variations depending on 
   whether the number of wavelengths in a waveband is fixed or variable. 
    
   The  followings  are  required  for  the  various  waveband-switching 
   techniques in waveband layer. 
    
   - Programmable  waveband  switching,  that  is,  the  number  of 
     wavelengths in a waveband can be controlled by GMPLS control plane  
   - The ratio of wavebands that can be demultiplexed to wavelengths 
     should be controlled by GMPLS control plane 
 
 
Kim et al.              Expires - August 2004                 [Page  6] 

draft-kim-ccamp-gmpls-mgoxc-01.txt                      February 2004 
 
    
   The following grouping strategies are required optionally to group 
   lightpaths into wavebands  
    
   - End-to-end grouping: grouping the lightpath with same source-
     destination only 
   - One-end grouping: grouping the lightpath between the same source 
     (or destination) nodes and different destination (or source) nodes 
   - Intermediate-path  grouping:  grouping  lightpath  with  common 
     intermediate-path from any source to any destination 
    
   Fiber level of MG-OXC has the ability of space switching for the 
   lightpath by fiber unit. 
    
   The followings are required for the fiber-switching layer. 
    
   - The number of wavebands in a fiber can be controlled by GMPLS 
     control plane  
   - The ratio of fibers that can be demultiplexed to wavebands should 
     be controlled by GMPLS control plane 
       
       
    
   2.1. Signaling Aspects for MG-OXC 
                  
   In order to perform the signaling of multi-granularity optical LSP, a 
   generalized label can make the waveband label [RFC3471]. Signaling 
   messages are used for the establishment, modification, status query 
   and release of an end-to-end optical MG-OXC connection.  
    
   - The association between local and remote optical LSP can be 
     configured either manually or dynamically using [LMP]. 
    
   - The association between the local/remote waveband and wavelength 
     can be configured either manually or dynamically using [LMP]. 
    
                  
   2.2. Routing Aspects for MG-OXC 
                  
     
   The following routing requirements of each layer should be considered 
   respectively. 
    
   - Information about physical topology (set of fiber connected between 
     MG-OXCs) 
   
   - Information about virtual topology (set of light path connected 
     between MG-OXCs) of each layer 
    
   - Information about link state of each layer 
 

 
 
Kim et al.              Expires - August 2004                 [Page  7] 

draft-kim-ccamp-gmpls-mgoxc-01.txt                      February 2004 
 
    
   - Lightpath grouping strategy depending on whether the number of 
     wavebands in a fiber is fixed or variable 
    
   - Information  about  the  continuity  of  wavelength  or  waveband 
     allocated to each link, e.g. wavelength or waveband converter is 
     equipped or not 
    
   -  Information about switching capability and port usage, that is, 
     information of capability of wavelength, waveband, and fiber 
     switching for each port 
 
   -  Information about the optical LSP (for example, link ID, link type, 
     ingress  and  egress  interface  IP  address,  maximum  bandwidth, 
     maximum reservable bandwidth, unreserved bandwidth, explicit route 
     object (ERO)) 
 
    
   2.3. Requirements for lightpath selection  
                  
   The following are functional requirements for path selection:  
    
   - Path selection shall support shortest path routing.  
   - Path selection shall also support constraint-based routing. At 
     least the following constraints shall be supported:  
        - Cost  
        - Link utilization  
        - Diversity  
        - Service Class  
                  
   - Path selection shall be able to include/exclude some specific 
     network resources, based on policy.  
    
   - Path selection shall be able to support different levels of 
     diversity, including node, link, SRLG and SRG.  
 
   - Path selection algorithms shall provide carriers the ability to 
     support a wide range of services and multiple levels of service 
     classes. Parameters such as service type, transparency, bandwidth, 
     latency, bit error rate, etc. may be relevant.  
                  
   Constraint-based routing in the MG-OXC network is significantly 
   complex compared to the IP network. There are many optical layer 
   constraints  to  consider  such  as  wavelength,  waveband,  fiber, 
   diversity, optical layer impairments, etc. 
                  
   2.4. Requirements on Protection of MG-OXC 
    
   When the failure of waveband lightpath occurs, it is very difficult 
   how to recover several wavelength lightpaths in a failed waveband 
   lighpath that have each different end-to-end path. The GMPLS networks 

 
 
Kim et al.              Expires - August 2004                 [Page  8] 

draft-kim-ccamp-gmpls-mgoxc-01.txt                      February 2004 
 
   can be segmented into several areas, such as, wavelength, waveband, 
   fiber areas in order to optimize the resilience and scalability of 
   networks.  Each  area  of  optical  LSP  has  the  independent  local 
   protection from other areas that the node adjacent to the failure 
   reroutes the lightpath around the failure. This can occur a lot 
   faster  because  no  failure  notification  across  the  networks  is 
   necessary. In doing this, one must distinguish between inter- and 
   intra-area protection because the GMPLS hierarchical networks are 
   separated into several areas. The MG-OXC interconnecting two or more 
   areas is called by border MG-OXC. This is done by local area 
   protection by the node adjacent to the failure or by the border MG-
   OXC on the path to the destination.   
    
    
   3. Security Considerations 
    
   This document does not introduce new security issues beyond those 
   inherent in GMPLS. It is, however, possible that using the suggested 
   network  management  attributes  provisioning  can  be  done  as 
   administrative usage. 
    
    
   References 
    
   [WAVEBAND]   R.Douville et al.,"Extensions to Generalized MPLS in 
                support of Waveband Switching,’’ Internet Draft, Work in 
                progress, draft-douville-ccamp-waveband-extensions-
                04.txt, June 2003. 
   [HCROSS]     M. Lee et al.,"Design of Hierarchical Crossconnect WDM 
                Networks Employing A Two-Stage Multiplexing Scheme of 
                Waveband and Wavelength," IEEE JSAC, vol. 20, no. 1 
                January 2002, pp 166-71. 
   [GMPLS-ARCH] Mannie, E.,’’Generalized Multi-Protocol Label Switching 
                Architecture", Internet Draft, Work in progress, draft-
                ietf-ccamp-gmpls-architecture-07.txt, May 2003. 
   [LMP]        Lang, J., "Link Management Protocol (LMP)", Internet 
                Draft, Work in progress, draft-ietf-ccamp-lmp-10.txt, 
                October 2003. 
   [RFC2026]    S. Bradner, "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 
                3", RFC 2026, October 1996. 
   [RFC2119]    Brander, s., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate 
                Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997. 
   [RFC2205]    Braden, R., et al., "Resource ReSerVation Protocol            
                (RSVP) -- Version 1 Functional Specification", RFC              
                2205, September 1997. 
   [RFC3212]    Jamoussi, B., et al., "Constraint-Based LSP Setup using         
                LDP", RFC 3212, January 2002. 
   [RFC3386]    W. Lai, D. McDysan, "Network Hierarchy and Multilayer 
                Survivability," IETF RFC 3386, November 2002.  
   [RFC3471]    L. Berger (Editor),’’ Generalized Multi-Protocol Label 
                Switching (GMPLS) Signaling Functional Description", 
                IETF RFC 3471, January 2003. 
 
 
Kim et al.              Expires - August 2004                 [Page  9] 

draft-kim-ccamp-gmpls-mgoxc-01.txt                      February 2004 
 
    
   Author's Addresses 
    
   Dae-Gun Kim 
   KT 
   206 Jungja-dong, Bundang-gu, Sungnam-City, Kyonggi-do,463-711, Korea 
   Phone : 82-31-707-8766 
   e-mail : dkim@kt.co.kr 
    
   Gyu Myoung Lee 
   Information and Communication University (ICU) 
   103-6 Munji-dong, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon, 305-732, Korea  
   Phone: 042-866-6122 
   e-mail : gmlee@icu.ac.kr 
    
   Jun Kyun Choi 
   Information and Communication University (ICU) 
   103-6 Munji-dong, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon, 305-732, Korea  
   Phone: 042-866-6122 
   e-mail : jkchoi@icu.ac.kr 
    
   Jin Woo Park  
   Korea University  
   1,5-ka, Anam-dong, Sungbuk-ku, Seoul, 136-701, Korea   
   Phone: 82-2-3290-3225  
   e-mail: jwpark@korea.ac.kr 
    
   Chul-Hee Kang 
   Korea University 
   1,5-ka, Anam-dong, Sungbuk-ku, Seoul, 136-701, Korea  
   Phone: 82-2-927-6116 
   e-mail: chkang@widecomm.korea.ac.kr  
     
   Full Copyright Statement 
    
   "Copyright (C) The Internet Society 2003. All Rights Reserved". This 
   document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to others, 
   and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it or 
   assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published and 
   distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any kind, 
   provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are 
   included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this 
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
   Internet  organizations,  except  as  needed  for  the  purpose  of 
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for 
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be followed, 
   or as required to translate it into  
    
   Document: draft-kim-gmpls-mgoxc-01.txt 
    
   Expiration Date: August 2004 
 
 
Kim et al.              Expires - August 2004                 [Page  10] 

