T2TRG                                                      Hong, Choong Seon                                       
Internet-Draft                                        Kyung Hee University
Intended status: Standards Track                   Tun, Yan Kyaw
Expires: December 09, 2022                     Kyung Hee University 
				Shashi Raj Pandey
				 Kyung Hee University
                                                               Kim, Ki Tae 
                                                          Kyung Hee University
                                                               Kang, Seok Won
                                                          Kyung Hee University
                                                                   October 2020
                                                                 
                                      








Resource Sharing in Virtualized Wireless Networks: 
             A Two-Layer Game Approach
                                    draft-hongcs-t2trg-rsvwm-00


Abstract

Wireless network virtualization is one of the auspicious 
approach to address the increasing 
demand of mobile data services. It enables logically decoupling
the traditional cellular network into infrastructure providers
(InPs) and mobile virtual network operators (MVNOs). It also
offers a virtualized wireless network (VWN), efficient resource
utilization, and isolation between network slices (i.e., MVNOs). In
this paper, we consider wireless network slicing for 
a single InP
who owns radio resources and multiple MVNOs who need radio
resources to provide specific services to their mobile users. One
of the challenges in wireless network slicing is how to 
efficiently allocate the limited radio resources available at the 
InP to the MVNOs. In this paper, we address 
the problem of efficient allocation of the InP radio 
resources to the MVNOs which aims to maximize the 
total network capacity of the InP. To this end, 
we decompose our considered problem into two phases. The
first phase is an efficient allocation of the InP radio 
resources (bandwidth) to the MVNOs, and the second phase 
is an optimal allocation of MVNOs resources gained from 
the InP to their mobile users. We then propose 
a Generalized Kelly Mechanism framework and the Karush-Kuhn-
Tucker (KKT) conditions to solve the first and the 
second phase of our resource allocation problem, respectively.

Hong, et al.          Expires  December 09, 2022                [Page 1]
Internet-Draft      Resource Management                   October 2020

Status of this work 

This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
working documents as Internet-Drafts. The list of current Internet-
Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.


Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts
as reference material or to cite them other than as
"work in progress."

Hong, et al.          Expires  December 09, 2022                [Page 2]
Internet-Draft      Resource Management                October 2020

This Internet-Draft will expire on December 09, 2022.


Copyright Notice

Copyright (c) 2020 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
document authors.  All rights reserved.

 This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
 Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
 (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
 publication of this document.  Please review these documents
 carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
 to this document.  Code Components extracted 
from this document must include Simplified BSD License 
text as described in Section 4.e of
the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
described in the Simplified BSD License.









Table of Contents
1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . 3
2.  Main Idea  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
3.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . .. . . . .  . . . . . . . . . . 5
4.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . .  . . .  . . . .5
5.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
5.1. Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
5.2. Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
 Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . 7

1.  Introduction

Mobile network operators (MNOs) reduce the capital expenditure 
(CAPEX) and operational expenditure (OPEX) by slicing physical radio
resources and base station (BS) hardware [a]. 
It is also a promising approach to address the issues
associated with the increasing mobile data traffic. In wireless
network slicing, the traditional wireless cellular nework is
decoupled into infrastructure providers (InPs) and mobile
virtual network operators (MVNOs). An InP owns the physical
infrastructure (e.g., base stations, physical resource blocks
(RBs), cell sites) and operates the physical wireless network.




Hong, et al.          Expires  December 09, 2022                [Page 3]
Internet-Draft      Resource Management                October 2020


MVNOs will lease these infrastructure and physical resources
from multiple InPs to create their own virtual networks for
providing specific services to their end mobile users.
Slicing of a wireless network enables coexistence of MVNOs 
on a shared physical infrastructure with a flexible network 
operation [a]. Although wireless network slicing is a promising technique
for future wireless networks, several challenges such as efficient
resource allocation, inter-isolation, and intra-isolation, control signaling, 
mobility management, network management need to be addressed before 
deploying network slicing [b]. The biggest challenge in network 
slicing is how to efficiently allocate resources such as 
physical resource blocks (RBs), bandwidth and transmission power [c]. 
Efficient resource allocation in wireless network slicing will help 
improve resource utilization, and quality of services of each 
user, and can avoid interference among different MVNOs.





2. Main Idea

A virtualized wireless network model with an InP that
deploys a base station (BS) operating on the total system
bandwidth R, and a set of MVNOs M where
each MVNO is providing the specific mobile services to
its mobile users. In this virtualized wireless network model, 
MVNOs will lease fraction of bandwidth from the InP 
to provide services and satisfy the QoS requirement of 
their mobile users. At BS, the InP deploys a 
hypervisor to virtualize physical resource (eg., bandwidth and power) 
for leasing to MVNOs. Here, how the InP will 
virtualize its wireless bandwidth among multiple
MVNOs to provide services to their mobile users becomes the
central question. Because it is not possible for the InP 
to get direct access of user information: channel 
state information (CSI), and QoS requirements. Therefore, a 
workable solution would be to allocate bandwidth to MVNOs 
first, and then each MVNO can allocate the wireless 
bandwidth for its user to provide specific services. This 
solution approach is viewed as a two-stage solution approach.
In this work, the bandwidth allocation problem in WVN is
decomposed into two phases. In the first phase, the 
bandwidth allocation among different MVNOs is decided by the 
InP so that it can maximize the overall network 
utility. In the second phase, each MVNO strategically allocates 
the obtained proportion of bandwidth from the InP to 
its mobile users to maximize its own utility. 
 
Hong, et al.          Expires  December 09, 2022                [Page 4]
Internet-Draft      Resource Management                October 2020

The first phase of the resource allocation problem is
modeled as a Generalized Kelly Mechanism (GKM) [d]. 
GKM, also known as proportional allocation, is a 
kind of auction
that can reduce system complexity and signaling between buyers 
and a seller. In proportional allocation, the bidders will 
submit bidding values to obtain some items from the auctioneer.
The auctioneer then decides the allocation of those items 
amongst the bidders which will maximize the sum of 
the valuation of all bidders.

In other words, it will use an allocation strategy
to maximize the social welfare of the system. 
Correspondingly, in our model, we consider MVNOs as 
bidders and the InP as an auctioneer for bandwidth. 
Each MVNO will report its own bidding value to
the InP in each allocation round. Depending on the 
bidding values of all MVNOs, the InP proportionally allocate 
wireless bandwidth to the MVNOs. The bandwidth allocation amongst 
MVNOs is straightforward when an InP knows the valuation 
of MVNOs. However, the valuation function of each MVNO 
is a private information related with the dynamic channel 
conditions of its users.

In the second stage, each MVNO will allocate the resource 
it gained from the InP to it mobile users 
in order to satisfy the QoS requirement of each 
mobile users. Then,  Karush-Kuhn-Tuckers conditions are deployed
in order to solve the resource allocaiton problem 
in the second stage. 

3.  IANA Considerations

There are no IANA considerations related to this document.

4.  Security Considerations
There are no security considerations related to this document. 

Hong, et al.          Expires  December 09, 2022                [Page 5]
Internet-Draft      Resource Management                October 2020

5.  References

5.1.  Normative References 

[a] C. Liang and F. R. Yu, Wireless network 
     virtualization: A survey, some research issues and 
     challenges, IEEE Communications  Surveys & Tutorials, 
     vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 358--380, 2015.

[b] R. Kokku, R. Mahindra, H. Zhang, and S. Rangarajan, 
     NVS: A substrate for virtualizing wireless resources 
     in cellular networks, IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking, 
     vol. 20, no. 5, pp. 1333--1346, 2012.

[c] A. Haider, R. Potter, and A. Nakao, 
    Challenges in resource allocationin network virtualization, 
    in 20th ITC Specialist Seminar, 
   vol. 18, no. 2009, 2009.

[d] Y. Zaki, L. Zhao, C. Goerg, and A. Timm-Giel, 
     A novel LTE wireless virtualization framework, in Proc. 
     International Conference on Mobile Networks and Management, 
     2010, pp. 245--257.

3.2. Informative References 

Hong, et al.          Expires  December 09, 2022                [Page 6]
Internet-Draft      Resource Management                October 2020



Authors' Addresses


Choong Seon Hong
Computer Science and Engineering Department, Kyung Hee University
Yongin, South Korea
Phone: +82 (0)31 201 2532
Email: cshong@khu.ac.kr

Yan Kyaw Tun
Computer Science and Engineering Department, Kyung Hee University
Yongin, South Korea
Phone: +82 (010) 4068 8863
Email: ykyawtun7@khu.ac.kr

Shashi Raj Pandey
Computer Science and Engineering Department, Kyung Hee University
Yongin, South Korea
Phone: +82 (010) 3855 8816
Email: shashiraj@khu.ac.kr

Ki Tae Kim
Computer Science and Engineering Department, Kyung Hee University
Yongin, South Korea
Phone: +82 (010) 9189 1551
Email: glideslope@khu.ac.kr

Seok Won Kang
Computer Science and Engineering Department, Kyung Hee University
Yongin, South Korea
Phone: +82 (010) 7184 6634
Email:   dudtntdud@khu.ac.kr




