

                                                                         
    Internet Draft                                           J. Loughney 
    Document: draft-loughney-what-standards-01.txt                 Nokia 
    Expires: August 2004                                   February 2004 
     
     
                         Standards, What Standards? 
     
     
 Status of this Memo 
     
    This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
    all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 [1].  
     
    Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
    Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that      
    other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
    Drafts. 
     
    Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
    months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
    documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts 
    as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in 
    progress." 
     
    The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
         http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
    The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
         http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
     
 Abstract 
     
    This document proposes a split between the RFC number of a 
    specification and the label for a protocol or protocol set. The 
    Problem Working Group identified problems with the way in which the 
    IETF manages the document series.  This document discusses some of 
    the problems caused by the current state of affairs and suggests 
    some improvements. 
     











  
  
 Loughney                Expires - August 2004                [Page 1] 
                       Standards, What Standards?         February 2004 
  
  
     
 Table of Contents 
     
    1. Introduction..................................................3 
       1.1 The Problem(s)............................................3 
    2. Further Analysis of Identified Problems.......................4 
       2.1 Few Specifications Progress Beyond Proposed Standard......4 
       2.2 There is no Formal Bug Reporting or Tracking System.......4 
       2.3 Periodic Reviews of Protocols are not Being Carried Out...4 
       2.4 There is no Maintenance Team Responsible for a Protocol...5 
    3. Suggested Solution............................................5 
       3.1 Mock Example..............................................5 
       3.2 Open Issues...............................................6 
    4. Simple Example Based on an Existing Standard..................6 
    5. Security Considerations.......................................7 
    6. IANA Considerations...........................................7 
    References.......................................................7 
    Acknowledgments..................................................7 
    Author's Addresses...............................................7 
    Appendix A - A Pathological Example..............................7 
     




























  
  
 Loughney                Expires - August 2004                [Page 2] 
                       Standards, What Standards?         February 2004 
  
  
     
 1. Introduction 
     
    The IETF has produced a large (and useful) body of work. In many 
    ways, the IETF has been a victim of its own (or at least of IP's) 
    success.  It is reasonable to expect that as standards see 
    deployment and uses not envisioned by the original authors, bugs 
    will be found or clarification will be needed. 
     
    Additionally, as the standards with the IETF produces see wider 
    deployment by parties outside of the IETF, the system of 
    documentation and updating within the IETF may cause some amount of 
    confusion. 
     
    There may be different expectations of what IETF standards may 
    mean.  Vendors often implement protocols based upon drafts; a 
    proposed standard is seen as adequate enough for ensuring 
    interoperability; any bugs found in the specification can be 
    handled by code updates.  Other Standards Development Organizations 
    may require Draft Standard status, at a minimum, for referencing in 
    their documentations.  Government Agencies, however, may take the 
    standards levels literally and assume only Full Standards can be 
    considered as true standards. 
     
    Finally, the RFC numbering scheme does not lend itself for easily 
    tracking development on a specific protocol or protocol area. There 
    isn't any relationship between RFC numbers, so often one must rely 
    on the RFC Editor's search engine to find all relevant standards on 
    a specific protocol.  See Appendix A for a pathological example. 
     
 1.1 The Problem(s) 
     
    The following problems are excerpted from Section 2.4 of the IETF 
    Problem statement [PROB]. 
     
           o   Relatively few specifications are now progressed beyond 
               Proposed Standard (PS) to Draft Standard (DS) level, and 
               even fewer to Full Standard (FS). 
            
           o  There is no formal bug reporting or tracking system in 
               place for IETF specifications. 
            
           o  The periodic review of protocols at PS and DS levels 
               specified in [1] are not being carried out, allowing 
               protocols to persist in these lower maturity levels for 
               extended periods of time, whereas the process would 
               normally expect them to progress or be relegated to 
               Historic status. 
            
  
  
 Loughney                Expires - August 2004                [Page 3] 
                       Standards, What Standards?         February 2004 
  
  
           o  No individual or body is given the task of 'maintaining' 
               a specification after the original WG has closed down. 
               Specifications are generally only updated when a need 
               for a new version is perceived.  No attempt is normally 
               made to correct bugs in the specification (whether they 
               affect operation or not) and the specification is not 
               updated to reflect parts of the specification that have 
               fallen into disuse or were, in fact, never implemented.  
               This is in part because the current procedures would 
               require a standard to revert to the PS maturity level 
               even when specification maintenance is carried out which 
               can be demonstrated to have no or minimal effect on an 
               existing protocol at DS or FS level. 
     
    This document does not take a stand on the issue of the relevance 
    of the current standards track, but to note that in any given 
    moment, a standard may be on-going work to progress the document. 
  
 2. Further Analysis of Identified Problems 
     
    This section looks in greater detail the affects of the problems 
    listed in section 1.  Many of these issues are interlinked or 
    compound each other. 
     
 2.1 Few Specifications Progress Beyond Proposed Standard  
     
    The IETF, as of late, does not have a good track record of moving 
    protocols beyond Proposed Standard.  In fact, the goal of most 
    Working Groups is to produce a set of RFCs and then shut down.  
    Working groups that do this are considered to have succeeded.  
    There are only a handful of long-lived working groups, such as 
    IPv6, whose charters include progressing standards beyond Proposed 
    Standards.  
     
 2.2 There is no Formal Bug Reporting or Tracking System  
     
    Bugs in a specification can be found at any point. There have been 
    bugs found in even in Full Standards.  How do we ensure the 
    correctness in our own standards? 
     
 2.3 Periodic Reviews of Protocols are not Being Carried Out 
     
    Many protocols suffer from benign neglect.  The working group 
    charged with developing the protocol has gone dormant or shut down.  
    The principal authors of the specification may no longer be 
    involved in the IETF.  Further development of the protocol may even 
    be officially discouraged.   
     

  
  
 Loughney                Expires - August 2004                [Page 4] 
                       Standards, What Standards?         February 2004 
  
  
    Other SDOs may consider extensions or modification to the 
    protocols. This causes problems for parties interested in the 
    technology, as it becomes unclear as to exactly what specifies a 
    particular protocol.  Additionally, it makes it hard to track 
    errors or update in a specification or protocol. 
     
 2.4 There is no Maintenance Team Responsible for a Protocol 
     
    Specifications are generally only updated when a need for a new 
    version is perceived.  No attempt is normally made to correct bugs 
    in the specification (whether they affect operation or not) and the 
    specification is not updated to reflect parts of the specification 
    that have fallen into disuse or were, in fact, never implemented.  
    This is in part because the current procedures would require a 
    standard to revert to the PS maturity level even when specification 
    maintenance is carried out which can be demonstrated to have no or 
    minimal effect on an existing protocol at DS or FS level. 
     
 3. Suggested Solution 
     
    This document proposes a simple solution that provides a label for 
    a specification that is separate from the RFC Number. This label 
    should be the protocol name.   
     
    This document would authorize an additional link on the IETF main 
    page, which would provide a link to the listing of specification 
    labels. 
     
 3.1 Mock Example 
     
    In this section we provide a fictitious example, known as the Foo 
    MIB. Note that three versions of the Foo MIB have been made RFCs 
    4120, 4560 and 7890. RFC 4560 was a flawed attempt to do what 7890 
    did, which reached wide deployment before the flaw was discovered. 
     
    The specification label listing for "Ethernet MIB" could say: 
     
       Standard last updated: July 1, 2004 
     
                Stable IETF        1   Mult   Deployed Known 
                 tech  recommend impl  impl   widely   harmful 
     
     RFC 4120      Y      N        Y     Y        Y       N 
     RFC 4560      Y      N        Y     Y        Y       Y 
     RFC 7890      Y      Y        Y     N        N       N 
     Draft-foo-bis N      N        Y     N        N       N 
     
       The IETF recommends deployment of RFC 4120. 
       The IETF recommends implementation of RFC 7890. 
  
  
 Loughney                Expires - August 2004                [Page 5] 
                       Standards, What Standards?         February 2004 
  
  
       The IETF recommends experimentation with  
          draft-foo-bis. 
     
       The IETF recommends against implementing RFC 4560. 
     
       Important errata known for RFC 4120, 4560 and 7890 are: 
       <insert errata here> 
     
    One could imagine a team or an appointed expert in charge of 
    gathering experience with the documents. As implementation reports 
    and deployment experience gathers, the  "scorecard" - but NOT the 
    RFCs - would be updated. Other documents, rather than referring to 
    a specific RFC, would, when possible, refer to the protocol label. 
     
 3.2 Open Issues 
     
    In order to populate the label system work, there would need to be 
    a web location for this registry.  This would require some amount 
    of work on the IETF Secretariat's part. In addition, experts and/or 
    maintenance teams would need to be formed. Most likely document 
    authors and work group chairs would be possible candidates.  A 
    reasonable proposal would be to have an expert or set of experts 
    for specific protocols appointed by Area Directors, at least in a 
    trial phase. 
     
    One should note that the IETF already has a precedent set for 
    protocol experts in the form of IANA designated experts.   
     
    A reasonable next step would be to produce a web-based example 
    based upon this proposal. 
     
 4. Simple Example Based on an Existing Standard 
     
    SCTP has been chosen because it is a relatively new protocol but 
    also because the author is familiar with it. 
     
     
    Stream Control Transmission Protocol 
     
                Stable IETF        1   Mult   Deployed Known 
                 tech  recommend impl  impl   widely   harmful 
     
     RFC 2960      Y      Y        Y     Y        N       N 
     RFC 3309      Y      Y        Y     Y        N       N 
     Imp Guide [1] N      N        Y     Y        N       N 
     Add IP [2]    N      N        Y     Y        N       N 
     PR-SCTP [3]   N      N        Y     Y        N       N 
     
          [1] draft-ietf-tsvwg-sctpimpguide-10.txt 
  
  
 Loughney                Expires - August 2004                [Page 6] 
                       Standards, What Standards?         February 2004 
  
  
          [2] draft-ietf-tsvwg-addip-sctp-08.txt 
          [3] draft-ietf-tsvwg-prsctp-03.txt 
   
   Information References: 
     RFC 3257   Stream Control Transmission Protocol  
                Applicability Statement   
     RFC 3286   An Introduction to the Stream Control  
                Transmission Protocol (SCTP)   
     
    The IETF recommends implementing RFC 2960 with the updated checksum 
    coverage documented in RFC 3309.  draft-ietf-tsvwg-sctpimpguide 
    contains updated information found during conformance tests. 
     
 5. Security Considerations 
     
    This document in and of itself does not of itself have security 
    implications.   
      
 6. IANA Considerations 
     
    Currently there are no IANA implications.  However, should this 
    solution be deployed, there may be a need to link the specification 
    label with the IANA registry for a particular protocol. 
     
 References 
     
                      
    [2026]   Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 
             3", BCP 9, RFC 2026, October 1996. 
     
     
     
 Acknowledgments 
     
    The author would like to thank Harald Alvestrand for making the 
    author the 'designated expert' on this particular topic.  The 
    author wants to thank John Klensen for warning that there may be 
    dragons ahead. Thanks to Spencer Dawkins, Jordi Palet Martinez, 
    Keith Moore and Mike Pierce for reading & commenting. 
     
 Author's Addresses 
     
    John Loughney 
    Nokia 
    Email: john.loughney@nokia.com 
      
 Appendix A - A Pathological Example 
     

  
  
 Loughney                Expires - August 2004                [Page 7] 
                       Standards, What Standards?         February 2004 
  
  
    TCP has been a wildly successful protocol by any measure.  One of 
    the benefits of TCP has been that it has enabled interoperable 
    services running on top of it, irrespective of the layers below it. 
    This success has come at a price. 
     
    For example there have been discussions on the e2e mailing list 
    about what is TCP (http://www.postel.org/pipermail/end2end-
    interest/).  This has resulted in a new working group being formed 
    to, essentially, clean up the set of TCP standards. 
     
    Using the RFC Editor's page, (http://www.rfc-editor.org/cgi-
    bin/rfcsearch.pl), my first search retured: "Based on your search 
    of [tcp] in the Title field 93 matches were found." Then, a second 
    search: "Based on your search of [Transmission Control Protocol] in 
    the Title field 13 matches were found."  This points to a fact that 
    there are a large number of RFCs at least partly related to TCP. 
     
     
     
     





























  
  
 Loughney                Expires - August 2004                [Page 8] 
