



Network Working Group                                        R. Van Rein
Internet-Draft                                                 ARPA2.net
Intended status: Standards Track                       September 3, 2015
Expires: March 6, 2016


               Kerberos Realm Descriptors in DNS (KREALM)
                      draft-vanrein-dnstxt-krb1-02

Abstract

   This specification defines methods to determine Kerberos realm
   descriptive information for services that are known by their DNS
   name.  Currently, finding such information is done through static
   mappings or educated guessing.  DNS can make this process more
   dynamic, provided that DNSSEC is used to ensure authenticity of
   resource records.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on March 6, 2016.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2015 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of




Van Rein                  Expires March 6, 2016                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                 DNS KREALM                 September 2015


   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  The KREALM Resource Record  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  Defining Home Realms and Home Records . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   4.  Querying Kerberos Realm Descriptors . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     4.1.  Querying a Domain's Kerberos Realm Descriptors  . . . . .   6
     4.2.  Querying a Host's Kerberos Realm Descriptors  . . . . . .   6
   5.  Publishing Kerberos Realm Descriptors . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   6.  Tags in Kerberos Realm Descriptors  . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     6.1.  Kerberos Realm Descriptor Tag "realm" . . . . . . . . . .   8
     6.2.  Kerberos Realm Descriptor Tag "service" . . . . . . . . .   9
   7.  Efficiency Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   8.  Privacy Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   9.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   10. IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
   11. References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
     11.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
     11.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15

1.  Introduction

   When a Kerberos client contacts a service, it needs to obtain a
   service ticket, and for that it needs to contact the KDC for a realm
   under which the service is run.  To map a service name into a realm
   name and then into a KDC, clients tend to use static mappings or
   educated guesses; the client's KDC may or may not be involved in this
   process.  Through DNS, such mappings could be dynamically expanded,
   permitting more flexibility than under the current practice.

   Two mappings are needed for the given scenario.  One is a mapping
   from the FQDN of a service to its realm name; the other is a mapping
   from the realm name to the Kerberos-specific services such as the
   KDC.  The latter mapping is published in SRV records [RFC4120] and
   such traffic is protected by the Kerberos protocol itself.  The first
   mapping however, has hitherto not been standardised and is ill-
   advised over unsecured DNS because the published information is then
   neither validated by DNS nor does it lead to a protocol that could
   provide end-to-end validation for it.

   With the recent uprise of DNSSEC, it is now possible to make a
   reliable judgement on the authenticity of data in DNS, which enables
   the standardisation of the first mapping in the form of resource
   records in secured DNS.



Van Rein                  Expires March 6, 2016                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                 DNS KREALM                 September 2015


   This specification defines how to publish and process Kerberos Realm
   Descriptors using a newly defined resource record type KREALM.  Each
   of these records holds a series of tagged string values.  A few of
   these are defined below, others may be added by future
   specifications.

2.  The KREALM Resource Record

   This specification introduces a new DNS resource record that serves
   as a Kerberos Realm Descriptor.  The name for this DNS resource
   record type is KREALM, and its numeric value is TBD1.  The
   corresponding RDATA format is as follows:

   +--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+
   /                  KREALM-DATA                  /
   +--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+

   The syntax of KREALM-DATA is the DER encoding of the following ASN.1
   syntax:

   KREALM-DATA ::= SEQUENCE {
                   versionNumber INTEGER (0..) DEFAULT 0,
                   SET OF SEQUENCE {
                           tag IA5String,
                           value UTF8String
                   }
           }

   This specification makes the assumption that all future tag
   definitions will define their corresponding value fields to be
   represented in strings.

   DISCUSS: RFC 4120 defines realm names with the KerberosString type
   which is a GeneralString, but it then advises to constrain it to
   IA5String or else risk interoperability problems.  It is worth noting
   that the ESC "%" "G" prefix defined in ISO 2022 can be used to
   introduce an UTF8String in the KerberosString, and that
   implementations even exist that insert UTF8String in KerberosString
   fields without even that escape.  It's a jungle out there!  Defining
   UTF-8 for this new field type does not seem to be such a stretch; it
   includes the IA5String subset and it also keeps the door ajar for
   future attempts at I18N of realm names and other Kerberos parameters.
   OTOH, OCTETSTRING would probably be too general, and place too much
   faith in wire representations to be suitable for comparison.

   The advised format for the resource data in master zone files is the
   base64-encoded KREALM-DATA content in DER-encoding.  Although most
   data will be printable string data, it need not adhere to the ASCII



Van Rein                  Expires March 6, 2016                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                 DNS KREALM                 September 2015


   character set or another constrained set the DNS processing software
   may assume, it may include NUL bytes and have a somewhat complex
   grammar; all these aspects would complicate master zone files and
   thus make them more error-prone; hence the representation in base64
   format.

   Tags are registered with IANA, and this document defines the first
   few.  A special range of tags starting with "x-" is available for
   local or experimental use.  Implementations MAY safely ignore tags
   (and the corresponding value) that are not known to them.  An
   application that does not recognise a tag name MUST silently discard
   it.

   Software implementing this specification can be recognised by
   versionNumber 0; this is also the default versionNumber when absent
   from the encoding.  Future updates to this specification MUST use
   another versionNumber IF they invalidate any assumptions made in this
   specification.  Such new applications SHOULD advise how to setup DNS
   in a backward-compatible manner; they might for instance publish both
   old and new styles of KREALM records.

   Clients requesting KREALM records MUST ensure that the record uses
   proper syntax, including the string formats specified for tag and
   value fields and a versionNumber that the client understands.

   Multiple KREALM records may be supplied under a queried name, and
   there may be multiple that adhere to this syntax; these present
   alternatives that can be tried, possibly with different versionNumber
   values.  Since DNS does not supply them in any order, the DNS client
   can choose freely in what order to process these records.  One
   possibility is a DNS client that prefer certain KREALM records over
   others.

   In this general form, there are no constraints on the number of
   permissible occurrences of a tag in one or more KREALM records, but
   tags MUST define whether multiple occurrences are permitted, and if
   so, what their interpretation is.

3.  Defining Home Realms and Home Records

   One of the tags defined by this specification is the "realm" tag
   [Section 6.1] that specifies a realm name.  Realm names can be mapped
   [Section 7.2.3 of [RFC4120]] to DNS names.  Those realm names in
   "realm" tags of KREALM records that that map to the FQDN at which
   that KREALM record was found, are hereby defined as "Home Realms".

   KREALM records of which all "realm" tags are Home Realms, are hereby
   defined as "Home Records".  Note how KREALM records are not defined



Van Rein                  Expires March 6, 2016                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                 DNS KREALM                 September 2015


   to be Home Realms when they contain a mixture of Home Tags and
   "realm" tags that are not Home Tags.  Note how a single DNS name may
   hold many KREALM records, some of which are Home Records and some of
   which are not.

   In general, the DNS name to which a realm name maps can hold
   information about the location of a KDC [Section 7.2.3 of [RFC4120]]
   and other realm-specific services.  This is undeniable; but for Home
   Realms, the same FQDN is the basis for finding the KREALM record and
   the KDC and other services; for other KREALM records than Home
   Records, the KREALM tag is a reference to a realm that translates to
   another DNS name, which in turn serves as the basis for finding the
   KDC and other realm services.

   The following specifications are strict about their reliance on
   DNSSEC for KREALM records.  The reason for this is to ensure that
   both the pointer to the actual service and its containing realm are
   inserted into DNS by the same responsble party.  When combined with
   cryptographic ensurance of reaching the proper KDC for a realm, this
   provides a secure mechanism through which realms can be contacted,
   regardless of whether they are the realm into which a user logged on.

   Mechanisms for cryptographic ensurance of reaching realms is standard
   in Kerberos implementations; based on DNSSEC this may even be
   extended with more dynamic mechanisms, but that is not defined in
   this specification.  A result that this specification may have is
   that the user knows the realms to ask for, even if it is a realm that
   was hitherto unknown.  In that sense, the KREALM record can be a
   stepping stone in loosely connected links between Kerberos realms.

4.  Querying Kerberos Realm Descriptors

   The following subsections define two procedures for finding Kerberos
   realm descriptors for the DNS name of a service.  One procedure
   starts from a domain name, the other starts from the host name of a
   service.

   When dealing with services found through DNS SRV [RFC2782], a choice
   between the use of a domain name or host name is possible.  In these
   situations, the FQDN of the SRV queries, without the _Service._Proto
   prefix, MUST be used in the procedure for domain name queries, and
   the procedure for querying a domain should be followed rather than
   the procedure for a host name.

   Since DNS in general cannot be considered secure, the client MUST
   dismiss any DNS responses that are Insecure, Bogus or Indeterminate
   [Section 5 of [RFC4033]].  Only the remaining Secure responses are to
   be taken into account.  This specification does not require that the



Van Rein                  Expires March 6, 2016                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                 DNS KREALM                 September 2015


   client validates the responses by itself, but a client deployment
   SHOULD NOT accept DNS responses from a trusted validating DNS
   resolver over untrusted communication channels.

   To give one possible implementation, a Kerberos client may send DNS
   queries with the DNSSEC OK bit [RFC3225] set to enable DNSSEC, and
   require that the Authenticated Data bit [RFC3655] is set in the
   response to indicate the Secure state for answer and authority
   sections of the response.  When the DNS traffic to and from the
   validating resolver is protected, for instance because that resolver
   is reached over a loopback interface, then the Kerberos client has
   implemented the requirements for Secure use of the answer and
   authority sections in DNS responses.

   The result may contain KREALM records that do not adhere to the
   syntax of this specification; such KREALM records MUST be removed
   from the result.  In the sequence of tag-and-value pairs, there may
   be tags that are unknown; such tags and their value MUST be ignored
   when further processing the results.  Finally, some tags are
   specifically registered with IANA for use in Home Tags, and those
   MUST be ignored if the KREALM record is not a Home Record.

   When no Secure DNS responses are received, this procedure MUST be
   terminated without extracting realm descriptive information from DNS.
   Such termination need not be fatal; non-DNS procedures may exist to
   find a realm name.

4.1.  Querying a Domain's Kerberos Realm Descriptors

   To find Kerberos Realm Descriptors for a domain name, a DNS client
   conducts a KREALM query targeted directly at the domain name.

   Where this specification speaks of querying a domain, its
   interpretation of a domain is that of a name space, which may or may
   not have a host attached, but which is likely to have services
   attached, for instance through AAAA, MX or SRV records.  Domain names
   also occur in many naming schemes after an optional username and @
   symbol, such as the domain name (that also happens to be termed
   "realm", but without connection to Kerberos realms) in a Network
   Access Identifier [RFC4282].

4.2.  Querying a Host's Kerberos Realm Descriptors

   To find a Kerberos Realm Descriptor for a host name, a KREALM query
   is performed by upward iteration towards the DNS root, but never
   crossing over the zone apex, as marked by a SOA record.





Van Rein                  Expires March 6, 2016                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                 DNS KREALM                 September 2015


   Although upward iteration through the DNS could in extreme cases be
   detrimental to DNS performance, most practical zones will not have
   many levels of host names, and as a result the search for the KREALM
   records should not take long.  Also, as described in Section 5 below,
   operators do have the ability to define additional KREALM records at
   strategic names.

   The algorithm starts by setting the current name to the host name.
   Then, it goes through the following loop:

   1.  A KREALM query is launched against the current name.

   2.  When the query times out in spite of resending or attempting
       other name servers, then the algorithm ends in failure.

   3.  When a Secure DNS response arrives holding one or more KREALM
       records, then these can be processed; the algorithm ends
       successfully.

   4.  When a Secure denial is received in the form of an NSEC [RFC3845]
       or NSEC3 [RFC5155] record, the algorithm continues.

   5.  When the type bit map in the secure denial indicates the presence
       of a SOA record under the current name, then no further
       iterations are possible, and the algorithm ends in failure.

   6.  The first label is removed from the current name, and the loop
       repeats.

   A failure from the above algorithm indicates that no Kerberos Realm
   Descriptor records could be found, and so that no assumptions may be
   made on those.

5.  Publishing Kerberos Realm Descriptors

   KREALM records are best published at the DNS-mapped name for a
   Kerberos realm, where they can be setup as Home Records.  In many
   practical situations, this DNS-mapped realm name will match the apex
   of a zone.  It is also possible to strategically position KREALM
   records at lower positions in the DNS hierarchy, although those could
   not be setup as Home Records.

   When a KREALM record is published for a certain DNS name, it will
   cover all MX and SRV records for that DNS name, as well as all host
   names defined at the same DNS name or hierarchically lower but in the
   same zone.  SRV and MX records for hierarchically lower DNS names
   need a separate KREALM record.




Van Rein                  Expires March 6, 2016                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                 DNS KREALM                 September 2015


   For child zones that contain service definitions that fall under a
   parent zone, the KREALM records must be repeated to supporting
   finding the Kerberos Realm Descriptor for the child zones' services.
   This is a result of the refusal of the algorithms to cross-over to
   parent zones.

   The additional mentioning of KREALM records on hierarchically lower
   names than the DNS-mapped realm name is also useful when the contents
   of the KREALM records needs to be modified.  One form of overriding
   KREALM definitions worth noting is one that does not define a
   Kerberos realm at all; such a record is useful to undefine any realm
   names that are defined higher up the DNS hierarchy.

   Note that KREALM records with wildcard names will not work.  All host
   names and most domain names define at least one resource record (of
   any type) with the name that the wildcard should cover.  These
   defined names cause the wildcards to be suppressed [RFC4592] from DNS
   responses, even when querying a non-existent KREALM record.

6.  Tags in Kerberos Realm Descriptors

   The names of tags are partitioned into two types:

   o  General Tags can be used in any KREALM records;

   o  Home Tags can only be used in Home Records.

   Any Home Tags that occur in other KREALM records than Home Records
   MUST be ignored.

6.1.  Kerberos Realm Descriptor Tag "realm"

   The tag "realm" MAY be present in all KREALM records, and it MUST be
   recognised and processed by implementations of this specification; in
   other words, the tag is not optional.

   The value of a "realm" tag provides a realm name for the queried
   FQDN.  The permissible values of this tag conform to the permissible
   names of realm names [Section 6.1 of [RFC4120]], which a conforming
   application MUST validate before processing the value.  This
   includes, but is not limited to, domain-style realm names.  Since the
   value field is a general UTF8String, it is to be treated as a case-
   sensitive string [RFC4343], just like realm names.

   It is possible to define zero "realm" tags in a KREALM record.  This
   indicates that no realm is defined by that record.  This is not an
   invalid condition; other KREALM records, if any, or other service-to-
   realm mappings may still be used.



Van Rein                  Expires March 6, 2016                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                 DNS KREALM                 September 2015


   When multiple "realm" tags occur in one KREALM record, then they
   present alternative suggestions to combine with all other tags in the
   same KREALM record.

   An example use of the "realm" tag in a TXT record is

   example.com.  IN KREALM "MBgxFjAUFgVyZWFsbQwLRVhBTVBMRS5DT00="

   Written out, the RDATA holds the following DER representation:

   SEQUENCE
      SET
         SEQUENCE
            IA5STRING    realm
            UTF8STRING   EXAMPLE.COM

   Since the value of all "realm" tags map to the FQDN of this KREALM
   record, this KREALM record is a Home Record.  As a result, tags that
   are registered as Home Tags may be added to this realm descriptor.

   In addition to the previous example, the following tag indicates that
   there is no realm, and so it is useless to request a service ticket
   for ftp.example.com, as far as this domain descriptor in DNS is
   concerned:

   ftp.example.com.  IN KREALM "MAIxAA=="

   The RDATA for this KREALM record encodes no tags and no values at
   all:

   SEQUENCE
      SET

6.2.  Kerberos Realm Descriptor Tag "service"

   The tag "service" MAY be present in any KREALM record, and it SHOULD
   be recognised by implementations of this specification.  The tag is
   optional.

   The value of a "service" tag is the name of a service, as used in
   principal names.  This can be used as a hint to clients that need to
   match "service" tags.  The occurrence of a "service" tag and a
   "realm" tag in the same KREALM record is a hint that a service ticket
   for the combination probably exists.  Note that the value of this tag
   is a general UTF8String, and that it is case-sensitive [RFC4343].

   The purpose of this tag is to enable clients to locally select
   alternatives that it may wish to pursue; adding a "service" tag may



Van Rein                  Expires March 6, 2016                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                 DNS KREALM                 September 2015


   improve the speed of resolution when multiple alternatives are listed
   in DNS, which is especially fruitful when future initiatives would
   require public key cryptography for realm crossover.

   When no "service" tag is defined in a KREALM record, then no hint for
   selection is available; processing must then continue under the
   assumption that any desired service name may be available for the
   realm description.  In contrast, when one or more "service" tags are
   defined in a KREALM record, then this set may be considered a
   complete specification of available services.  Note that multiple
   KREALM records may exist, each of which may or may not define
   "service" tags.

   When multiple "service" tags occur in one KREALM record, then they
   present alternative suggestions to combine with all other tags in the
   same KREALM record.

   An example use of this tag in a KREALM record is

   www.example.com.  IN KREALM "ME8xTTAOFgdzZXJ2aWNlDANmdHAwDxYHc2Vydmlj
   ZQwESFRUUDAUFgVyZWFsbQwLRVhBTVBMRS5DT00wFBYFcmVhbG0MC0VYQU1QTEUuT1JH"

   This RDATA contains the following data structure:

   SEQUENCE
      SET
         SEQUENCE
            IA5STRING    service
            UTF8STRING   ftp
         SEQUENCE
            IA5STRING    service
            UTF8STRING   HTTP
         SEQUENCE
            IA5STRING    realm
            UTF8STRING   EXAMPLE.COM
         SEQUENCE
            IA5STRING    realm
            UTF8STRING   EXAMPLE.ORG

   This matches the following principal names, found by iterating over
   all combinations of "server" and "realm" values:

   o  HTTP/www.example.com@EXAMPLE.COM

   o  HTTP/www.example.com@EXAMPLE.ORG

   o  ftp/www.example.com@EXAMPLE.COM




Van Rein                  Expires March 6, 2016                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft                 DNS KREALM                 September 2015


   o  ftp/www.example.com@EXAMPLE.ORG

   Apart from the case-insensitivity of the DNS name "www.example.com",
   this list is a complete list of principal names matched by the KREALM
   record.  For instance, a service named "krbtgt" is not described by
   this KREALM record.

7.  Efficiency Considerations

   KREALM records are useful to define realm names for servers whose DNS
   information is not statically mapped in a Kerberos setup.  This may
   simplify operative control of such static mappings.  It may also
   introduce more dynamicity, which may be useful for such things as
   realm crossover.

   Since realm names cannot be derived directly from DNS names, clients
   tend to construct various principal names by appending all the realm
   names that they are aware of, and attempting to obtain a service
   ticket for each in turn, until one is found.  The KDC may also
   perform such actions, and return a reference [RFC6806] to a realm for
   consideration.  In general, the list of service principal names that
   may be considered can be relatively long.

   The use of "realm" tags help the client to focus on those realms for
   which a service has a name defined.  This limit the list of realm
   names to attempt to those realm names that the service suggests.  The
   client does not need to guess as heavily.  Similarly, the combined
   use of "service" tags helps to select only those KREALM records that
   further constrain the scope to search.

   Limiting the length of the list of ticket requests is especially
   useful for situations with realm crossover when this involves public-
   key cryptography, because such algorithms are much slower than the
   symmetric algorithms that are normally used for Kerberos.

   The combined publication of multiple "realm" tags with multiple
   "service" tags enables a compact representation of variations that a
   client should iterate over, without the need to store the resulting
   cartesian product in DNS.

   The use of an iterative procedure that moves up along the DNS
   hierarchy could in theory end up hogging DNS bandwidth, but practical
   zones have only very few levels (and Kerberos is not used in reverse
   DNS) so the number of iterations is very limited.  Furthermore, any
   nuisance would concentrate at the authoritative DNS servers, which
   are operated by the parties that can insert additional KREALM records
   to overcome any problems.  In short, the burden on DNS should not be
   aggravated by this iterative approach.



Van Rein                  Expires March 6, 2016                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft                 DNS KREALM                 September 2015


8.  Privacy Considerations

   It is common to spread service information in DNS, but for internal
   use this may be considered less desirable.  This is why the "service"
   tag [Section 6.2], is optional.

   Similarly, internal applications may still prefer local definitions
   for realm names that a client should consider; this specification
   does not enforce the KREALM record in those situations.

   For situations which crossover between realms, the choice between
   static configuration in files and KDC configuration versus a dynamic
   configuration in DNS is still a choice; the dynamic option based on
   DNS publishes more information, but dynamic applications are more
   likely to desire such information to be publicly and securely
   available.

9.  Security Considerations

   This specification defines a mechanism to redirect from a FQDN to a
   realm name that may not map to that same FQDN, or that define that no
   realm name exists for the originating FQDN.  Publishing such a
   Kerberos Realm Descriptor is the prerogative of the DNS administrator
   who is also in charge of publishing the location of the service that
   is protected by Kerberos.  This administrator is generally trusted
   not to attack the security of a zone; DNSSEC makes this assumption
   even stronger than unsecured DNS, and this specification does not
   reduce or expand on that assumption.

   When an external attacker would be permitted to spoof a KREALM record
   in a victim's DNS, then it could be possible for that attacker to
   convince the client that the attacker is the authentic provider for
   the service.  Additional spoofing of host name references could then
   complete the attack.  This has been mitigated by requiring DNSSEC for
   all such KREALM records.

   Another angle of attack could be due to suppression of KREALM
   records, specifically the ones for a host name which have a fallback
   option at the zone apex.  Such attacks could direct a client to rely
   on information that may form a alternative of lesser security.  Such
   attacks have been mitigated by insisting on signed denials, and by
   stating that a non-responsive DNS server should not lead to the
   assumption that one can move up in the DNS hierarchy.

   The process of detecting the zone apex relies on the inclusion of a
   SOA record in each zone apex, and only in the zone apex.  Doing this
   properly is common practice, and it is in the interest of the zone
   being protected, so no rogue constructs are to be expected for Secure



Van Rein                  Expires March 6, 2016                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft                 DNS KREALM                 September 2015


   DNS.  The presence of a SOA record is not done through an explicit
   query but rather from inspection of a secure denial on a previously
   queried domain; this is a secure practice.

   The ability to create a KREALM record that references a realm
   operated under another DNS name introduces a potential of setting
   flags for that remote realm that may be counter-productive.  Given
   the open-endedness of the IANA registry for tags, problems that this
   may cause are mitigated by ignoring unknown tags, and treating known
   tags differently when they are registered as Home Tags; such tags are
   not processed for references to realms operated under another DNS
   name.

10.  IANA Considerations

   This specification defines a new "Resource Record (RR) Type", to be
   registered in IANA registry of Domain Name System (DNS) Parameters".
   The name of the RRType is KREALM, its value is TBD1 and its meaning
   is "Kerberos Realm Descriptor".

   This specification establishes a new registry with IANA, whose
   entries are subject to expert review and whose definition must be
   described in a publicly available specification.  The new registry
   will be known as the "DNS KREALM Tag Registry".  Each entry must
   provide a Yes/No flag to indicate if the tag is a Home Tag, meaning
   that it may only be interpreted as part of Home Records.

   The initial entries for this new registry introduced by this
   specification are:

                +----------+-----------+-----------------+
                | Tag name | Home Tag? | Definition      |
                +----------+-----------+-----------------+
                | realm    | No        | [TBD:THIS-SPEC] |
                | service  | No        | [TBD:THIS-SPEC] |
                +----------+-----------+-----------------+

   Tag names are case-sensitive.  Registration of new tags is subject to
   expert review, and a specification must be created as part of its
   definition.

   DISCUSS: Suggestions on the submission process for new tags are
   requested.

   In addition to the foregoing, tag names starting with "x-" are
   reserved for local and experimental use, for which registration is
   neither possible nor required.  These unregistered tags will not be
   protected from name clashes.



Van Rein                  Expires March 6, 2016                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft                 DNS KREALM                 September 2015


11.  References

11.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2782]  Gulbrandsen, A., Vixie, P., and L. Esibov, "A DNS RR for
              specifying the location of services (DNS SRV)", RFC 2782,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2782, February 2000,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2782>.

   [RFC3845]  Schlyter, J., Ed., "DNS Security (DNSSEC) NextSECure
              (NSEC) RDATA Format", RFC 3845, DOI 10.17487/RFC3845,
              August 2004, <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3845>.

   [RFC4033]  Arends, R., Austein, R., Larson, M., Massey, D., and S.
              Rose, "DNS Security Introduction and Requirements", RFC
              4033, DOI 10.17487/RFC4033, March 2005,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4033>.

   [RFC4120]  Neuman, C., Yu, T., Hartman, S., and K. Raeburn, "The
              Kerberos Network Authentication Service (V5)", RFC 4120,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC4120, July 2005,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4120>.

   [RFC4343]  Eastlake 3rd, D., "Domain Name System (DNS) Case
              Insensitivity Clarification", RFC 4343, DOI 10.17487/
              RFC4343, January 2006,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4343>.

   [RFC5155]  Laurie, B., Sisson, G., Arends, R., and D. Blacka, "DNS
              Security (DNSSEC) Hashed Authenticated Denial of
              Existence", RFC 5155, DOI 10.17487/RFC5155, March 2008,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5155>.

11.2.  Informative References

   [RFC3225]  Conrad, D., "Indicating Resolver Support of DNSSEC", RFC
              3225, DOI 10.17487/RFC3225, December 2001,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3225>.

   [RFC3655]  Wellington, B. and O. Gudmundsson, "Redefinition of DNS
              Authenticated Data (AD) bit", RFC 3655, DOI 10.17487/
              RFC3655, November 2003,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3655>.

   [RFC4282]  Aboba, B., Beadles, M., Arkko, J., and P. Eronen, "The
              Network Access Identifier", RFC 4282, DOI 10.17487/
              RFC4282, December 2005,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4282>.



Van Rein                  Expires March 6, 2016                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft                 DNS KREALM                 September 2015


   [RFC4592]  Lewis, E., "The Role of Wildcards in the Domain Name
              System", RFC 4592, DOI 10.17487/RFC4592, July 2006,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4592>.

   [RFC6806]  Hartman, S., Ed., Raeburn, K., and L. Zhu, "Kerberos
              Principal Name Canonicalization and Cross-Realm
              Referrals", RFC 6806, DOI 10.17487/RFC6806, November 2012,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6806>.

Author's Address

   Rick van Rein
   ARPA2.net
   Haarlebrink 5
   Enschede, Overijssel  7544 WP
   The Netherlands

   Email: rick@openfortress.nl

































Van Rein                  Expires March 6, 2016                [Page 15]
