


BLISS WG                                                       J. Elwell
Internet-Draft                         Siemens Enterprise Communications
Intended status: Informational                              GmbH & Co KG
Expires: May 19, 2008                                      S. Srinivasan
                                                   Microsoft Corporation
                                                       November 16, 2007


   An Analysis of Do Not Disturb (DND) Implementations in the Session
                       Initiation Protocol (SIP)
                     draft-elwell-bliss-dnd-01.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on May 19, 2008.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

Abstract

   Do Not Disturb (DND) is a commonly used expression for indicating a
   condition where a human user of real-time communications does not
   wish to be interrupted by incoming calls or other forms of
   communication.  This document discusses the nature of DND, ways of
   observing DND, and limitations of and possible improvements to DND



Elwell & Srinivasan       Expires May 19, 2008                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft               Do Not Disturb                November 2007


   support in the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) and the Rich
   Presence Information Data Format (RPID).

   This work is being discussed on the bliss@ietf.org mailing list.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  What is DND? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3.  Approaches to observing DND  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   4.  Indicating DND via SIP presence  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   5.  Handling communications that encounter a DND condition . . . .  5
     5.1.  Rejection due to DND . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     5.2.  Forwarding due to DND  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     5.3.  Proxy involvement  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   6.  Overriding a DND condition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   7.  Setting and clearing a DND condition . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   8.  Conclusions and recommendations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   9.  IANA considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   10. Security considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   11. Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   12. Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 13


























Elwell & Srinivasan       Expires May 19, 2008                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft               Do Not Disturb                November 2007


1.  Introduction

   The Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) (RFC 3261 [1] establishes calls
   or sessions for real-time communication between users and for sending
   instant messages.  Do Not Disturb (DND) is a commonly used expression
   for indicating a condition where a human user of real-time
   communications does not wish to be interrupted by incoming calls or
   other forms of communication.  While this condition exists, the user
   normally requires that incoming calls or messages be rejected or
   given alternative treatment such as forwarding to voicemail.

   Presence systems can indicate the state of a user to authorised
   watchers, thereby allowing them to avoid initiating communications
   when the user is not available.  A DND condition is one condition
   where the user would not normally be available.

   Although SIP can be used to reject calls or messages in the face of a
   DND condition or take alternative action, this is not well
   standardized and different implementations have emerged.  Although
   these generally can interoperate to some extent, they do not always
   result in consistent indications to callers.  Likewise, although
   presence systems based on the basic Presence Information Data Format
   (PIDF) defined in RFC 3863 [3] and the rich PIDF defined in RFC 4480
   [8] can indicate availability or otherwise of a user, these formats
   cannot explicitly indicate a DND condition.

   This document discusses the nature of DND, ways of observing DND, and
   limitations of and possible improvements to DND support in SIP and
   RPID.  In particular it identifies the following issues:

   o  indicating DND in RPID;
   o  called UA indicating DND to its proxy so that alternative action
      can be taken;
   o  indicating DND to the calling UA when the call is rejected because
      of DND;
   o  the scope of DND when there are multiple contacts available.


2.  What is DND?

   Do Not Disturb (DND) is a commonly used expression for indicating a
   condition where a human user of real-time communications does not
   wish to be interrupted by incoming calls or other forms of
   communication.  Such a condition tends to last for a few 10s of
   minutes or a few hours, perhaps because the user is in a meeting or
   is concentrating on an important job.  It does not tend to be used
   when the user is absent (e.g., on vacation, travelling or simply not
   in the office) and is unable to receive incoming communications.  It



Elwell & Srinivasan       Expires May 19, 2008                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft               Do Not Disturb                November 2007


   does not tend to be used when the user is simply busy on another
   communication occupying resources needed for a new communication
   (e.g., when engaged in a telephone call and therefore unable to
   receive further telephone calls on the same device).  The condition
   can be selective according to the type of communication (e.g.,
   instant messaging (IM) allowed but telephone calls not allowed).  It
   does not tend to be used for non-real-time communications such as
   email.  A DND condition might apply to all callers or might grant
   exceptions to certain callers (e.g., to an assistant or secretary) so
   that only those particular callers can break through.  A user can
   also invoke the condition casually for a particular incoming
   communication.  A user might arrange that a DND condition be invoked
   automatically based on the user's current activity, e.g., when
   viewing a document full screen.

   For the purposes of this document, DND is defined as follows:

      Do Not Disturb (DND): a condition whereby a user of real-time
      communications does not wish to be interrupted by incoming calls
      or other forms of communication.


3.  Approaches to observing DND

   There are two basic approaches to ensuring that a DND condition is
   observed.

   With the first approach, the condition is advertised to potential
   callers so that they are aware and do not attempt to initiate
   communications that would violate the condition.  This can be
   achieved through a presence application.

   With the second approach, communications encountering a DND condition
   at the destination receive alternative treatment, such as forwarding
   to voicemail, forwarding to another user, or rejection.

   In other words, the first approach is equal to giving indications as
   in a traffic light, and the second approach is more a means of
   enforcement, where if someone doesn't honor these indications, action
   is taken on an incoming call at the destination.

   Note that even with the first approach, a destination with a DND
   condition can still receive incoming communications, and hence the
   second approach is still needed.  Some callers will not check
   presence information or be unable to access presence information, and
   others might attempt a communication regardless.





Elwell & Srinivasan       Expires May 19, 2008                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft               Do Not Disturb                November 2007


4.  Indicating DND via SIP presence

   RFC 4480 [8] defines rich presence extensions to the basic Presence
   Information Data Format (PIDF) defined in RFC 3863 [3].  PIDF defines
   only "open" or "closed" as a status, although this can be accompanied
   by a free text note in one or more languages.  RFC 4480 extends this
   by defining certain activities such as "appointment", "away", "meal",
   "meeting", "on-the-phone", "busy", etc..  Furthermore an activity can
   be bounded in time by means of "from" and "until" attributes.  Most
   activities can be associated with a status of either "open" or
   "closed", perhaps using "open" in conjunction with activities that
   would imply "closed" in order to allow communication in urgent
   situations.  Status might depend on the type of communication, e.g.,
   audio or IM.

   It can be seen that there is no explicit indication of a DND
   condition, although a number of activities, particularly when
   accompanied by status "closed", suggest that the user does not wish
   to be disturbed.

   One option to indicate DND in a rich PIDF document (RFC 4480 [8])
   would be to extend RPID by introducing a "do-not-disturb" activity
   with "open" status.  First, the "do-not-disturb" activity would
   clearly communicate DND state in a presence document.  This would
   allow watchers to select an appropriate presence state indication for
   presentation purposes.  Secondly, using "open" status would indicate
   that communication might still be possible, depending on destination
   policies.  On the other hand, a "closed" status would be too
   restrictive.


5.  Handling communications that encounter a DND condition

   Typical treatment of an incoming communication encountering a DND
   condition at the destination is to reject it, forward it to voicemail
   or forward it to another user or device.  This treatment could be in
   line with a callee's current handling of incoming calls when in an
   "offline" state.

   A DND condition can be detected at a called UA or at the domain
   proxy.  The entity that detects the condition can determine the
   action to be taken.  Alternatively, the proxy can override the action
   taken by the UA.  For example, a UA might reject a call because of
   DND, but the proxy might wait to see what happens at other registered
   UAs and/or forward the call to voicemail.






Elwell & Srinivasan       Expires May 19, 2008                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft               Do Not Disturb                November 2007


5.1.  Rejection due to DND

   When rejecting a SIP INVITE or MESSAGE request due to DND, either a
   suitable SIP response code or a defined header field value needs to
   be selected, to report the condition to the caller and to proxies to
   handle the rejection due to DND in some other way, if required (see
   Section 5.3).

   Of course, the callee may not wish to reveal the DND condition to the
   caller.  If not, and if it cannot rely on a proxy in its domain to
   take alternative action, then a code such as 486 Busy (to make it
   look like a busy condition), 180 Alerting followed later by 408
   Request Timeout (to make it look like a no reply condition) or 603
   Decline (to make it look like a deliberate rejection by the user)
   might be chosen.  However, the choice of SIP response code or SIP
   header field in this situation is outside the scope of this document.

   Assuming the callee is prepared to reveal the DND condition to the
   caller, one possibility is the SIP 480 Temporarily Unavailable
   response code.  RFC 3261 [1] assigns the following meaning to the 480
   response code:

      "The callee's end system was contacted successfully but the callee
      is currently unavailable (for example, is not logged in, logged in
      but in a state that precludes communication with the callee, or
      has activated the "do not disturb" feature).  The response MAY
      indicate a better time to call in the Retry-After header field.
      The user could also be available elsewhere (unbeknownst to this
      server).  The reason phrase SHOULD indicate a more precise cause
      as to why the callee is unavailable.  This value SHOULD be
      settable by the UA.  Status 486 (Busy Here) MAY be used to more
      precisely indicate a particular reason for the call failure.
      "This status is also returned by a redirect or proxy server that
      recognizes the user identified by the Request-URI, but does not
      currently have a valid forwarding location for that user."

   Although this suggests the use of 480 for indicating a DND condition,
   480 is not used exclusively for this purpose.  The second quoted
   paragraph indeed indicates another condition that would give rise to
   a 480 response.  Furthermore, RFC 3398 [2]recommends mapping a couple
   of Q.850 causes to 480 (19 No Answer from User and 20 Subscriber
   Absent), and although these both have the general meaning of user
   temporarily unavailable, neither has quite the semantics of DND.  RFC
   3261 recommends the use of the reason phrase for indicating a more
   precise meaning.  The inclusion or a Retry-After header field can
   sometimes be useful in a DND situation where the duration of the
   condition can be anticipated.




Elwell & Srinivasan       Expires May 19, 2008                  [Page 6]

Internet-Draft               Do Not Disturb                November 2007


   Some implementations use the 486 Busy Here response code.  However,
   this does not explicitly indicate a DND condition unless the reason
   phrase is used.  It may suggest that techniques such as the dialog
   event package (RFC 4235 [4]) can be used to detect when a device
   becomes free, but this probably will not work in the case of DND,
   since the device concerned is likely to be free anyway.  In fact some
   implementations use 486 for a separate "make busy" feature.  Again
   the Retry-After header field can be used to good effect.

   Another possibility is 603 Decline.  However, this may be considered
   too impolite.  Also it causes any other branches in a forking
   situation to be abandoned, which may or may not be the desired
   outcome.  Furthermore, it appears to mean that a proxy cannot even
   forward to voicemail, say.  Again the Retry-After header field can be
   used to good effect, and this may counter the perception of
   impoliteness.

   Whichever response code is used, for casual invocation of DND by the
   user when an incoming call arrives the user will already have been
   alerted.  Therefore a 180 provisional response will probably already
   have been sent.  Depending on the final response code, the caller may
   infer that this is not a blanket DND condition and that the called
   user does not wish to speak to that particular caller.

   Whichever response code is used, it is possible to use the reason
   phrase to denote a particular condition, rather than the standard
   reason phrase (e.g., use "480 Do Not Disturb" instead of "480
   Temporarily Unavailable").  As there is no standardized reason phrase
   it is suitable only for display purposes and not for taking automated
   action.  Also there is the language problem.  Another possibility is
   to use the Error-Info header field to provide a URI where more
   information is available.  This would be suitable for rendering to a
   user, and within a given deployment could be acted on automatically
   by agreeing particular URI values (e.g., URNs).

   The problem at present, with no standardized means of indicating DND
   and a variety of different implementations, is that interworking is
   compromised.  For example, suppose a proxy is configured to take
   particular action (e.g., forward to voicemail) on receipt of a DND
   indication and expects that indication to be in the form of a 480
   response.  The expected proxy behaviour will not occur if a UA from a
   different vendor issues a different response for a DND condition
   (e.g., 486, 603).  Likewise, unexpected behaviour might arise if the
   UA emits a 480 response under circumstances other than DND.

   There are probably arguments for saying that the means of indicating
   a DND condition to a proxy (so that it can impose whatever policy is
   in force for such circumstances) should be different from the means



Elwell & Srinivasan       Expires May 19, 2008                  [Page 7]

Internet-Draft               Do Not Disturb                November 2007


   of conveying a suitable indication to the caller (where precision
   might not be required).

   Another issue is the SIP heterogeneous error response forking problem
   (HERFP), whereby a forked request can receive different error
   responses from different branches.  For example, one UAS could
   respond with 480 to indicate DND and another could indicate 486 to
   indicate a busy condition.  There is no rule for which of these is to
   be conveyed back to the UAC.  This is a well-known problem with SIP
   and solving this interaction problem is outside the scope of this
   document.

5.2.  Forwarding due to DND

   If calls are to be forwarded due to DND, there might be some benefit
   in indicating the reason for forwarding to the new target.  One way
   to achieve this is by placing a suitable SIP response code (e.g.,
   480) in the URI for the new target, as specified in RFC 4458 [7].
   This works either for forwarding by a UA (by redirecting using a 3xx
   response) or for forwarding by a proxy (by retargeting or by
   redirecting).  However, there is no provision for including a reason
   phrase, so the code alone has to be sufficient.  Also if further
   retargeting or redirection occurs (resulting in yet another new
   target URI), then this information is overwritten.

   Another mechanism for conveying the DND condition to a forwarded-to
   target is request history information (RFC 4244 [5]).  This suffers
   from the limitation that it works only for retargeting, because there
   is no facility to convey the reason for redirection (only the 3xx
   response code is provided in this case).

5.3.  Proxy involvement

   A proxy (or B2BUA) can be involved in DND in two ways.

   Firstly, if a UAS rejects a request due to DND, a proxy in that
   domain can take alternative action, e.g., forward to voicemail or to
   another user, in accordance with established policy.  To do this, it
   requires an explicit indication of the condition in the response from
   the UAS.

   Also a DND-aware proxy could handle heterogeneous error responses in
   a meaningful way, e.g., by ensuring that DND is reported to the
   caller when some UASs have reported busy and some DND.  This poses an
   additional problem when there has been forwarding to a different
   user.  For example, consider a call to Alice that for some reason is
   forwarded to Bob, where it gets rejected because of DND.  If the DND
   condition is reported to the caller without also an indication that



Elwell & Srinivasan       Expires May 19, 2008                  [Page 8]

Internet-Draft               Do Not Disturb                November 2007


   this condition applies to Bob, rather than Alice, this could be
   misleading.  It might be better to report the original condition at
   Alice that led to Bob being contacted.  This problem is not specific
   to DND, but is an example of a more general problem associated with
   heterogeneous error responses.

   Another factor is whether to act immediately when one UAS reports DND
   (cancelling any other outstanding branches) or wait for other
   branches to respond.  This last aspect should really be controllable
   to match user requirements.

   Secondly, a proxy can be aware of the DND condition in advance
   through some non-SIP means or by presence watching and can reject or
   forward calls without first passing the request to registered
   contacts.  This allows a DND condition to apply to all contacts and
   also removes the HERFP problem.


6.  Overriding a DND condition

   In some environments certain users might be authorised to override a
   DND condition at a called user.  A technique that might be applicable
   is specified in RFC 4412 [6].


7.  Setting and clearing a DND condition

   Setting or clearing a DND condition at a device is a local matter.
   Setting or clearing a DND condition at a proxy can be done by non-SIP
   means (e.g., via a web page or by downloading a script).  The only
   support provided by SIP is in publishing presence information to a
   compositor.  Setting or clearing the condition at a UA is a local
   matter.


8.  Conclusions and recommendations

   OPEN ISSUE.  Where do we go from here?  There was a HUGE email thread
   beginning 2006-08-02 in which this was discussed at length, without
   firm conclusions.  Many of the issues raised and opinions expressed
   are hopefully captured above.  There did not seem to be any appetite
   for a new SIP response code.  There seemed to be a majority of
   opinions in favour or using 480 in some way.  Possibly 480 together
   with a Retry-After header field would imply something like a DND
   condition, although the problem there is how to handle the situation
   where the user has not specified a duration.  So a new response code
   (or a new header field) would have the merit of providing an explicit
   indication without necessarily needing to include a Retry-After



Elwell & Srinivasan       Expires May 19, 2008                  [Page 9]

Internet-Draft               Do Not Disturb                November 2007


   header field.  There may need to be be a difference between what is
   indicated to the local proxy and what is indicated to the caller.

   A major part of that thread discussed the treatment of 6xx responses
   (and 603 in particular) by proxies, and whether it is intended to
   prevent retargeting to voicemail or to another AoR.  It seems there
   is ambiguity in RFC 3261 concerning the precise meaning of 6xx
   responses.  One interpretation might be that a 6xx response should be
   on behalf of destinations in the same domain, but should have no
   impact on branches in other domains.  There was also a suggestion
   that there might be a more general need (beyond DND) for a UA, when
   rejecting a request, to indicate to the domain proxy how to handle
   forking and retargeting, based on what the user has indicated (e.g.,
   if the user pressed the "forward to voicemail" button, the proxy
   should do that and abandon other branches).  These aspects require
   further elaboration, either in a future version of this draft or
   separately.

   Furthermore, is there a desire to extend RPID?

   Possible requirements for ongoing work include:

      REQ1 - There MUST be a way for a UA to indicate through presence
      that it is not willing to receive a call or message because the
      user does not wish to be disturbed.
      REQ2 - There MUST be a way for a UA to indicate when rejecting a
      call that the user does not wish to be disturbed.
      REQ3 - There MUST be a way to determine the scope of DND when
      multiple contacts are available.
      REQ4 - There MUST be a way for the DND condition to take
      precedence in a HERFP situation in accordance with user
      requirements.
      REQ5 - It MUST be possible for a proxy that is aware of a DND
      condition to take appropriate action without forwarding the call
      or message request to the UA.
      REQ6 - It MUST be possible for a proxy to intervene in a rejection
      by a UA due to DND and take alternative action (e.g., forward to
      voicemail).

   With the exception of presence aspects, DND is part of a broader
   topic of Automatic Call Handling (ACH) being discussed within the
   BLISS WG.  However, the issues of a suitable response code and a
   suitable presence indication are specific to DND.


9.  IANA considerations

   None.



Elwell & Srinivasan       Expires May 19, 2008                 [Page 10]

Internet-Draft               Do Not Disturb                November 2007


10.  Security considerations

   For reasons or privacy or politeness a user may not wish to reveal
   his/her precise state to a caller or presence watcher, and this might
   extend to the DND condition.  To get around this, a less precise
   indication may need to be given, but this might then prevent
   intervention by the proxy in the callee's domain.


11.  Acknowledgements

   Thanks to Mohammad Vakil for contributing material on presence and to
   Shida Schubert for carrying out an initial review and providing
   comments.


12.  Informative References

   [1]  Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston, A.,
        Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley, M., and E. Schooler, "SIP:
        Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261, June 2002.

   [2]  Camarillo, G., Roach, A., Peterson, J., and L. Ong, "Integrated
        Services Digital Network (ISDN) User Part (ISUP) to Session
        Initiation Protocol (SIP) Mapping", RFC 3398, December 2002.

   [3]  Sugano, H., Fujimoto, S., Klyne, G., Bateman, A., Carr, W., and
        J. Peterson, "Presence Information Data Format (PIDF)",
        RFC 3863, August 2004.

   [4]  Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., and R. Mahy, "An INVITE-
        Initiated Dialog Event Package for the Session Initiation
        Protocol (SIP)", RFC 4235, November 2005.

   [5]  Barnes, M., "An Extension to the Session Initiation Protocol
        (SIP) for Request History Information", RFC 4244, November 2005.

   [6]  Schulzrinne, H. and J. Polk, "Communications Resource Priority
        for the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)", RFC 4412,
        February 2006.

   [7]  Jennings, C., Audet, F., and J. Elwell, "Session Initiation
        Protocol (SIP) URIs for Applications such as Voicemail and
        Interactive Voice Response (IVR)", RFC 4458, April 2006.

   [8]  Schulzrinne, H., Gurbani, V., Kyzivat, P., and J. Rosenberg,
        "RPID: Rich Presence Extensions to the Presence Information Data
        Format (PIDF)", RFC 4480, July 2006.



Elwell & Srinivasan       Expires May 19, 2008                 [Page 11]

Internet-Draft               Do Not Disturb                November 2007


Authors' Addresses

   John Elwell
   Siemens Enterprise Communications GmbH & Co KG
   Hofmannstrasse 51
   D-81379 Munich
   Germany

   Phone: +44 115 943 4989
   Email: john.elwell@siemens.com


   Srivatsa Srinivasan
   Microsoft Corporation
   One Microsoft Way
   Redmond, WA  98052
   USA

   Email: srivats@exchange.microsoft.com
































Elwell & Srinivasan       Expires May 19, 2008                 [Page 12]

Internet-Draft               Do Not Disturb                November 2007


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Elwell & Srinivasan       Expires May 19, 2008                 [Page 13]


