Network Working Group                                       G. Hellstrom
Internet-Draft                                                   Omnitor
Intended status: Informational                               A. van Wijk
Expires: September 7, 2010               Real-Time Text Taskforce (R3TF)
                                                           March 8, 2010


          Registration of the Real-time-text Media Feature Tag
                   draft-hellstrom-text-turntaking-03

Abstract

   This memo defines a new Media Feature Tag "real-time-text" for use in
   SIP registration and session establishment.  This is used to indicate
   if a device capable of text communication has full real-time text
   capabilities or limitations in its capabilities requiring the users
   to apply some turn-taking habits.

To the RFC editor

   Please replace y.y with the assigned ASN.1 identifier and XXXX with
   the RFC number of this specification.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 7, 2010.

Copyright Notice




Hellstrom & van Wijk    Expires September 7, 2010               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft      Real-time-text Media Feature Tag          March 2010


   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   3.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   4.  Example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   5.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   6.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   7.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6



























Hellstrom & van Wijk    Expires September 7, 2010               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft      Real-time-text Media Feature Tag          March 2010


1.  Introduction

   Media feature tags for use in SIP headers are introduced in RFC 3840
   [RFC3840].  They are used with the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP).

   When negotiating a text communication medium in a session, a user may
   find it very desirable to achieve a text communication path with
   real-time text capabilities.  In order to support routing of
   negotiating to support this preference, an indication in a SIP media-
   feature tag can be used.  That media-feature tag is defined in this
   specification.  One value is given to the parameter for indication of
   full simultaneous two way capabilities of the text communication.

   When interworking with legacy telecommunication devices through a
   gateway, an IP based text phone using SIP may be required to limit
   its capabilities to match those devices.  For example, V.21 based
   textphones are full duplex in transport, but have varying handling of
   the presentation.  Some types merge the two sources in one window.
   Some have a kind of irc-like display with labels in front of the text
   from different participants.  And yet some do a split in two windows
   of real-time text from each direction.

   In order for a SIP-based text capable device to display an
   appropriate user interface when interacting with one of these legacy
   devices, it is necessary to convey a parameter indicating the limited
   capability of the legacy device.  It is also of interest to route
   calls to the most capable device.

   When it is interacting with a legacy device, an IP text capable
   device may receive an offer that contains the 'real-time-text' tag
   indicating some restriction.  That tag then acts as a cue to
   configure the user interface appropriately, although there is nothing
   in the generated answer to indicate that this has been done.
   Similiarly, if an answer is received that contains a 'real-time-text'
   tag with a value indicating restrictions, that indicates that the
   remote device has limited capabilities regarding simulaneity, and the
   user-interface should present some indication of this to the user.

   More information on handling of real-time text is found in RFC 5194.
   Framework for real-time text over IP using the Session Initiation
   Protocol [RFC5194].  This memo defines such a parameter.


2.  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].



Hellstrom & van Wijk    Expires September 7, 2010               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft      Real-time-text Media Feature Tag          March 2010


3.  IANA Considerations

   This specification defines a Media Feature tag 'real-time-text'.  Its
   formatting in SIP headers is described in the following:

   Media Feature Tag name: sip.real-time-text

   ASN.1 Identifier: y.y.

   Summary of the media feature indicated by this tag: The sip.real-
   time-text media feature tag indicates whether a communications device
   can simultaneously handle the real-time text medium and audio in its
   user interface or towards attached devices, or if limitations must be
   applied by users who communicate with the device.

   Values appropriate for use with this feature tag: Token with an
   equality relationship.

   Defined values are:

   full:  The device can handle real-time text simultaneously in both
      directions and if it supports audio, audio and text can also be
      handled simultaneously. (default)

   restricted:  The device requires some ordered turn-taking to take
      place.  It is not specified how strict this turntaking must be,
      and it is left to the users to figure out what level of turntaking
      signaling is needed.

   The feature tag is intended primarily for use in the following
   applications, protocols, services, or negotiation mechanisms: This
   feature tag is most useful in a communications application for
   describing the capabilities of a SIP multimedia communication device,
   SIP application servers implementing services including real-time
   text, or a PSTN textphone gateway, connecting SIP devices with legacy
   textphones, with the intention both to support routing of the call
   and indication to the SIP device user if turntaking must be applied.

   Examples of typical use: Choosing to communicate with a native, real-
   time text capable device rather than a legacy textphone behind a
   gateway, when a selection is possible.  Instruct the user of the SIP
   device about the need to apply turntaking habits as used with legacy
   textphones when the call is made through a gateway with that kind of
   device.

   Related standards or documents: RFC XXXX.

   Security Considerations: Security considerations for this media



Hellstrom & van Wijk    Expires September 7, 2010               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft      Real-time-text Media Feature Tag          March 2010


   feature tag are discussed in Section 11.1 of RFC 3840.


4.  Example

   The following example shows the use of the 'real-time-text' tag in a
   SIP message.


         REGISTER sip:example.com SIP/2.0
      From: sip:user@example.com;tag=asd98
      To: sip:user@example.com
      Call-ID: hh89as0d-asd88jkk@host.example.com
      CSeq: 9987 REGISTER
      Max-Forwards: 70
      Via: SIP/2.0/UDP host.example.com;branch=z9hG4bKnashds8
      Contact: <sip:user@host.example.com>;audio;text;
      real-time-text=restricted
      Content-Length: 0


5.  Security Considerations

   Security considerations for this media feature tag are discussed in
   Section 11.1 of RFC 3840.


6.  Acknowledgements

   The need for this registration was discussed with Barry Dingle,
   Gonzalo Camarillo , and Colin Perkins.


7.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC2506]  Holtman, K., Mutz, A., and T. Hardie, "Media Feature Tag
              Registration Procedure", BCP 31, RFC 2506, March 1999.

   [RFC3261]  Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston,
              A., Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley, M., and E.
              Schooler, "SIP: Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261,
              June 2002.

   [RFC3840]  Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., and P. Kyzivat,
              "Indicating User Agent Capabilities in the Session



Hellstrom & van Wijk    Expires September 7, 2010               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft      Real-time-text Media Feature Tag          March 2010


              Initiation Protocol (SIP)", RFC 3840, August 2004.

   [RFC5194]  van Wijk, A. and G. Gybels, "Framework for Real-Time Text
              over IP Using the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)",
              RFC 5194, June 2008.


Authors' Addresses

   Gunnar Hellstrom
   Omnitor
   Box 92 054
   Stockholm  12006
   Sweden

   Email: gunnar.hellstrom@omnitor.se
   URI:   http://www.omnitor.se


   Arnoud van Wijk
   Real-Time Text Taskforce (R3TF)
   NL

   Email: arnoud@realtimetext.org
   URI:   www.realtimetext.org


























Hellstrom & van Wijk    Expires September 7, 2010               [Page 6]


