

SIP Working Group                                 W. Marshall 
Internet Draft                                    AT&T 
Document: <draft-dcsgroup-sip-proxy-proxy-05.txt>  
Category: Informational                           K. Ramakrishnan 
                                                  TeraOptic Networks 
                                                   
                                                  E. Miller 
                                                  Terayon Networks 
                                                   
                                                  G. Russell 
                                                  CableLabs 
                                                   
                                                  B. Beser 
                                                  Pacific Broadband 
                                                   
                                                  M. Mannette 
                                                  K. Steinbrenner 
                                                  3Com 
                                                   
                                                  D. Oran 
                                                  F. Andreasen 
                                                  Cisco 
                                                   
                                                  J. Pickens 
                                                  Com21 
                                                   
                                                  P. Lalwaney 
                                                  Nokia 
                                                   
                                                  J. Fellows 
                                                  Copper Mountain Networks 
                                                   
                                                  D. Evans 
                                                  D. R. Evans Consulting 
                                                   
                                                  K. Kelly 
                                                  NetSpeak 
                                                   
                                                  August, 2001 
    
    
             SIP proxy-to-proxy extensions for supporting DCS 
 
 
Status of this Memo 
 
    
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full compliance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026[1].  
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
  
DCS Group   Category Informational - Expiration 2/28/2002           1 


                SIP Proxy-to-Proxy Extensions                August 2001 
 
 
   Drafts. Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of 
   six months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
   documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts 
   as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in 
   progress."  
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt  
    
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
   The distribution of this memo is unlimited.  It is filed as <draft-
   dcsgroup-sip-proxy-proxy-05.txt>, and expires February 28, 2002. 
   Please send comments to the authors. 
    
    
    
1. Abstract 
    
   In order to deploy a residential telephone service at very large 
   scale across different domains, it is necessary for trusted elements 
   owned by different service providers to exchange trusted information 
   that conveys customer-specific information and expectations about 
   the parties involved in the call. This document describes extensions 
   to the Session Initiation Protocol (RFC2543) for supporting the 
   exchange of customer information and billing information between 
   trusted entities in the architecture described in <draft-dcsgroup-
   sip-arch-02.txt>.  
    
2. Conventions used in this document 
    
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in 
   this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [2]. 
    
    
3. Table of Contents 
    
   Status of this Memo................................................1 
   1. Abstract........................................................2 
   2. Conventions used in this document...............................2 
   3. Table of Contents...............................................2 
   4. Introduction....................................................3 
   5. Trust Boundary..................................................5 
   6. Requires and Supported Option Tag Values........................5 
   7. DCS-TRACE-PARTY-ID..............................................6 
   7.1 Syntax.........................................................7 
   7.2 Procedures at an Untrusted User Agent Client (UAC).............7 
   7.3 Procedures at a Trusted User Agent Client (UAC)................7 
   7.4 Procedures at an Untrusted User Agent Server (UAS).............7 
   7.5 Procedures at a Trusted User Agent Server (UAS)................7 
   7.6 Procedures at Proxy............................................8 
  
DCS Group    Category Informational - Expiration 2/28/02            2 


                SIP Proxy-to-Proxy Extensions                August 2001 
 
 
   7.6.1 Procedures at Originating Proxy..............................8 
   7.6.2 Procedures at Terminating Proxy..............................8 
   8. DCS-GATE........................................................8 
   8.1 Syntax.........................................................9 
   8.2 Procedures at an Untrusted User Agent Client (UAC).............9 
   8.3 Procedures at a Trusted User Agent Client (UAC)................9 
   8.4 Procedures at an Untrusted User Agent Server (UAS).............9 
   8.5 Procedures at a Trusted User Agent Server (UAS)...............10 
   8.6 Procedures at Proxy...........................................10 
   8.6.1 Procedures at Originating Proxy.............................10 
   8.6.2 Procedures at Terminating Proxy.............................10 
   9. DCS-OSPS.......................................................11 
   9.1 Syntax........................................................11 
   9.2 Procedures at an Untrusted User Agent Client (UAC)............11 
   9.3 Procedures at a Trusted User Agent Client (UAC)...............12 
   9.4 Procedures at an Untrusted User Agent Server (UAS)............12 
   9.5 Procedures at a Trusted User Agent Server (UAS)...............13 
   9.6 Procedures at Proxy...........................................13 
   10. DCS-BILLING-ID and DCS-BILLING-INFO...........................13 
   10.1 Syntax.......................................................14 
   10.2 Procedures at an Untrusted User Agent Client (UAC)...........16 
   10.3 Procedures at a Trusted User Agent Client (UAC)..............16 
   10.4 Procedures at an Untrusted User Agent Server (UAS)...........16 
   10.5 Procedures at a Trusted User Agent Server (UAS)..............16 
   10.6 Procedures at Proxy..........................................17 
   10.6.1 Procedures at Originating Proxy............................17 
   10.6.2 Procedures at Terminating Proxy............................18 
   11. DCS-LAES and DCS-REDIRECT.....................................18 
   11.1 Syntax.......................................................19 
   11.2 Procedures at an Untrusted User Agent Client (UAC)...........19 
   11.3 Procedures at a Trusted User Agent Client (UAC)..............19 
   11.4 Procedures at an Untrusted User Agent Server (UAS)...........20 
   11.5 Procedures at a Trusted User Agent Server (UAS)..............20 
   11.6 Procedures at Proxy..........................................21 
   11.6.1 Procedures at Originating Proxy............................21 
   11.6.2 Procedures at Terminating Proxy............................22 
   12. Security Considerations.......................................23 
   13. Notice Regarding Intellectual Property Rights.................23 
   14. References....................................................23 
   15. Acknowledgements..............................................24 
   16. Author's Addresses............................................24 
   Full Copyright Statement..........................................26 
    
    
4. Introduction 
    
   In order to deploy a residential telephone service at very large 
   scale across different domains, it is necessary for trusted elements 
   owned by different service providers to exchange trusted information 
   that conveys billing information and expectations about the parties 
   involved in the call. 
    

  
DCS Group    Category Informational - Expiration 2/28/02            3 


                SIP Proxy-to-Proxy Extensions                August 2001 
 
 
   There are many billing models used in deriving revenue from 
   telephony services today. Charging for telephony services is tightly 
   coupled to the use of network resources. It is outside the scope of 
   this document to discuss the details of these numerous and varying 
   methods. 
    
   A key motivating principle of the DCS architecture described in [3] 
   is the need for network service providers to be able to control and 
   monitor network resources; revenue may be derived from the usage of 
   these resources as well as from the delivery of enhanced services 
   such as telephony. Furthermore, the DCS architecture recognizes the 
   need for coordination between call signaling and resource 
   management.  This coordination ensures that users are authenticated 
   and authorized before receiving access to network resources and 
   billable enhanced services. 
  
   DCS-Proxies, as defined in [3], have access to subscriber 
   information and act as policy decision points and trusted 
   intermediaries along the call signaling path. Edge routers provide 
   the policy enforcement mechanism and also capture and report usage 
   information.  Edge routers need to be given billing information that 
   can be logged with Record Keeping or Billing servers.  The DCS 
   Proxy, as a central point of coordination between call signaling and 
   resource management, can provide this information based on the 
   authenticated identity of the calling and called parties. Since 
   there is a trust relationship among DCS Proxies, they can be relied 
   upon to exchange trusted billing information pertaining to the 
   parties involved in a call.  
    
   For these reasons, it is appropriate to consider defining SIP header 
   extensions to allow DCS Proxies to exchange information during call 
   setup. It is the intent that the extensions would only appear on 
   trusted network segments, should be inserted upon entering a trusted 
   network region, and removed before leaving trusted network segments. 
   Rules for inserting and removing headers exchanged only between 
   proxies are for further study.  
    
   Significant amounts of information is retrieved by an originating 
   proxy in its handling of a connection setup request from a user 
   agent.  Such information includes location information about the 
   subscriber (essential for emergency services calls), billing 
   information, and station information (e.g. coin operated phone). In 
   addition, while translating the destination number, information such 
   as the local-number-portability office code is obtained and will be 
   needed by all other proxies handling this call. 
    
   For Usage Accounting records, it is necessary to have an identifier 
   that can be associated with all the event records produced for the 
   call. Call-ID cannot be used as such an identifier since it is 
   selected by the originating user agent, and may not be unique among 
   all past calls as well as current calls. Further, since this 
   identifier is to be used by the service provider, it should be 

  
DCS Group    Category Informational - Expiration 2/28/02            4 


                SIP Proxy-to-Proxy Extensions                August 2001 
 
 
   chosen in a manner and in a format that meets the service provider's 
   needs. 
    
   Billing information may not necessarily be unique for each user 
   (consider the case of calls from an office all billed to the same 
   account).  Billing information may not necessarily be identical for 
   all calls made by a single user (consider prepaid calls, credit card 
   calls, collect calls, etc).  It is therefore necessary to carry 
   billing information separate from the calling and called party 
   identification.  Furthermore, some billing models call for split-
   charging where multiple entities are billed for portions of the 
   call. 
    
   The addition of two SIP General Header Fields allows for the capture 
   of billing information and billing identification for the duration 
   of the call. Alternative techniques such as multi-part attachments 
   will not coexist with encrypted messages. 
    
   It is the intent that the billing extensions would only appear on 
   trusted network segments, and MAY be inserted by a DCS Proxy in 
   INVITE requests entering a trusted network segment, and removed 
   before leaving trusted network segments.   
    
5. Trust Boundary 
    
   The DCS architecture defines a trust boundary around the various 
   systems and servers that are owned, operated by, and/or controlled 
   by the service provider.  These trusted systems include the proxies 
   and various servers such as bridge servers, voicemail servers, 
   announcement servers, etc.  Outside of the trust boundary lie the 
   customer premises equipment, and various media servers operated by 
   third-party service providers. 
    
   Certain subscriber-specific information, such as billing and 
   accounting information, stays within the trust boundary.  Other 
   subscriber-specific information, such as endpoint identity, may be 
   presented to untrusted endpoints or may be withheld based on 
   subscriber profiles. 
    
   The User Agent (UA) may be either within the trust boundary or 
   outside the trust boundary, depending on exactly what function is 
   being performed and exactly how it is being performed.   
   Accordingly, the procedures followed by a User Agent are different 
   depending on whether the UA is within the trust boundary or outside 
   the trust boundary. 
    
   The following sections giving procedures for User Agents therefore 
   are subdivided into trusted user agents and untrusted user agents.  
   A trusted user agent is, in almost all cases, equivalent to the 
   combination of an untrusted user agent and a proxy. 
    
    
6. Requires and Supported Option Tag Values 
  
DCS Group    Category Informational - Expiration 2/28/02            5 


                SIP Proxy-to-Proxy Extensions                August 2001 
 
 
    
   UACs which support one or more of the extensions defined here 
   include a Supported header in all requests, except ACK, with the 
   option tag according to the following table: 
         
     Extension Headers Supported            Option tag 
      
     DCS-Trace-Party-ID                     DCS.Trace 
     DCS-Gate                               DCS.Gate 
     DCS-OSPS                               DCS.OSPS 
     DCS-Billing-ID and DCS-Billing-Info    DCS.Billing 
     DCS-LAES and DCS-Redirect              DCS.Laes 
        All of the above                    DCS 
    
    
   Proxies on the signaling path may have their own requirements for 
   the extensions defined in this document. If the Supported header in 
   the request lists the option tag value given above, a proxy can be 
   certain the UAC understands the extension headers corresponding to 
   that tag value. If, however, the Supported header was absent, or was 
   present but didn't include the desired tag value, the proxy MAY 
   reject the request with a 421, and indicate in the Require header 
   that one or more of the features are needed. As an alternative, the 
   proxy MAY forward the request, but MUST NOT add any extensions 
   defined in this document. This will allow the call to proceed 
   without the extensions. 
    
   If a proxy wishes to ensure that the UAS understands the extensions 
   described in this document, it MAY add a Requires header to the 
   request with the option tag value as given above.  If a proxy wishes 
   to ensure that other proxies understand the extensions described in 
   this document, it MAY add a Proxy-Requires header to the request 
   with the option tag value as given above. 
    
   If a proxy receives a request with a Proxy-Requires header with an 
   option tag value given above, but does not support the extensions 
   described in this document for that tag value, it MUST reject the 
   request with a 421. 
    
   If the UAS receives a request with a Requires header with an option 
   tag value given above, but does not support the extensions described 
   in this document for that tag value, it MUST reject the request with 
   a 421. 
    
   If a proxy or UAS receives a request with a Supported header with an 
   option tag value given above, and uses the extensions described in 
   this document in the response, it MUST include a Require header in 
   the response, with the appropriate tag value, indicating that the 
   feature was applied to the response. 
    
7. DCS-TRACE-PARTY-ID 
    

  
DCS Group    Category Informational - Expiration 2/28/02            6 


                SIP Proxy-to-Proxy Extensions                August 2001 
 
 
   In the telephone network, calling identity information is used to 
   support regulatory requirements such as the Customer Originated 
   Trace service, which provide the called party with the ability to 
   report obscene or harassing phone calls to law enforcement.  This 
   service is provided independent of caller-id, and operates even if 
   the caller requested anonymity.  The calling party is here 
   identified as the station originating the call. In order for this 
   service to be dependable, the called party must be able to trust 
   that the calling identity information being presented is valid.  
    
   To initiate a customer-originated-trace from an untrusted UAC, an 
   additional header is defined for the INVITE request sent from the 
   untrusted UAC to its proxy.  This header is called Dcs-Trace-Party-
   ID, and does not appear in any other request or response.  The proxy 
   receiving a properly formed INVITE request with this header performs 
   the service-provider-specific functions of recording and reporting 
   the caller identity for law enforcement action.  The proxy then 
   completes the call to either an announcement server or to the 
   service-provider's business office to collect further information 
   about the complaint.  A trusted UAC does not use this header, as it 
   initiates this action locally. 
    
7.1 Syntax 
    
   The BNF description of this header is: 
    
        Dcs-Trace-Party-ID = "Dcs-Trace-Party-ID" ":" "<" addr-spec ">"  
    
   Addr-spec contains a URL that identifies the remote endpoint.  Addr-
   spec typically contains a tel: URL giving the identity of the remote 
   endpoint, or a DCS-URL with a private-param when privacy was 
   requested by the remote endpoint.  This URL SHOULD be the value 
   received in the Remote-Party-ID header of the harassing call. 
    
7.2 Procedures at an Untrusted User Agent Client (UAC) 
    
   The UAC MUST insert a Dcs-Trace-Party-ID header into the initial 
   INVITE message for a customer-originated-trace request.  The UAC 
   MUST use a Request-URI with username of "call-trace" and host 
   identifying the provisioned proxy for the untrusted UA. 
    
7.3 Procedures at a Trusted User Agent Client (UAC) 
    
   A trusted UAC performs the customer-originated-trace in a manner 
   similar to the originating proxy, described below.  A trusted UAC 
   MUST NOT include this header in any request. 
    
7.4 Procedures at an Untrusted User Agent Server (UAS) 
    
   This header MUST NOT appear in any response sent by a UAS. 
    
7.5 Procedures at a Trusted User Agent Server (UAS) 
    
  
DCS Group    Category Informational - Expiration 2/28/02            7 


                SIP Proxy-to-Proxy Extensions                August 2001 
 
 
   This header MUST NOT appear in any request sent by a UAS. 
    
7.6 Procedures at Proxy 
    
   Two sets of proxy procedures are defined: (1) the procedures at an 
   originating proxy, and (2) the procedures at a terminating proxy. 
   The originating proxy is a proxy that received the INVITE request 
   from a non-trusted endpoint.  
    
   The terminating proxy is a proxy that sends the INVITE request to a 
   non-trusted endpoint.  
    
   A proxy that both receives the INVITE request from an untrusted 
   endpoint, and sends the INVITE request to an untrusted endpoint, 
   performs both sets of procedures.   
    
7.6.1 Procedures at Originating Proxy 
    
   If the Dcs-Trace-Party-ID header is present in the initial INVITE 
   request from the UAC, and the Request-URI of the INVITE has username 
   of "call-trace" and host of the originating proxy, the originating 
   proxy MUST perform the service-provider-specific functions of 
   recording and reporting the caller identity for law enforcement 
   action.  The proxy then MUST direct the call to either an 
   announcement server or to the service-provider's business office to 
   collect further information about the complaint. 
    
   The originating proxy MUST remove the Dcs-Trace-Party-ID header from 
   the INVITE before sending the request to another proxy or UAS. 
    
7.6.2 Procedures at Terminating Proxy 
    
   This header MUST NOT appear in any request or response sent by a 
   proxy. 
    
8. DCS-GATE 
    
   The Dcs-Gate header extension is used only on requests and responses 
   between proxies.  It never is sent to, nor sent by, an untrusted 
   UAC/UAS. 
    
   The proxy-proxy signaling establishes a synchronization path that 
   may be required by the PacketCable Dynamic Quality of Service (D-
   QoS) specification to coordinate the release of resources of the 
   call.  As per the D-QoS specification, the CMTS monitors the packet 
   flow, and generates a Gate-Close message in response to either an 
   explicit close request from the MTA/RGW, or when an equipment or 
   facility failure causes the connection to be broken. This Gate-Close 
   message is directed either to the local CMS/Agent, or to the remote 
   CMS/Agent, or to the CMTS serving the remote MTA, depending on the 
   capabilities of the endpoints.  When a CMS/Agent receives such a 
   Gate-Close message, it considers it identical to a call termination 
   request. 
  
DCS Group    Category Informational - Expiration 2/28/02            8 


                SIP Proxy-to-Proxy Extensions                August 2001 
 
 
    
   The Dcs-Gate header is used between proxies, and conveys the 
   location of the remote gate, identity of the gate, and the security 
   key to be used in gate coordination messages.   
    
8.1 Syntax 
    
   The BNF description of the Dcs-Gate header is as follows: 
    
        Dcs-Gate                = "Dcs-Gate" ":" hostport "/" Gate-ID  
                                   [";" Gate-Key ";" Gate-CipherSuite] 
                                   [Gate-strength-token] 
        Gate-ID                 = 1*alphanum 
        Gate-Key                = 1*alphanum 
        Gate-CipherSuite        = token 
        Gate-strength-token     = "required" | "optional" 
    
   Hostport gives the IP address or FQDN of the CMTS/EdgeRouter that 
   enforces the QoS, or the endpoint system that simulates the gate 
   coordination exchange on behalf of an edge router. 
    
   Gate-ID is a token used at the system named in the Hostport 
   parameter to identify the particular session.  For DCS systems, it 
   is a 32-bit quantity encoded as an 8-character string of digits 0-9 
   and letters a-f. 
    
   Gate-Key is a character string that provides keying information to 
   the system named in the hostport parameter.  The method of deriving 
   the actual keys for the gate coordination messages, and the security 
   procedures, are beyond the scope of this document. 
    
   Gate-CipherSuite is a character string that gives the type of 
   encryption algorithm that will be used to secure the gate 
   coordination messages.   
    
   Gate-Strength-Token specifies whether the gate coordination is 
   required or optional for the current session.  Its use is described 
   in the following sections. 
    
8.2 Procedures at an Untrusted User Agent Client (UAC) 
    
   This header is never sent to an untrusted UAC, and is never sent by 
   an untrusted UAC.   
    
8.3 Procedures at a Trusted User Agent Client (UAC) 
    
   A UAC located within the trust boundary of the service provider 
   performs the functions given in section 7.6.1. 
    
8.4 Procedures at an Untrusted User Agent Server (UAS) 
    
   This header is never sent to an untrusted UAS, and is never sent by 
   an untrusted UAS. 
  
DCS Group    Category Informational - Expiration 2/28/02            9 


                SIP Proxy-to-Proxy Extensions                August 2001 
 
 
    
8.5 Procedures at a Trusted User Agent Server (UAS) 
    
   A UAS located within the trust boundary of the service provider 
   performs the functions given in section 7.6.2. 
    
8.6 Procedures at Proxy 
    
   The Dcs-Gate header MUST NOT appear in any message other than the 
   initial INVITE request, or in the first non-100 response to that 
   request.  The proxy MUST remove the Dcs-Gate header in any request 
   or response sent to an untrusted endpoint. 
    
   Two sets of proxy procedures are defined: (1) the procedures at an 
   originating proxy, and (2) the procedures at a terminating proxy. 
   The originating proxy is a proxy that received the INVITE request 
   from a non-trusted endpoint.  
    
   The terminating proxy is a proxy that sends the INVITE request to a 
   non-trusted endpoint.  
    
   A proxy that both receives the INVITE request from an untrusted 
   endpoint, and sends the INVITE request to a non-trusted endpoint, 
   does not generate a Dcs-Gate header.   
    
   A proxy that is neither an originating proxy nor a terminating proxy 
   has no function in coordinating the commitment of resources.   
    
8.6.1 Procedures at Originating Proxy 
    
   The originating proxy MUST insert a Dcs-Gate header in the initial 
   INVITE message for a new call. 
    
   The originating proxy MUST identify the system that will perform 
   gate coordination (either the proxy itself, or the CMTS controlling 
   the media flow to the endpoint), and the identification token used 
   at that system to identify the call.  It MUST insert the IP address 
   or FQDN of that system in the hostport parameter of the Dcs-Gate 
   header, and the identification token as the Gate-ID. 
    
   The originating proxy MUST pick a security key and cipher suite for 
   the gate coordination message exchange, and insert these values in 
   the Dcs-Gate header. 
    
   If the system that will perform gate coordination is a CMTS, the 
   strength token MUST be given as required.  If the system that will 
   perform gate coordination is the proxy itself, the strength token 
   MAY be given as optional, or omitted. 
    
8.6.2 Procedures at Terminating Proxy 
    
   The terminating proxy MUST identify the system that will perform 
   gate coordination (either the proxy itself, or the CMTS controlling 
  
DCS Group    Category Informational - Expiration 2/28/02           10 


                SIP Proxy-to-Proxy Extensions                August 2001 
 
 
   the media flow to the endpoint), and the identification token used 
   at that system to identify the call.  Gate coordination will be 
   required for this call if (1) the strength token in the Dcs-Gate 
   header in the initial INVITE indicates 'required', or (2) the system 
   that will perform gate coordination at the destination is a CMTS.   
    
   If gate coordination is required for this call, the terminating 
   proxy MUST include a Dcs-Gate header in the first non-100 response 
   to the initial INVITE request.  It MUST insert the IP address or 
   FQDN of the system that will perform gate coordination in the 
   hostport parameter of the Dcs-Gate header, and the identification 
   token as the Gate-ID. 
    
   If gate coordination is not required for this call, the terminating 
   proxy SHOULD NOT include a Dcs-Gate header in the first non-100 
   response to the initial INVITE request. 
    
    
9. DCS-OSPS 
    
   Some calls have special call processing requirements that may not be 
   satisfied by normal user agent call processing. For example, when a 
   user is engaged in a call and another call arrives, such a call 
   might be rejected with a busy indication. However, some PSTN 
   operator services require special call processing. In particular, 
   the Busy line verification (BLV) and Emergency interrupt (EI) 
   services initiated by an operator from an Operator Services Position 
   System (OSPS) on the PSTN network have such a need. 
    
   In order to inform the SIP user agent that special treatment should 
   be given to a call, we use a new OSPS header field, which may be set 
   to a value indicating when a special type of call processing is 
   requested. We define two values in this header, namely "BLV" for 
   busy line verification and "EI" for emergency interrupt. 
    
   If the user agent decides to honor such a request, the response of 
   the user agent to an INVITE with either "BLV" or "EI" will not be a 
   busy indication. When such a request is received, the user agent may 
   look at the Remote-Party-ID, and decide only to honor the request if 
   "rpi-type" is "operator" and Remote-Party-ID was authenticated by 
   the user agent's proxy. 
    
9.1 Syntax 
    
        Dcs-OSPS        = "Dcs-OSPS" ":" OSPS-Tag 
        OSPS-Tag        = "BLV" | "EI" | token 
    
   The OSPS-Tag value of "token" is defined for extensibility, and is 
   reserved for future use. 
    
9.2 Procedures at an Untrusted User Agent Client (UAC) 
    

  
DCS Group    Category Informational - Expiration 2/28/02           11 


                SIP Proxy-to-Proxy Extensions                August 2001 
 
 
   The Dcs-OSPS header MUST NOT be sent in a request from an untrusted 
   UAC. 
    
9.3 Procedures at a Trusted User Agent Client (UAC) 
    
   This header is typically only inserted by a Media-Gateway-Controller 
   that is controlling a Media Gateway with special MF trunk 
   connections to a PSTN OSPS system.  This trunk group is usually 
   referred to as a BLV-trunk group, and employs special signaling 
   procedures that prevent inadvertant use.  Calls originating at the 
   PSTN OSPS system are sent over this trunk group, and result in an 
   INVITE request with the OSPS header. 
    
   This header MAY be sent in an INVITE request, and MUST NOT appear in 
   any message other than an INVITE request.   
    
   OSPS-Tag value "BLV" MUST NOT appear in any INVITE other than an 
   initial INVITE request establishing a new session.   
    
   OSPS-Tag value "EI" MUST NOT appear in any INVITE request other than 
   a subsequent INVITE within a pre-existing session established with 
   the OSPS-Tag value of "BLV". 
    
9.4 Procedures at an Untrusted User Agent Server (UAS) 
    
   If the UAS receives an INVITE request with an OSPS-Tag, call-leg 
   identification that matches an existing call, and the existing call 
   was not established with the OSPS-Tag, it MUST reject the request 
   with a 409-Conflict error code.  If the UAS receives an INVITE 
   request with an OSPS-Tag value of "EI", with call-leg identification 
   that does not match an existing call, it MUST reject the request 
   with a 409-Conflict error code. 
    
   If the UAS receives an INVITE that contains an OSPS-Tag value of 
   "BLV" and is not willing to cooperate in offering this service, it 
   MUST reject the request with a 403-Forbidden error code.  Otherwise, 
   the UAS MUST verify the Dcs-Remote-Party-ID header contains a rpi-
   type token with value "operator." If the call is not from a service-
   provider-certified operator, it SHOULD be rejected with a 401-
   Unauthorized error code.  
    
   The UAS SHOULD NOT reject an INVITE with a BLV OSPS-Tag due to a 
   busy condition.  The UAS MUST NOT respond with a 3xx-Redirect error 
   code to an INVITE with a BLV OSPS-Tag.  The UAS SHOULD NOT alert the 
   user of the incomming call attempt if the BLV OSPS-Tag is present in 
   the INVITE. 
    
   If an INVITE with OSPS-Tag of "BLV" is accepted (meeting all QoS 
   pre-conditions, etc.), the UAS MUST send an audio stream on this 
   conection to the address and port given in the SDP of the INVITE.  
   The UAS MAY perform a mixing operation between the two ends of an 
   active call.  The UAS MAY send a copy of the local voice stream, and 
   (if no activity on the local voice stream) send a copy of the 
  
DCS Group    Category Informational - Expiration 2/28/02           12 


                SIP Proxy-to-Proxy Extensions                August 2001 
 
 
   received voice stream. If the state of the UAS is idle, the UAS 
   SHOULD send a stream of silence packets to OSPS.  If the state of 
   the UAS is ringing or ringback, the UAS SHOULD send a ringback 
   stream to OSPS. 
    
   If an INVITE with OSPS-Tag of "EI" is accepted, the UAS MUST enable 
   communication between the UAC and the local user.  The UAS MAY put 
   any existing call on hold, or initiate an ad-hoc conference. 
    
9.5 Procedures at a Trusted User Agent Server (UAS) 
    
   The procedures at a trusted UAS are identical to those described in 
   8.4. 
    
9.6 Procedures at Proxy 
    
   There is no special processing of this header at proxies. 
 
10. DCS-BILLING-ID and DCS-BILLING-INFO 
    
   In order to deploy a residential telephone service at very large 
   scale across different domains, it is necessary for trusted elements 
   owned by different service providers to exchange trusted information 
   that conveys billing information and expectations about the parties 
   involved in the call. 
    
   There are many billing models used in deriving revenue from 
   telephony services today. Charging for telephony services is tightly 
   coupled to the use of network resources. It is outside the scope of 
   this document to discuss the details of these numerous and varying 
   methods. 
    
   A key motivating principle of the DCS architecture is the need for 
   network service providers to be able to control and monitor network 
   resources; revenue may be derived from the usage of these resources 
   as well as from the delivery of enhanced services such as telephony. 
   Furthermore, the DCS architecture recognizes the need for 
   coordination between call signaling and resource management.  This 
   coordination ensures that users are authenticated and authorized 
   before receiving access to network resources and billable enhanced 
   services. 
    
   Proxies have access to subscriber information and act as policy 
   decision points and trusted intermediaries along the call signaling 
   path. Edge routers provide the policy enforcement mechanism and also 
   capture and report usage information.  Edge routers need to be given 
   billing information that can be logged with Record Keeping or 
   Billing servers.  The proxy, as a central point of coordination 
   between call signaling and resource management, can provide this 
   information based on the authenticated identity of the calling and 
   called parties. Since there is a trust relationship among proxies, 
   they can be relied upon to exchange trusted billing information 
   pertaining to the parties involved in a call. 
  
DCS Group    Category Informational - Expiration 2/28/02           13 


                SIP Proxy-to-Proxy Extensions                August 2001 
 
 
    
   For these reasons, it is appropriate to consider defining SIP header 
   extensions to allow proxies to exchange information during call 
   setup. It is the intent that the extensions would only appear on 
   trusted network segments, should be inserted upon entering a trusted 
   network region, and removed before leaving trusted network segments. 
   Rules for inserting and removing headers exchanged only between 
   proxies are for further study. 
    
   Significant amounts of information is retrieved by an originating 
   proxy in its handling of a connection setup request from a user 
   agent.  Such information includes location information about the 
   subscriber (essential for emergency services calls), billing 
   information, and station information (e.g. coin operated phone). In 
   addition, while translating the destination number, information such 
   as the local-number-portability office code is obtained and will be 
   needed by all other proxies handling this call. 
    
   For Usage Accounting records, it is necessary to have an identifier 
   that can be associated with all the event records produced for the 
   call. Call-ID cannot be used as such an identifier since it is 
   selected by the originating user agent, and may not be unique among 
   all past calls as well as current calls. Further, since this 
   identifier is to be used by the service provider, it should be 
   chosen in a manner and in a format that meets the service provider's 
   needs. 
    
   Billing information may not necessarily be unique for each user 
   (consider the case of calls from an office all billed to the same 
   account).  Billing information may not necessarily be identical for 
   all calls made by a single user (consider prepaid calls, credit card 
   calls, collect calls, etc).  It is therefore necessary to carry 
   billing information separate from the calling and called party 
   identification.  Furthermore, some billing models call for split-
   charging where multiple entities are billed for portions of the 
   call. 
    
   The addition of two SIP General Header Fields allows for the capture 
   of billing information and billing identification for the duration 
   of the call. Alternative techniques such as multi-part attachments 
   will not coexist with encrypted messages. 
    
   It is the intent that the billing extensions would only appear on 
   trusted network segments, and MAY be inserted by a proxy in INVITE 
   requests entering a trusted network segment, and removed before 
   leaving trusted network segments.  The Dcs-Billing-ID and Dcs-
   Billing-Info header extensions are used only on requests and 
   responses between proxies.  They are never sent to, nor sent by, an 
   untrusted UAC/UAS. 
    
10.1 Syntax 
    

  
DCS Group    Category Informational - Expiration 2/28/02           14 


                SIP Proxy-to-Proxy Extensions                August 2001 
 
 
   The Dcs-Billing-ID and Dcs-Billing-Info headers are defined by the 
   following BNF. 
        Dcs-Billing-ID          = "Dcs-Billing-ID" ":"  
                                        Billing-Correlation-ID "/" FEID 
        Dcs-Billing-Info        = "Dcs-Billing-Info" ":"  
                                        [hostport] 1#Acct-Entry 
        Acct-Entry              = Acct-Charge-Number "/"  
                                        Acct-Calling-Number  "/" 
                                        Acct-Called-Number  
                                        ["/" Acct-Routing-Number 
                                        "/" Acct-Loc-Routing-Number] 
        Acct-Charge-Number      = "<" URI ">" 
        Acct-Calling-Number     = "<" URI ">" 
        Acct-Called-Number      = "<" URI ">" 
        Acct-Routing-Number     = "<" URI ">" 
        Acct-Loc-Routing-Number = "<" URI ">" 
        Billing-Correlation-ID  = 1*hex 
        FEID                    = 1*hex 
    
   The Dcs-billing-ID extension contains an identifier that can be used 
   by an event recorder to associate multiple usage records, possibly 
   from different sources, with a billable account. Dcs-billing-id is 
   chosen to be globally unique within the system for a window of 
   several months.  This header is only used between proxies. 
    
   The Billing-Correlation-ID is specified in other PacketCable 
   documents as a 16-byte binary structure, containing 4 bytes of NNTP 
   timestamp, 8 bytes of MAC address of the network element that 
   generated the ID, and 4 bytes of monotonically increasing sequence 
   number at that network element. This MUST be encoded in the Dcs-
   Billing-ID header as a hex string of up to 32 characters.  Leading 
   zeroes may be suppressed. 
    
   The Financial Entity ID (FEID) is specified in other PacketCable 
   documents as a 4-byte binary structure, containing the financial 
   identifier for that domain.  FEID can be associated with a type of 
   service and could be assigned to multiple domains by the same 
   provider.  A domain could contain multiple assigned FEIDs.  This 
   MUST be encoded in the Dcs-Billing-ID header as a hex string of up 
   to 8 characters.  Leading zeroes may be suppressed. 
    
   The Dcs-billing-info extension identifies a subscriber account 
   number of the payer, and other information necessary for accurate 
   billing of the service.   
    
   The hostport, if present, specifies a record keeping server for 
   event messages relating to this call.  If not present, the default 
   record keeping server for each network element is sent the event 
   messages.   
    
   Acct-data contains the information needed by the Gate Controller to 
   give to the CMTS for generation of event message records.  Acct-
   Charge-Number, Acct-Calling-Number, Acct-Called-Number, Acct-
  
DCS Group    Category Informational - Expiration 2/28/02           15 


                SIP Proxy-to-Proxy Extensions                August 2001 
 
 
   Routing-Number, and Acct-Location-Routing-Number are each defined as 
   URLs; they should all contain tel: URLs with E.164 formatted 
   addresses. 
    
10.2 Procedures at an Untrusted User Agent Client (UAC) 
    
   This header is never sent to an untrusted UAC, and is never sent by 
   an untrusted UAC.   
    
10.3 Procedures at a Trusted User Agent Client (UAC) 
    
   The UAC MUST generate the Billing-Correlation-ID for the call, and 
   insert the Dcs-Billing-ID header into the initial INVITE message 
   sent to the terminating proxy. 
    
   If the response to the initial INVITE is a 3xx-Redirect, the UAC 
   generates a new initial INVITE request to the destination specified 
   in the Contact: header, as per standard SIP.  If a UAC receives a 
   3xx-Redirect response to an initial INVITE, the INVITE generated by 
   the UAC MUST contain the Dcs-Billing-Info headers from the 3xx-
   Redirect response. 
    
   An originating proxy that includes a Refer-to header in a REFER 
   request MUST include a Dcs-Billing-Info header in the Refer-to's 
   URL.  This Dcs-Billing-Info header MUST include the accounting 
   information of the initiator. 
    
   A UAC that sends a mid-call REFER request including a Refer-to 
   header MUST include a Dcs-Billing-ID header and one or more Dcs-
   Billing-Info headers attached to the Refer-to.  The Dcs-Billing-Info 
   headers MUST include the complete set of Dcs-Billing-Info headers 
   associated with the current call, and MUST include one additional 
   Dcs-Billing-Info header (for the segment from the initiator) with 
   accounting information of the initiator.  
    
10.4 Procedures at an Untrusted User Agent Server (UAS) 
    
   This header is never sent to an untrusted UAS, and is never sent by 
   an untrusted UAS. 
    
10.5 Procedures at a Trusted User Agent Server (UAS) 
    
   The UAS MAY include a Dcs-Billing-Info header in the first non-100 
   response to an initial INVITE message if it wishes to override the 
   billing information that was present in the INVITE (e.g. for a toll-
   free call).  The decision to do this and the contents of the 
   resulting Dcs-Billing-Info header MUST be determined by service 
   provider policy provisioned in the UAS. 
    
   The UAS MUST add Dcs-Billing-Info headers to a 3xx-redirect response 
   to an initial INVITE.  All Dcs-Billing-Info headers present in the 
   initial INVITE MUST be copied to the 3xx-redirect response.  In 
   addition, the UAS MUST add an additional Dcs-Billing-Info header, 
  
DCS Group    Category Informational - Expiration 2/28/02           16 


                SIP Proxy-to-Proxy Extensions                August 2001 
 
 
   for the segment from the destination to the forwarded-to 
   destination, giving the accounting information for the call 
   forwarder. 
    
10.6 Procedures at Proxy 
    
   Two sets of proxy procedures are defined: (1) the procedures at an 
   originating proxy, and (2) the procedures at a terminating proxy. 
   The originating proxy is a proxy that received the INVITE request 
   from a non-trusted endpoint.  
    
   The terminating proxy is a proxy that sends the INVITE request to a 
   non-trusted endpoint. 
    
   For purposes of mid-call changes, such as call transfers, the proxy 
   that receives the request from a non-trusted endpoint is considered 
   the initiating proxy; the proxy that sends the request to a non-
   trusted endpoint is considered the recipient proxy.  Procedures for 
   the initiating proxy are included below with those for originating 
   proxies, while procedures for the recipient proxy are included with 
   those for terminating proxies. 
    
   A proxy that both receives the INVITE request from an untrusted 
   endpoint, and sends the INVITE request to a non-trusted endpoint, 
   does not generate Dcs-Billing-ID nor Dcs-Billing-Info headers.   
    
   A proxy that is neither an originating proxy nor a terminating proxy 
   has no function in manipulating existing calls.   
    
10.6.1 Procedures at Originating Proxy 
    
   The originating proxy MUST generate the Billing-Correlation-ID for 
   the call, and insert the Dcs-Billing-ID header into the initial 
   INVITE message sent to the terminating proxy. 
    
   If the Request-URI contains a private-param, and the decoded 
   username contains billing information, the originating proxy MUST 
   generate a Dcs-Billing-Info header with that decrypted information.  
   Otherwise, the originating proxy MUST determine the accounting 
   information for the call originator, and insert a Dcs-Billing-Info 
   header including that information. 
    
   If the response to the initial INVITE is a 3xx-Redirect, received 
   prior to a 18x-Ringing, the originating proxy generates a new 
   initial INVITE request to the destination specified in the Contact: 
   header, as per standard SIP.  If an originating proxy receives a 
   3xx-Redirect response to an initial INVITE prior to a 18x-Ringing 
   response, the INVITE generated by the proxy MUST contain the Dcs-
   Billing-Info headers from the 3xx-Redirect response. 
    
   If the response to the initial INVITE is a 3xx-Redirect, received 
   after a 18x-Ringing, the originating proxy generates a private URL 
   and places it in the Contact header of a 3xx-Redirect response sent 
  
DCS Group    Category Informational - Expiration 2/28/02           17 


                SIP Proxy-to-Proxy Extensions                August 2001 
 
 
   to the originating endpoint.  This private URL MUST contain the 
   sequence of Dcs-Billing-Info values, which indicate the complex 
   charging arrangement for the new call, and an expiration time very 
   shortly in the future, to limit the ability of the originator to re-
   use this private-param for multiple calls. 
    
   An originating proxy that includes a Refer-to header in a REFER 
   request MUST include a Dcs-Billing-Info header in the Refer-to's 
   URL.  This Dcs-Billing-Info header MUST include the accounting 
   information of the initiator. 
    
   An initiating proxy that sends a REFER request including a Refer-to 
   header MUST include a Dcs-Billing-ID header and one or more Dcs-
   Billing-Info headers in the Refer-to's URL.  The Dcs-Billing-Info 
   headers MUST include the complete set of Dcs-Billing-Info headers 
   associated with the current call, and MUST include one additional 
   Dcs-Billing-Info header (for the segment from the initiator) with 
   accounting information of the initiator.  
    
10.6.2 Procedures at Terminating Proxy 
    
   The terminating proxy MUST NOT send the Dcs-Billing-ID nor the Dcs-
   Billing-Info headers to a non-trusted destination. 
    
   The terminating proxy MAY include a Dcs-Billing-Info header in the 
   first non-100 response to an initial INVITE message if it wishes to 
   override the billing information that was present in the INVITE 
   (e.g. for a toll-free call).  The decision to do this and the 
   contents of the resulting Dcs-Billing-Info header MUST be determined 
   by service provider policy provisioned in the terminating proxy. 
   The terminating proxy MUST add Dcs-Billing-Info headers to a 3xx-
   redirect response to an initial INVITE.  All Dcs-Billing-Info 
   headers present in the initial INVITE MUST be copied to the 3xx-
   redirect response.  In addition, the terminating proxy MUST add an 
   additional Dcs-Billing-Info header, for the segment from the 
   destination to the forwarded-to destination, giving the accounting 
   information for the call forwarder. 
    
   A proxy receiving a mid-call REFER request that includes a Refer-to 
   header generates a private URL and places it in the Refer-to header 
   sent to the endpoint.  This private URL MUST contain the value of 
   Dcs-Billing-ID, the sequence of Dcs-Billing-Info values, which 
   indicate the complex charging arrangement for the new call, and an 
   expiration time very shortly in the future, to limit the ability of 
   the endpoint to re-use this private-param for multiple calls. 
    
11. DCS-LAES and DCS-REDIRECT 
    
   The Dcs-Laes extension contains the information needed to support 
   Lawfully Authorized Electronic Surveillance.  This header contains 
   the address and port of an Electronic Surveillance Delivery Function 
   for delivery of a duplicate stream of event messages related to this 
   call.  The header may also contain an additional address and port 
  
DCS Group    Category Informational - Expiration 2/28/02           18 


                SIP Proxy-to-Proxy Extensions                August 2001 
 
 
   for delivery of call content.  Security key information is included 
   to enable pairs of Delivery Functions to securely exchange 
   surveillance information.  This header is only used between proxies. 
    
   The Dcs-Redirect extension contains call identifying information 
   needed to support the requirements of Lawfully Authorized Electronic 
   Surveillance of redirected calls.  This header is only used between 
   proxies. 
    
11.1 Syntax 
    
   The format of the Dcs-Laes header is given by the following BNF. 
        Dcs-LAES        = "Dcs-LAES" ":" Laes-sig ["," Laes-content] 
                                ";" Laes-key 
        Laes-sig        = hostport 
        Laes-content    = hostport 
        Laes-key        = token 
        Dcs-Redirect    = "Dcs-Redirect" ":" Called-id  Redirector   
                                Num-redir 
        Called-id       = "<" SIP-URL ">" 
        Redirector      = "<" SIP-URL ">" 
        Num-redir       = 1*DIGIT 
    
   The values of Laes-sig and Laes-content are addresses of the 
   Electronic Surveillance Delivery Function, and used as the 
   destination address for call-identifying information and call-
   content, respectively.   
    
   Laes-key is a string generated by the proxy that is used by the 
   Delivery Function to securely transfer information between them. 
    
11.2 Procedures at an Untrusted User Agent Client (UAC) 
    
   This header is never sent to an untrusted UAC, and is never sent by 
   an untrusted UAC.   
    
11.3 Procedures at a Trusted User Agent Client (UAC) 
    
   The UAC checks for an outstanding lawfully authorized surveillance 
   order for the originating subscriber, and, if present, includes this 
   information in the Authorization for Quality of Service or signals 
   this information to the device performing the intercept (e.g. a 
   Media Gateway).   
    
   If the Dcs-LAES header is present in the 183-Session-Progress 
   response (indicating surveillance is required on the terminating 
   subscriber, but that the terminating equipment is unable to perform 
   that function), the UAC MUST include this information in the 
   Authorization for Quality of Service, or MUST signal this 
   information to the device performing the intercept (e.g. a Media 
   Gateway).   
    

  
DCS Group    Category Informational - Expiration 2/28/02           19 


                SIP Proxy-to-Proxy Extensions                August 2001 
 
 
   If a 3xx-Redirect response is received to the initial INVITE 
   request, and if a Dcs-LAES header is present in the 3xx response, 
   the UAC MUST include that header unchanged in the reissued INVITE.  
   The UAC MUST also include a Dcs-Redirect header containing the 
   original dialed number, the new destination number, and the number 
   of redirections that have occurred. 
    
   A UAC that includes a Refer-to header in a REFER request, when the 
   originating subscriber has an outstanding lawfully authorized 
   surveillance order, MUST include a Dcs-Laes header attached to the 
   Refer-to. The Dcs-LAES header MUST include the address and port of 
   the local Electronic Surveillance Delivery Function for a copy of 
   the call's event messages, MUST include the address and port of the 
   local Electronic Surveillance Delivery Function for the copy of call 
   content if call content is to be intercepted, and MUST include a 
   random string for use as a security key between the Delivery 
   Functions. 
    
   The trusted UAC MUST NOT send the Dcs-Laes and Dcs-Redirect headers 
   to an untrusted entity. 
    
    
11.4 Procedures at an Untrusted User Agent Server (UAS) 
    
   This header is never sent to an untrusted UAS, and is never sent by 
   an untrusted UAS.   
    
11.5 Procedures at a Trusted User Agent Server (UAS) 
    
   The UAS checks for an outstanding lawfully authorized surveillance 
   order for the terminating subscriber.  If present, the UAS includes 
   this information in the authorization for Quality of Service.   
    
   If the terminating equipment is unable to perform the required 
   surveillance (e.g. if the destination is a voicemail server), the 
   UAS MUST include a Dcs-LAES header in the 183-Session-Progress 
   response requesting the originating proxy to perform the 
   surveillance.  The Dcs-LAES header MUST include the address and port 
   of the local Electronic Surveillance Delivery Function for a copy of 
   the call's event messages, MUST include the address and port of the 
   local Electronic Surveillance Delivery Function for the copy of call 
   content if call content is to be intercepted, and MUST include a 
   random string for use as a security key between the Delivery 
   Functions. 
    
   If the response to the initial INVITE request is a 3xx-Redirect 
   response, and there is an outstanding lawfully authorized 
   surveillance order for the terminating subscriber, the UAS MUST 
   include a Dcs-Laes header in the 3xx-Redirect response, with 
   contents as described above.   
    
   The trusted UAS MUST NOT send the Dcs-Laes and Dcs-Redirect headers 
   to an untrusted entity. 
  
DCS Group    Category Informational - Expiration 2/28/02           20 


                SIP Proxy-to-Proxy Extensions                August 2001 
 
 
    
    
11.6 Procedures at Proxy 
    
   Two sets of proxy procedures are defined: (1) the procedures at an 
   originating proxy, and (2) the procedures at a terminating proxy. 
   The originating proxy is a proxy that received the INVITE request 
   from a non-trusted endpoint. 
    
   The terminating proxy is a proxy that sends the INVITE request to a 
   non-trusted endpoint. 
    
   For purposes of mid-call changes, such as call transfers, the proxy 
   that receives the request from a non-trusted endpoint is considered 
   the initiating proxy; the proxy that sends the request to a non-
   trusted endpoint is considered the recipient proxy.  Procedures for 
   the initiating proxy are included below with those for originating 
   proxies, while procedures for the recipient proxy are included with 
   those for terminating proxies. 
    
   A proxy that both receives the INVITE request from an untrusted 
   endpoint, and sends the INVITE request to a non-trusted endpoint, 
   does not generate Dcs-Laes nor Dcs-Redirect headers.   
    
   A proxy that is neither an originating proxy nor a terminating proxy 
   has no function in manipulating existing calls.   
    
11.6.1 Procedures at Originating Proxy 
    
   The originating proxy checks for an outstanding lawfully authorized 
   surveillance order for the originating subscriber, and, if present, 
   includes this information in the Authorization for Quality of 
   Service or signals this information to the device performing the 
   intercept (e.g. a Media Gateway).   
    
   If the Dcs-LAES header is present in the 183-Session-Progress 
   response (indicating surveillance is required on the terminating 
   subscriber, but that the terminating equipment is unable to perform 
   that function), the originating proxy MUST include this information 
   in the Authorization for Quality of Service, or MUST signal this 
   information to the device performing the intercept (e.g. a Media 
   Gateway).   
    
   If the Request-URI in an initial INVITE request contains the 
   private-param user parameter, the originating proxy MUST decrypt the 
   username information to find the real destination for the call, and 
   other special processing information. If electronic surveillance 
   information is contained in the decrypted username, the originating 
   proxy MUST generate a Dcs-LAES header with the surveillance 
   information.  
    
   If a 3xx-Redirect response is received to the initial INVITE request 
   prior to a 18x-Ringing, and if a Dcs-LAES header is present in the 
  
DCS Group    Category Informational - Expiration 2/28/02           21 


                SIP Proxy-to-Proxy Extensions                August 2001 
 
 
   3xx response, the originating proxy MUST include that header 
   unchanged in the reissued INVITE.  The originating proxy MUST also 
   include a Dcs-Redirect header containing the original dialed number, 
   the new destination number, and the number of redirections that have 
   occurred. 
    
   If a 3xx-Redirect response is received to the initial INVITE request 
   after a 18x-Ringing, the originating proxy generates a private URL 
   and places it in the Contact header of a 3xx-Redirect response sent 
   to the originating endpoint.  If a Dcs-Laes header is present in the 
   3xx response, this private URL MUST contain (1) the electronic 
   surveillance information from the 3xx-Redirect response, (2) the 
   original destination number, (3) the identity of the redirecting 
   party, and (4) the number of redirections of this call. 
    
   An originating proxy that includes a Refer-to header in a REFER 
   request, when the originating subscriber has an outstanding lawfully 
   authorized surveillance order, MUST include a Dcs-Laes header in the 
   Refer-to's URL. The Dcs-LAES header MUST include the address and 
   port of the local Electronic Surveillance Delivery Function for a 
   copy of the call's event messages, MUST include the address and port 
   of the local Electronic Surveillance Delivery Function for the copy 
   of call content if call content is to be intercepted, and MUST 
   include a random string for use as a security key between the 
   Delivery Functions. 
    
   An initiating proxy that sends a mid-call REFER request including a 
   Refer-to header, when the initiating subscriber has an outstanding 
   lawfully authorized surveillance order, MUST include a Dcs-Laes 
   header in the Refer-to's URL.  The Dcs-Laes header MUST include the 
   information listed above.  
    
   The originating proxy MUST NOT send the Dcs-Laes and Dcs-Redirect 
   headers to an untrusted entity. 
    
    
11.6.2 Procedures at Terminating Proxy 
    
   The terminating proxy checks for an outstanding lawfully authorized 
   surveillance order for the terminating subscriber.  If present, the 
   terminating proxy includes this information in the authorization for 
   Quality of Service.   
    
   The terminating proxy MUST NOT send the Dcs-Laes and Dcs-Redirect 
   headers to an untrusted entity. 
    
   If the terminating equipment is unable to perform the required 
   surveillance (e.g. if the destination is a voicemail server), the 
   terminating proxy MUST include a Dcs-LAES header in the 183-Session-
   Progress response requesting the originating proxy to perform the 
   surveillance.  The Dcs-LAES header MUST include the address and port 
   of the local Electronic Surveillance Delivery Function for a copy of 
   the call's event messages, MUST include the address and port of the 
  
DCS Group    Category Informational - Expiration 2/28/02           22 


                SIP Proxy-to-Proxy Extensions                August 2001 
 
 
   local Electronic Surveillance Delivery Function for the copy of call 
   content if call content is to be intercepted, and MUST include a 
   random string for use as a security key between the Delivery 
   Functions. 
    
   If the response to the initial INVITE request is a 3xx-Redirect 
   response, and there is an outstanding lawfully authorized 
   surveillance order for the terminating subscriber, the terminating 
   proxy MUST include a Dcs-Laes header in the 3xx-Redirect response, 
   with contents as described above.   
    
   A proxy receiving a mid-call REFER request that includes a Refer-to 
   header with a Dcs-laes header attached MUST generate a private URL 
   and place it in the Refer-to header sent to the endpoint.  This 
   private URL MUST contain the Dcs-Laes information from the attached 
   header. 
    
    
    
12. Security Considerations 
 
   Billing information is often considered sensitive and private 
   information to the customers.  It is therefore necessary that the 
   Proxies take precautions to protect this information from 
   eavesdropping and interception.  Use of IPSec between Proxies is 
   recommended. 
    
13. Notice Regarding Intellectual Property Rights 
    
   The IETF has been notified of intellectual property rights claimed 
   in regard to some or all of the specification contained in this 
   document.  For more information consult the online list of claimed 
   rights. 
    
14. References 







    
 
   1. Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3", BCP 
      9, RFC 2026, October 1996. 
    
   2  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement 
      Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997 
    
   3  DCS Group, "Architectural Considerations for Providing Carrier 
      Class Telephony Services Utilizing SIP-based Distributed Call 
 
  
DCS Group    Category Informational - Expiration 2/28/02           23 


                SIP Proxy-to-Proxy Extensions                August 2001 
 
 
 
      Control Mechanisms", draft-dcsgroup-sip-arch-04.txt, February 
      2001. 
    
    
    
 
    
15. Acknowledgements 
    
   The Distributed Call Signaling work in the PacketCable project is 
   the work of a large number of people, representing many different 
   companies.  The authors would like to recognize and thank the 
   following for their assistance: John Wheeler, Motorola; David 
   Boardman, Daniel Paul, Arris Interactive; Bill Blum, Jon Fellows, 
   Jay Strater, Jeff Ollis, Clive Holborow, Motorola; Doug Newlin, 
   Guido Schuster, Ikhlaq Sidhu, 3Com; Jiri Matousek, Bay Networks; 
   Farzi Khazai, Nortel; John Chapman, Bill Guckel, Michael Ramalho, 
   Cisco; Chuck Kalmanek, Doug Nortz, John Lawser, James Cheng, Tung-
   Hai Hsiao, Partho Mishra, AT&T; Telcordia Technologies; and Lucent 
   Cable Communications. 
    
    
16. Author's Addresses 
    
   Bill Marshall 
   AT&T 
   Florham Park, NJ  07932 
   Email: wtm@research.att.com  
    
   K. K. Ramakrishnan 
   TeraOptic Networks 
   Summit, NJ  07901 
   Email: kk@teraoptic.com  
    
   Ed Miller 
   Terayon 
   Louisville, CO  80027 
   Email: E.Miller@terayon.com  
    
   Glenn Russell 
   CableLabs 
   Louisville, CO  80027 
   Email: G.Russell@Cablelabs.com 
    
   Burcak Beser 
   Pacific Broadband Communications 
   San Jose, CA 
   Email: Burcak@pacband.com 
    
   Mike Mannette 
   3Com 
   Rolling Meadows, IL  60008 
  
DCS Group    Category Informational - Expiration 2/28/02           24 


                SIP Proxy-to-Proxy Extensions                August 2001 
 
 
   Email: Michael_Mannette@3com.com 
    
   Kurt Steinbrenner 
   3Com 
   Rolling Meadows, IL  60008 
   Email: Kurt_Steinbrenner@3com.com 
    
   Dave Oran 
   Cisco 
   Acton, MA  01720 
   Email: oran@cisco.com 
    
   Flemming Andreasen 
   Cisco 
   Edison, NJ 
   Email: fandreas@cisco.com 
    
   John Pickens 
   Com21 
   San Jose, CA 
   Email: jpickens@com21.com 
    
   Poornima Lalwaney 
   Nokia 
   San Diego, CA  92121 
   Email: poornima.lalwaney@nokia.com 
    
   Jon Fellows 
   Copper Mountain Networks 
   San Diego, CA  92121 
   Email: jfellows@coppermountain.com 
    
   Doc Evans 
   D. R. Evans Consulting 
   Boulder, CO  80303 
   Email: n7dr@arrl.net 
    
   Keith Kelly 
   NetSpeak 
   Boca Raton, FL  33587 
   Email: keith@netspeak.com 
    
    










  
DCS Group    Category Informational - Expiration 2/28/02           25 


                SIP Proxy-to-Proxy Extensions                August 2001 
 
 
    
Full Copyright Statement 
 
   "Copyright (C) The Internet Society (date). All Rights Reserved. 
   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published 
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any 
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph 
   are included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this 
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for 
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be 
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than 
   English.  The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and 
   will not be revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or 
   assigns.  This document and the information contained herein is 
   provided on an "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE 
   INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR 
   IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF 
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED 
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE." 
    
   Expiration Date This memo is filed as <draft-dcsgroup-sip-proxy-
   proxy-05.txt>, and expires February 28, 2002. 
    
    
    























  
DCS Group    Category Informational - Expiration 2/28/02           26 

