

Network Working Group                                   A. Phillips, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                          webMethods, Inc.
Expires: March 11, 2005                                         M. Davis
                                                                     IBM
                                                      September 10, 2004


                     Tags for Identifying Languages
                       draft-phillips-langtags-06

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at http://
   www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on March 11, 2005.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004). All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   This document describes the structure, content, construction, and
   semantics of language tags for use in cases where it is desirable to
   indicate the language used in an information object. It also
   describes how to register values for use in language tags and a
   construct for matching such language tags, including user defined
   extensions for private interchange. This document replaces RFC 3066
   (which replaced RFC 1766).







Phillips & Davis         Expires March 11, 2005                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                  September 2004


Table of Contents

   1.    Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.    The Language Tag . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.1   Syntax . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.2   Language Subtag Sources and Interpretation . . . . . . . . .  6
   2.2.1 Pre-Existing RFC 3066 Registrations  . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   2.2.2 Possibilities for Registration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   2.2.3 Classes of Conformance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   2.3   Choice of Language Tag . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   2.4   Meaning of the Language Tag  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
   2.4.1 Language Range . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
   2.4.2 Matching Language Tags . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
   2.4.3 Canonicalization of Language Tags  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
   2.5   Considerations for Private Use Subtags . . . . . . . . . . . 21
   3.    IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
   3.1   Format of the IANA Language Subtag Registry  . . . . . . . . 23
   3.2   Stability of IANA Registry Entries . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
   3.3   Registration Procedure for Subtags . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
   3.4   Extensions and Extensions Namespace  . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
   4.    Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
   5.    Character Set Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
   6.    Changes from RFC 3066  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
         References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
         Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
   A.    Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
   B.    Examples of Language Tags (Informative)  . . . . . . . . . . 42
   C.    Conversion of the RFC 3066 Language Tag Registry . . . . . . 44
         Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . 47






















Phillips & Davis         Expires March 11, 2005                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                  September 2004


1. Introduction

   Human beings on our planet have, past and present, used a number of
   languages. There are many reasons why one would want to identify the
   language used when presenting or requesting information.

   Information about a user's language preferences commonly needs to be
   identified so that appropriate processing can be applied. For
   example, the user's language preferences in a browser can be used to
   select web pages appropriately. A choice of language preference can
   also be used to select among tools (such as dictionaries) to assist
   in the processing or understanding of content in different languages.

   In addition, knowledge about the particular language used by some
   piece of information content may be useful or even required by some
   types of information processing; for example spell-checking,
   computer-synthesized speech, Braille transcription, or high-quality
   print renderings.

   One means of indicating the language used is by labeling the
   information content with a language identifier. These identifiers can
   also be used to specify user preferences when selecting information
   content, or for labeling additional attributes of content and
   associated resources.

   These identifiers can also be used to indicate additional attributes
   of content that are closely related to the language. In particular,
   it is often necessary to indicate specific information about the
   dialect, writing system, or orthography used in a document or
   resource, as these attributes may be important for the user to obtain
   information in a form that they can understand, or important in
   selecting appropriate processing resources for the given content.

   This document specifies an identifier mechanism, a registration
   function for values to be used with that identifier mechanism, and a
   construct for matching against those values. It also defines a
   mechanism for private use values and future extension and describes
   how private use, registered values, and matching interact.

   This document replaces RFC 3066, which replaced RFC 1766. For a list
   of changes in this document, see Section 6.

   The keywords "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC 2119] [11].






Phillips & Davis         Expires March 11, 2005                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                  September 2004


2. The Language Tag

2.1 Syntax

   The language tag is composed of one or more parts: A primary language
   subtag and a (possibly empty) series of subsequent subtags. Subtags
   are distinguished by their length, position in the subtag sequence,
   and content, so that each type of subtag can be recognized solely by
   these features. This makes it possible to construct a parser that can
   extract and assign some semantic information to the subtags, even if
   specific subtag values are not recognized. Thus a parser need not
   have an up-to-date copy of the registered subtag values to perform
   most searching and matching operations.






































Phillips & Davis         Expires March 11, 2005                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                  September 2004


   The syntax of this tag in ABNF [RFC 2234] [12] is:

   Language-Tag = (lang
                   *("-"extlang)
                   ["-"script]
                   ["-"region]
                   *("-"variant)
                   *("-"extension)
                   ["-"privateuse])
                   / privateuse         ; private-use tag
                   / grandfathered      ; grandfathered registrations

   lang            = 2*3ALPHA           ; shortest ISO 639 code
                   / registered-lang
   extlang         = 3ALPHA             ; reserved for future use
   script          = 4ALPHA             ; ISO 15924 code
   region          = 2ALPHA             ; ISO 3166 code
                   / 3DIGIT             ; UN country number
   variant         = ALPHA(4*7alphanum) ; registered variants
                   / DIGIT(3*7alphanum)
   extension       = singleton 1*("-"(2*8alphanum)) ; extension subtag(s)
   privateuse      = "x" 1*("-"(1*8alphanum))       ; private use subtag(s)
   singleton       = 1ALPHA             ; single letters (except x, which has special meaning)
   registered-lang = 4*8ALPHA           ; registered language subtag
   grandfathered   = ALPHA*(alphanum / "-")           ; grandfathered registration
   alphanum        = (ALPHA / DIGIT)    ; letters and numbers

                      Figure 1: Language Tag ABNF

   The character "-" is HYPHEN-MINUS (ABNF: %x2D). Whitespace is not
   permitted in a language tag. Spaces in the ABNF are for legibility
   and are not part of the grammar. For examples of language tags, see
   Appendix B. Note that although [RFC 2234] [12] refers to octets, the
   language tags described in this document are sequences of characters
   from the US-ASCII repertoire. Language tags may be used in documents
   and applications that use other encodings, so long as these encompass
   the US-ASCII repertoire. An example of this would be an XML document
   that uses the Unicode UTF-16LE encoding.

   The tags and their subtags, including private-use and extensions, are
   to be treated as case insensitive: there exist conventions for the
   capitalization of some of them, but these should not be taken to
   carry meaning.

   For example:

   o  [ISO 639] [3] recommends that language codes be written in lower
      case ('mn' Mongolian).



Phillips & Davis         Expires March 11, 2005                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                  September 2004


   o  [ISO 3166] [4] recommends that country codes be capitalized ('MN'
      Mongolia).

   o  [ISO 15924] [2] recommends that script codes use lower case with
      the initial letter capitalized ('Cyrl' Cyrillic).

   However, in the language tags defined by this document, the tag
   "mn-Cyrl-MN" is not distinct from "MN-cYRL-mn" or "mN-cYrL-Mn" (or
   any other combination) and each of these variations conveys the same
   meaning: Mongolian written in the Cyrillic script as used in
   Mongolia.

   For informative examples of language tags, see Appendix B at the end
   of this document.

2.2 Language Subtag Sources and Interpretation

   The namespace of language tags and their subtags is administered by
   the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA) [16] according to the
   rules in Section 3 of this document. The registry maintained by IANA
   is the source for valid subtags: other standards referenced in this
   section provide the source material for that registry.

   Terminology in this section:

   o  Tag or tags refers to a complete language tag, such as
      "fr-Latn-CA". Examples of tags in this document are enclosed in
      double-quotes ("en-US").

   o  Subtag refers to a specific section of a tag, separated by hyphen,
      such as the subtag 'Latn' in "fr-Latn-CA". Examples of subtags in
      this document are enclosed in single quotes ('Latn').

   o  Code or codes refers to tags defined in external standards (and
      which are used as subtags in this document). For example, 'Latn'
      is an ISO 15924 [2] script code which was used to define the
      'Latn' script subtag for use in a language tag. Examples of codes
      in this document are enclosed in single quotes ('en', 'Latn').

   The definitions in this section apply to the various subtags within
   the language tags defined by this document, excepting those
   "grandfathered" tags defined in Section 2.2.1.

   Language tags are designed so that each subtag has unique length and
   content restrictions. These make identification of the subtag's type
   possible, even if the content of the subtag itself is unrecognized.
   This allows tags to be parsed and processed without reference to the
   latest version of the underlying standards or the IANA registry and



Phillips & Davis         Expires March 11, 2005                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                  September 2004


   makes the associated exception handling when parsing tags simpler.

   Subtags in the IANA registry that do not come from an underlying
   standard can only appear in specific positions in a tag.
   Specifically, they can only occur as primary language subtags or as
   variant subtags.

   Note that sequences of private-use and extension subtags MUST occur
   at the end of the sequence of subtags and MUST NOT be interspersed
   with subtags defined elsewhere in this document.

   Single letter and digit subtags are reserved for current or future
   use. These include the following current uses:

   o  The single letter subtag 'i' is reserved for grandfathered,
      IANA-registered primary language subtags, such as "i-enochian".

   o  The single letter subtag 'x' is reserved to introduce a sequence
      of private-use subtags. The interpretation of any private-use
      subtags is defined solely by private agreement and is not defined
      by the rules in this section or in any standard or registry
      defined in this document.

   o  All other single letter subtags are reserved to introduce
      standardized extension subtag sequences as described in Section
      3.4.

   The primary subtag is the first subtag in a language tag and cannot
   be empty. Except as noted, the primary subtag is the language subtag.
   The following rules apply to the assignment and interpretation of the
   primary subtag:

   o  All 2-character language subtags were defined in the IANA registry
      according to the assignments found in the standard ISO 639, "Code
      for the representation of names of languages" [ISO 639-1] [3], or
      using assignments subsequently made by the ISO 639 Part 1
      maintenance agency or governing standardization bodies.

   o  All 3-character language subtags were defined in the IANA registry
      according to the assignments found in ISO 639 Part 2, "Codes for
      the representation of names of languages -- Part 2: Alpha-3 code
      [ISO 639-2] [1]", or assignments subsequently made by the ISO 639
      Part 2 maintenance agency or governing standardization bodies.

   o  The subtags in the range 'qaa' through 'qtz' are reserved for
      private use in language tags. These subtags correspond to codes
      reserved by ISO 639-2 for private use. These codes MAY be used for
      non-registered primary-language subtags (instead of using



Phillips & Davis         Expires March 11, 2005                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                  September 2004


      private-use subtags following 'x-'). Please refer to Section 2.5
      for more information on private use subtags.

   o  All language subtags of 4 to 8 characters in length in the IANA
      registry were defined via the registration process in Section 3.3
      and MAY be used to form the primary language subtag. At the time
      this document was created, there were no examples of this kind of
      subtag and future registrations of this type will be discouraged:
      primary languages are STRONGLY RECOMMENDED for registration with
      ISO 639 and subtags rejected by ISO 639 will be closely
      scrutinized before they are registered with IANA.

   o  The single character subtag 'x' as the primary subtag indicates
      that the language tag consists solely of subtags whose meaning is
      defined by private agreement. For example, in the tag "x-fr-CH",
      the subtags 'fr' and 'CH' should not be taken to represent the
      French language or the country of Switzerland (or any other value
      in the IANA registry) unless there is a private agreement in place
      to do so. See Section 2.5.

   o  Other values MUST NOT be assigned to the primary subtag except by
      revision or update of this document.

   Note: For languages that have both an ISO 639-1 2-character code and
   an ISO 639-2 3-character code, only the ISO 639-1 2-character code is
   defined in the IANA registry.

   Note: For languages that have no ISO 639-1 2-character code and for
   which the ISO 639-2/T (Terminology) code and the ISO 639-2/B
   (Bibliographic) codes differ, only the Terminology code is defined in
   the IANA registry. At the time this document was created, all
   languages that had both kinds of 3-character code were also assigned
   a 2-character code; it is not expected that future assignments of
   this nature will occur.

   Note: To avoid problems with versioning and subtag choice as
   experienced during the transition between RFC 1766 and RFC 3066, as
   well as the canonical nature of subtags defined by this document, the
   ISO 639 Registration Authority Joint Advisory Committee (RA-JAC) has
   included the following statement in [6]:

   "A language code already in ISO 639-2 at the point of freezing ISO
   639-1 shall not later be added to ISO 639-1. This is to ensure
   consistency in usage over time, since users are directed in Internet
   applications to employ the alpha-3 code when an alpha-2 code for that
   language is not available."

   In order to avoid instability of the canonical form of tags, if a



Phillips & Davis         Expires March 11, 2005                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                  September 2004


   2-character code is added to ISO 639-1 for a language for which a
   3-character code was already included in ISO 639-2, the 2-character
   code will not be added as a subtag in the registry. See Section 3.2.

   For example, if some content were tagged with 'haw' (Hawaiian), which
   currently has no 2-character code, the tag would not be invalidated
   if ISO 639-1 were to assign a 2-character code to the Hawaiian
   language at a later date.

   For example, one of the grandfathered IANA registrations is
   "i-enochian". The subtag 'enochian' could be registered in the IANA
   registry as a primary language subtag (assuming that ISO 639 does not
   register this language first), making tags such as "enochian-AQ" and
   "enochian-Latn" valid.

   The following rules apply to the extended language subtags:

   o  Three letter subtags immediately following the primary subtag are
      reserved for future standardization, anticipating work that is
      currently under way on ISO 639.

   o  Extended language subtags MUST follow the primary subtag and
      precede any other subtags.

   o  There MAY be any additional number of extended language subtags.

   o  Extended language subtags will not be registered except by
      revision of this document.

   o  Extended language subtags MUST NOT be used to form language tags
      except by revision of this document.

   Example: In a future revision or update of this document, the tag
   "zh-gan" (registered under RFC 3066) might become a valid
   non-grandfathered tag in which the subtag 'gan' might represent the
   Chinese dialect 'Gan'.

   The following rules apply to the script subtags:

   o  All 4-character subtags were defined according to ISO 15924
      [2]--"Codes for the representation of the names of scripts":
      alpha-4 script codes, or subsequently assigned by the ISO 15924
      maintenance agency or governing standardization bodies, denoting
      the script or writing system used in conjunction with this
      language.

   o  Script subtags MUST immediately follow the primary language subtag
      and all extended language subtags and MUST occur before any other



Phillips & Davis         Expires March 11, 2005                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                  September 2004


      type of subtag described below.

   o  The subtags 'Qaaa' through 'Qabx' are reserved for private use in
      language tags. These subtags correspond to codes reserved by ISO
      15924 for private use. These codes MAY be used for non-registered
      script values. Please refer to Section 2.5 for more information on
      private-use subtags.

   o  Script subtags cannot be registered using the process in Section
      3.3 of this document. Variant subtags may be considered for
      registration for that purpose.

   Example: "de-Latn" represents German written using the Latin script.

   The following rules apply to the region subtags:

   o  All 2-character subtags following the primary subtag were defined
      in the IANA registry according to the assignments found in ISO
      3166 [4]--"Codes for the representation of names of countries and
      their subdivisions - Part 1: Country codes"--alpha-2 country codes
      or assignments subsequently made by the ISO 3166 maintenance
      agency or governing standardization bodies.

   o  All 3-character codes consisting of digit (numeric) characters
      were defined in the IANA registry according to the assignments
      found in UN Standard Country or Area Codes for Statistical  Use
      [5] or assignments subsequently made by the governing standards
      body.

   o  The region subtag defines language variations used in a specific
      region, geographic, or political area. Region subtags MUST follow
      any language, extended language, or script subtags and MUST
      precede all other subtags.

   o  There may be at most one region subtag in a language tag.

   o  Generally the ISO 3166 code is used to form the subtag except for
      countries with ambiguous ISO 3166 alpha-2 codes. Please refer to
      Section 2.3 for information on the reasons why the UN M49 code may
      be canonical for a specific country or region.

   o  UN numeric codes assigned to 'macro-geographical (continental)' or
      sub-regions not associated with an assigned ISO 3166 alpha-2 code
      are defined in the IANA registry and are valid for use in language
      tags.

   o  UN numeric codes for 'economic groupings' or 'other groupings' are
      not defined in the IANA registry and MUST NOT be used to form



Phillips & Davis         Expires March 11, 2005                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                  September 2004


      language tags.

   o  The alphanumeric codes in Appendix X of the UN document are also
      undefined and MUST NOT be used. (At the time this document was
      created these values match the ISO 3166 alpha-2 codes.)

   o  The subtags 'AA', 'QM'-'QZ', 'XA'-'XZ', and 'ZZ' are reserved for
      private use in language tags. These subtags correspond to codes
      reserved by ISO 3166 for private use. These codes MAY be used for
      private use region subtags (instead of using a private-use subtag
      sequence). Please refer to Section 2.5 for more information on
      private use subtags.

   "de-Latn-CH" represents German ('de') written using the Latin script
   ('Latn') as used in Switzerland ('CH').

   "sr-Latn-YU" represents Serbian ('sr') written using Latin script
   ('Latn') as used in Serbia and Montenegro ('YU'). Note: Stability
   rules described in Section 3.2 apply to this language tag).

   "es-419" represents Spanish ('es') as used in the UN-defined Latin
   America and Caribbean region ('419').

   The following rules apply to the variant subtags:

   o  Variant subtags, as a collection in the IANA registry, are not
      associated with any external standard. Variant subtags and their
      meanings are defined by the registration process defined in
      Section 3.3.

   o  Variant subtags MUST follow all of the other defined subtags, but
      precede any extension or private-use subtag sequences.

   o  More than one variant MAY be used to form the language tag.

   o  Variant subtags MUST be registered with IANA according to the
      rules in Section 3.3 of this document before being used to form
      language tags. In order to distinguish variants from other types
      of subtags, registrations must meet the following length and
      content restrictions:

      *  Variant subtags that begin with a letter (a-z, A-Z) MUST be at
         least five characters long.

      *  Variant subtags that begin with a digit (0-9) MUST be at least
         four characters long.

      *  The maximum length of a variant subtag is eight characters



Phillips & Davis         Expires March 11, 2005                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                  September 2004


         long.

   "en-boont" represents the Boontling dialect of English.

   "de-CH-1996" represents German as used in Switzerland and as written
   using the spelling reform beginning in the year 1996 C.E.

   The following rules apply to extensions:

   o  Extension subtags are separated from the other subtags defined in
      this document by a single-letter subtag ("singleton"). The
      singleton MUST be one allocated to a registration authority via
      the mechanism described in Section 3.4 and cannot be the letter
      'x', which is reserved for private-use subtag sequences, or the
      letter 'i', which is reserved because it is used in a few
      grandfathered tags.

   o  Note: Private-use subtag sequences starting with the singleton
      subtag 'x-' are described below.

   o  An extension MUST follow at least a primary language subtag. That
      is, a language tag cannot begin with an extension. Extensions
      extend language tags, they do not override or replace them. For
      example, "a-value" is not a well-formed language tag, while
      "de-a-value" is.

   o  Each singleton subtag MUST appear at most one time in each tag
      (other than as a private-use subtag). That is, singleton subtags
      MUST NOT be repeated. For example, the tag "en-a-bbb-a-ccc" is
      invalid because the subtag '-a' appears twice.

   o  Extension subtags MUST meet all of the requirements for the
      content and format of subtags defined in this document.

   o  Extension subtags MUST meet whatever requirements are set by the
      document that defines their singleton prefix and whatever
      requirements are provided by the maintaining authority.

   o  Each extension subtag MUST be from two to eight characters long
      and consist solely of letters or digits, with each subtag
      separated by a single '-'.

   o  Each singleton MUST be followed by at least one extension subtag.
      For example, the tag "tlh-a-b-foo" is invalid because the first
      singleton 'a' is followed immediately by another singleton 'b'.

   o  Extension subtags MUST follow all language, extended language,
      script, region and variant subtags in a tag.



Phillips & Davis         Expires March 11, 2005                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                  September 2004


   o  All subtags following the singleton and before another singleton
      are part of the extension. Example: In the tag "fr-a-Latn", the
      subtag 'Latn' does not represent the script subtag 'Latn' defined
      in the IANA Language Subtag Registry. Its meaning is defined by
      the extension 'a'.

   o  In the event that more than one extension appears in a single tag,
      the tag SHOULD be canonicalized as described in Section 2.4.3.

   o  When comparing or matching language tags, extensions MAY be
      ignored.

   For example, if the prefix '-r' and the shown subtags were defined,
   then the following tag would be a valid example:
   "en-Latn-GB-boont-r-extended-sequence-x-private"

   The following rules apply to private-use subtags:

   o  Private-use subtags are separated from the other subtags defined
      in this document by the reserved single-character subtag 'x'.

   o  Private-use subtags MUST follow all language, extended language,
      script, region, variant, and extension subtags in the tag. Another
      way of saying this is that all subtags following the singleton 'x'
      MUST be considered private use. Example: The subtag 'US' in the
      tag "en-x-US" is a private use subtag.

   o  Unlike Extensions, a tag MAY consist entirely of private-use
      subtags.

   o  No source is defined for private use subtags. Use of private use
      subtags is by private agreement and SHOULD NOT be considered part
      of this document.

   For example: Users who wished to utilize SIL Ethnologue for
   identification might agree to exchange tags such as
   "az-Arab-x-AZE-derbend". This example contains two private-use
   subtags. The first is 'AZE' and the second is 'derbend'.

2.2.1 Pre-Existing RFC 3066 Registrations

   Existing IANA-registered language tags from RFC 1766 and/or RFC 3066
   that are not defined by additions to this document maintain their
   validity. IANA will maintain these tags in the registry under either
   the "grandfathered" or "redundant" type. For more information see
   Appendix C.





Phillips & Davis         Expires March 11, 2005                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                  September 2004


2.2.2 Possibilities for Registration

   Possibilities for registration of subtags include:

   o  Primary language subtags for languages not listed in ISO 639 that
      are not variants of any listed or registered language, can be
      registered. At the time this document was created there were no
      examples of this form of subtag. Before attempting to register a
      language subtag, there MUST be an attempt to register the language
      with ISO 639. No language subtags will be registered for codes
      that exist in ISO 639-1 or ISO 639-2, which are under
      consideration by the ISO 639 maintenance or registration
      authorities, or which have never been attempted for registration
      with those authorities. If ISO 639 has previously rejected a
      language for registration, it is reasonable to assume that there
      MUST be additional very compelling evidence of need before it will
      be registered in the IANA registry (to the extent that it is very
      unlikely that any subtags will be registered of this type).

   o  Dialect or other divisions or variations within a language, its
      orthography, writing system, regional variation, or historical
      usage may be registered as variant subtags. An example is the
      'scouse' subtag (the Scouse dialect of English).

   This document leaves the decision on what subtags are appropriate or
   not to the registration process described in Section 3.3.

   ISO 639 defines a maintenance agency for additions to and changes in
   the list of languages in ISO 639. This agency is:

   International Information Centre for Terminology (Infoterm)
   Aichholzgasse 6/12, AT-1120
   Wien, Austria
   Phone: +43 1 26 75 35 Ext. 312 Fax: +43 1 216 32 72

   ISO 639-2 defines a maintenance agency for additions to and changes
   in the list of languages in ISO 639-2. This agency is:

   Library of Congress
   Network Development and MARC Standards Office
   Washington, D.C. 20540 USA
   Phone: +1 202 707 6237  Fax: +1 202 707 0115
   URL: http://www.loc.gov/standards/iso639

   The maintenance agency for ISO 3166 (country codes) is:

   ISO 3166 Maintenance Agency
   c/o International Organization for Standardization



Phillips & Davis         Expires March 11, 2005                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                  September 2004


   Case postale 56
   CH-1211 Geneva 20 Switzerland
   Phone: +41 22 749 72 33  Fax: +41 22 749 73 49
   URL: http://www.iso.org/iso/en/prods-services/iso3166ma/index.html

   The registration authority for ISO 15924 (script codes) is:

   Unicode Consortium Box 391476
   Mountain View, CA 94039-1476, USA
   URL: http://www.unicode.org/iso15924

   The Statistics Division of the United Nations Secretariat maintains
   the Standard Country or Area Codes for Statistical Use and can be
   reached at:

   Statistical Services Branch
   Statistics Division
   United Nations, Room DC2-1620
   New York, NY 10017, USA

   Fax: +1-212-963-0623
   E-mail: statistics@un.org
   URL: http://unstats.un.org/unsd/methods/m49/m49alpha.htm

2.2.3 Classes of Conformance

   Implementations may wish to express their level of conformance with
   the rules and practices described in this document. There are
   generally two classes of conforming implementations: "well-formed"
   processors and "validating" processors. Claims of conformance SHOULD
   explicitly reference one of these definitions.

   An implementation that claims to check for well-formed language tags
   MUST:

   o  Check that the tag and all of its subtags, including extension and
      private-use subtags, conform to the ABNF or that the tag is on the
      list of grandfathered tags.

   o  Check that singleton subtags that identify extensions do not
      repeat. For example, the tag "en-a-xx-b-yy-a-zz" is not
      well-formed.

   Well-formed processors are strongly encouraged to implement the
   default fallback mechanism in Section 2.4.2 and the associated
   canonicalization rules contained in Section 2.4.3.

   An implementation that claims to be validating MUST:



Phillips & Davis         Expires March 11, 2005                [Page 15]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                  September 2004


   o  Check that the tag is well-formed.

   o  Specify the particular registry date for which the implementation
      performs validation of subtags.

   o  Check that either the tag is a grandfathered tag, or that all
      language, script, region, and variant subtags consist of valid
      codes for use in language tags according to the IANA registry as
      of the particular date specified by the implementation.

   o  Specify which, if any, extension RFCs as defined in Section 3.4
      are supported, including version, revision, and date.

   o  For any such extensions supported, check that all subtags used in
      that extension are valid.

   o  If the processor generates tags, it MUST do so in canonical form,
      including any supported extensions, as defined in Section 2.4.3.


2.3 Choice of Language Tag

   One may occasionally be faced with several possible tags for the same
   body of text.

   Interoperability is best served when all users use the same language
   tag in order to represent the same language. If an application has
   requirements that make the rules here inapplicable, then that
   application risks damaging interoperability. Users of this document
   are strongly discouraged against defining their own rules for
   language tag choice and matching.

   Standards, protocols and applications that reference this document
   normatively but apply different rules to the ones given in this
   section MUST specify how the procedure varies from the one given
   here.

   1.  Use as precise a tag as possible, but no more specific than is
       justified. For example, 'de' might suffice for tagging an email
       written in German, while "de-CH-1996" is probably unnecessarily
       precise for such a task.

   2.  Avoid using subtags that add no distinguishing information about
       the content. For example, the script subtag in "en-Latn-US" is
       generally unnecessary, since nearly all English texts are written
       in the Latin script.

   3.  Use the canonical subtag from the IANA registry in preference to



Phillips & Davis         Expires March 11, 2005                [Page 16]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                  September 2004


       any of its aliases. For example, you SHOULD use 'he' for Hebrew
       in preference to 'iw'.

   4.  You SHOULD NOT use the 'UND' (Undetermined) language subtag to
       label content, even if the language is unknown. Omitting the tag
       is preferred. Some protocols may force you to give a value for
       the language tag and the 'UND' subtag may be useful when
       specifying a range (as described in Section 2.4.2).

   5.  You SHOULD NOT use the 'MUL' (Multiple) subtag if the protocol
       allows you to use multiple languages, as is the case for the
       Content-Language header in HTTP.

   To ensure consistent backward compatibility, this document contains
   several provisions to account for potential instability in the
   standards used to define the subtags that make up language tags.
   These provisions mean that no language tag created under the rules in
   this document will become obsolete. In addition, tags that are in
   canonical form will always be in canonical form.

2.4 Meaning of the Language Tag

   The language tag always defines a language as spoken (or written,
   signed or otherwise signaled) by human beings for communication of
   information to other human beings. Computer languages such as
   programming languages are explicitly excluded.

   If a language tag B contains language tag A as a prefix, then B is
   typically "narrower" or "more specific" than A. For example,
   "zh-Hant-TW" is more specific than "zh-Hant".

   This relationship is not guaranteed in all cases: specifically,
   languages that begin with the same sequence of subtags are NOT
   guaranteed to be mutually intelligible, although they may be. For
   example, the tag "az" shares a prefix with both "az-Latn"
   (Azerbaijani written using the Latin script) and "az-Cyrl"
   (Azerbaijani written using the Cyrillic script). A person fluent in
   one script may not be able to read the other, even though the text
   might be identical. Content tagged as "az" most probably is written
   in just one script and thus might not be intelligible to a reader
   familiar with the other script.

   The relationship between the tag and the information it relates to is
   defined by the standard describing the context in which it appears.
   Accordingly, this section can only give possible examples of its
   usage.

   o  For a single information object, the associated language tags



Phillips & Davis         Expires March 11, 2005                [Page 17]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                  September 2004


      might be interpreted as the set of languages that is required for
      a complete comprehension of the complete object. Example: Plain
      text documents.

   o  For an aggregation of information objects, the associated language
      tags could be taken as the set of languages used inside components
      of that aggregation.  Examples: Document stores and libraries.

   o  For information objects whose purpose is to provide alternatives,
      the associated language tags could be regarded as a hint that the
      content is provided in several languages, and that one has to
      inspect each of the alternatives in order to find its language or
      languages. In this case, the presence of multiple tags might not
      mean that one needs to be multi-lingual to get complete
      understanding of the document. Example: MIME multipart/
      alternative.

   o  In markup languages, such as HTML and XML, language information
      can be added to each part of the document identified by the markup
      structure (including the whole document itself). For example, one
      could write <span lang="FR">C'est la vie.</span> inside a
      Norwegian document; the Norwegian-speaking user could then access
      a French-Norwegian dictionary to find out what the marked section
      meant. If the user were listening to that document through a
      speech synthesis interface, this formation could be used to signal
      the synthesizer to appropriately apply French text-to-speech
      pronunciation rules to that span of text, instead of misapplying
      the Norwegian rules.


2.4.1 Language Range

   A Language Range is a set of languages whose tags all begin with the
   same sequence of subtags. A Language Range can be represented by a
   'language-range' tag, by using the definition from HTTP/1.1 [15] :

      language-range = language-tag / "*"

   That is, a language-range has the same syntax as a language-tag or is
   the single character "*". This definition of language-range implies
   that there is a semantic relationship between tags that share the
   same subtag prefixes.

   A language-range matches a language-tag if it exactly equals the tag,
   or if it exactly equals a prefix of the tag such that the first
   character following the prefix is "-". (That is, the language-range
   "en-de" matches the language tag "en-DE-boont", but not the language
   tag "en-Deva".)



Phillips & Davis         Expires March 11, 2005                [Page 18]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                  September 2004


   The special range "*" matches any tag. A protocol which uses language
   ranges may specify additional rules about the semantics of "*"; for
   instance, HTTP/1.1 specifies that the range "*" matches only
   languages not matched by any other range within an "Accept-Language:"
   header.

   As noted above, not all languages or content denoted by a specific
   language-range may be mutually intelligible and this use of a prefix
   matching rule does not imply that language tags are assigned to
   languages in such a way that it is always true that if a user
   understands a language with a certain tag, then this user will also
   understand all languages with tags for which this tag is a prefix.
   The prefix rule simply allows the use of prefix tags if this is the
   case.

2.4.2 Matching Language Tags

   Implementations that are searching for content or otherwise matching
   language tags to a language-range [Section 2.4.1] may choose to
   assume that there is a semantic relationship between two tags that
   share common prefixes. This is called 'language tag fallback'. The
   most common implementation follows this pattern:

   1.  When searching for content using language tag fallback, the
       language tag is progressively truncated from the end until a
       match is located. For example, starting with the tag
       "en-US-boont", searches or matches would first be performed with
       the whole tag, then with "en-US", and finally with "en". This
       allows some flexibility in finding content in accordance with
       Rules 1 and 2 in Section 2.3. It also typically provides better
       results when data is not available at a specific level of tag
       granularity or is sparsely populated (than if the default
       language for the system or content were used). Any implementation
       that uses this technique should ensure that appropriate data is
       available on each level.

   Tag to match: en-US-boont
   1. en-US-boont
   2. en-US
   3. en

               Figure 2: Default Fallback Pattern Example

   2.

       Note:  Implementations may choose to implement different styles
          of matching for different kinds of processing. For example, an
          implementation could treat an absent script subtag as a



Phillips & Davis         Expires March 11, 2005                [Page 19]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                  September 2004


          "wildcard" field; thus "az-AZ" would match "az-AZ",
          "az-Cyrl-AZ", "az-Latn-AZ", etc. but not "az". If one item is
          to be choosen, the implementation could pick among those
          matches based on other information, such as the most likely
          script used in the language/region in question. Because the
          language subtag cannot be absent, the 'UND' subtag can
          sometimes be used as a 'wildcard' for this style of matching.
          For example, in a query where you want to select all language
          tags that contain 'Latn' as the script code and 'AZ' as the
          region code, you could use "und-Latn-AZ".

       Note:  Private-use and Extension subtags are orthogonal to
          language tag fallback. By default, implementations SHOULD
          ignore both private-use and extension subtags and follow the
          default fallback pattern (above). Thus a request to match the
          tag "en-US-boont-x-1943" would produce exactly the same
          information content as the example above.

   3.  Implementations that choose to interpret one or more private-use
       or extension subtags can choose a different fallback pattern or
       use the private-use or extension subtags to interpret content in
       a different fashion.

   4.  Implementations that choose not to interpret one or more
       private-use or extension subtags SHOULD NOT remove or modify
       these extensions in content that they are processing.

   5.  Any language tag processor MAY match language tags using simple
       string comparisons and the default fallback pattern and SHOULD
       use this pattern for unrecognized extension subtag sequences that
       are processed for matching. When performing canonicalization of
       language tags for the purpose of matching, implementations MUST
       NOT reorder the subtags within an extension or private-use subtag
       sequence.

   6.  Extension and private-use subtags MAY be ignored when matching or
       comparing language tags to a language-range (such as when
       performing language negotiation or selecting content).

   7.  Some applications of language tags may want or need to consider
       extensions and private-use subtags when matching tags. If
       extensions and private-use subtags are included in a matching
       process that utilizes the default fallback mechanism, then the
       implementation MUST canonicalize the language tags and/or ranges
       before performing the matching. Note that implementations that
       claim to be "well-formed" processors as defined in Section 2.2.3
       generally fall into this category.




Phillips & Davis         Expires March 11, 2005                [Page 20]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                  September 2004


2.4.3 Canonicalization of Language Tags

   Since a particular language tag or language-range may be processed
   many times, language tags SHOULD always be created or generated in a
   canonical form suitable for matching using the default fallback
   mechanism.

   A language tag is in canonical form when:

   1.  The tag is well-formed according the rules in Section 2.1 and
       Section 2.2.

   2.  None of the subtags in the language tag has a canonical_value
       mapping in the IANA registry (see Section 3.1). Subtags with a
       canonical_value mapping must be replaced with their mapping in
       order to canonicalize the tag.

   3.  If more than one extension subtag sequence exists, the extension
       sequences are ordered into case-insensitive ASCII order by
       singleton subtag.

   Example: The language tag "en-A-aaa-B-ccc-bbb-x-xyz" is in canonical
   form, while "en-B-ccc-bbb-A-aaa-X-xyz" is well-formed but not in
   canonical form.

   Example: The language tag "en-NH" (English as used in the New
   Hebrides) is not canonical because the 'NH' subtag has a canonical
   mapping to 'VU' (Vanuatu).

   Note: Canonicalization of language tags does not imply anything about
   the use of upper or lowercase letter in subtags as described in
   Section 2.1. All comparisons MUST be performed in a case-insensitive
   manner.

   An extension MUST define any relationships that may exist between the
   various subtags in the extension and thus MAY define an alternate
   canonicalization scheme for the extension's subtags. Extensions MAY
   define how the order of the extension's subtags are interpreted. For
   example, an extension could define that its subtags are in canonical
   order when the subtags are placed into ASCII order: that is,
   "en-a-aaa-bbb-ccc" instead of "en-a-ccc-bbb-aaa". Another extension
   might define that the order of the subtags influences their semantic
   meaning (so that "en-b-ccc-bbb-aaa" has a different value from
   "en-b-aaa-bbb-ccc").

2.5 Considerations for Private Use Subtags

   Private-use subtags require private agreement between the parties



Phillips & Davis         Expires March 11, 2005                [Page 21]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                  September 2004


   that intend to use or exchange language tags that use them and great
   caution should be used in employing them in content or protocols
   intended for general use. Private-use subtags are simply useless for
   information exchange without prior arrangement.

   The value and semantic meaning of private-use tags and of the subtags
   used within such a language tag are not defined by this document.

   The use of subtags defined in the IANA registry as having a specific
   private use meaning convey more information that a purely private use
   tag prefixed by the singleton subtag 'x-'. For applications this
   additional information may be useful.

   For example, the private-use region subtags in the range AA, QM-QZ,
   XA-XZ and ZZ (derived from ISO 3166 private use codes) may be used to
   form a language tag. A tag such as "zh-Hans-XQ" conveys a great deal
   of public, interchangeable information about the language material
   (that it is Chinese in the simplified Chinese script and is suitable
   for some geographic region 'XQ'). While the precise geographic region
   is not known outside of private agreement, the tag conveys far more
   information than an opaque tag such as "x-someLang", which contains
   no information about the language subtag or script subtag outside of
   the private agreement.

   However, in some cases content tagged with private use subtags may
   interact with other systems in a different and possibly unsuitable
   manner compared to tags that use opaque, privately defined subtags,
   so the choice of the best approach may depend on the particular
   domain in question.






















Phillips & Davis         Expires March 11, 2005                [Page 22]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                  September 2004


3. IANA Considerations

   This section deals with the processes and requirements necessary to
   maintain the registry of subtags and extensions for use in language
   tags as defined by this document and in accordance with the
   requirements of RFC 2434 [14].

   The language subtag registry will be maintained so that, except for
   extension subtags, it is possible to validate all of the subtags that
   appear in a language tag under the provisions of this document or its
   revisions or successors. In addition, the meaning of the various
   subtags will be unambiguous and stable over time. (The meaning of
   private-use subtags, of course, is not defined by the IANA registry.)

   The registry defined under this document contains a comprehensive
   list of all of the subtags valid in language tags. This allows
   implementers a straightforward and reliable way to validate language
   tags.

3.1 Format of the IANA Language Subtag Registry

   The IANA Language Subtag Registry will consist of a text file that is
   machine readable in the format described in this section, plus copies
   of the registration forms approved by the Language Subtag Reviewer in
   accordance with the process described in Section 3.3. With the
   exception of the registration forms for grandfathered tags, no
   registration records will be maintained for the initial set of
   subtags.

   Each record in the subtag registry will consist of a series of fields
   separated by semicolons and terminated by a newline. Text appearing
   after a "#" symbol contains comments. Whitespace surrounding fields
   in the file is ignored. Lists inside a field are comma separated.

   There is a single date record at the start of the file which
   indicates the most recent modification date of the file. It has two
   fields: the type field is "date", and the second field is the
   modification date, in ISO 8601 format. For example: 2004-06-28
   represents June 28, 2004 in the Gregorian calendar:

      date; 2004-06-28

   The fields in each subtag record, in order, are:

      type; subtag; description; date; canonical_value;
      recommended_prefix # comments





Phillips & Davis         Expires March 11, 2005                [Page 23]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                  September 2004


   o  Semicolons delimit each of the fields.

   o  Empty fields (and their semicolons) at the end of the record may
      be omitted.

   o  Leading or trailing whitespace in each field is not part of the
      content.

   o  When the type is "grandfathered" or "redundant", then the subtag
      field is actually a whole tag.

   o  The "recommended_prefix" field is empty, except where the type is
      "variant"

   o  Notes are always presented as comments at the end, after a hash
      ("#") mark.

   o  The sequence '..' denotes a range of values. Such a range
      represents all subtags of the same length that are alphabetically
      within that range, including the values explicitly mentioned. For
      example 'a..c' denotes the values 'a', 'b', and 'c'.

   The field 'type' MUST consist of one of the following strings:
   "language", "extlang", "script", "region", "variant",
   "grandfathered", and "redundant" and denotes the type of subtag (or
   tag, in the case of "grandfathered" and "redundant").

   The field 'subtag' contains the subtag being defined.

   The field 'description' contains a description of the subtag
   transcribed into ASCII.

   The field 'date' contains the date the record was added to the
   registry in ISO 8601 format. For example: 2004-06-28 represents June
   28, 2004, in the Gregorian calendar.

   The field 'canonical value' represents a canonical mapping of this
   record to a subtag record of the same 'type'. Note that this field
   MUST NOT be modified: therefore a subtag whose record contains no
   canonical mapping when the record is created is a canonical form and
   will remain so.

   The field 'recommended prefix' is for use with registered variants
   and contains a comma separated list of language-ranges considered
   most appropriate for use with this subtag. Additional values can be
   added to this field for variants only via additional registration.
   Other modification of this field (such as removing or changing
   values) is not permitted.



Phillips & Davis         Expires March 11, 2005                [Page 24]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                  September 2004


   Notes and comments may contain additional information about the
   subtag, as deemed appropriate for understanding the registry and
   implementing language tags using the various subtags. These values
   can be changed via the registration process and no guarantee of
   stability is provided.


   # IANA Language Subtag Registry
   # This registry lists all valid subtags for language tags
   # created under RFC XXXX.
   date; 2004-08-07

   # language codes: ISO 639 and registered codes

   # ISO 639-1 (alpha-2) codes
   language; aa; Afar; 2004-07-06; ;
   language; ab; Abkhazian; 2004-07-06; ;
   language; ae; Avestan; 2004-07-06; ;
   language; he; hebrew; 2004-06-28; ;
   language; iw; hebrew; 2004-06-28; he ; #note mapping
   language; qaa..qtz; PRIVATE USE; 2004-07-06; ;
   language; raj; Rajasthani; 2004-07-06; ;
   language; seuss; Hypothetical Language; 2005-04-01 ; ;# registered language

   # script codes: ISO 15924

   script; Arab; Arabic; 2004-07-06; ;
   script; Armn; Armenian; 2004-07-06; ;
   script; Bali; Balinese; 2004-07-06; ;
   # region codes: ISO 3166 and UN codes

   # ISO 3166-1 alpha-2 codes

   region; AA; PRIVATE USE; 2004-08-01; ;
   region; AD; Andorra; 2004-07-06; ;
   region; AE; United Arab Emirates; 2004-07-06; ;
   region; AF; Afghanistan; 2004-07-06; ;
   region; CS; Czechoslovakia; 2004-06-28; ;
   region; YU; Serbia and Montenegro; 2004-06-28; ;# changed 2003-07-23;  formerly Yugoslavia

   # United Nations M.49 numeric codes
   region; 001; World; 2004-07-06; ;
   region; 002; Africa; 2004-07-06; ;
   region; 003; North America; 2004-07-06; ;
   region; 005; South America; 2004-07-06; ;

   ## registered variants




Phillips & Davis         Expires March 11, 2005                [Page 25]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                  September 2004


   variant; boont; Boontling; 2003-02-14; ; en
   variant; gaulish; Gaulish; 2001-05-25; ; cel
   variant; guoyu; Mandarin or Standard Chinese; 1999-12-18; ; zh

   # grandfathered from RFC 3066

   grandfathered; en-GB-oed; English, Oxford English Dictionary spelling; 2003-07-09; ;
   grandfathered; i-ami; 'Amis; 1999-05-25; ;
   grandfathered; i-bnn; Bunun; 1999-05-25; ;

   # redundant
   # The following codes were registered as complete tags, but can now be
   # composed of registered subtags and do not require registration.

   redundant; art-lojban; Lojban; 2001-11-11; ;  # use language art + variant lojban
   redundant; az-Arab; Azerbaijani in Arabic script; 2003-05-30; ;  # use language az + script Arab
   redundant; az-Cyrl; Azerbaijani in Cyrillic script; 2003-05-30; ;  # use language az + script Cyrl
   redundant; en-boont; Boontling; 2003-02-14; ;  # use language en + variant boont

                Figure 3: Example of the Registry Format

   Maintenance of the registry requires that as new codes are assigned
   by ISO 639, ISO 15924, and ISO 3166, the Language Subtag Reviewer
   will evaluate each assignment, determine whether it conflicts with
   existing registry entries, and submit the information to IANA for
   inclusion in the registry.

   The Language Subtag Reviewer MUST ensure that new subtags meet the
   requirements in Section 2.3 or submit an appropriate alternate subtag
   as described in that section. She or he will use the following form
   to submit this information:

   LANGUAGE SUBTAG REGISTRATION FORM (NEW RECORD)
   Record Text:
   Type:
   Subtag:
   Description:
   Date:
   Canonical Mapping:
   Recommended Prefix:
   Note:

                                Figure 4

   The field 'record text' contains the exact record that IANA is to
   insert into the Language Subtag Registry. The contents of the
   remaining fields must exactly match those in this field.




Phillips & Davis         Expires March 11, 2005                [Page 26]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                  September 2004


   Whenever an entry is created or modified in the registry, the 'date'
   record at the start of the registry is updated to reflect the most
   recent modification date in ISO 8601 format.

3.2 Stability of IANA Registry Entries

   The stability of entries and their meaning in the registry is
   critical to the long term stability of language tags. The rules in
   this section guarantee that a specific language tag's meaning is
   stable over time and will not change and that the choice of language
   tag for specific content is also stable over time.

   These rules specifically deal with how changes to codes (including
   withdrawal and deprecation of codes) maintained by ISO 639, ISO
   15924, ISO 3166, and UN M49 are reflected in the IANA Language Subtag
   Registry. Assignments to the IANA Language Subtag Registry MUST
   follow the following stability rules:

   o  Values in the fields 'type', 'subtag', 'date' and 'canonical
      value' MUST NOT be changed and are guaranteed to be stable over
      time.

   o  Values in the 'description' field MUST NOT be changed in meaning;
      they may be changed to add information or change names to the most
      common modern usage. For example, countries occasionally change
      their official names: an historical example of this would be
      "Upper Volta" changing to "Burkina Faso (Upper Volta)".

   o  Values in the field 'recommended prefix' MAY be added via the
      registration process.

   o  Values in the field 'recommended prefix' MAY be modified, so long
      as the modifications broaden the set of recommended prefixes. That
      is, a recommended prefix MAY be replaced by another recommended
      prefix, as long as the new prefix describes a language range for
      the old prefix. For example, the prefix "en-US" could be replaced
      by "en", but not by the ranges "en-Latn", "fr", or "en-US-boont".

   o  Values in the field 'recommended prefix' MUST NOT be removed.

   o  The field 'notes' MAY be added, changed, modified, or removed via
      the registration process or any of the processes or considerations
      described in this section.

   o  Codes assigned by ISO 639, ISO 15924, and ISO 3166 that do not
      conflict with existing subtags of the associated type and whose
      meaning is not the same as an existing subtag of the same type are
      entered into the IANA registry as new records and their value is



Phillips & Davis         Expires March 11, 2005                [Page 27]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                  September 2004


      canonical for the meaning assigned to them.

   o  Codes assigned by ISO 639, ISO 15924, or ISO 3166 that are
      withdrawn by their respective maintenance or registration
      authority remain valid in language tags. The registration process
      MAY be used to add a note indicating the withdrawal of the code by
      the respective standard.

   o  Codes assigned by ISO 639, ISO 15924, or ISO 3166 that do not
      conflict with existing subtags of the associated type but which
      represent the same meaning as an existing subtag of that type are
      entered into the IANA registry as new records. The field
      'canonical value' for that record MUST contain the existing subtag
      of the same meaning

      Example If ISO 3166 were to assign the code 'IM' to represent the
         value "Isle of Man" (represented in the IANA registry by the UN
         M49 code '833'), '833' remains the canonical subtag and 'IM'
         would be assigned '833' as an alias. This prevents tags that
         are in canonical form from becoming non-canonical.

      Example If the tag 'enochian' were registered as a primary
         language subtag and ISO 639 subsequently assigned an alpha-3
         code to the same language, the new ISO 639 code would be
         entered into the IANA registry as a subtag with a canonical
         mapping to 'enochian'. The new ISO code can be used, but it is
         not canonical.

   o  Codes assigned by ISO 639, ISO 15924, or ISO 3166 that conflict
      with existing subtags of the associated type MUST NOT be entered
      into the registry. The following additional considerations apply:

      *  For ISO 639 codes, if the newly assigned code's meaning is not
         represented by a subtag in the IANA registry, the Language
         Subtag Reviewer, as described in Section 3.3, shall prepare a
         proposal for entering in the IANA registry as soon as practical
         a registered language subtag as an alternate value for the new
         code. The form of the registered language subtag will be at the
         discretion of the Language Subtag Reviewer and must conform to
         other restrictions on language subtags in this document.

      *  For ISO 15924 codes, if the newly assigned code's meaning is
         not represented by a subtag in the IANA registry, the Language
         Subtag Reviewer, as described in Section 3.3, shall prepare a
         proposal for entering in the IANA registry as soon as practical
         a registered variant subtag as an alternate value for the new
         code. The form of the registered variant subtag will be at the
         discretion of the Language Subtag Reviewer and must conform to



Phillips & Davis         Expires March 11, 2005                [Page 28]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                  September 2004


         other restrictions on variant subtags in this document.

      *  For ISO 3166 codes, if the newly assigned code's meaning is
         associated with the same UN M49 code as another 'region'
         subtag, then the existing region subtag remains as the
         canonical entry for that region and no new entry is created. A
         note MAY be added to the existing region subtag indicating the
         relationship to the new ISO 3166 code.

      *  For ISO 3166 codes, if the newly assigned code's meaning is
         associated with a UN M49 code that is not represented by an
         existing region subtag, then then the Language Subtag Reviewer,
         as described in Section 3.3, shall prepare a proposal for
         entering the appropriate numeric UN country code as an entry in
         the IANA registry.

      *  For ISO 3166 codes, if there is no associated UN numeric code,
         then the Language Subtag Reviewer SHALL petition the UN to
         create one. If there is no response from the UN within ninety
         days of the request being sent, the Language Subtag Reviewer
         shall prepare a proposal for entering in the IANA registry as
         soon as practical a registered variant subtag as an alternate
         value for the new code. The form of the registered variant
         subtag will be at the discretion of the Language Subtag
         Reviewer and must conform to other restrictions on variant
         subtags in this document. This situation is very unlikely to
         ever occur.

   o  Stability provisions apply to grandfathered tags with this
      exception: should all of the subtags in a grandfathered tag become
      valid subtags in the IANA registry, then the grandfathered tag
      MUST be marked as redundant. Note that this will not affect
      language tags that match the grandfathered tag, since these tags
      will now match valid generative subtag sequences. For example, if
      the subtags 'min' and 'nan' in the language tag "zh-min-nan" were
      to be registered as extended language subtags, then the
      grandfathered tag "zh-min-nan" would be deprecated (but existing
      content or implementations that use "zh-min-nan" would remain
      valid).


3.3 Registration Procedure for Subtags

   The procedure given here MUST be used by anyone who wants to use a
   subtag not currently in the IANA Language Subtag Registry.

   Only primary language and variant subtags will be considered for
   independent registration. (Subtags required for stability and subtags



Phillips & Davis         Expires March 11, 2005                [Page 29]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                  September 2004


   required to keep the registry synchronized with ISO 639, ISO 15924,
   ISO 3166, and UN M.49 within the limits defined by this document are
   the only exceptions to this. See Section 3.2.)

   This procedure MAY also be used to register or alter the information
   for the "description", "note", or "recommended prefix" fields in a
   subtag's record as described in Figure 3. Changes to all other fields
   in the IANA registry is NOT permitted.

   If registering a new language subtag, the process starts by filling
   out the registration form reproduced below. Note that each response
   is not limited in size and should take the room necessary to
   adequately describe the registration.

   LANGUAGE SUBTAG REGISTRATION FORM
   1. Name of requester:
   2. E-mail address of requester:
   3. Subtag to be registered:
   4. Type of Registration:
      [ ] language
      [ ] variant
   5. Description of subtag (in English or transcribed into ASCII):
   6. Intended meaning of the subtag:
   7. Recommended prefix(es) of subtag (for variants):
   8. Native name of the language or variation (transcribed into ASCII):
   9. Reference to published description of the language (book or article):
   10. Any other relevant information:

                                Figure 5

   The subtag registration form MUST be sent to
   <ietf-languages@iana.org> for a two week review period before it can
   be submitted to IANA. (This is an open list. Requests to be added
   should be sent to <ietf-languages-request@iana.org>.)

   Variant subtags are generally registered for use with a particular
   language range (see Section 2.4.2). For example, the subtag 'boont'
   is intended for use with language tags that match the language range
   "en", since Boontling is a dialect of English. In other words, the
   subtag 'boont' is intended for use in tags that start with 'en' and
   could include tags such as "en-Latn-boont" or "en-US-boont". This
   information MUST be provided in the registration form.

   Any registered subtag MAY be incorporated into a variety of language
   tags, according to the rules of Section 2.1, including tags that do
   not match any of the intended language ranges of the registered
   subtag (Note that this is probably a poor choice). This makes
   validation simpler and thus more uniform across implementations, and



Phillips & Davis         Expires March 11, 2005                [Page 30]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                  September 2004


   does not require new registrations for different intended language
   ranges.

   The intended language ranges for a given registered subtag will be
   maintained in the IANA registry as a guide to usage. If it is
   necessary to add an additional intended language range to that list
   for an existing language tag, that can be done by filing an
   additional registration form. In that form, the "Any other relevant
   information:" field should indicate that it is the addition of an
   additional intended language range.

   Requests to add a language range to a subtag that imply a different
   semantic meaning will probably be rejected. For example, a request to
   add the language range "de" to the subtag 'nedis' so that the tag
   "de-nedis" represented some German dialect would be rejected. The
   'nedis' subtag represents a particular Slovenian dialect and the
   additional registration would change the semantic meaning assigned to
   the subtag. A separate subtag SHOULD be created for such instances.

   When the two week period has passed, the subtag reviewer, who is
   appointed by the IESG, either forwards the request to IANA@IANA.ORG,
   or rejects it because of significant objections raised on the list or
   due to problems with constraints in this document (which should be
   explicitly cited). Note that the reviewer can raise objections on the
   list if he or she so desires. The important thing is that the
   objection must be made publicly.

   The applicant is free to modify a rejected application with
   additional information and submit it again; this restarts the two
   week comment period.

   Decisions made by the reviewer may be appealed to the IESG [RFC 2028]
   [10] under the same rules as other IETF decisions [RFC 2026] [19].
   All registered forms are available online in the directory http://
   www.iana.org/numbers.html under "languages".

   Updates of registrations follow the same procedure as registrations.
   The subtag reviewer decides whether to allow a new registrant to
   update a registration made by someone else; normally objections by
   the original registrant would carry extra weight in such a decision.

   Registrations are permanent and stable. Once registered, subtags will
   not be removed from the registry and will remain the canonical method
   of referring to a specific language or variant. This provision does
   not apply to grandfathered tags, which may become deprecated due to
   registration of subtags.

   Note: The purpose of the "published description" in the registration



Phillips & Davis         Expires March 11, 2005                [Page 31]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                  September 2004


   form is intended as an aid to people trying to verify whether a
   language is registered or what language or language variation a
   particular subtag refers to. In most cases, reference to an
   authoritative grammar or dictionary of that language will be useful;
   in cases where no such work exists, other well known works describing
   that language or in that language may be appropriate. The subtag
   reviewer decides what constitutes "good enough" reference material.
   This requirement is not intended to exclude particular languages or
   dialects due to the size of the speaker population or lack of a
   standardized orthography. Minority languages will be considered
   equally on their own merits.

3.4 Extensions and Extensions Namespace

   Extension subtags are those introduced by single-letter subtags other
   than 'x-'. They are reserved for the generation of identifiers which
   contain a language component, and are compatible with applications
   that process language tags according to this specification. For
   example, they might be used to define locale identifiers, which are
   generally based on language.

   The structure and form of extensions are defined by this document so
   that implementations can be created that are forward compatible with
   applications that may be created using single-letter subtags in the
   future. In addition, defining a mechanism for maintaining
   single-letter subtags will lend to the stability of this document by
   reducing the likely need for future revisions or updates.

   IANA will maintain a registry of allocated single-letter subtags.
   This registry contains the following information: letter identifier;
   name; purpose; RFC defining the subtag namespace and its use; and the
   name, URL, and email address of the maintaining authority.

   Allocation of a single-letter subtag shall take the form of an RFC
   defining the name, purpose, processes, and procedures for maintaining
   the subtags. The maintaining or registering authority, including
   name, contact email, discussion list email, and URL location of the
   registry must be indicated clearly in the RFC. The RFC MUST specify
   each of the following:

   o  The specification MUST reference the specific version or revision
      of this document that govern its creation and MUST reference this
      section of this document.

   o  The specification and all subtags defined by the specification
      MUST follow the ABNF and other rules for the formation of tags and
      subtags as defined in this document. In particular it MUST specify
      that case is not significant.



Phillips & Davis         Expires March 11, 2005                [Page 32]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                  September 2004


   o  The specification MUST specify a canonical representation and this
      canonical representation SHOULD NOT conflict with any of the
      matching or fallback mechanisms defined in this document.

   o  The specification of valid subtags MUST be available over the
      Internet and at no cost.

   o  The specification MUST be in the public domain or available via a
      royalty-free license acceptable to the IETF and specified in the
      RFC.

   o  The specification MUST be versioned and each version of the
      specification MUST be numbered, dated, and stable.

   o  The specification MUST be stable. That is, extension subtags, once
      defined by a specification, MUST NOT be retracted or change in
      meaning in any substantial way.

   o  IANA MUST be informed of changes to the contact information and
      URL for the specification.

   The determination of whether an Internet-Draft meets the above
   conditions and the decision to grant or withhold such authority rests
   solely with the IESG, and is subject to the normal review and appeals
   process associated with the RFC process.

   Extension authors are strongly cautioned that many (including most
   well-formed) processors will be unaware of any special relationships
   or meaning inherent in the order of extension subtags. Extension
   authors SHOULD avoid subtag relationships or canonicalization
   mechanisms that interfere with the default fallback mechanism. For
   example, if the subtag 'aaa' were least significant in the tag
   "fr-c-aaa-bbb-ccc".


















Phillips & Davis         Expires March 11, 2005                [Page 33]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                  September 2004


4. Security Considerations

   The only security issue that has been raised with language tags since
   the publication of RFC 1766, which stated that "Security issues are
   believed to be irrelevant to this memo", is a concern with language
   ranges used in content negotiation - that they may be used to infer
   the nationality of the sender, and thus identify potential targets
   for surveillance.

   This is a special case of the general problem that anything you send
   is visible to the receiving party. It is useful to be aware that such
   concerns can exist in some cases.

   The evaluation of the exact magnitude of the threat, and any possible
   countermeasures, is left to each application protocol.

   Although the specification of valid subtags for an extension MUST be
   available over the Internet, implementations SHOULD NOT mechanically
   depend on it being always accessible, to prevent denial-of-service
   attacks.































Phillips & Davis         Expires March 11, 2005                [Page 34]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                  September 2004


5. Character Set Considerations

   The syntax in this document requires that language tags use only the
   characters A-Z, a-z, 0-9, and HYPHEN-MINUS, which are present in most
   character sets, so presentation of language tags should not have any
   character set issues.

   The issue of deciding upon the rendering of characters based on the
   language tag is not addressed in this memo; however, if different
   spans of text are not marked with font information, it may be useful
   to provide the ability to mark spans of text with language. For
   example, a rendering engine may use that information in deciding
   which font to use in displaying Han-based ideographs when it
   encounters mixed Japanese-Chinese text that has no attached font
   information.




































Phillips & Davis         Expires March 11, 2005                [Page 35]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                  September 2004


6. Changes from RFC 3066

   The main goals for this revision of language tags were the following:

   'Compatibility.' All valid RFC 3066 language tags  (including those
   in the IANA registry)  remain valid in this specification. Thus there
   is complete backward compatibility of this specification with
   existing content. In addition, this document defines language tags in
   such as way as to ensure future compatibility, and processors based
   solely on the RFC 3066 ABNF (such as those described in XML Schema
   version 1.0) will be able to process tags described by this document.

   'Stability.' Because of the changes in underlying ISO standards, a
   valid RFC 3066 language tag may become invalid (or have its meaning
   change) at a later date. With so much of the world's computing
   infrastructure dependent on language tags, this is simply
   unacceptable: it invalidates content that may have an extensive
   shelf-life. In this specification, once a language tag is valid, it
   remains valid forever. Previously, there was no way to determine when
   two tags were equivalent. This specification provides a stable
   mechanism for doing so, through the use of canonical forms. These are
   also stable, so that implementations can depend on the use of
   canonical forms to assess equivalency.

   'Validity.'  The structure of language tags defined by this document
   makes it possible to determine if a particular tag is well-formed
   without regard for the actual content or "meaning" of the tag as a
   whole. This is important because the registry and underlying
   standards  change over time. In addition, it must be possible to
   determine if a tag is valid (or not) for a given point in time in
   order  to provide reproducible, testable results.  This process must
   not be error-prone; otherwise even intelligent people will generate
   implementations that give different results. This specification
   provides for that by having a single data file, with specific
   versioning information, so that the validity of language tags at any
   point in time can be precisely determined (instead of interpolating
   values from many separate sources).

   'Extensibility.' It is important to be able to differentiate between
   written forms of language -- for computer implementations, this is
   far more important than distinguishing spoken forms. Languages are
   written in a wide variety of different scripts, so this document
   provides for the generative use of ISO 15924 script codes. Like the
   generative use of ISO language and country codes in RFC 3066, this
   allows combinations to be produced without resorting to the
   registration process. The addition of UN codes provides for the
   generation of language tags with regional scope, which is also
   required for information technology.



Phillips & Davis         Expires March 11, 2005                [Page 36]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                  September 2004


   The recast of the registry from containing whole language tags to
   subtags is a key part of this. An important feature of RFC 3066 was
   that it allowed generative use of subtags. This allows people to
   meaningfully use generated tags, without the delays in registering
   whole tags, and the burden on the registry of having to supply all of
   the combinations that people may find useful.

   Because of the widespread use of language tags, it is potentially
   disruptive to have periodic revisions of the core specification,
   despite demonstrated need. The extension mechanism provides for a way
   for independent RFCs to define extensions to language tags. These
   extensions have a very constrained, well-defined structure to prevent
   extensions from interfering with implementations of language tags
   defined in this document. The document also anticipates features of
   ISO 639-3 with the addition of the extlang subtags. The use and
   definition of private use tags has also been modified, to allow
   people to move as much information as possible out of private use
   tags, and into the regular structure. The goal is to dramatically
   reduce the need to produce a revision of this document in the future.

   The specific changes in this document to meet these goals are:

   o  Defines the ABNF and rules for subtags so that the category of all
      subtags can be determined without reference to the registry.

   o  Adds the concept of well-formed vs. validating processors,
      defining the rules by which an implementation can claim to be one
      or the other.

   o  Changes the IANA language tag registry to a language subtag
      registry that provides a complete list of valid subtags in the
      IANA registry. This allows for robust implementation and ease of
      maintenance. The language subtag registry becomes the canonical
      source for forming language tags.

   o  Provides a process that guarantees stability of language tags, by
      handling reuse of values by ISO 639, ISO 15924, and ISO 3166 in
      the event that they register a previously used value for a new
      purpose.

   o  Allows ISO 15924 script code subtags and allows them to be used
      generatively. Adds the concept of a variant subtag and allows
      variants to be used generatively. Adds the ability to use a class
      of UN tags as regions.

   o  Defines the private-use tags in ISO 639, ISO 15924, and ISO 3166
      as the mechanism for creating private-use language, script, and
      region subtags respectively.



Phillips & Davis         Expires March 11, 2005                [Page 37]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                  September 2004


   o  Adds a well-defined extension mechanism.

   o  Defines an extended language subtag, possibly for use with certain
      anticipated features of ISO 639-3.

   Ed Note: The following items are provided for the convenience of
   reviewers and will be removed from the final document.

   Changes between draft-05 and this version are:

   o  Adjusted the ABNF formatting slightly in a non-substantive way
      (B.Fenner)

   o  Added various edits per P.Constable (P.Constable)

   o  Added back variants with a minimum length of four when the variant
      starts with a digit. This allows use to make the eight German year
      registrations redundant and preserves the year mechanism for
      future use. (J.Cowan, P.Constable, others)

   o  Modified the text describing which subtags are allowed to be
      registered so that it doesn't imply that codes assigned by the
      various standards cannot be registered. (P.Constable)

   o  Made the formatting use "tag" and 'subtag' quoting consistently
      (J.Cowan)

   o























Phillips & Davis         Expires March 11, 2005                [Page 38]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                  September 2004


References

   [1]   International Organization for Standardization, "ISO 639-2:1998
         - Codes for the representation of names of languages -- Part 2:
         Alpha-3 code - edition 1", August 1988.

   [2]   ISO TC46/WG3 and M. Everson, Ed., "ISO 15924:2003 (E/F) - Codes
         for the representation of names of scripts", March 2003.

   [3]   International Organization for Standardization, "Code for the
         representation of names of languages, 1st edition", ISO
         Standard 639, 2002.

   [4]   International Organization for Standardization, "Codes for the
         representation of names of countries, 3rd edition", ISO
         Standard 3166, August 1988.

   [5]   Statistical Division, United Nations, "Standard Country or Area
         Codes for Statistical Use", UN Standard Country or Area Codes
         for Statistical Use, Revision 4 (United Nations publication,
         Sales No. 98.XVII.9, June 1999.

   [6]   ISO 639 Joint Advisory Committee, "ISO 639 Joint Advisory
         Committee:  Working principles for ISO 639 maintenance", March
         2000, <http://www.loc.gov/standards/iso639-2/
         iso639jac_n3r.html>.

   [7]   Hardcastle-Kille, S., "Mapping between X.400(1988) / ISO 10021
         and RFC 822", RFC 1327, May 1992.

   [8]   Borenstein, N. and N. Freed, "MIME (Multipurpose Internet Mail
         Extensions) Part One: Mechanisms for Specifying and Describing
         the Format of Internet Message Bodies", RFC 1521, September
         1993.

   [9]   Alvestrand, H., "Tags for the Identification of Languages", RFC
         1766, March 1995.

   [10]  Hovey, R. and S. Bradner, "The Organizations Involved in the
         IETF Standards Process", BCP 11, RFC 2028, October 1996.

   [11]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
         Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [12]  Crocker, D. and P. Overell, "Augmented BNF for Syntax
         Specifications: ABNF", RFC 2234, November 1997.

   [13]  Berners-Lee, T., Fielding, R. and L. Masinter, "Uniform



Phillips & Davis         Expires March 11, 2005                [Page 39]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                  September 2004


         Resource Identifiers (URI): Generic Syntax", RFC 2396, August
         1998.

   [14]  Narten, T. and H. Alvestrand, "Guidelines for Writing an IANA
         Considerations Section in RFCs", BCP 26, RFC 2434, October
         1998.

   [15]  Fielding, R., Gettys, J., Mogul, J., Frystyk, H., Masinter, L.,
         Leach, P. and T. Berners-Lee, "Hypertext Transfer Protocol --
         HTTP/1.1", RFC 2616, June 1999.

   [16]  Carpenter, B., Baker, F. and M. Roberts, "Memorandum of
         Understanding Concerning the Technical Work of the Internet
         Assigned Numbers Authority", RFC 2860, June 2000.

   [17]  Alvestrand, H., "Tags for the Identification of Languages", BCP
         47, RFC 3066, January 2001.

   [18]  Yergeau, F., "UTF-8, a transformation format of ISO 10646", STD
         63, RFC 3629, November 2003.

   [19]  <http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2026.txt>


Authors' Addresses

   Addison Phillips (editor)
   webMethods, Inc.
   432 Lakeside Drive
   Sunnyvale, CA  94088
   US

   EMail: aphillips@webmethods.com


   Mark Davis
   IBM

   EMail: mark.davis@us.ibm.com












Phillips & Davis         Expires March 11, 2005                [Page 40]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                  September 2004


Appendix A. Acknowledgements

   Any list of contributors is bound to be incomplete; please regard the
   following as only a selection from the group of people who have
   contributed to make this document what it is today.

   The contributors to RFC 3066 and RFC 1766, the precursors of this
   document, made enormous contributions directly or indirectly to this
   document and are generally responsible for the success of language
   tags.

   The following people (in alphabetical order) contributed to this
   document or to RFCs 1766 and 3066:

   Glenn Adams, Harald Tveit Alvestrand, Tim Berners-Lee, Marc Blanchet,
   Nathaniel Borenstein, Eric Brunner, Sean M. Burke, Jeremy Carroll,
   John Clews, Jim Conklin, Peter Constable, John Cowan, Mark Crispin,
   Dave Crocker, Martin Duerst, Michael Everson, Doug Ewell, Ned Freed,
   Tim Goodwin, Dirk-Willem van Gulik, Marion Gunn, Paul Hoffman,
   Richard Ishida, Olle Jarnefors, Kent Karlsson, John Klensin, Alain
   LaBonte, Eric Mader, Keith Moore, Chris Newman, Masataka Ohta, George
   Rhoten, Markus Scherer, Keld Jorn Simonsen, Thierry Sourbier, Otto
   Stolz, Tex Texin, Andrea Vine, Rhys Weatherley, Misha Wolf, Francois
   Yergeau and many, many others.

   Very special thanks must go to Harald Tveit Alvestrand, who
   originated RFCs 1766 and 3066, and without whom this document would
   not have been possible. Special thanks must go to Michael Everson,
   who has served as language tag reviewer for almost the complete
   period since the publication of RFC 1766. Special thanks to Doug
   Ewell, for his production of the first complete subtag registry, and
   his work in producing a test parser for verifying language tags.



















Phillips & Davis         Expires March 11, 2005                [Page 41]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                  September 2004


Appendix B. Examples of Language Tags (Informative)

   Simple language subtag:

      de (German)

      fr (French)

      ja (Japanese)

      i-enochian (example of a grandfathered tag)

   Language subtag plus Script subtag:

      zh-Hant (Traditional Chinese)

      en-Latn (English written in Latin script)

      sr-Cyrl (Serbian written with Cyrillic script)

   Language-Script-Region:

      zh-Hans-CN (Simplified Chinese for the PRC)

      sr-Latn-YU (Serbian, Latin script, Serbia and Montenegro)

   Language-Script-Region-Variant:

      en-Latn-US-boont (Boontling dialect of English)

      de-Latn-CH-1996 (German written in Latin script for Switzerland
      using the orthography of 1996)

   Language-Region:

      de-DE (German for Germany)

      zh-SG (Chinese for Singapore)

      cs-CS (Czech for Czechoslovakia)

      sr-YU (Serbian for Serbia and Montenegro)

      es-419 (Spanish for Latin America and Carribean region using the
      UN region code)

   Other Mixtures:




Phillips & Davis         Expires March 11, 2005                [Page 42]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                  September 2004


      en-boont (Boontling dialect of English)

   private-use mechanism:

      de-CH-x-phonebk

      az-Arab-x-AZE-derbend

   Extended language subtags (examples ONLY: extended languages must be
   defined by revision or update to this document):

      zh-min

      zh-min-nan-Hant-CN

   Private-use subtags:

      x-whatever (private use using the singleton 'x')

      qaa-Qaaa-QM-x-southern (all private tags)

      de-Qaaa (German, with a private script)

      de-Latn-QM (German, Latin-script, private region)

      de-Qaaa-DE (German, private script, for Germany)

   Tags that use extensions (examples ONLY: extensions must be defined
   by revision or update to this document or by RFC):

      en-US-u-islamCal

      zh-CN-a-myExt-x-private

      en-a-myExt-b-another

   Some Invalid Tags:

      de-419-DE (two region tags)

      a-DE (use of a single character subtag in primary position; note
      that there are a few grandfathered tags that start with "i-" that
      are valid)

      ar-a-aaa-b-bbb-a-ccc (two extensions with same single letter
      prefix)





Phillips & Davis         Expires March 11, 2005                [Page 43]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                  September 2004


Appendix C. Conversion of the RFC 3066 Language Tag Registry

   Upon publication of this document as a BCP, the existing IANA
   language tag registry must be converted into the new subtag registry.
   This section defines the process for performing this conversion.

   The impact on the IANA maintainers of the registry of this conversion
   will be a small increase in the frequency of new entries. The initial
   set of records represents no impact on IANA, since the work to create
   it will be performed externally.

   When this document is published, an email request will be sent to the
   list ietf-languages@iana.org requesting the conversion of the
   registry from the authors of this document. In that request, the
   authors of this document will provide a URL whose referred content is
   the proposed IANA Language Subtag Registry following conversion.
   There will be a Last Call period of not less than four weeks for
   comments and corrections to be discussed on the
   ietf-languages@iana.org mail list. Changes as a result of comments
   will not restart the Last Call period. At the end of the period, the
   authors will forward the URL to IANA, which will post the new
   registry on-line.

   Tags that are currently deprecated will be maintained as
   grandfathered entries. The record for the grandfathered entry will
   contain a note indicating that the entry is 'deprecated' and reason
   for the deprecation.

   Tags that consist entirely of subtags that are valid under this
   document and which have the correct form and format for tags defined
   by this document are superseded by this document. Such tags are
   placed in the 'redundant' section of the registry. For example,
   zh-Hant is now defined by this document.

   Tags that contain subtags which are consistent with registration
   under the guidelines in this document will have a new subtag
   registration created for each eligible subtag. If all of the subtags
   in the original tag are fully defined by the resulting registrations
   or by this document, then the original tag is superseded by this
   document. Such tags are placed in the 'redundant' section of the
   registry. For example, en-boont will result in a new subtag "boont"
   and the RFC 3066 registered tag 'en-boont' placed in the redundant
   section of the registry.

   Tags that contain one or more subtags that do not match the valid
   registration pattern and which are not otherwise defined by this
   document are marked as 'grandfathered' by this document.




Phillips & Davis         Expires March 11, 2005                [Page 44]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                  September 2004


   There will be a reasonable period in which the community may comment
   on the proposed list entries, which SHALL be no less than two weeks
   in length. At the completion of this period, the Language Subtag
   Reviewer will notify IANA@IANA.ORG and the ietf-languages mail lists
   that the task is complete and forward the necessary materials to IANA
   for publication.

   Registrations that are in process under the rules defined in RFC 3066
   MAY be completed under the former rules, at the discretion of the
   language tag reviewer. Any new registrations submitted after the
   request for conversion of the registry MUST be rejected.

   All existing RFC 3066 language tag registrations will be maintained
   in perpetuity.

   The rules governing the conversion of RFC 1766 and RFC 3066
   registered tags are:

   o  If the formerly registered tag would now be defined by this
      document, then the existing tag is superseded by this document and
      is placed in the 'redundant' section of the registry: no subtag
      will be registered as a result. For example, 'zh-Hans' is now
      defined by the addition of ISO 15924 script codes.

   o  If the registered tag contained one or more subtags that follow
      the guidelines for registered language or variant subtags, and all
      of the subtags are either now defined by this document or would be
      valid to register, then each subtag not already covered by this
      document will be registered automatically by IANA without further
      review. The RFC 3066 registered tag is placed in the 'redundant'
      section of the registry. For example: the tag 'en-boont' fits the
      pattern for a registered variant. The variant subtag "boont" will
      be registered automatically and 'en-boont' put into the
      'redundant' section of the registry.

   o  If the registered tag contains any subtags that are not otherwise
      valid for registration according to the rules in this document,
      then the tag as a whole is maintained as an exceptional case (that
      is, it is "grandfathered"). This includes special cases of Sign
      Language tags. For example, the tag 'zh-min-nan' is not covered by
      any addition and is grandfathered, as is 'sgn-BE-fr' (Belgian
      French Sign Language).

   Users of tags that are grandfathered should consider registering
   appropriate subtags in the IANA subtag registry (but are not required
   to).

   Where two subtags have the same meaning, the priority of which to



Phillips & Davis         Expires March 11, 2005                [Page 45]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                  September 2004


   make canonical SHALL be the following:

   o  As of January 1, 2003, if a code exists in the associated ISO
      standard and it is not deprecated or withdrawn as of that date,
      then it has priority.

   o  Otherwise, the earlier-registered tag in the associated ISO
      standard has priority.











































Phillips & Davis         Expires March 11, 2005                [Page 46]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                  September 2004


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it
   has made any effort to identify any such rights. Information on the
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11. Copies of
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of
   licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to
   obtain a general license or permission for the use of such
   proprietary rights by implementors or users of this specification can
   be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice
   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF Executive
   Director.


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004). All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assignees.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION



Phillips & Davis         Expires March 11, 2005                [Page 47]

Internet-Draft                  langtags                  September 2004


   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.











































Phillips & Davis         Expires March 11, 2005                [Page 48]


