


Network Working Group                                           A. Kukec
Internet-Draft                                      University of Zagreb
Expires: January 23, 2008                                  July 22, 2007


        Additions to IKEv2 tutorial and Rationale for Decisions
                draft-kukec-ikev2-tutorial-additions-01

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 23, 2008.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).















Kukec                   Expires January 23, 2008                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft          Using IKE with IPv6 CGAs               July 2007


Abstract

   This document contains additions to the R. Perlman's draft
   Understanding IKEv2: Tutorial, and rationale for decisions.  Its
   purpose is to request for comments and to incorporate it into
   draft-ietf-ipsec-ikev2-tutorial-01.  This document describes some of
   controversial issues discussed on the IPsec mailing list and
   described in various IETF documents that were written after the
   publication of draft-ietf-ipsec-ikev2-tutorial-01.  Its additional
   purpose is to explain some of IKEv2 protocol parts that were not
   described in draft-ietf-ipsec-ikev2-tutorial-01.  It follows the
   original R. Perlman draft's concept to be both a tutorial for
   understanding IKEv2 and a summary of IKEv2 issues.


Table of Contents

   1.  IKEv2 with old and/or new IPsec architecture . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.1.  SA bundles in IKEv2  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Alice (initiator) and Alice (original initiator) . . . . . . .  6
     2.1.  Alice and Bob  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   3.  IKEv2 and PAD database . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   4.  Identity types for Alice and Bob . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     4.1.  Secure SPD lookup  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   5.  RSA authentication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   6.  Different authentication methods for Alice and Bob . . . . . . 14
   7.  Alice's EAP authentication without Bob's RSA authentication  . 15
   8.  NAT traversal and UDP/TCP checksums  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   9.  Alice's requests for internal address with DHCP and RADIUS . . 18
   10. Rekeying and reauthentication  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
     10.1. REKEY_SA and DELETE payloads in the same time  . . . . . . 20
     10.2. Bob's repeated authentication  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
   11. Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
   12. Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
   13. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
     13.1. Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
     13.2. Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
   Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 27












Kukec                   Expires January 23, 2008                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft          Using IKE with IPv6 CGAs               July 2007


1.  IKEv2 with old and/or new IPsec architecture

   There are two currently used versions of the IPsec architecture:

   o  the old IPsec architecture described in [1],

   o  the new IPsec architecture described in [2].

   Nowadays all common kernels have implementation of the IPsec stack
   based on the old IPsec architecture.  Therefore IKEv2 is often used
   in combination with that old architecture.  In spite of the fact that
   is possible to implement IKEv2 "on the top" of it, that is the
   standard violation - IKEv1 is compliant only with the old IPsec
   architecture and IKEv2 is compliant only with the new one.  There are
   some important features that IKEv2 can achieve only if it is used in
   combination with the new IPsec architecture.  Some examples of
   differences between two IPsec architectures and impact on IKEv2 are:

   o  The old IPsec architecture supports SA bundles (protection of the
      SA with the AH and ESP protocol in the same time).  The new IPsec
      architecture only simulates nested SAs through the forwarding
      table and appropriate Security Policies for each security protocol
      (AH or ESP).  IKEv2 does not support IKEv1-style combined SAs.

   o  The new IPsec architecture introduces IP address ranges in traffic
      selectors, while the old IPsec architecture supports only IP
      networks.  IKEv2 requires address ranges which can not be
      implemented in combination with the old IPsec architecture.

1.1.  SA bundles in IKEv2

   The nested SAs processing in IKEv2 depends on the version of the
   IPsec architecture:

   o  the old IPsec architecture and IKEv1 support combined SAs,

   o  the new IPsec architecture and IKEv2 only simulate nested SAs
      through the forwarding table and appropriate Security Policies.

   It is important to point out that even in old IPsec architecture, the
   term combined SAs is related only to CHILD SAs.  IKE SA protects only
   IKE traffic, it is duplex and logical association (it does not really
   exist in the OS kernel).

   Combined SAs in IKEv1 (for example AH+ESP bundle) are SA pair that is
   protected both with the AH and the ESP protocol in the same time.
   Only one Security Policy is enough to describe combined SAs.




Kukec                   Expires January 23, 2008                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft          Using IKE with IPv6 CGAs               July 2007


   [ TSi = (any proto, Alice); TSr = (any proto, Bob); transform = AH +
   ESP ]

   The Security Policy in the row above contains Alice's traffic
   selectors, Bob's traffic selectors and the transform for SA pair.  It
   says: all Alice's traffic for Bob protect both with AH and ESP in the
   same time.  Combined SAs always originate from only one Security
   Policy.

   In IKEv2, for the AH+ESP protection each packet traverses through the
   IPsec boundary two times as a consequent of two Security Policies:

   1.  [ TSi = (any proto, Alice); TSr = (any proto, Bob); transform =
       ESP ]

   2.  [ TSi = (ESP, Alice); TSr = (ESP, Bob); transform = AH ]

   First Security Policy causes the ESP protection of each Alice's
   packet for Bob, while second Security Policy causes AH protection of
   each Alice's ESP protected packet for Bob.

   The IKEv2 payload structure described in [3] still supports combined
   SAs from the old IPsec architecture, in spite of the fact that IKEv2
   must be explicitly based on the new architecture.  The reason why
   IKEv2 still supports the IKEv1 style combined SAs is in the IKEv2 SA
   payload structure: SA payload contains one or more proposals.  Each
   proposal contains one or more protocols (AH protocol or ESP
   protocol).  The protocol ID (for AH or ESP) is located in the
   proposal payload which is allowed by the IKEv2 specification to
   appear multiple times in each IKEv2 INIT message and not in the SA
   payload which is unique and only one for each initial IKE exchange.
   The compliance of the IKEv2 with the new IPsec architecture (in which
   one SA pair must be protected with exactly one security protocol)
   could be achieved with either of these two solutions:

   o  to move the protocol ID (for AH or ESP) from the proposal payload
      to the SA payload.  Then, it would be only one protocol ID for one
      SA payload),

   o  to change the SA payload to contain only one proposal payload.

   However, it is allowed to use multiple proposal payloads in IKEv2,
   but only if all of them have the same protocol ID.  One such instance
   is when one wants to provide to following policy: [allow AES and ESN]
   or [3DES and NO ESN] and forbid [AES and NO ESN].  When receiving
   such multiple proposals, the receiver can return an error if it
   concludes that all of the proposals do not contain the same protocol
   ID.



Kukec                   Expires January 23, 2008                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft          Using IKE with IPv6 CGAs               July 2007


   Obviously, the first solution (to move the protocol ID from the
   proposal payload to the SA payload) would be a better solution.  The
   major cause why the IKEv2 spec still supports SA bundles is that
   IKEv2 was already in the RFC queue when the new IPsec architecture
   (rfc4301) was revised not to support SA bundles and it was too late
   to revise it.

   (References: [IPSEC] " Is AH + ESP required or needed in IKEv2 ",
   August 2005.)










































Kukec                   Expires January 23, 2008                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft          Using IKE with IPv6 CGAs               July 2007


2.  Alice (initiator) and Alice (original initiator)

   There is a difference between Alice (initiator) and Alice (original
   initiator)[11].  The initiator is the peer that has initiated the
   whole IKEv2 initial exchange.  The initiator of the IKE_SA_INIT
   exchange is also the initiator in the IKE_AUTH exchange, but he does
   not have to be the initiator of the CREATE_CHILD_SA exchange.
   Therefore the initiator of the whole IKE SA exchange is sometimes
   called the original initiator and the peer who initiated the current
   CHILD SA is called only initiator.

   The described difference between the initiator and the original
   initiator can be explained additionally on the example of rekeying
   and reauthentication:

   o  only the original initiator can initiate reauthentication (the
      process that includes complete new initial IKE SA INIT and IKE
      AUTH exchanges followed with the CREATE CHILD SA exchange),

   o  the initiator can only initiate rekeying (the process of the
      cryptographic material recalculation that includes only the CREATE
      CHILD SA exchange).

2.1.  Alice and Bob

   IKEv2's architecture is the peer-to-peer architecture.  However,
   Alice and Bob are not always fully equal peers.  There are a few
   exceptions usually related to the road warrior scenario (Endpoint to
   Security Gateway tunnel scenario):

   o  Only the original initiator can send the configuration request
      payload (CFG_REQUEST) to get the configuration data from the
      original responder (server).  The original responder can only
      initiate rekeying.

   o  Only the original initiator can use extended authentication
      (EAP)[5], while the original responder acts as a server.

   o  Only the original initiator can be behind a NAT.  The problem is
      simply that the initiator can not start communication with the
      responder if he does not have a public IP address.  There are no
      problems with NAT detection mechanism - it can detect for both
      initiator and / or responder if someone has rewritten their
      address.







Kukec                   Expires January 23, 2008                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft          Using IKE with IPv6 CGAs               July 2007


3.  IKEv2 and PAD database

   IPsec architecture contains three databases:

   o  the SAD database with Security Associations,

   o  the SPD database with Security Policies,

   o  the PAD (Peer Authorization Database) database that represents
      link between IKEv2 and the SPD database.

   SAD and SPD databases exist in common OS kernels while the PAD
   database is pseudo-database whose functionality is described in the
   IPsec architecture specification.

   The PAD database is divided into two parts: the authentication part
   and the authorization part.  The authentication part imposes exactly
   which authentication material has to be used when verifying the
   peer's authenticity and which authentication method peer uses.  The
   authorization part makes a check if a peer with a specific identity
   is valid to create the designated CHILD SA.  That identity does not
   have to be necessarily from the IKEv2 ID payload; it can be, for
   example, from the certificate or it can be internal EAP authenticated
   identity.

   The example of the PAD entry is shown in the Table 1:


      +----------------------------------+-----------------------------+
      |        Authentication data       |      Authorization data     |
      +----------------------------------+-----------------------------+
      |        Peer ID: my_domain        | SA Constraints: *@my_domain |
      |                                  |                             |
      | Auth Data: CA cert for my_domain |                             |
      |                                  |                             |
      |  Revocation Info: http://my_crl  |                             |
      +----------------------------------+-----------------------------+

   The authentication part of the PAD entry contains:

   o  the peer's ID.  Identity types are equivalent to types of IKEv2 ID
      payloads),

   o  the authentication data.  Shared secret, end-entity certificate or
      certification authority certificate),

   o  the information about the revocation material.  OCSP server and
      his public key or a pointer to the Certificate Revocation List in



Kukec                   Expires January 23, 2008                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft          Using IKE with IPv6 CGAs               July 2007


      case of a public key authentication based on X509 certificates.

   The authorization part of the PAD entry contains:

   o  addresses or symbolic names (IDs) that a peer is allowed to use
      when establishing designated CHILD SAs.

   The PAD entry will also usually contain the flag that determines
   whether the SPD lookup will be based on the address (stored in the TS
   payload of the CREATE_CHILD_SA message) or on the symbolic name
   (exchanged in the IKE AUTH message, either in the ID payload, the
   certificate or somewhere else).

   The link between IKEv2 and the SPD database contains three steps:

   1.  The authentication: After the receipt of Bob's identity and his
       authentication material, Alice verifies his authentication
       material against authentication data from the PAD entry that
       matches Bob's identity.

   2.  The authorization: In case of the successful verification of
       Bob's credentials, Alice checks in the PAD entry if Bob is
       allowed to create designated CHILD SAs.  This process is called
       the SA constraining.

   3.  The SPD lookup: After the authentication in the first step and
       the authorization in the second step, Alice finally performs the
       Security Policy lookup for Bob. Such SPD lookup based on the
       appropriate PAD entry and on the appropriately selected identity
       that matches the identity from peer's credential is called the
       secure SPD lookup[7].

   The authentication part of the PAD database allows avoiding heuristic
   during the process of validation of the received authentication data.
   One could imagine the following scenario with IKEv2 daemon without
   the appropriate PAD entry: Alice possesses two certificates: CERT1
   issued by the corporation T1 and CERT2 issued by the corporation T2.
   Bob is a gateway and behind him is a VPN containing both the T1's
   network and T2's network.  Bob has certification authority
   certificates for both corporations (CA_CERT1 and CA_CERT2).  If CERT1
   expires and CERT2 does not expire, in spite of the fact that Alice
   should not be able to "contact" the corporation T1, she will
   authenticate herself successfully - Bob will succesfully verify her
   CERT2 against CA_CERT2.  Alice can then communicate both with T1 and
   T2, and not only with T2.  In such scenario (without the PAD
   database) Bob will try to validate the received Alice's certificate
   against each CA certificate that he has.  With the appropriate PAD
   entry, Bob knows exactly against which CA certificates he has to



Kukec                   Expires January 23, 2008                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft          Using IKE with IPv6 CGAs               July 2007


   validate Alice's certificate.

   The authorization part of the PAD database enables flexibility in
   choosing the policies by using both symbolic names (identities,
   either IKEv2 ID's or certificate identities) as well as addresses.
   The [7] describes the IKEv2 ID profile that ensures the secure SPD
   lookup based on that identity.  It describes how to perform the check
   if an identity from the PAD entry matches the corresponding identity
   found in the received certificate.  Each IKEv2 implementation must be
   able to perform such check, although there must be possibility to
   configure the implementation not to do so due to interoperability
   reasons.

   Additionally, the PAD database could store an additional information,
   for example whether to perform the matching between the received ID
   payload and corresponding PKIX attributes from the certificate.



































Kukec                   Expires January 23, 2008                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft          Using IKE with IPv6 CGAs               July 2007


4.  Identity types for Alice and Bob

   The ID payload in IKEv2 contains an identity that peers insert in
   each IKE AUTH message.  It is used:

   o  For the authentication purposes, in the process of the AUTH
      payload calculation and in the process of searching the peer's PAD
      entry that contains information about peer's authentication
      material,

   o  For the symbolic SPD lookup.  Security policies can be selected
      based on either symbolic names or on IP addresses.  In case of
      symbolic names, PAD identity is compared to the IKEv2 ID payload.
      To perform the secure SPD lookup, those two identities should
      match.  (Non-symbolic SPD lookup is process of selecting specific
      Security Polity based on IP addresses that are compared to TS
      payload.),

   o  For the certificate lookup (optionally).

   The IKEv2 ID payload does not have to match the data from the
   insecure outer IP header.  For the example the road warrior client
   can use his private IP address as ID and the certificate based on
   that private IP address as his credential to authenticate himself
   even when he is not in his private network.  The only requirement is
   that none of our other peers does not have that same ID.

   The decision which identity type to use depends on the specific
   scenario.  However looking from the security aspect, there is no
   special advantage of any of them.  For example the advantage of
   ID_RFC822_ADDR (e-mail address), ID_FQDN (domain name) and ID_KEY_ID
   (vendor specific information) types is that they make it easier to
   name a great number of peers with dynamic IP addresses.  In the case
   of a small number of clients with static IP addresses it is
   convenient to use the ID_IPv4(6)_ADDR.  Usually, ID_DER_ASN1 type
   that matches the certificate Subject field (DN) will not be used in
   case of the pre-shared key authentication and ID_KEY_ID will not be
   used in the case of the public key based authentication.

   There are two types of ID_DER_ASN1 identites: ID_DER_ASN1_DN and
   ID_DER_ASN1_GN.  ID_DER_ASN1_DN is equal to the X.501 Distinguished
   Name (for example, CN=MyName, O=MyOrganization, C=MyCountry), while
   ID_DER_ASN1_GN is equal to X.509 General Name.  With ID_DER_ASN1_GN
   one could specify almost everything of any use on the Internet
   (e-mail address, URL, X.400, postal address, phone fax, pet's name,
   etc).  However ID_DER_ASN1_GN is not allowed in IKEv2.  If Alice
   wants to identify herself with e-mail address, instead of generating
   ID_DER_ASN1_GN identity type, she has to use SubjectAltName fields



Kukec                   Expires January 23, 2008               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft          Using IKE with IPv6 CGAs               July 2007


   from the certificate.  Those SubjectAltName fields match IKEv2
   identity types:

      Certificate SubjectAltName iPAddress matches IKEv2
      ID_IPv4(6)_ADDR,

      Certificate SubjectAltName dNSName matches IKEv2 ID_FQDN,

      Certificate SubjectAltName rfc822Name matches IKEv2
      ID_RFC822_ADDR,

      Entire certificate Subject field matches the ID_DER_ASN1_DN IKEv2
      identity type.

4.1.  Secure SPD lookup

   SPD lookup can be based on either IKEv2 ID payload (symbolic names)
   or on the IP addresses.  For the PKI scenario (RSA authentication
   based on X509 certificates) [7] describes how to perform secure
   symbolic SPD and certificate lookups.  The secure symbolic SPD lookup
   is based on the matching the PAD entry identity with the IKEv2 ID
   payload.  For the certificate lookup, [7] also suggests that one
   should check if the ID payload from the IKEv2 message matches the
   data from peer's certificate.  It is convinient to populate the ID
   payload with the corresponding PKIX certificate attribute.  Although
   the properly populated ID payload can be used for the secure
   certificate lookup, such matching of the ID payload and corresponding
   certificate field narrows the number of appropriate identity types.
   For example, one should not use SubjectAltName of type IPaddress in
   the certificate because the usage of the ID_IPv4(6)_ADDR in IKEv2 ID
   payload is not recommended in the situations where a peer has dynamic
   IP address or is behind the NAT.  Another reason to have an identity
   different from the certificate's identity is flexibility.  For
   example in the multi-homed environments ID payload from each of the
   network interfaces will contain different identity, yet all of them
   will usually use the same given certificate to prove identity.

   The solution for the interoperability problems that could be
   consequent of required identities' matching can be achieved by the
   appropriate PAD entries that contain additional information that
   informs a remote peer whether to match or not.

   (References: [IPSEC] " Identities types IP address ", January 2005.
   [IPSEC] " ID and subject/subject-alt in certificate ", April 2005. ".
   )






Kukec                   Expires January 23, 2008               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft          Using IKE with IPv6 CGAs               July 2007


5.  RSA authentication

   Besides the pre-shared key authentication, the RSA authentication is
   the most often used authentication method in IKEv2.  There are
   different types of the RSA authentication based on different kinds of
   credentials: Raw RSA keys, DNS Signed Key, PGP Certificate, Kerberos
   Token, X509 Certificate - Signature, Hash and URL of X509
   Certificate, etc.  All of the previously mentioned credentials can be
   exchanged either through out-of-band means or in the CERTREQ/CERT
   payloads.

   The CERTREQ payload provides an information to peer about the trusted
   certification authorities.  Alice creates the CERTREQ payload based
   on all CA certificates that she has.  After the receipt of such
   CERTREQ payload Bob searches if some of his certificates have been
   provided by the certification authority listed in the received
   CERTREQ payload.  He responses with the CERT payload that contains
   only certificates selected based on the CA hashes in the received
   CERTREQ payload.  Alice can either ignore received CERT payload or
   proceed with the validation of received certificates.  If she has the
   locally stored Bob's certificate, either exchanged with some out-of-
   band means or stored in the previous authentication process, she
   ignores all of received CERT payloads and validates Bob's locally
   stored certificate.  However if Alice does not have Bob's certificate
   stored locally, she validates received certificates against CA
   certificates and the revocation material from Bob's PAD entry.

   While the CERTREQ payload consists always of the Certificate Encoding
   and of the concatenated list of SHA-1 hashes of the certification
   authorities (CAs), the CERT payload structure depends on the
   Certificate Encoding.  In case of the X509 Certificate - Signature,
   the CERT payload contains the X509 certificate, while in case of the
   Hash and URL of X509 Certificate contains the SHA-1 hash of X509
   certificate followed by the URL that resolves into DER encoded X509
   certificate.  Therefore, Hash and URL type is appropriate for devices
   with little memory and lower bandwith (eg. mobile handsets).
   Unfortunately at the moment the X509 certificate does not have an
   attribute to store URL in it.  However if Alice uses the Hash and URL
   certificates, she sends to Bob both the Hash and URL CERTREQ payload
   and the HTTP_CERT_LOOKUP_SUPPORTED notification.  This notification
   serves as an information to Bob that Alice is able to receive and
   validate Hash and URL certificates.  After the receipt of the Hash
   and URL CERT payload, Alice downloads the certificate from URL
   extracted from the CERT payload.  She compares if the SHA-1 hash of
   the dowloaded certificate matches the SHA-1 hash in the CERT payload
   and proceeds with the certificate validation.  The Hash and URL CERT
   payload is used to shorten the CERT payload which is of prevention of
   the IP fragmentation (some NATs/firewalls might block IP fragments,



Kukec                   Expires January 23, 2008               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft          Using IKE with IPv6 CGAs               July 2007


   IP fragments are potential security vulnerability, etc).

   The use of Hash and URL certificates is important for multiple CERT
   payloads exchange.  In most cases, both Alice and Bob will have only
   one X509 certificate but there are scenarios in which they will
   exchange multiple certificates, either as

   o  the certificate chain or

   o  the certificate bundle.

   The certificate chain consists of the end-entity certificate followed
   by the intermediate CA certificates and the root certificate.  The
   certificate bundle is the ASN.1 sequence of certificates, which are
   either end-entity certificates or the certificate chain.  The example
   of the certificate bundle is the X509 Certificate - Signature stored
   in one CERT payload and X.509 Certificate - Attribute in another,
   where the X.509 Certificate - Attribute is exchanged to obtain an
   additional authorization information.  Another example of the
   certificate bundle exchange are X509 certificates with the same
   public key but different Subject fields and/or SubjectAltName
   extensions.  The exchange of a such certificate bundle can be
   relevant for the successful authentication to a peer which is
   configured to check the matching of the received identity from the
   IKEv2 ID payload with the corresponding PKIX attribute from the X509
   certificate (Subject or SubjectAltName).  In case of exchanging
   multiple certificates, the AUTH payload is always signed with public
   key from the first CERT payload.

   The main advantage of the RSA authentication (compared to the PSK
   authentication) is that it relies on the popular principles of a
   cryptographic material exchange.  For example X509 Certificate -
   Signature and URL of X509 Certificate use the Public Key
   Infrastructure (PKI).  The importance of the RSA authentication lays
   in fact that it is the only authentication method that the responder
   can use in the roadwarrior IKEv2 scenario in which the roadwarrior
   client (Alice) uses extended authentication (EAP)[5].  In spite of
   newer EAP authentication methods that are mutual, Bob must
   authenticate himself to the initiator with the RSA based
   authentication.  However, there are some methods that suggest, for
   example, using EAP methods with channel binding support instead of
   Bob's authentication[5].

   (References: [IPSEC] " certificate encoding type in ikev2 ", July
   2004.)






Kukec                   Expires January 23, 2008               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft          Using IKE with IPv6 CGAs               July 2007


6.  Different authentication methods for Alice and Bob

   In most cases both Alice and Bob will use the same authentication
   method (either PSK or RSA authentication).  However IKEv2 permits
   that Alice, for example, uses the certificate based authentication
   and Bob uses the shared secret.  Obviously in such cases Bob needs to
   trust at least one certification authority to be able to validate
   Alice's certificate and Alice needs to have Bob's shared secret.  In
   such scenarios the name shared secret is rather misleading because
   Bob does not use the same secret as Alice as his credentital (Bob
   uses the certificate as a credential).  Therefore for the PSK
   authentication is just important that both Alice and Bob have matched
   the same secret with Bob's identity, while for the RSA authentication
   is important that Bob has appropriate PAD entry for Alice in his PAD
   database with the information about CA certificates and the
   revocation material.

   The question that arise up before the IKE AUTH exchange is which
   authentication method the peer will use?  This issue is the
   consequent of the fact that we can not select appropriate (peer's)
   PAD entry with the information about the peer's authentication
   material sooner then we receive the IKE AUTH message with peer's ID
   payload.  In the moment of sending the CERTREQ payload there is no
   possibility to find out which authentication method our peer will
   use.  Therefore it is convenient to send the CERTREQ payload by
   default, even if peer (Bob in our case) itself does not use the RSA
   authentication.  This way Alice is not limited which authentication
   method to use.  An implementation that does not send the CERTREQ
   payload by default could cause interoperability problems in case of
   the authentication with the peer that sends the CERT payload only
   after the previously received CERTREQ payload.  The purpose of the
   CERTREQ is strictly informational and the event of the CERTREQ
   payload ignoring is not an error.  Bob can either ignore the CERTREQ
   payload and use the authentication method different than the RSA
   authentication or he can use the RSA authentication and answer with
   the CERT payload.

   (References: [IPSEC] " certificate payloads/requests in IKEv2 ",
   September 2005.)












Kukec                   Expires January 23, 2008               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft          Using IKE with IPv6 CGAs               July 2007


7.  Alice's EAP authentication without Bob's RSA authentication

   n the EAP scenario, where Alice uses EAP authentication, IKEv2
   requires that Bob uses the RSA authentication.  That was perfectly
   reasonable from the security perspective when EAP methods were one-
   sided.  Newer EAP authentication methods that are mutual [5] brought
   out the idea of the EAP usage without the Bob's RSA authentication
   which means the omitting of the AUTH payload from message 4.

   Mutual EAP authentication methods imply producing the shared key (MSK
   value) that is used for AUTH payload calculation (message 7 and 8)
   over the Diffie-Hellman values (message 1 and 2).  However even when
   using mutual EAP methods with shared keys but without Bob's signature
   in message 4, there is a possibility for a MITM attack such as
   described in [12].  Non-IKEv2 attacker can perform such reverse MITM
   attack by stealing IKEv2 exchanges and moving them to an un- tunneled
   non-IKEv2 context.  In such scenarios attacker does not fail when
   checking the MSK value due to the fact that he completely
   impersonates Bob (an IKEv2 responder).  Additionally authentication
   of the DH values is done after the EAP success message which makes
   the keys for encryption of the EAP messages meaningless (attacker can
   easily establish them with Alice).

   Therefore IKEv2 requires mutual EAP authentication methods that
   generate shared key in conjunction with the public key to produce
   Bob's signature to sign the AUTH payload in the message 4.  On the
   other hand, [5] suggests EAP authentication without the requirement
   for Bob's RSA authentication. [5] requests an eap method with mutual
   authentication and key generation in addition to the channel binding
   support instead of Bob's public key signature.  It arguments proposal
   for omitting Bob's public key authentication with explanation that
   the use of PKI for this purpose can be even counterproductive.  The
   deployment of the additional infrastructure such as PKI may be
   expensive and may cause new vulnerabilities.

   (References: [IPSEC] " Clarification of EAP authentication in IKEv2?
   ", Dec 2003. )














Kukec                   Expires January 23, 2008               [Page 15]

Internet-Draft          Using IKE with IPv6 CGAs               July 2007


8.  NAT traversal and UDP/TCP checksums

   The impact of the NAT traversal on the process of fixing the UDP/TCP
   checksums depends on the selected IPsec mode.  From NAT-T
   perspective, there are three cases:

   o  the tunnel mode,

   o  the UDP encapsulation of the ESP packets,

   o  the transport mode.

   In the tunnel mode NAT box changes only the outer IP header but not
   the inner one.  Because only the inner IP header is under the
   integrity protection, the combination of the tunnel mode with the NAT
   traversal does not introduce checksum problems.  Similarly, in the
   UDP-encapsulation the inner IP header stays as it is and the outer
   UDP header is not encrypted; therefore NAT box can easily fix
   checksums.  The problem is the transport mode through a NAT-T because
   there is only one IP header that is both changed by the NAT box and
   is protected by the integrity algorithm.  The combination of the NAT
   with the transport mode raised some questions:

   o  Whether to support the transport mode through a NAT-T or not
      (because IPSEC/IKEv2 with NAT-T is less secure),

   o  How to fix the UDP/TCP checksums in such scenario.

   There were some arguments that one does not need the transport mode
   at all, while everything can be done with the ESP tunnel mode.  That
   is just partly true, because there are two main differences between
   the tunnel and the transport mode:

   o  the overhead caused by the additional header in the tunnel mode,

   o  the difference with the selector checking.

   While the first can be solved with the appropriate compression, the
   second one still remains.  Therefore it has been decided to keep the
   ESP transport mode with one additional fact to be remembered - NAT-T
   is not the mandatory mechanism in the IKEv2.

   The question on how to fix UDP/TCP checksums was the consequent of
   the dropping out the NAT-OA payload in IKEv2 (NAT-OA exists only in
   IKEv1).  NAT-OA payload was used in IKEv1 to transport the original
   IP address (i.e. the address that Alice sent in her packet).  When
   Bob received such packet, he could use that address to adjust the
   transport checksum after decrypting received packet.  Contrary to the



Kukec                   Expires January 23, 2008               [Page 16]

Internet-Draft          Using IKE with IPv6 CGAs               July 2007


   IKEv1 NAT-OA principle, in IKEv2 only the hash of the original IP
   address is transported and it is used only for the NAT discovery.
   Initially people were suggesting three different ways of fixing the
   transport checksums in IKEv2:

   o  the incremental recomputing based on the IP address received in
      the IP header,

   o  the recomputing based on the original IP address.

   The incremental recomputing principle uses the data from the received
   IP header to fix the cheksum.  But, if there is NAT box between Alice
   and Bob, Bob will not receive the IP header with Alice's address but
   rather with the source address of the NAT box.  That automatically
   means that the combination of NAT-t and the transport mode could be
   used only if peers would know the IP address of the NAT box.  In the
   scenario where Bob is NATed, in case of the incremental recomputing,
   he would have to know the address of the NAT box.  For example if
   Alice sends packet to NATed Bob, she calculates the checksum as
   function of her address and Bob's NAT box address.  Therefore Bob
   would need to know the address of NAT box (which he does not know) to
   fix the checksum.  Even the tunnel mode in case of the incremental
   recomputing is not the perfect solution, while there are some
   security issues.  In the tunnel mode Bob can recompute checksum based
   on the IP address from the received inner IP header because NAT box
   does not change it.  However, one could think that this is secure
   principle because the inner IP header is integrity protected.  This
   thought is unfortunately not correct because in such a way one looses
   the possibility of discovering errors based on the original address.
   One can only detect if bits have been changed before entering the ESP
   tunnel (during the encryption) and not somewhere on the path between
   Alice and Bob.

   Therefore IKEv2 has adopted the second solution, the recomputing
   based on the original IP address that Alice puts in one of the
   existing IKEv2 payloads - traffic selector payload.  After the
   receipt of the message, Bob performs the only correct process of
   fixing the checksum: new_CSUM = CSUM + original_address from the TS
   payload - new_address.

   (References: [IPSEC] " Another NAT Traversal question ", March 2003.)










Kukec                   Expires January 23, 2008               [Page 17]

Internet-Draft          Using IKE with IPv6 CGAs               July 2007


9.  Alice's requests for internal address with DHCP and RADIUS

   Imagine the following two scenarios: 1.  Alice (client) has private
   IP address, 2.  Two clients have same addresses.  In both cases will
   appear routing problems.  In the first case, the internal router will
   not forward packets to the VPN gateway.  In the second case, where
   two clients have same IP addresses (usually assigned by the NAT box),
   there is no way for the VPN gateway to find out who is the target.

   IKEv2 calls Alice IPsec Remote Access Client (IRAC) and Bob IPsec
   Remote Access Server (IRAS).  In IKEv1 this part of the IKE protocol
   was called the MODECFG.  IKEv2 has inherited MODECFG almost
   unchanged, but with different name - Configuration Payloads.

   Alice needs to allocate address before creating the IKE SAs and CHILD
   SAs, which means, in the IKE AUTH exchange.  She messages Bob with
   the request for the address and other configuration parameters in the
   form of the Configuration Payload named CFG_REQUEST.  Such request is
   inserted in the IKE_AUTH request message.  Alice can send the request
   wither with zero-valued attributes or with non-zero attributes.  Non-
   zero attributes Bob interprets as suggested values.  Alice can also
   request the same attribute multiple times by repeating it multiple
   times in the Configuration Payload.  For example, this will happen if
   she wants to allocate more than one IP address.  After the receipt of
   CFG_REQUEST, Bob achieves requested data from DHCP, RADIUS or LDAP
   server or any other locally configured pool of data.

   After receipt of the CFG_REQUEST Bob starts acting as, for example,
   DHCP relay.  When Bob acts as DHCP client, he transforms CFG_REQUEST
   to DHCPDISCOVER and does a LAN broadcast[8].  After the receipt of
   DHCPOFFER (which represents offered configuration parameters from
   DHCP server), Bob sends DHCPREQUEST.  Finally with DHCPACK message he
   gets the address and all other configuration data for Alice.  Then he
   forms CFG_REPLY and inserts it in the Configuration Payload before
   the SA and TS payloads in the IKE AUTH request.  In case of the
   RADIUS client/server communication[9], the initial exchange is more
   complicated due to the fact that it requires a password.  The
   consequent is that Alice needs to perform the extended authentication
   (EAP) and she needs to insert the Configuration Payload in the first
   IKE AUTH message.  After the receipt of the IKEv2 message 5 that
   contains the EAP payload, Bob uses the EAP password to perform the
   RADIUS Access-Request and waits for the RADIUS server to respond with
   the Access-Response.  Access-Response will contain attributes that
   Bob transforms into Configuration Payload parameters.  Bob sends to
   Alice CFG_REPLY in message 6.  Optionally Bob can send Accounting-
   Request (START) to RADIUS server before message 6 and Accounting-
   Response (STOP) upon deletion of the IKE SAs and CHILD SAs.




Kukec                   Expires January 23, 2008               [Page 18]

Internet-Draft          Using IKE with IPv6 CGAs               July 2007


   Issue missing: the interaction beetwen the CFG EXPIRY attribute and
   DHCP timeouts..

















































Kukec                   Expires January 23, 2008               [Page 19]

Internet-Draft          Using IKE with IPv6 CGAs               July 2007


10.  Rekeying and reauthentication

   IKE SAs and CHILD SAs are allowed to be used only for a limited
   amount of time.  That time is called hardlimit time (authlimit time)
   in case of IKE SA and softlimit time in case of CHILD SA[2].  When
   hardlimit time expires, IKE SA has to be reauthenticated; and when
   the softlimit time expires, CHILD SA has to be rekeyed.  The
   reauthentication includes always the rekeying and, as a consequent,
   the hardlimit time has to be shorter than the softlimit time.  In
   order to support light implementations, IKEv2 declares rekeying of
   the CHILD SAs as an optional mechanism.

   The rekeying is the process of the new CHILD SA creation followed by
   the process of deletion of the old CHILD SA.  The new CHILD SA
   belongs to the same IKE SA to which the replaced CHILD SA belonged.
   The rekeying is achieved with the CREATE_CHILD_SA exchange that
   contains the REKEY_SA notification.  This is contrary to the
   CREATE_CHILD_SA exchange during the first authentication, which does
   not contain the REKEY_SA notification.  Algorithms proposed in the SA
   payload of CREATE_CHILD_SA exchange during the reauthentication might
   not be the same as those in the current SA.  This should not be
   treated as error due to the fact that it is a matter of local policy.

   The reauthentication is actually the rekeying of the IKE SA; that is
   the process which starts with the creation of the new, equivalent IKE
   SA.  After the creation of the new IKE SA is finished, the
   implementation performs rekeying - the creation of the new equivalent
   CHILD SAs within the new IKE SA.  Finally at the end of the
   reauthentication, implementation uses the old IKE SA (for the last
   time) to send the DELETE payload to delete itself.  Therefore the
   reauthentication is achieved through completly new initial handshake
   - IKE INIT exchange and IKE AUTH exchange.

   Both Alice and Bob are allowed to initiate both the rekeying and the
   reauthentication.  This can lead to the scenarios of a dropping-out-
   from-synchronization such as simultaneous CHILD_SA close,
   simultaneous IKE_SA close, simultaneous CHILD_SA rekeying,
   simultaneous IKE_SA rekeying, parallel closing and rekeying a
   CHILD_SA, rekeying of the CHILD_SA or IKE_SA soon after its creation
   that are described in [11].

10.1.  REKEY_SA and DELETE payloads in the same time

   Some people argued that there is no need for both the REKEY_SA
   notification and the exchange of DELETE payloads in the rekeying SAs
   process.  Instead, one could either:





Kukec                   Expires January 23, 2008               [Page 20]

Internet-Draft          Using IKE with IPv6 CGAs               July 2007


   o  replace the existing SA without exchanging DELETE payloads,

   o  or create a parallel SA without the REKEY_SA notification and
      delete the old one afterwards.

   In first scenario the problem is the possible lost of some traffic if
   the decision of not using the old SA immediately after the rekeying
   is not supported by both Alice and Bob.

   Although, there were also two things that people pointed out against
   the second scenario (and in favour of not omitting the REKEY_SA):

   o  REKEY_SA notification contains the SA identifier and is base for
      avoiding IKEv1-heuristic way of searching for SAs that have to be
      rekeyed,

   o  REKEY_SA notification allows making statistics over SAs that could
      provide the optimization of rekeying.  Additionally, REKEY_SA
      notification could be interpreted as an early warning about
      incoming packets from the new rekeyed SA.

   However, the DELETE payload also contains the SA identifier - the SPI
   of Alice's incoming designated SA.  So, the only actual reason for
   REKEY_SA notification lies mainly in the possibility for making
   statistics.  Finally, the only allowed principle currentlu in IKEv2
   is rekeying with both the REKEY_SA notification and the DELETE
   payload.

   (References: [IPSEC] " REKEY_SA Notify clarification wanted ", July
   2005.)

10.2.  Bob's repeated authentication

   Reauthentication in IKEv2 is performed by the repeating of the
   initial handshake (first four messages) and therefore presents the
   problem in situations where Bob can not initiate the
   reauthentication.  For example, if Alice is original initiator, only
   Alice's authentication can be extended and she is the only one that
   can initiate the reauthentication.

   The solution for the repeated authentication problem is described in
   [4]. [4] introduces the AUTH_LIFETIME notification which Bob sends in
   the IKE AUTH response or in the INFORMATIONAL message to Alice.  The
   AUTH_LIFETIME notification contains information about the time period
   during which Alice has to repeat the authentication.  If she does not
   repeat authentication in the demanded period, Bob sends the Delete
   notification and deletes the current IKE SA.




Kukec                   Expires January 23, 2008               [Page 21]

Internet-Draft          Using IKE with IPv6 CGAs               July 2007


   In the case of the EAP reauthentication, one must notice that the
   identity authenticated by the EAP method may not be equal to the
   initial identity from the IKEv2 IDi payload.  The example is EAP Fast
   reconnect which Alice can choose to decrease the number of EAP round
   trips by the reusing of the existing EAP-IKEv2 security context.  The
   described EAP-IKEv2 reauthentication can be performed only if Alice
   and Bob have already been mutually authenticated.  In such
   reauthentication, Alice uses special Fast reconnect EAP identifier
   (FRID) to tell Bob that she wants to use the EAP Fast reconnect.
   FRID will be different than the identity from the IKEv2 IDi payload
   which was authenticated in the previous exchange.  Therefore, one
   should not perform the symbolic policy lookup based on that old IKEv2
   IDi identity.  The EAP authenticated identity is always used for
   access control decisions while the initial response identity from the
   IKEv2 IDi payload is used for AAA routing purposes and selecting
   which EAP method to use[10].  Therefore, the symbolic policy lookup
   (SPD lookup based on identities prescribed in the PAD database)
   should always be based on the EAP authenticated identity to ensure
   the successful policy lookup that follows after each
   reauthentication.  This situation where policy is not selected based
   on the identity from the ID payload of the IKEv2 message is normally
   allowed by the protocol and it is not new in the protocol.  It is
   similar to the situation when SPD entry is selected based on some
   value from the certificate instead of identity from the ID payload.

   (References: [IPSEC] " Reauthentication in IKEv2 ", October 2004. )

























Kukec                   Expires January 23, 2008               [Page 22]

Internet-Draft          Using IKE with IPv6 CGAs               July 2007


11.  Security Considerations

   None.
















































Kukec                   Expires January 23, 2008               [Page 23]

Internet-Draft          Using IKE with IPv6 CGAs               July 2007


12.  Acknowledgements

   I am grateful for the Radia Perlman's permission to work on additions
   to her draft Understanding IKEv2: Tutorial and Rationale for
   decisions [6].  Also, it has been a great experience to be able to
   work on IKEv2 project for ZEMRIS on Faculty of electrical engineering
   and computing, University of Zagreb.












































Kukec                   Expires January 23, 2008               [Page 24]

Internet-Draft          Using IKE with IPv6 CGAs               July 2007


13.  References

13.1.  Normative References

   [1]   Kent, S., "Security Architecture for the Internet Protocol",
         RFC 2401, November 1998.

   [2]   Kent, S. and K. Seo, "Security Architecture for the Internet
         Protocol", RFC 4301, December 2005.

   [3]   Kaufman, C., "The Internet Key Exchange version 2 (IKEv2)",
         RFC 4306, December 2005.

   [4]   Nir, J. and P. Hoffman, "Repeated Authentication in Internet
         Key Exchange (IKEv2) Protocol", RFC 4478, December 2005.

   [5]   Eronen, P. and H. Tschofenig, "Extension for EAP Authentication
         in IKEv2", draft-eronen-ipsec-ikev2-eap-auth-05 (work in
         progress), October 2006.

   [6]   Perlman, R., "Understanding IKEv2: Tutorial, and rationale for
         decisions", draft-ietf-ipsec-ikev2-tutorial-01 (work in
         progress), March 2003.

   [7]   Korver, B., "The Internet IP Security PKI Profile of IKEv1/
         ISAKMP, IKEv2, and PKIX",
         draft-ietf-pki4ipsec-ikecert-profile-12 (work in progress),
         February 2007.

13.2.  Informative References

   [8]   Droms, R., "Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol", RFC 2131,
         March 1997.

   [9]   Rigney, C., Rubens, A., Simpson, W., and S. Willens, "Remote
         Authentication Dial In User Service (RADIUS)", RFC rfc2865,
         June 2000.

   [10]  Aboba, B., Blunk, J., Vollbrecht, J., Carlson, J., and H.
         Levkowetz, "Extensible Authentication Protocol (EAP)",
         RFC rfc3748, June 2004.

   [11]  Eronen, P. and P. Hoffman, "IKEv2 Clarifications and
         Implementation Guidelines", RFC rfc4718, October 2006.

   [12]  Asokan, N., Niemi, V., and K. Nyberg, "Man-in-the-Middle in
         Tunneled Authentication Protocols", October 2006.




Kukec                   Expires January 23, 2008               [Page 25]

Internet-Draft          Using IKE with IPv6 CGAs               July 2007


Author's Address

   Ana Kukec
   University of Zagreb
   Unska bb
   Zagreb
   Croatia

   Email: anchie@tel.fer.hr










































Kukec                   Expires January 23, 2008               [Page 26]

Internet-Draft          Using IKE with IPv6 CGAs               July 2007


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Kukec                   Expires January 23, 2008               [Page 27]

