Network Working Group                                         L. Dunbar
Internet Draft                                                   Huawei
Intended status: Informational                                 M. Zarny
Expires: January 2015                                     Goldman Sachs
                                                            C. Jacquenet
                                                          France Telecom
                                                         S. Chakrabarty
                                                              US Ignite

                                                           July 4, 2014



          Dynamic Network Security as a Service Problem Statement
                draft-dunbar-nsaas-problem-statement-00.txt


Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79. This document may not be modified,
   and derivative works of it may not be created, except to publish it
   as an RFC and to translate it into languages other than English.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents
   at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 4, 2009.







Dunbar, et al.         Expires January 4, 2015                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft      Network SaaS Problem Statement            July 2014


Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2014 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors. All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document. Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with
   respect to this document. Code Components extracted from this
   document must include Simplified BSD License text as described in
   Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without
   warranty as described in the Simplified BSD License.

Abstract

   This draft describes the motivation, use cases, and the problem
   statement for network security as a service.

Table of Contents


   1. Introduction...................................................3
      1.1. Motivation................................................3
      1.2. Network Security Functions under Consideration............4
      1.3. The scope of the proposed work............................5
   2. Conventions used in this document..............................6
   3. Use Case: Virtual Firewall Function On Demand in Cloud DCs.....7
   4. Use Case: Security Functions provided to a Mobile Operator.....7
   5. Problem Space..................................................8
      5.1. Issues of the current Cloud-based Security Solutions......8
      5.2. Other problems............................................9
      5.3. The Benefits..............................................9
   6. Related industry initiatives..................................10
      6.1. OpenStack Firewall/Security as a Service.................10
      6.2. Security as a Service by Cloud Security Alliance.........10
   7. Potential Solutions...........................................11
   8. Conclusion and Recommendation.................................11
   9. Manageability Considerations..................................11
   10. Security Considerations......................................11
   11. IANA Considerations..........................................11
   12. References...................................................12
      12.1. Normative References....................................12
      12.2. Informative References..................................12
   13. Acknowledgments..............................................12



Dunbar, et al.         Expires January 4, 2015                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft      Network SaaS Problem Statement            July 2014


  1.Introduction

   This draft describes the motivation, use cases, and the problem
   statement for dynamic network security as a service.

  1.1. Motivation

   The main benefits of virtualized network functions are increased
   flexibility to efficiently share the resources, and decreased setup
   and management costs. These services can be deployed in enterprise
   networks or in provider networks. Many enterprises are increasing
   consuming these services hosted in their providers' networks. In
   particular, they are consuming network security services hosted off
   premises.

   Some of the reasons driving up this demand are the need and desire
   to:

     . Dynamically provision and update firewall policies
     . Implement stringent security functions at branch offices where
        minimal security infrastructures/capabilities exist
     . Provide virtual network security services for applications
        operating over virtual networks such as NVO3
     . Maintain consistent security policies across a large number of
        small low powered/low processing sensors


   According to [Gartner-2013], the demand for cloud-based security
   services is growing. Small and medium-sized businesses (SMBs) are
   increasingly adopting cloud-based security services to replace on-
   premises security tools, while larger enterprises are deploying a
   mix of traditional and cloud-based security services.

   Despite their increasing popularity, most common cloud security
   services-like most cloud services in general-do not yet have
   industry standards by which users can request their desired services
   from some vendors. (The "user-provider" relationship may exist
   between two different firms or between different domains of the same
   firm.)

   Another area ripe for standardization is how these services may be
   dynamically provisioned, updated, or/and verified to fulfill on-
   demand requests. Issues here range from the more typical ones like
   the scalability, availability and extensibility of the cloud-based
   services to more esoteric ones like a lack of intelligent policy to


Dunbar, et al.         Expires January 4, 2015                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft      Network SaaS Problem Statement            July 2014


   configuration translation and a lack of consistent way to implement
   policies across multiple regions and entities.

   Open source projects like OpenStack and CloudStack have begun to
   tackle the issues but much work remains. The objective of this draft
   is to describe the problem set for which future architecture and
   solutions can be developed.





  1.2. Network Security Functions under Consideration

   There are many network functions being deployed and new ones are
   popping up with business and application demands. In order to have a
   concrete context for the protocols discussion, we start with the
   following network security related functions:

     . Firewall
     . DDOS/Anti-DOS
     . Access control/Authorization/Authentication
     . Remote identity management
     . Secure Key management
     . Intrusion Detection System/ Intrusion Prevention System
        (IDS/IPS)
     . Threat detection: Eavesdropping, Trojans, viruses and worms,
        Malware, etc.


   The reason for starting with security-related functions is due to
   the wide acceptance of security functions that are not running on
   customer/enterprise premises. Numerous security vendors are now
   leveraging cloud based models to deliver security solutions. This
   shift has occurred for a variety of reasons including greater
   economies of scale, streamlined delivery mechanisms, and the demand
   of business and applications for more sophisticated security
   functions that they do not have. Consumers, enterprise clients as
   well as applications are embracing the business model of requesting
   for security functions that do not run on their own premises on
   demand, also known as Security as a Service.





Dunbar, et al.         Expires January 4, 2015                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft      Network SaaS Problem Statement            July 2014


  1.3. The scope of the proposed work

   Virtual Security Function is a security function that can be
   requested by one domain (e.g., two different domains of one service
   provider, enterprise clients, or applications, etc.) but may be
   owned or managed by another domain (e.g., service provider). Those
   security functions may be hosted on physical appliances or
   instantiated as virtual machines on common compute server (i.e. the
   Virtualized network functions defined by ETSI NFV).

   Note: Virtual Security Function and "Cloud-based Security Functions"
   are used interchangeably in this draft.

   The "requester <-> provider" relationship has different connotations
   in different scenarios:

     . Client <-> Provider relationship, i.e. client requesting some
        network functions from its provider;
     . Inter-domain, e.g. Domain A <-> Domain B relationship, i.e. one
        operator domain requesting some network functions from another
        operator domain, where "A" and "B" can be from same operator or
        different operators; or
     . Applications <-> Network relationship, i.e. an application
        (e.g. cluster of servers) requesting some functions from
        network, etc.


   The security functions offered by 3rd party need Bi-directional
   periodic communications between the requesters and the providers for
   policies negotiation, validation, potentially re-directing traffic
   to higher level security functions, etc. Therefore, the service
   requires protocol exchange. Simply API is not enough.



   The objective of the proposed work is to standardize the protocols
   (or the interface) and architecture for Requester and Provider to
   negotiate the functions needed as well as the associated attributes.

   The proposed protocols between requester and provider can be used
   for the following scenarios:

     . A Client requests a certain network security function from a
        provider



Dunbar, et al.         Expires January 4, 2015                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft      Network SaaS Problem Statement            July 2014


     . The provider fulfills the request for example, by instantiating
        an instance of the service in question, or configures an
        additional rule in an already provisioned service.


  2. Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [RFC2119].

   In this document, these words will appear with that interpretation
   only when in ALL CAPS. Lower case uses of these words are not to be
   interpreted as carrying RFC-2119 significance.

   Cloud DC:   The data centers that are not on premises of enterprises
               yet have the compute/storage resources that can be
               requested or purchased by the enterprises. What the
               enterprises actually get is Virtual Data Centers.

   DC:         Data Center

   Domain:     The term "Domain" in this draft has different
               connotations in different scenarios:
               Client <-> Provider relationship, i.e. client requesting
                           some network functions from its provider;
               Domain A <-> Domain B relationship, i.e. one operator
                           domain requesting some network functions
                           from another operator domain; or
               Applications <-> Network relationship, i.e. an
                           application (e.g. cluster of servers)
                           requesting some functions from network, etc.


   Virtual Network Function:  an L4-L7 network function that can be
               requested by one domain (e.g. two different domains of
               one service provider, enterprise clients, or
               applications, etc.) but may be owned or managed by
               another domain (e.g. service provider). Those network
               functions would be running over physical appliances or
               instantiated as virtual machines on common compute
               servers (i.e. the ETSI NFV defined Virtualized network
               functions). The "Network Function" here means a range of
               L4-L7 functions.



Dunbar, et al.         Expires January 4, 2015                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft      Network SaaS Problem Statement            July 2014


   Virtual Security Function: a security function that can be requested
               by one domain but may be owned or managed by another
               domain.

   Cloud-based security functions: used interchangeably with the
               "Virtual Security Functions" in this draft.


  3. Use Case: Virtual Firewall Function On Demand in Cloud DCs

   Clients of a cloud data center not only need virtual networks to
   interconnect their virtual compute/storage resources, but they also
   need virtual firewall services to enforce the proper communication
   policies. VPN clients, especially branch office access points, may
   need firewalls that are hosted by the VPN provider to be integrated
   with the VPN service.

   Per [NW-2011], A cloud-based firewall is different from an on-
   premise one (aside from its location) in three key areas:
   scalability, availability and extensibility.

      . Scalability: Cloud-based firewalls are designed to serve
         multiple customers and their increasing demand. Unlike with an
         on-premise firewall, upgrading a cloud-based firewall-e.g.,
         for greater throughput-should be transparent to enterprise
         users.
      . Availability: Cloud-based firewall providers tend to offer
         extremely high availability through their highly redundant and
         resilient data centers. In contrast, most enterprises may not
         be able to offer "carrier-grade" high availability.
      . Extensibility: Enterprises looking for vendor diversity can
         subscribe to cloud-based firewalls from different providers.
         Furthermore, additional features can be added more seamlessly,
         transparently.


  4. Use Case: Security Functions provided to a Mobile Operator

   Maintaining security is challenging, especially in mobile
   environments, where all kinds of user devices (smartphones, pads,
   personal assistants, etc.) access applications located in the cloud.
   Not only are applications no longer hosted in contained data
   centers, (which have a higher chance of encountering various
   security threats), but also the mobile devices might not have the



Dunbar, et al.         Expires January 4, 2015                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft      Network SaaS Problem Statement            July 2014


   sophisticated processing power or expertise to run up-to-date
   security protection functions to guard against rapidly changing
   threats.

   Evolving threats to mobile networks can affect mobile devices, radio
   access networks (RANs), and applications hosted in cloud data
   centers.

   The trend is to have security functions delivered as a service from
   the provider, without requiring on-premise hardware or software
   maintenance.

   These security services often include authentication (e.g., the
   ability to authenticate employees to control the cloud services and
   data they have access to), anti-virus, anti-malware/spyware,
   intrusion detection, and security event management, among others.

   The security function offering can be between different domains of
   one operator or between subscribers to providers. Backhaul operators
   can offer the security function services to mobile operators.

   Security-as-a-Service to mobile environments offers a number of
   benefits, including:

     . Greater security expertise than typically available to mobile
        users,
     . Flexibility of managing evolving threats
     . Ensuring service availability
     . Reducing deployment and operational costs
     . Effectively organizing groups of apps or users,
     . Constant virus definition updates.


  5. Problem Space

  5.1. Issues of the current Cloud-based Security Solutions

   Many vendors already offer Security as a Service in the cloud.
   However, all their solutions are proprietary, with different
   interfaces and different modes of operation. Some offerings follow a
   peer-to-peer model: i.e. requiring clients to peer with vendor
   provided functions hosted in the cloud. A competing model requires
   clients to download their desired functions to local devices. In
   this model, it is difficult to maintain consistent software updates
   across all the devices. Consistency issues can exist across: (1)


Dunbar, et al.         Expires January 4, 2015                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft      Network SaaS Problem Statement            July 2014


   multiple regions for a single application; (2) multiple
   applications; and/or (3) multiple zones (e.g., between internal and
   perimeter zones).


   In addition, the current mode of operation for Security as a Service
   via a Cloud infrastructure does not have any common
   interfaces/mechanisms for clients or applications to verify if the
   required functions can fulfill the policies needed by the
   clients/applications. There is a lack of user-friendly service
   (policy) template.



  5.2. Other problems

   Here are some other problems associated with Security Function on
   Demand that might be out of the scope of this proposed WG:

     . Diverse security services:
        The proposed WG might not be able to cover every possible
        security service.

     . Scalability:
        Not only diverse CPU/memory needed for different security
        functions can be difficult to manage, but the solution itself
        may have some limits, e.g. maximum number of firewall rules.

     . Availability:
        The VNF pool is to address the availability of virtualized
        network functions.

     . Converting policies to vendor-specific configurations
     . Dynamic features update



  5.3. The Benefits

   The goal of the proposed work is to establish an architectural
   framework and mechanisms for clients (or one domain) to request
   security functions from a network provider (or another domain). The
   framework allows the clients to view, request, and/or verify the
   security functions/solution offered by different vendors. This



Dunbar, et al.         Expires January 4, 2015                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft      Network SaaS Problem Statement            July 2014


   framework can make it easy for a cluster of devices requiring the
   similar security policies to have consistent policies across
   multiple sites.

   The network service providers, with their physical access to a vast
   number of enterprises and consumers, are very well positioned to
   provide the "Security Function on Demand" platform.  The providers
   can act as security function brokers to their directly connected
   domains. They can offer a service catalog and standard mechanisms by
   which enterprises (or applications) can query request, or/and verify
   the needed security functions.

   With the standard protocols for clients to request the needed
   security functions, network operators can leverage their current VPN
   to enterprises and access to a vast population of end users to offer
   a set of consolidated Security solutions. The IETF can play an
   instrumental role in defining this common interface and framework
   for network operators.



  6. Related industry initiatives

  6.1. OpenStack Firewall/Security as a Service

   OpenStack completed the Firewall as a Service project and specified
   the set of APIs for Firewall services:
   http://docs.openstack.org/admin-guide-
   cloud/content/fwaas_api_abstractions.html

   OpenStack has defined the APIs for managing Security Groups:
   http://docs.openstack.org/admin-guide-
   cloud/content/securitygroup_api_abstractions.html

   The attributes defined by OpenStack Firewall/Security as a Service
   will be the basis of the information model for the proposed work at
   the VNFOD IETF initiative.

  6.2.  Security as a Service by Cloud Security Alliance

   https://cloudsecurityalliance.org/research/secaas/#_get-involved

   SaaS by CSA is at the initial stage of defining the scope of work.






Dunbar, et al.         Expires January 4, 2015                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft      Network SaaS Problem Statement            July 2014


  7. Potential Solutions

   While it is too early to specify any solutions, some potential
   candidates are described just to prove that the identified problem
   is well bounded for the IETF to specify the needed solutions.

   The protocol needed for this negotiation may be somewhat correlated
   to the dynamic service parameter negotiation procedure [RFC7297].
   The CPP template documented in RFC7297, even though currently
   covering only Connectivity, could be extended as a basis for the
   negotiation procedure. Likewise, the companion CPNP protocol could
   be a candidate to proceed with the negotiation procedure.

   The "security as a service" would be a typical example of the kind
   of (CPP-based) negotiation procedures that could take place between
   a corporate customer and a service provider. However, more security
   specific parameters have to be considered by this proposed work.



  8. Conclusion and Recommendation

   Although open source projects such as OpenStack have taken on the
   security as a service initiative, much work needs to be done. For
   example, OpenStack today covers only a minimal set of security
   functions. The IETF has a responsibility to define a comprehensive
   framework and necessary standards by which network security
   functions may be offered, requested, implemented or verified.



  9. Manageability Considerations

   TBD.

  10. Security Considerations

   TBD

  11. IANA Considerations

   This document requires no IANA actions. RFC Editor: Please remove
   this section before publication.






Dunbar, et al.         Expires January 4, 2015                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft      Network SaaS Problem Statement            July 2014


  12. References

12.1. Normative References

   [RFC2119] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
             Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC7297] Boucadair, M., "IP Connectivity Provisioning Profile",
             RFC7297, April 2014.

12.2. Informative References

   [Boucadair-framework] M. Boucadair, et al, "Differentiated Service
             Function Chaining Framework", < draft-boucadair-service-
             chaining-framework-00>; Aug 2013

   [Gartner-2013] E. Messmer, "Gartner: Cloud-based security as a
             service set to take off", Network World, 31 October 2013

   [NW-2011] J. Burke, "The Pros and Cons of a Cloud-Based Firewall",
             Network World, 11 November 2011

   [SC-MobileNetwork] W. Haeffner, N. Leymann, "Network Based Services
             in Mobile Network", IETF87 Berlin, July 29, 2013

   [Application-SDN] J. Giacomonni, "Application Layer SDN", Layer 123
             ONF Presentation, Singapore, June 2013

  13. Acknowledgments

   Acknowledgements to Andy Malis for his review and contributions.

   This document was prepared using 2-Word-v2.0.template.dot.
















Dunbar, et al.         Expires January 4, 2015                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft      Network SaaS Problem Statement            July 2014


Authors' Addresses

   Linda Dunbar
   Huawei Technologies
   5340 Legacy Drive, Suite 175
   Plano, TX 75024, USA
   Phone: (469) 277 5840
   Email: ldunbar@huawei.com

   Myo Zarny
   Goldman Sachs
   30 Hudson Street
   Jersey City, NJ 07302
   Email: myo.zarny@gs.com

   Christian Jacquenet
   France Telecom
   Rennes 35000
   France
   Email: Christian.jacquenet@orange.com

   Shaibal Chakrabarty
   US Ignite
   1776 Massachusetts Ave NW, Suite 601
   Washington, DC 20036
   Phone: (214) 708 6163
   Email: shaibalc@us-ignite.org






















Dunbar, et al.         Expires January 4, 2015                [Page 13]

