





Internet Engineering Task Force
Internet Draft                                               Schulzrinne
draft-schulzrinne-sip-911-01.txt                             Columbia U.
March 25, 2001
Expires: December 2001


        Emergency Call Services for SIP-based Internet Telephony

STATUS OF THIS MEMO

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress".

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   To view the list Internet-Draft Shadow Directories, see
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

Abstract

   If Internet Telephony is to offer a full replacement for traditional
   telephone services, it needs to provide emergency call services. In
   the United States, emergency calls are known as 911 services, based
   on the number dialed. This note describes some options for providing
   enhanced emergency service, i.e., emergency calls that allow
   emergency response centers to determine the address where the caller
   is located. This is made more difficult by the temporary nature of IP
   addresses, the large number of ISPs and their lack of legal
   responsibility for emergency services and the ability of many
   Internet terminals to be connected to the Internet at different
   locations. This note explores some of the requirements and design
   choices.


1 Introduction




Schulzrinne                                                   [Page 1]

Internet Draft             Emergency Calling              March 25, 2001


   Providing emergency communications, exemplified by the Enhanced 911
   (E911) service available in the United States, encompasses a number
   of steps and requirements [1,2]:

        o The caller needing emergency assistance initiates a call to
          the appropriate Public Safety Answering Point (PSAP),
          typically via nationwide uniform number (911 in the United
          States, 000 in Australia, 112 in the European Community, with
          special numbers in some countries for police, ambulance or
          fire). This functionality, without the additional features
          below, is called "basic 911', while the features below
          constitute "enhanced 911".

        o The call is routed by the local switch to a PSAP, based on the
          calling number.

        o At a PSAP, emergency operators determine the nature of the
          emergency and contact the appropriate agency. A single PSAP is
          usually responsible for an area covering several independent
          police and fire departments. This area is called an Emergency
          Service Zone (ESZ).  It is identified by an Emergency Service
          Number (ESN), a number consisting of three to five digits that
          represents a unique combination of emergency service agencies
          such as law enforcement, fire and emergency medical service.
          The Master Street Address Guide (MSAG) is a database of street
          names and house number ranges within a community defining
          emergency service zones and the associated Emergency Service
          Numbers (ESNs).

          Note that the appropriate PSAP may not be the one
          geographically closest to the caller, due to political,
          geographic and administrative boundaries. Also, service areas
          of different emergency service agencies may not be the same.
          For example, a whole city may be served by the same law
          enforcement agency, but may have a number of different
          emergency medical service units serving different boroughs or
          other divisions.

          Calls to the first PSAP, the so-called primary PSAP, may be
          relayed to a secondary PSAP.

        o Wireless phones in the United States must be able to reach 911
          even if the phone is not a registered subscriber.

        o Since it is possible that the caller is too confused,
          frightened or young to properly identify the location of the
          emergency, modern 911 systems [not sure about Europe] require
          all local telephone operators to maintain a database, called



Schulzrinne                                                   [Page 2]

Internet Draft             Emergency Calling              March 25, 2001


          the ALI (Automatic Location Identification) database,
          containing current subscriber addresses, telephone numbers and
          supplementary emergency information for landline telephones.

          For wireless service, operators must be able to identify the
          location of the user within 50 m (for 67% of calls).

          The PSAP obtains the caller's phone number, name and address.
          This database lookup is called Automatic Location
          Identification (ALI). The caller's phone number is delivered
          to the PSAP regardless of any restrictions on caller ID
          delivery (CLID).

        o Certain services, such as call-waiting or three-party calls,
          are restricted during (basic) 911 calls. The caller cannot
          hang up the call and place another call.

   Internet telephony offers the opportunity not only to supply current
   emergency services, but also to add functionality. For example,
   multimedia communications can be used to provide video images or
   biometrics. A two-way video call allow an emergency medical
   technician to instruct a person at the scene of the emergency in
   emergency procedures and provide corrective feedback to those
   performing first aid.

   The call setup can provide additional medical background, without
   having to store the information in a central database. Due to the
   faster call setup times and the ease of redirection, calls can be
   forwarded and transferred to emergency personnel en route to the
   caller or a nearby PSAP, in case the primary PSAP serving the
   caller's location is overloaded. Unlike current PSAPs, which require
   dedicated equipment, an Internet-based PSAP could be set up anywhere
   Internet access is available, providing easy relocation should the
   PSAP be unavailable during natural disasters. The ability to indicate
   language capabilities of the caller can help route the call to an
   operator, without the additional delay of having a general operator
   try to ascertain the language of the caller.

   Multiple media, including audio, video and text chat, also offer
   improved capabilities to people with disabilities, making it more
   likely, for example, that a deaf person visiting somewhere can find a
   multimedia-capable device from which at least text (instant message)
   communication is possible.

   Also, while 911 service is available to about 85% of the U.S.
   population, other countries have very different numbering schemes
   (e.g., 110 and 112 in Germany and other European countries). Also,
   many corporate and hotel PBX systems do not support 911. Internet



Schulzrinne                                                   [Page 3]

Internet Draft             Emergency Calling              March 25, 2001


   telephony may be able to make the service universally available.

   However, many of the assumptions underlying the current 911 service
   do not hold for Internet telephony.

   It appears likely that users of Internet telephony services, wired or
   wireless, expect similar behavior as in existing networks. Indeed,
   even if the call is terminated at the PSAP via the PSTN, difficulties
   can arise if the caller is using Internet telephony, as the fire
   department may well be summoned to the telephone company building
   housing the VoIP-PSTN gateway.

   Simply replicating the existing phone-only emergency call system
   seems ill-advised. In the future, users are not likely to perceive
   Internet telephony as a separate service, but simply as another
   communications service along with email, chat and maybe even
   distributed games. Thus, it is desirable to allow a user to summon
   emergency assistance from any communication application, regardless
   of the underlying protocols. A general infrastructure also makes it
   easier for users with disabilities to summon help [3].

   Emergency numbers in an Internet context require components similar
   to those listed above. We first describe alternatives for reaching an
   emergency operator in Section 2 and then discuss how the emergency
   operator can locate the caller in Section 3.

2 Reaching Emergency Help

   The architecture described here envisions Internet PSAPs (iPSAPs)
   that operate in a fashion roughly similar to today's telephone-only
   PSAPs.  These iPSAPs triage incoming communication and then contact
   the appropriate public safety agency. Callers reach the iPSAP in two
   stages, by indicating a common, location-independent address (Section
   2.1), with a network entity then routing the call to the appropriate
   iPSAP (Section 2.2).

2.1 User-Visible Emergency Address

   Emergency addresses can be defined at both the network and
   application layer. At the network layer, a designated scoped
   multicast address [4] could reach a local node with knowledge of the
   iPSAP's address (see below) that then forwards the request to the
   appropriate authority. Multicast precludes the use of TCP and
   application-layer forwarding obliterates the original IP identity.

   As an alternative, an IPv6 anycast address can be designated for
   emergency communications, but a DHCP option for configuring end
   systems would need to be defined.



Schulzrinne                                                   [Page 4]

Internet Draft             Emergency Calling              March 25, 2001


   At the application layer, any protocol designed for user-to-user
   communication, including email, SIP, IRC and chat, should have a
   designated domain-specific emergency response address, similar to the
   current hostmaster@domain , postmaster@domain , webmaster@domain and
   similar functional addresses [5].  There is no need to restrict this
   to one address, however, so that a message addressed to, say, 911 ,
   sos , or 110 reach the correct destination, regardless of the host
   part of the URL. It is highly desirable to standardize this address
   Internet-wide rather than leaving this to national authorities, to
   avoid having to customize software applications for each national
   jurisdiction.

   It is difficult to provision a proxy for all possible emergency
   numbers, as there are at least 60 different ones in use throughout
   the world ( 000 01 02 03 04 05 061 07 080 091 100 10022 101 10111
   10177 102 107 110 111 112 113 117 118 119 120 122 123 131 132 133 140
   144 15 150 155 158 160 166 17 171 175 18 19 190 191 192 193 196 199
   911 92 93 94 990 993 994 995 997 998 999).

   In addition, callers may also use the tel URL [6] in SIP requests
   with the local emergency number. However, this does not simplify the
   problem since the PSTN gateway still has to determine whether the
   caller is within the same PSAP and thus can simply dial 911.  As
   discussed in Section 3, PSTN gateways are likely to yield incorrect
   location information.

2.2 Finding the Appropriate iPSAP

   Either the end system or a network entity, i.e., a SIP proxy server,
   can determine the appropriate iPSAP. Here, end systems include PSTN-
   to-VoIP gateways. As noted earlier, the appropriate iPSAP may not be
   the one geographically closest to the user. Except for corporate
   campuses with their own emergency response infrastructure, boundaries
   of areas served by an iPSAP (the ESZ) are very unlikely to bear any
   ressemblance to network topology or network administrative regions.

   In either case, there are a number of alternatives, including DNS,
   SLP or a central directory server. We discuss these options below.

   For SIP-bases systems, note that end system and proxy-based routing
   can be combined in a network, similar to how request routing works
   for regular SIP requests. If an end system or proxy does not know how
   to find the appropriate iPSAP, it routes it to another proxy that may
   know.  If the request does not contain location information, the
   proxy inserts it, as described in Section 3, possibly indicating how
   certain it is about the accuracy of the location information.

   PSTN-to-VoIP gateways need to take the location of the caller into



Schulzrinne                                                   [Page 5]

Internet Draft             Emergency Calling              March 25, 2001


   account and thus will likely have to access existing ALI databases.

   In an emergency response system, reliability is particularly
   important.  Thus, it is desirable to minimize the number of servers
   and resolution steps necessary to reach the PSAP. As much as
   possible, the system has to work even if wide-area communications is
   unavailable and should minimize the delay even if the network is
   congested.

2.2.1 Finding the iPSAP via multicast or anycast

   As discussed in Section 2.1, a multicast or anycast address can be
   defined which allows any system to locate the nearest iPSAP.
   Unfortunately, network scoping and topology are not likely to conform
   to the civic boundaries served by an iPSAP, but they may well be
   congruent within a corporate campus network.

   The SIP INVITE or MESSAGE requests can be multicast. Other protocols
   may have to add multicast capabilities or need to use a separate
   multicast protocol to locate the server, which is then contacted via
   unicast. In that case, SLP 2.2.3 may well be appropriate.

2.2.2 Finding the iPSAP via DNS

   User locations are mapped into a DNS hierarchy, with each entry
   referring to the appropriate iPSAP. The DNS hierarchy can be either
   geographically based or be based on civil designations such as postal
   codes or town names, or both. A DNS hierarchy based on geo location
   (longitude and latitude) is not likely to work well since the
   appropriate resolution of the entries is difficult to determine in
   general. For example, geographically close locations may be part of
   different jurisdictions or separated by a river or mountain ridge.
   Also, PSAPs cover areas of very different size, depending on
   population density. Town names or postal codes ("civil location") can
   be readily encoded into DNS, as in 07605.us.emergency.arpa ,
   5.0.6.7.0.us.emergency.arpa or leonia.nj.us.emergency.arpa remains to
   be determined whether there is sufficient overlap between PSAPs and
   postal zones to make this approach viable. This approach works only
   if the proxy or end system has accurate civil location information,
   as discussed below. Also, all valid postal codes or names need to be
   populated.

   The DNS entry can point to an SRV or NAPTR record, making it easy for
   different protocols (SIP, H.323, chat, IRC, etc.) to reuse the same
   directory infrastructure and allowing services for different
   communications media to be handled by different iPSAPs. (For example,
   if a particular communications mechanism is not widely used or
   requires special equipment, one location may handle it for several



Schulzrinne                                                   [Page 6]

Internet Draft             Emergency Calling              March 25, 2001


   iPSAPs.)

   A DNS-based approach has the advantage that it scales well and
   entries can easily be delegated. However, end systems or proxies have
   to be configured with their civil location. Thus, either the end
   system or proxy has to be able to determine the correct location of
   the end system. This is likely to be easy for DSL, cable modem and
   leased-line installation, but more difficult for dial and wireless
   users, as discussed in Section 3.1.

   A direct mapping of emergency phone numbers via the approach pursued
   in the enum working group [7] does not seem to be possible, since it
   would map every such query to the same iPSAP location. An indirect
   mapping to a location service, however, is necessary in any event.

2.2.3 Finding the iPSAP via SLP

   Finding an iPSAP can be considered a service location problem.
   However, the SLP zone mechanism is not a good fit for service
   location, since it usually corresponds to a local network
   administrative zone. However, in most cases, a single SLP zone falls
   within a single PSAP jurisdiction, so that the mapping is likely to
   be valid. On the other hand, SLP does not really offer anything in
   that case that a simple query protocol could not do just as well.
   Unless entities can discover the local service directory via
   multicast, adding SLP would require yet another configuration
   mechanism.

   The SLP entry would likely contain the DNS entry discussed above or,
   directly, the address of the iPSAP. (The latter avoids reliance on
   DNS, but is less flexible.)

   A resolution mechanims based on SLP is not likely to be viable until
   almost all local networks support the service. It adds little
   functionality if the proxy locates the appropriate iPSAP, as it can
   perform the same look-up logic as the SLP server, saving an
   additional step.

   Also, if SLP were to be deployed primarily for emergency call use, it
   would be less likely to be tested regularly and thus be less
   reliable.  Reliability extensions to SLP [8] may be advisable to
   remove single points of failure.

   Thus, the use of SLP is not likely to be viable alternative.

2.2.4 Finding the iPSAP via DHCP

   As long as the address of the iPSAP is constant for all devices



Schulzrinne                                                   [Page 7]

Internet Draft             Emergency Calling              March 25, 2001


   served by a DHCP [9] server, it is easy to configure it into DHCP.
   Unfortunately, it appears to be difficult for applications on
   standard operating systems to access DHCP configuration information;
   embedded devices have no such difficulty.

2.2.5 Finding the iPSAP via LDAP

   An LDAP server could, given information about a caller's civil or
   geographical location, return the appropriate iPSAP address. Unlike
   the mapping from user identifier to location (see Section 3.2.3),
   this information is less privacy-sensitive, but updates to the data
   base have to be carefully controlled.

   This approach requires configuring end systems or proxies with the
   address of the appropriate LDAP server, thus making the approach not
   viable for robust end system use.

3 Locating Emergency Callers

   Probably the most difficult aspect of an Internet-based emergency
   call system is determining the civil or geographical user location.
   The problem has two aspects, namely how the end system or network
   determines the terminal's location (Section 3.1) and how the iPSAP
   obtains this information (Section 3.2).

3.1 Determining User Location

   First, devices or the network have to determine their geo or civil
   location. This may well turn out to be easier for cellular devices,
   where all the techniques suggested for second-generation wireless
   systems can be applied. These include GPS or radio-based location
   [10]. For wireless LANs, the RADAR project [11] has shown that IEEE
   802.11-based devices can be located to room accuracy within a
   building if radio conditions are modeled or surveyed. However, GPS
   generally does not work within buildings, so that even assuming
   desktop computers or Internet phones could be economically equipped
   with GPS receivers, additional methods have to be found. (GPS systems
   presumably report a location just before entering a building, which
   may well be sufficient. This is less satisfactory when entering a
   tunnel in the Alps or under the British Channel since the old reading
   may be off by a whole country. Also, GPS location or triangulation is
   of limited usefulness within buildings due to the large uncertainty
   in altitude.)

   If the terminal obtains location information, it may need to update
   an external server, such as DNS or a specialized location service
   [12,13,14].




Schulzrinne                                                   [Page 8]

Internet Draft             Emergency Calling              March 25, 2001


   For devices connected to local area networks, such as switched
   Ethernet, it is suggested that each port periodically sends a message
   to the attached devices indicating the geo or civil location. The
   switch is configured with this information via SNMP. Since jacks are
   reasonably stationary in most hard-wired installations, this requires
   only a one-time effort, but would require a substantial upgrade
   effort for existing installations. However, due to the use of patch
   panels and hubs, there is a chance that small-scale inaccuracies
   creep in, but probably at the scale of room numbers rather than
   buildings. (In addition, this information could also be useful for
   asset management.)

   Even for wireless LANs with base station connected to Ethernet
   switches, this would provide location accuracy of about 100 to 300'
   and generally within a single floor of a building.

   Location information can also be configured directly into end
   systems, preferably in a manner that allows all applications access
   to this information. This would allow SIP, for example, to simply add
   a header to emergency call setup requests or mid-call INFO requests
   containing the geographic location. However, the likelihood that
   users will correctly enter or update this information is low, even
   if, for example, operating systems would require entry of such
   information. Even with modestly mobile systems, such as PCs that are
   moved from office to home or moved between homes, the information is
   likely to be out of date in a large fraction of cases.

   This approach has the advantage that the end system controls the
   delivery of information. On the other hand, applications then have to
   be aware when the user contacts the emergency address.

3.2 Conveying User Location to the iPSAP

   The user location can be conveyed to the iPSAP in a number of
   different ways, as illustrated in Fig. 1. Generally, the location
   information can be delivered directly by the end system into
   application-layer protocols, inserted by SIP proxies or be obtained
   by the iPSAP from either the device or a database. The first two
   methods depend on the application-layer protocol, while the latter
   can be used for any protocol employed to contact the iPSAP. We
   evaluate some of the alternatives below and summarize the options in
   Table 1.



3.2.1 DNS

   Network providers or terminals can store location information in DNS,



Schulzrinne                                                   [Page 9]

Internet Draft             Emergency Calling              March 25, 2001






    GPS
     |
     V
[wireless terminal]
  |
  \-- INVITE sip:911              --> [SIP proxy] --\
      GPos: 42 21 54 N 71 06 18 W                   |
                                                    |
                                      INVITE sip:911
                                      GPos: 42 21 54 N 71 06 18 W      
                                      GL: S3.US.45420.1910
                                                    |
                                                    \---------\
                                                              | 
                                                              | 
[wired terminal]   <---- location info --- [Ethernet switch]  |
     |                                                        | 
     \------  INVITE sip:911  --->  [SIP proxy]  ---> [PSAP]<-/
              GL: S3.US.45420.1910


   Figure  1:  Architecture  for  obtaining   and   conveying   location
   information to a PSAP




   Method      Sec.   suitable for  modifications required?
   ________________________________________________________
   DNS         3.2.1  any           no
   SLoP        3.2.2  any           no
   Identifier  3.2.3  any           yes
   ISP         3.2.4  any           true IP address
   SIP URL     3.2.5  SIP
   SIP proxy   3.2.6  SIP


   Table 1: Comparison of options for conveying system location  to  the
   iPSAP

   via dynamic DNS updates. DNS-based schemes have been defined that
   yield either a civil [15] or a geographic location, based on a
   caller's domain name. For example, [15] defines DNS resource records
   of the form below:



Schulzrinne                                                  [Page 10]

Internet Draft             Emergency Calling              March 25, 2001


   donuts A 192.188.192.1
          GL S3.US.45420.1910 "1425 Arbor Avenue, Dayton OH"


   From the record, the country (US), 9-digit zip code (45420-1910) and
   the street address can be determined.

   Alternatively, DNS can also contain geographic information, encoded
   either as strings [16], e.g.,

   <owner> <ttl> <class> GPOS <longitude> <latitude> <altitude>



   GPOS -32.6882 116.8652 10.0


   or as binary (RFC 1876 [17]). RFC 1876 [17] also offers an indication
   of the precision of the location, as well as the circumference of the
   object. An example RFC 1876 record might contain

   cambridge-net.kei.com. LOC   42 21 54 N 71 06 18 W -24m 30m



   DNS mechanisms work only if the mapping between device and location
   is correct. If given an IP address in the SIP request, e.g., in the
   SDP "c=" line or the SIP Contact header, it does an reverse address
   lookup first to obtain a domain name. As long as both the reverse
   mapping and location part of the DNS entry is updated dynamically by
   the network provider or end system, this also works when IP addresses
   are assigned dynamically. It gets significantly more complicated if
   NATs or NAPTs are used since several different devices, in different
   locations, may share the same IP address. If mobile IP is used, the
   visited network has to do the DNS updates.

   DNS information, including location information, is available to
   anybody, raising serious privacy concerns. DNS is fundamentally not
   designed to limit the distribution of information, although access
   control additions to DNS may be feasible.

3.2.2 SLoP (Spatial Location Protocol)

   A specialized protocol for obtaining location information is being
   discussed within the IETF [13]. It relies on a globally unique
   identifier for network objects. This identifier in turn is used as a
   key into one of several databases containing location information.




Schulzrinne                                                  [Page 11]

Internet Draft             Emergency Calling              March 25, 2001


3.2.3 End System Identifier

   An end system identifier such as a MAC address or the identifier
   proposed by the SLoP effort [18] is mapped to a location in one or
   more global databases maintained by civil authorities. The database
   may be accessed, for example, through LDAP [19] or whois [20,21].
   This identifier would then have to be conveyed in IP or application-
   layer messages such as SIP INVITE or INFO. However, such an
   identifier raises privacy issues, even though access to the location
   database can be more readily secured. For non-stationary devices, the
   database still needs to be updated by the end system or system
   administrator.

3.2.4 Location Information Provided by ISP

   Since network access providers generally identify their customers via
   PPP authentication, or by setting up a key for cable modems or via
   the physical line for a digital subscriber line, they have the
   necessary location information as part of their normal billing and
   maintenance records. Thus, they appear to be in the best position to
   supply this information. One model has the iPSAP use reverse address
   mapping on the IP address of the request (or some other identifier at
   the application layer) to the organization that was delegated this
   address or identifier. (This information can be obtained via whois
   from whois.arin.net , whois.apnic.net or whois.ripe.net organization
   then maintains a server that maps addresses to customer locations,
   using any remote query protocol. This clearly imposes additional
   requirements on the coupling between DHCP and customer databases. If
   a permanent customer identifier, scoped by AS, is conveyed by
   application-layer protocols making emergency calls, the mapping is
   static, but additional changes to DHCP and application support is
   needed.

   The above outline of a solution glosses over a number of potential
   problems. For dial-in users, the calling number is needed; it is
   available to the modem pool unless the caller suppresses caller id
   and so it could be propagated along with the billing/"home" location.

   NATs would have to update the organization's customer-to-IP-address
   database on a connection-by-connection basis. However, NATs can be
   ignored in many residential and small-business access networks, as
   each household or business is assigned one IP address, shared by a
   number of devices.

   Depending on whether reverse tunneling is used or not, mobile IP may
   also obscure the "physical" IP address. For SIP, the network address
   of the SIP request is likely to identify the outbound proxy or some
   other proxy in the call path, not the IP address of the caller. Thus,



Schulzrinne                                                  [Page 12]

Internet Draft             Emergency Calling              March 25, 2001


   the iPSAP should use the address in the SDP message instead.

3.2.5 Location Derived from SIP URL

   This approach is specific to SIP-based emergency calls. The iPSAP
   could also query the domain indicated in the SIP URL in the request's
   From header. However, this is not likely to work since the SIP URL
   may be provided by a service provider that has no direct transport
   relationship with the user and, in all likelihood, does not have
   correct address information since it may not have a billing
   relationship to the user. Even assuming that this service provider
   has a correct address record for the customer, this approach fails
   for users that move. For example, a user logging in from a hotel room
   would still be located as being at home.

3.2.6 SIP Proxy Inserts Location Information

   The outbound SIP proxy can insert the information obtained from the
   local authentication database into SIP requests, assuming again that
   all (911) SIP requests use an outbound proxy associated with a
   transport-based ISP that has accurate customer records.

   For example:

   GPos: 42 21 54 N 71 06 18 W -24m 30m
   GL: S3.US.45420.1910 "1425 Arbor Avenue, Dayton OH"


   This approach has the advantage that it looks the same to the iPSAP
   whether information is derived via GPS or by the proxy.

3.2.7 Summary

   It is likely that a combination of mechanisms will need to be
   deployed.  For wireless end systems, either the end system or the
   wireless network operator can readily offer location information,
   either reflected back through the end system into application-layer
   protocol or via a system identifier and a database accessible to
   iPSAP authorities.

   For landline devices attached to LANs, it appears easiest to enhance
   Ethernet switches to provide location information to their ports, as
   all other mechanisms are likely to be difficult to maintain as
   devices move from place to place.

4 Service Restrictions

   Telephony emergency services impose restrictions on call features



Schulzrinne                                                  [Page 13]

Internet Draft             Emergency Calling              March 25, 2001


   while an emergency call is in progress. For example, a caller cannot
   transfer a call, switch to a call-waiting call or put the emergency
   operator on hold. In peer-to-peer signaling, Internet telephony end
   systems would have to implement these behaviors.

5 Network-Layer Priority and Preemption

   It may be desirable to provide reserved resources or a higher traffic
   priority to emergency calls. In RSVP, this is relatively
   straightforward for the caller-operator direction if network
   operators can authenticate emergency operators. Similarly, marking
   packets destined for the iPSAP with a higher-priority DS value in a
   diffserv environment requires no additional protocol support and is a
   local operational issue likely to be dealt with by national
   regulators.

6 Summary

   This note proposes investigation into how Internet communications
   services can be employed to summon emergency assistance. In summary,
   we propose a number of protocol steps.

        o Define a global emergency identifier for all communications
          protocols, including email, SIP, instant messaging and
          possibly IRC.  This is similar to the existing conventions for
          hostmaster , postmaster , etc.

        o Define a mechanism that ensures that communication directed at
          an emergency address is delivered to the appropriate iPSAP.

        o Define a mechanism that allows end systems and/or ISPs to
          obtain location information about the system placing an
          emergency call, which is then passed on to duly authorized
          iPSAPs. A combination of end-system provided and ISP-based
          mechanisms seem most likely to be scalable and work for both
          wired, indoor as well as wireless, outdoor end systems.

        o Ensuring priority for emergency communications does not appear
          to require additional protocol mechanisms.

7 Security Considerations

   Internet-based emergency communications shares some of the same
   problems that traditional "911" services have, such as the
   possibility of prank calls and false alarms. Thus, such a system can
   only be deployed successfully if end users are identified by
   location. Location information is highly sensitive and thus must be
   protected from disclosure to inappropriate parties. In the ISP-based



Schulzrinne                                                  [Page 14]

Internet Draft             Emergency Calling              March 25, 2001


   location model, standard access controls, encryption and
   authentication of the iPSAP are required, but are well understood.

8 Bibliography

   [1] National Emergency Number Association, "9-1-1 tutorial."
   http://www.nena9-1-1.org/desktop/9-1-1

   [2] Telcordia, "E9-1-1 service description," Special Report SR-4163,
   Telcordia, Morristown, New Jersey, May 1997.

   [3] J. Rosenberg, H. Schulzrinne, and H. Sinnreich, "SIP enabled
   services to support the hearing impaired," Internet Draft, Internet
   Engineering Task Force, July 2000.  Work in progress.

   [4] D. Meyer, "Administratively scoped IP multicast," Request for
   Comments 2365, Internet Engineering Task Force, July 1998.

   [5] D. Crocker, "Mailbox names for common services, roles and
   functions," Request for Comments 2142, Internet Engineering Task
   Force, May 1997.

   [6] A. Vaha-Sipila, "URLs for telephone calls," Request for Comments
   2806, Internet Engineering Task Force, Apr. 2000.

   [7] P. Faltstrom, "E.164 number and DNS," Internet Draft, Internet
   Engineering Task Force, Aug. 2000.  Work in progress.

   [8] W. Zhao, H. Schulzrinne, and E. Guttman, "mSLP - mesh-enhanced
   service location protocol," Internet Draft, Internet Engineering Task
   Force, Oct.  2000.  Work in progress.

   [9] R. Droms, "Dynamic host configuration protocol," Request for
   Comments 2131, Internet Engineering Task Force, Mar. 1997.

   [10] J. H. Reed, K. J. Krizman, B. D. Woerner, and T. S. Rappaport,
   "An overview of the challenges and progress in meeting the E-911
   requirement for location service," IEEE Communications Magazine ,
   Vol. 36, pp. 30--37, Apr.  1998.

   [11] P. V. Bahl and V. Padmanabhan, "Radar: An in-building rf-based
   user location and tracking system," in Proceedings of the Conference
   on Computer Communications (IEEE Infocom) , (Tel Aviv, Israel), Mar.
   2000.

   [12] J. Ruutu, H. Tang, and J. Loughney, "Problems and requirements
   of some IP applications based on spatial location information,"
   Internet Draft, Internet Engineering Task Force, Feb. 2000.  Work in



Schulzrinne                                                  [Page 15]

Internet Draft             Emergency Calling              March 25, 2001


   progress.

   [13] M. Korkea-aho, "Some scenarios for an ISL architecture,"
   Internet Draft, Internet Engineering Task Force, Mar. 2000.  Work in
   progress.

   [14] S. Nyckelgard and J. Loughney, "ISL architectural
   considerations," Internet Draft, Internet Engineering Task Force,
   Mar. 2000.  Work in progress.

   [15] A. Costanzo, "Definition of the DNS GL resource record used to
   encode geographic locations," Internet Draft, Internet Engineering
   Task Force, June 2000.  Work in progress.

   [16] C. Farrell, M. Schulze, S. Pleitner, and D. Baldoni, "DNS
   encoding of geographical location," Request for Comments 1712,
   Internet Engineering Task Force, Nov. 1994.

   [17] C. Davis, P. Vixie, T. Goodwin, and I. Dickinson, "A means for
   expressing location information in the domain name system," Request
   for Comments 1876, Internet Engineering Task Force, Jan. 1996.

   [18] H. Tang, "Target naming scheme," Internet Draft, Internet
   Engineering Task Force, July 2000.  Work in progress.

   [19] W. Yeong, T. Howes, and S. Kille, "Lightweight directory access
   protocol," Request for Comments 1777, Internet Engineering Task
   Force, Mar. 1995.

   [20] K. Harrenstien, M. K. Stahl, and E. J. Feinler, "NICNAME/WHOIS,"
   Request for Comments 954, Internet Engineering Task Force, Oct. 1985.

   [21] S. Williamson and M. Kosters, "Referral whois protocol
   (rwhois)," Request for Comments 1714, Internet Engineering Task
   Force, Nov. 1994.

9 Acknowledgements

   Matthew Cannon, Dave Devanathan, Mark Handley, Jonathan Rosenberg and
   Henry Sinnreich participated in an earlier discussion on this topic.
   Jonathan Rosenberg and John Stanaway provided helpful comments on
   this draft.

10 Authors' Addresses

   Henning Schulzrinne
   Dept. of Computer Science
   Columbia University



Schulzrinne                                                  [Page 16]

Internet Draft             Emergency Calling              March 25, 2001


   1214 Amsterdam Avenue
   New York, NY 10027
   USA
   electronic mail:  schulzrinne@cs.columbia.edu


   Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (c) The Internet Society (2001). All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


















Schulzrinne                                                  [Page 17]

