


6LoWPAN Working Group                                          D. Kaspar
Internet-Draft                                Simula Research Laboratory
Expires: August 25, 2008                                          E. Kim
                                                                    ETRI
                                                                C. Gomez
                                       Technical University of Catalonia
                                                                   (UPC)
                                                              C. Bormann
                                                 Universitaet Bremen TZI
                                                       February 22, 2008


      Problem Statement and Requirements for 6LoWPAN Mesh Routing
                   draft-dokaspar-6lowpan-routreq-04

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 25, 2008.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).








Kaspar, et al.           Expires August 25, 2008                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft      6LoWPAN Mesh Routing Requirements      February 2008


Abstract

   This document provides the problem statement for 6LoWPAN mesh
   routing.  It also defines the requirements for 6LoWPAN mesh routing
   considering the low-power characteristics of the network and its
   devices.

   
Table of Contents

   1.  Problem Statement  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Design Space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   3.  Scenario Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   4.  6LoWPAN Routing Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     4.1.  Routing Requirements depending on the 6LoWPAN Device
           Types/Roles  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     4.2.  Routing Requirements depending on Types of 6LoWPAN
           Applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     4.3.  Mesh-under Specific Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   5.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   6.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
   7.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
     7.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
     7.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 20

























Kaspar, et al.           Expires August 25, 2008                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft      6LoWPAN Mesh Routing Requirements      February 2008


1.  Problem Statement

   Low-power wireless personal area networks (LoWPANs) are formed by
   devices complying to the IEEE 802.15.4 standard [7][8].  LoWPAN
   devices are distinguished by their low bandwidth, short range, scarce
   memory capacity, limited processing capability and other attributes
   of inexpensive hardware.  In this document, the characteristics of
   nodes participating in LoWPANs are assumed to be those described in
   [5].

   IEEE 802.15.4 networks support star and mesh topologies and consist
   of two different device types: reduced-function devices (RFDs) and
   full-function devices (FFDs).  RFDs have the most limited
   capabilities and are intended to perform only simple and basic tasks.
   RFDs may only associate with a single FFD at a time, but FFDs may
   form arbitrary topologies and accomplish more advanced functions,
   such as multi-hop routing.

   However, neither the IEEE 802.15.4 standard nor the 6LoWPAN format
   specification ("IPv6 over IEEE 802.15.4" [6]) specify how mesh
   topologies could be obtained and maintained.  Routing in mesh
   networks has been the subject of much research.  Also in the IETF, a
   number of experimental protocols have been developed in the Mobile
   Ad-hoc Networks (MANET) working group, such as AODV [2], OLSR [3], or
   DYMO [11].  However, these existing routing protocols may not be
   satisfying for mesh routing in a LoWPAN domain, for the following
   reasons:

   o  6LoWPAN nodes have special types and roles, such as primary
      battery-operated RFDs, battery-operated and mains-powered FFDs,
      possibly RFDs and FFDs of various capability levels, mains-powered
      and high-performance gateways, data aggregators, etc. 6LoWPAN
      routing protocols should support multiple device types and roles.

   o  Handling sleeping nodes is very critical in 6LoWPANs, more than in
      traditional ad-hoc networks. 6LoWPAN nodes might stay in sleep-
      mode for most of the time.  Time synchronization is important for
      efficient forwarding of packets.

   o  A possibly simpler routing problem; 6LoWPANs might be either
      transit-networks or stub-networks.  However, we can focus on stub
      networks first as many practical 6LoWPANs are configured with stub
      networks at this moment.  We can simplify networks by an
      assumption of no transit networks.

   o  A possibly harder routing problem; routing in 6LoWPANs requires to
      consider power-optimization, harsh environment, data-aware
      routing, etc.  These are not easy requirements to satisfy



Kaspar, et al.           Expires August 25, 2008                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft      6LoWPAN Mesh Routing Requirements      February 2008


      together.

   This creates new challenges on obtaining robust and reliable mesh
   routing within LoWPANs.

   Using the 6LoWPAN header format, there are two layers routing
   protocols can be defined at, commonly referred to as "mesh-under" and
   "route-over".  The mesh-under approach supports routing under the IP
   link and is directly based on the link-layer IEEE 802.15.4 standard,
   therefore using (64-bit or 16-bit short) MAC addresses.  On the other
   hand, the route-over approach relies on IP routing and therefore
   supports routing over possibly various types of interconnected links
   (see also Figure 1).

   Most statements in this draft apply to both the mesh-under and route-
   over cases.

   The 6LoWPAN problem statement document ("6LoWPAN Problems and Goals"
   [5]) briefly mentions four requirements on routing protocols;

      (a) low overhead on data packets

      (b) low routing overhead

      (c) minimal memory and computation requirements

      (d) support for sleeping nodes considering battery saving

   These four high-level requirements only describe the need for low
   overhead and power saving.  But, based on the fundamental features of
   LoWPAN, more detailed routing requirements are presented in this
   document, which can lead to further analysis and protocol design.

   In summary, the main problems of mesh routing in LoWPANs are:

   1.  Existing routing solutions do not operate in 6LoWPAN's adaptation
       layer (and do not support the addressing scheme defined by IEEE
       802.15.4).  If a routing protocol for 6LoWPAN is designed to run
       in the IP layer, it should be adapted to meet the 6LoWPAN-
       specific requirements.  It must be evaluated which layer is most
       suitable for 6LoWPAN routing.

   2.  The precise 6LoWPAN routing requirements must be defined.

   3.  It needs to be clarified how existing routing solutions can be
       adapted to meet the low-power requirements presented in
       Section 4.




Kaspar, et al.           Expires August 25, 2008                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft      6LoWPAN Mesh Routing Requirements      February 2008


   Considering the problems above, this draft addresses mesh routing
   requirements for 6LoWPANs for both mesh-under and route-over routing
   protocol design.

   Application-specific features affect the design of 6lowpan routing
   requirements and the corresponding solutions.  However, various
   applications can be profiled by similar technical characteristics.
   This document states the requirements to consider the general
   features of all categories of 6LoWPAN applications.  However, one
   single routing solution may not be the best one for all 6LoWPAN
   applications.








































Kaspar, et al.           Expires August 25, 2008                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft      6LoWPAN Mesh Routing Requirements      February 2008


2.  Design Space

   Apart from a wide variety of routing algorithms possible for 6LoWPAN,
   the question remains as to whether routing should be performed mesh-
   under (in the adaptation layer defined by the 6lowpan format document
   [6]), or in the IP-layer using a route-over approach.  The most
   significant consequence of mesh-under routing is that routing would
   be directly based on the IEEE 802.15.4 standard, therefore using (64-
   bit or 16-bit shortened) MAC addresses instead of IP addresses, and a
   LoWPAN would be seen as a single IP link.  In case a route-over
   mechanism is to be applied to a LoWPAN it must also support 6LoWPAN's
   unique properties using global IPv6 addressing.

   Additionally, because of the low-performance characteristics of
   LoWPANs, a light-weight routing protocol must be produced that meets
   the design goals and requirements presented in this document.

   Figure 1 shows the place of 6LoWPAN mesh routing in the entire
   network stack;

    +-----------------------------+    +-----------------------------+
    |  Application Layer          |    |  Application Layer          |
    +-----------------------------+    +-----------------------------+
    |  Transport Layer (TCP/UDP)  |    |  Transport Layer (TCP/UDP)  |
    +-----------------------------+    +-----------------------------+
    |  Network Layer (IPv6)       |    |  Network       +---------+  |
    +-----------------------------+    |  Layer         | Routing |  |
    |  6LoWPAN       +---------+  |    |  (IPv6)        +---------+  |
    |  Adaptation    | Routing |  |    +-----------------------------+
    |  Layer         +---------+  |    |  6LoWPAN Adaptation Layer   |
    +-----------------------------+    +-----------------------------+
    |  IEEE 802.15.4 (MAC)        |    |  IEEE 802.15.4 (MAC)        |
    +-----------------------------+    +-----------------------------+
    |  IEEE 802.15.4 (PHY)        |    |  IEEE 802.15.4 (PHY)        |
    +-----------------------------+    +-----------------------------+

        Figure 1: Mesh-under (left) and route-over routing (right)

   In order to avoid packet fragmentation and the overhead for
   reassembly, routing packets should fit into a single IEEE 802.15.4
   physical frame and application data should not be expanded to an
   extent that they no longer fit.

   If a mesh-under routing protocol is built for operation in 6LoWPAN's
   adaptation layer, routing control packets are placed after the
   6LoWPAN Dispatch.  Multiple routing protocols can be supported by the
   usage of different Dispatch bit sequences.  When a route-over
   protocol is built in the IPv6 layer, the Dispatch value can be chosen



Kaspar, et al.           Expires August 25, 2008                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft      6LoWPAN Mesh Routing Requirements      February 2008


   as one of the Dispatch patterns for 6LoWPAN compressed or
   uncompressed IPv6, followed by the IPv6 header.

















































Kaspar, et al.           Expires August 25, 2008                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft      6LoWPAN Mesh Routing Requirements      February 2008


3.  Scenario Considerations

   IP-based low-power WPAN technology is still in its early stage of
   development, but the range of conceivable usage scenarios is
   tremendous.  The numerous possible applications of sensor networks
   make it obvious that mesh topologies will be prevalent in LoWPAN
   environments and routing will be a necessity for expedient
   communication.  Research efforts in the area of sensor networking
   have put forth a large variety of multi-hop routing algorithms [9].
   Most related work focuses on optimizing routing for specific
   application scenarios, which can largely be categorized into the
   following models of communication:

   o  Flooding (in very small networks)

   o  Data-aware routing (dissemination vs. gathering)

   o  Event-driven vs. query-based routing

   o  Geographic routing

   o  Probabilistic routing

   o  Hierarchical routing

   Depending on the topology of a LoWPAN and the application(s) running
   over it, these different types of routing may be used.  However, this
   draft abstracts from application-specific communication and describes
   general routing requirements valid for any type of routing in
   LoWPANs.

   The following parameters can be used to describe specific scenarios
   in which the candidate routing protocols could be evaluated.

   a.  Network Properties:

       *  Device Number, Density and Network Diameter:
          These parameters usually affect the routing state directly
          (e.g. the number of entries in a routing table or neighbor
          list).  Especially in large and dense networks, policies must
          be applied for discarding "low-quality" and stale routing
          entries in order to prevent memory overflow.

       *  Connectivity:
          Due to external factors or programmed disconnections, a LoWPAN
          can be in several states of connectivity; anything in the
          range from "always connected" to "rarely connected".  This
          poses great challenges to the dynamic discovery of routes



Kaspar, et al.           Expires August 25, 2008                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft      6LoWPAN Mesh Routing Requirements      February 2008


          across a LoWPAN.

       *  Dynamicity (incl. mobility):
          Location changes can be induced by unpredictable external
          factors or by controlled motion, which may in turn cause route
          changes.  Also, nodes may dynamically be introduced into a
          LoWPAN and removed from it later.  The routing state and the
          volume of control messages is heavily dependent on the number
          of moving nodes in a LoWPAN and their speed.

       *  Deployment:
          In a LoWPAN, it is possible for nodes to be scattered randomly
          or to be deployed in an organized manner.  The deployment can
          occur at once, or as an iterative process, which may also
          affect the routing state.

       *  Spacial Distribution of Nodes and Gateways:
          Network connectivity depends on node spatial distribution
          besides other factors like device number, density and
          transmission range.  For instance, nodes can be placed on a
          grid, or can be randomly placed in an area (bidimensional
          Poisson distribution), etc.  In addition, if the LoWPAN is
          connected to other networks through infrastructure nodes
          called gateways, the number and spatial distribution of
          gateways affects network congestion and available bandwidth,
          among others.

       *  Traffic Patterns, Topology and Applications:
          The design of a LoWPAN and the requirements on its application
          have a big impact on the most efficient routing type to be
          used.  For different traffic patterns (point-to-point,
          multipoint-to-point, point-to-multipoint) and network
          architectures, various routing mechanisms have been
          introduced, such as data-aware, event-driven, address-centric,
          and geographic routing.

       *  Quality of Service (QoS):
          For mission-critical applications, support of QoS is mandatory
          in resource-constrained LoWPANs and cannot be achieved without
          a certain degree of control message overhead.

       *  Security:
          LoWPANs may carry sensitive information and require a high
          level of security support where the availability, integrity,
          and confidentiality of data are primordial.  Secured messages
          cause overhead and affect the power consumption of LoWPAN
          routing protocols.




Kaspar, et al.           Expires August 25, 2008                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft      6LoWPAN Mesh Routing Requirements      February 2008


   b.  Node Parameters:

       *  Processing Speed and Memory Size:
          These basic parameters define the maximum size of the routing
          state.  LoWPAN nodes may have different performance
          characteristics beyond the common RFD/FFD distinction.

       *  Power Consumption and Power Source:
          The number and topology of battery- and mains-powered nodes in
          a LoWPAN affect routing protocols in their selection of
          optimal paths for network lifetime maximization.

       *  Transmission Range:
          This parameter affects routing.  For example, a high
          transmission range may cause a dense network, which in turn
          results in more direct neighbors of a node, higher
          connectivity and a larger routing state.

       *  Traffic Pattern: This parameter affects routing since high-
          loaded nodes (either because they are the source of packets to
          be transmitted or due to forwarding) may incur a greater
          contribution to delivery delays than low-loaded nodes.  This
          applies to both data packets and routing control messages
          themselves.



























Kaspar, et al.           Expires August 25, 2008               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft      6LoWPAN Mesh Routing Requirements      February 2008


4.  6LoWPAN Routing Requirements

   This section defines a list of requirements for 6LoWPAN routing.  The
   most important design property unique to low-power networks is that
   6LoWPANs support multiple device types and roles, for example:

   o  primary battery-operated RFDs

   o  battery-operated and mains-powered FFDs

   o  possibly various levels of RFDs and FFDs

   o  mains-powered, high-performance gateway(s)

   o  data aggregators, etc.

   Due to these unique device types and roles 6LoWPANs need to consider
   the following two primary features:

   o  Power conservation: some devices are mains-powered, but most are
      battery-operated and need to last several months to a few years
      with a single AA battery.  Many devices are mains-powered most of
      the time, but still need to function for possible extended periods
      from batteries (e.g. before building power is switched on for the
      first time).

   o  Low performance: tiny devices, memory sizes, processors, low
      bandwidth, high loss rates, etc.

   These fundamental features of LoWPANs affect the design of routing
   solutions, so that existing routing specifications should be
   simplified and modified to the smallest extent possible, in order to
   fit the low-power requirements of LoWPANs, meeting the following
   requirements:

4.1.  Routing Requirements depending on the 6LoWPAN Device Types/Roles

   The general objectives listed in this subsection should be followed
   by 6LoWPAN routing protocols.  The importance of each requirement is
   dependent on what device type the protocol is running on and what the
   role of the device is.

   R01: 6LoWPAN routing protocols SHOULD be simple and of low
   computational complexity.

      A LoWPAN routing protocol should be designed to minimize the
      required memory size, computational and algorithmical complexity.
      A routing protocol of low complexity helps to achieve the goal of



Kaspar, et al.           Expires August 25, 2008               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft      6LoWPAN Mesh Routing Requirements      February 2008


      reducing power consumption, improves robustness, is more easy to
      analyze, and is implicitly less prone to security attacks.

   R02: 6LoWPAN routing protocols SHOULD have a low routing state.

      Operation with low routing state (such as routing tables and
      neighbor lists) SHOULD be maintained.  For example, devices may
      have only 32 forwarding entries available.  A LoWPAN routing
      protocol solution should consider the limited memory size
      (typically starting at 4K bytes, in which it is hard to store
      neighbor state of 100s of nodes) and computation capabilities of
      participating devices; due to these hardware restrictions, code
      length should be considered to fit within a small memory size.

   R03: 6LoWPAN routing protocols SHOULD cause minimal power
   consumption, both in the efficient use of control packet and also in
   the process of packet forwarding after route establishment.

      Saving energy is crucially important to LoWPAN devices that are
      not mains-powered but have to rely on a depleting source, such as
      a battery.  The lifetime of a LoWPAN node depends on the energy it
      can store and harvest.  Routing protocol design for 6LoWPAN should
      consider IEEE 802.15.4 link layer feedback on energy consumption.
      Power-aware routing is a non-trivial task, because it is affected
      by many mutually conflicting goals:

      *  Minimization of total energy consumed in the network

      *  Maximization of the time until a network partition occurs

      *  Minimizing the energy variance at each node

      *  Minimizing the cost per packet

      while keeping packet delivery ratio, latency or other requirements
      depending on each application.

      Compared to functions such as computational operations or taking
      sensor samples, radio communications is by far the dominant factor
      of power consumption [12].  One way of battery lifetime
      optimization is by achieving a minimal control message overhead.

   R04: Neighbor discovery for 6LoWPAN routing SHOULD be energy-
   efficient.

      Neighbor discovery is a major precondition to allow routing in a
      network.  Especially in a low-power environment, where nodes might
      be in periodic sleeping states, it is difficult to define whether



Kaspar, et al.           Expires August 25, 2008               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft      6LoWPAN Mesh Routing Requirements      February 2008


      a node is a neighbor of another or not.  Mesh-under neighbor
      discovery for 6LoWPANs is currently still in progress and
      described more detailed in [10].  In case of a route-over
      protocol, IPv6 neighbor discovery should be operated energy-
      efficiently.

   R05: 6LoWPAN routing protocols SHOULD be reliable despite
   unresponsive nodes.

      Many nodes in LoWPAN environments might periodically hibernate
      (i.e. disable their transceiver activity) in order to save energy.
      Therefore, mesh routing protocols must ensure robust packet
      delivery despite nodes frequently shutting off their radio
      transmission interface.  Feedback from the lower IEEE 802.15.4
      layer may be considered to enhance the power-awareness of 6LoWPAN
      routing protocols.

4.2.  Routing Requirements depending on Types of 6LoWPAN Applications

   The routing requirements described in this subsection are heavily
   dependent on application needs.

   R06: 6LoWPAN routing protocol SHOULD support various traffic
   patterns.

      6LoWPANs mainly have point to multipoint or multipoint to point
      traffic pattern.  Many emerging applications include point to
      point communication as well. 6LoWPAN routing protocol should be
      designed with the consideration of forwarding packets from/to
      multipoint.

   R07: 6LoWPAN routing protocols SHOULD be robust to dynamic loss
   rates.

      An important trait of LoWPAN devices is their unreliability due to
      limited system capabilities, and also because they might be
      closely coupled to the physical world with all its unpredictable
      variation(including RSSI and interference variation), noise, and
      asynchrony.  It is predicted that LoWPANs will be comprised of
      significantly higher numbers of devices than counted in current
      networks, causing user interaction and maintenance to become
      impractical and therefore requiring robustness and self-healing
      capabilities in their fundamental network structure.  The design
      of mesh routing protocols must consider the fact that packets are
      to be delivered with reasonable probability despite unreliable and
      unresponsive nodes.

   R08: 6LoWPAN routing protocols SHOULD allow for dynamically adaptive



Kaspar, et al.           Expires August 25, 2008               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft      6LoWPAN Mesh Routing Requirements      February 2008


   topologies and mobile nodes.

      There are several challenges that should be addressed by a 6LoWPAN
      routing protocol in order to create robust routing in dynamic
      environments:

      *  Mobile nodes changing their location inside a LoWPAN.

      *  Movement of a LoWPAN with respect to other (inter)connected
         LoWPANs.

      *  Nodes permanently joining or leaving the LoWPAN.

      *  Nodes appearing and disappearing in the network due to changes
         in the physical environment.

      When supporting dynamic topologies and mobile nodes, route
      maintenance should be managed by keeping in mind the goal of a
      minimal routing state.

   R09: 6LoWPAN routing protocols SHOULD be scalable.

      A LoWPAN may consist of just a couple of nodes (for instance in a
      body-area network), but may expand to much higher numbers of
      devices (e.g. monitoring of large buildings).  It is therefore
      necessary that routing mechanisms are designed to be scalable for
      operation in various network sizes.  However, due to a lack of
      memory size and computational power, 6LoWPAN routing might limit
      forwarding entries to a small number, such as 32 routing table
      entries.  Routing protocols should be designed to achieve both
      scalability and minimality in terms of used system resources.

   R10: 6LoWPAN protocol control messages SHOULD be secured.

      Security threats within LoWPANs may be different from existing
      threat models in ad-hoc network environments.  Neighbor Discovery
      in IEEE 802.15.4 links may be susceptible to threats as listed in
      RFC3756 [4].  Bootstrapping may also impose additional threats.
      Security is also very important for designing robust routing
      protocols, but it should not cause significant transmission
      overhead.  While there are applications which require very high
      security, such as in traffic control, other applications are less
      easily harmed by wrong node behaviour, such as a home
      entertainment system.







Kaspar, et al.           Expires August 25, 2008               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft      6LoWPAN Mesh Routing Requirements      February 2008


4.3.  Mesh-under Specific Requirements

   The routing requirements described in this subsection allow
   optimization and correct operation of routing solutions taking into
   account the specific features of IEEE 802.15.4 physical and MAC
   layers.

   R11: 6LoWPAN routing protocol control messages SHOULD not create
   fragmentation of physical layer (PHY) frames.

      In order to save energy, routing overhead should be minimized in
      order to prevent fragmentation of frames on the physical layer
      (PHY).  Therefore, 6LoWPAN routing should not cause packets to
      exceed the IEEE 802.15.4 frame size.  This both reduces the energy
      required for transmission, avoids unnecessary waste of bandwidth
      and prevents the need for packet reassembly.

   R12: For neighbor discovery, 6LoWPAN devices SHOULD avoid sending
   "Hello" messages.  Instead, link-layer mechanisms (such as
   acknowledgments or beacon responses) MAY be utilized to keep track of
   active neighbors.

   R13: In order to find energy-optimal routing paths, LoWPAN mesh
   routing protocols should minimize power consumption by utilizing a
   combination of the link quality indication (LQI) provided by the MAC
   layer and other measures, such as hop count.  Variability of LQI with
   time should be considered.

   R14: The procedure of local repair and related control messages
   should not harm overall energy consumption from the routing
   protocols.  Local repair (when possible) can help reducing loss
   rates, end-to-end delivery delays, and in successful cases a
   reduction of control overhead.

   R15: In case a routing protocol operates in 6LoWPAN's adaptation
   layer, then routing tables and neighbor lists SHOULD support 16-bit
   short and 64-bit extended addresses.














Kaspar, et al.           Expires August 25, 2008               [Page 15]

Internet-Draft      6LoWPAN Mesh Routing Requirements      February 2008


5.  Security Considerations

   Security issues are described in Section 4
















































Kaspar, et al.           Expires August 25, 2008               [Page 16]

Internet-Draft      6LoWPAN Mesh Routing Requirements      February 2008


6.  Acknowledgements

   The authors would like to thank Myung-Ki Shin for giving the idea of
   writing this draft.















































Kaspar, et al.           Expires August 25, 2008               [Page 17]

Internet-Draft      6LoWPAN Mesh Routing Requirements      February 2008


7.  References

7.1.  Normative References

   [1]   Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
         Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [2]   Perkins, C., Belding-Royer, E., and S. Das, "Ad hoc On-Demand
         Distance Vector (AODV) Routing", RFC 3561, July 2003.

   [3]   Clausen, T. and P. Jacquet, "Optimized Link State Routing
         Protocol (OLSR)", RFC 3626, October 2003.

   [4]   Nikander, P., Kempf, J., and E. Nordmark, "IPv6 Neighbor
         Discovery (ND) Trust Models and Threats", RFC 3756, May 2004.

   [5]   Kushalnagar, N., Montenegro, G., and C. Schumacher, "IPv6 over
         Low-Power Wireless Personal Area Networks (6LoWPANs): Overview,
         Assumptions, Problem Statement, and Goals", RFC 4919,
         August 2007.

   [6]   Montenegro, G., Kushalnagar, N., Hui, J., and D. Culler,
         "Transmission of IPv6 Packets over IEEE 802.15.4 Networks",
         RFC 4944, September 2007.

   [7]   IEEE Computer Society, "IEEE Std. 802.15.4-2003", October 2003.

   [8]   IEEE Computer Society, "IEEE Std. 802.15.4-2006",
         September 2006.

7.2.  Informative References

   [9]   Bulusu, N. and S. Jha, "Wireless Sensor Networks", July 2005.

   [10]  Chakrabarti, S. and E. Nordmark, "LoWPAN Neighbor Discovery
         Extensions, draft-chakrabarti-6lowpan-ipv6-nd-04 (work in
         progress)", November 2007.

   [11]  Chakeres, I. and C. Perkins, "Dynamic MANET On-demand (DYMO)
         Routing, draft-ietf-manet-dymo-12 (work in progress)",
         June 2005.

   [12]  Pister, K. and B. Boser, "Smart Dust: Wireless Networks of
         Millimeter-Scale Sensor Nodes".







Kaspar, et al.           Expires August 25, 2008               [Page 18]

Internet-Draft      6LoWPAN Mesh Routing Requirements      February 2008


Authors' Addresses

   Dominik Kaspar
   Simula Research Laboratory
   Martin Linges v 17
   Snaroya  1367
   Norway

   Phone: +47-6782-8387
   Email: dokaspar.ietf@gmail.com


   Eunsook Kim
   ETRI
   161 Gajeong-dong
   Yuseong-gu
   Daejeon  305-700
   Korea

   Phone: +82-42-860-6124
   Email: eunah.ietf@gmail.com


   Carles Gomez
   Technical University of Catalonia (UPC)
   Escola Politecnica Superior de Castelldefels
   Avda. del Canal Olimpic, 15
   Castelldefels  08860
   Spain

   Phone: +34-93-413-7206
   Email: carlesgo@entel.upc.edu


   Carsten Bormann
   Universitaet Bremen TZI
   Postfach 330440
   Bremen  D-28359
   Germany

   Phone: +49-421-218-7024
   Fax:   +49-421-218-7000
   Email: cabo@tzi.org








Kaspar, et al.           Expires August 25, 2008               [Page 19]

Internet-Draft      6LoWPAN Mesh Routing Requirements      February 2008


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Kaspar, et al.           Expires August 25, 2008               [Page 20]


