Network Working Group                                         L. Dunbar
Internet Draft                                                   Huawei
Intended status: Informational                                 M. Zarny
Expires: March 2015                                       Goldman Sachs
                                                            C. Jacquenet
                                                          France Telecom
                                                         S. Chakrabarty
                                                              US Ignite

                                                     September 25, 2014



         Interface to Network Security Functions Problem Statement
                draft-dunbar-i2nsf-problem-statement-01.txt

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79. This document may not be modified,
   and derivative works of it may not be created, except to publish it
   as an RFC and to translate it into languages other than English.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents
   at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

   This Internet-Draft will expire on March 25, 2009.



Dunbar, et al.          Expires March 25, 2015                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft          I2NSF Problem Statement          September 2014


Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2014 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors. All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document. Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with
   respect to this document. Code Components extracted from this
   document must include Simplified BSD License text as described in
   Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without
   warranty as described in the Simplified BSD License.

Abstract

   This draft describes the motivation, use cases, and the problem
   statement for Interface to Network Security Functions.

Table of Contents


   1. Introduction...................................................3
      1.1. Motivation................................................3
      1.2. Network Security Functions under Consideration............4
      1.3. The scope of the proposed work............................5
   2. Conventions used in this document..............................7
   3. Use Case: Virtual Firewall Function On Demand in Cloud DCs.....8
   4. Use Case: Security Functions provided to a Mobile Operator.....9
   5. Problem Space.................................................10
      5.1. Issues of the current Cloud-based Security Solutions.....10
      5.2. Other problems...........................................11
      5.3. The Benefits.............................................11
   6. Related industry initiatives..................................12
      6.1. Related IETF WGs.........................................12
      6.2. Relationship with ETSI NFV...............................13
      6.3. OpenStack Firewall/Security as a Service.................13
      6.4. Security as a Service by Cloud Security Alliance.........14
      6.5. Productive Eco-system with Open Source Communities.......14
   7. Potential Solutions...........................................14
   8. Conclusion and Recommendation.................................15
   9. Manageability Considerations..................................15


Dunbar, et al.          Expires March 25, 2015                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft          I2NSF Problem Statement          September 2014


   10. Security Considerations......................................15
   11. IANA Considerations..........................................15
   12. References...................................................16
      12.1. Normative References....................................16
      12.2. Informative References..................................16
   13. Acknowledgments..............................................16



  1. Introduction

   This draft describes the motivation, use cases, and the problem
   statement for Interface to Network Security Functions.

   In the context of I2NSF, the term "Virtual Network Security
   Function" is used frequently to emphasize the point that the
   entities that consume the Network Security functions don't own or
   host them. Those network security functions can be achieved by
   physical appliances, or by VMs instantiated on servers.

  1.1. Motivation

   Enterprises are increasingly consuming network functions, especially
   the network security related functions that are hosted off their
   promises. Some of the reasons driving up this demand are the desire
   (and the necessity) to:

     . Implement stringent security functions at branch offices where
        minimal security infrastructures/capabilities exist;
     . Provide virtual network security services for clients, and/or
        applications operating over virtual networks in third party
        managed (or cloud) data centers;
     . Maintain consistent security policies across a large number of
        sites, users, or small low powered/low processing sensors.

   According to [Gartner-2013], the demand for cloud-based security
   services is growing. Small and medium-sized businesses (SMBs) are
   increasingly adopting cloud-based security services to replace on-
   premises security tools, while larger enterprises are deploying a
   mix of traditional and cloud-based security services.




Dunbar, et al.          Expires March 25, 2015                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft          I2NSF Problem Statement          September 2014


   To efficiently meet the dynamic demand of security functions
   requests from clients, it is desirable to have mechanisms to:

     . Create/delete/manage virtual security functions over physical
        appliances, (e.g.  Dynamically provision and update firewall
        policies for a virtual FW instance),
     . Have standardized concrete rules (or attributes) for
        instantiating VMs for virtual security functions, and
     . Have standardized mechanisms for clients, users, or
        applications to request/negotiate/validate security functions
        that are not physically located on the local premises.



   Despite their increasing popularity, most common cloud security
   services do not yet have industry standards by which users/clients
   can request their desired services. (The "user-provider"
   relationship may exist between two different firms or between
   different domains of the same firm.)

   Another area ripe for standardization is how these services may be
   dynamically provisioned, updated, or/and verified to fulfill on-
   demand requests. Issues here range from the more typical ones like
   the scalability, availability and extensibility of the cloud-based
   services to more esoteric ones like a lack of intelligent policy to
   configuration translation and a lack of consistent way to implement
   policies across multiple regions and entities.

  1.2. Network Security Functions under Consideration

   There are many network functions being deployed and new ones are
   popping up with business and application demands. In order to have a
   concrete context for the protocols discussion, we start with the
   following network security related functions:

     . Firewall
     . DDOS/Anti-DOS
     . Access control/Authorization/Authentication
     . Remote identity management
     . Secure Key management


Dunbar, et al.          Expires March 25, 2015                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft          I2NSF Problem Statement          September 2014


     . Intrusion Detection System/ Intrusion Prevention System
        (IDS/IPS)

   The reason for starting with security-related functions is due to
   the wide acceptance of security functions that are not running on
   customer/enterprise premises. Numerous security vendors are now
   leveraging cloud based models to deliver security solutions. This
   shift has occurred for a variety of reasons including greater
   economies of scale, streamlined delivery mechanisms, and the demand
   of business and applications for more sophisticated security
   functions that they do not have. Consumers, enterprise clients as
   well as applications are embracing the business model of requesting
   for security functions that do not run on their own premises on
   demand, also known as Network Security as a Service.



  1.3. The scope of the proposed work

   The Interface to Network Security Functions (I2NSF) initiative aims
   at improving the dynamic allocation and operation of network
   security functions by documenting a global framework that would
   include protocol-based control and management interfaces, along with
   adequate data models. The information required for the provisioning,
   the configuration and the operation of network security functions
   will be exchanged through the said interfaces and protocols. The
   I2NSF initiative will also take into account the need for co-
   existing with legacy configuration and management systems used to
   allocate and operate network security functions, whether they are
   embedded in network devices or virtualized in data center
   environments, for example. The standard Interface to
   request/negotiate/allocate/operate (Virtual) Network Security
   Functions (I2NSF) is one of the necessary tools for operators and
   service providers to offer network security functions as a service
   to their corporate clients.

   It is envisioned that clients of the I2NSF interfaces include
   management applications, service orchestration systems, network
   controllers, or user applications that may solicit network security
   resources.



Dunbar, et al.          Expires March 25, 2015                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft          I2NSF Problem Statement          September 2014


   Various aspects to I2NSF include:

   - The mechanism for clients (applications) to
   request/negotiate/validate security functions that are not
   physically located on the local premises,

   - The mechanism for creating virtual security functions on physical
   appliances, and

   - Application/user oriented rules/policies to instantiate virtual
   security functions as VMs on common compute servers (NFV
   initiative).



   The "requester <-> provider" relationship has different connotations
   in different scenarios:

   - Client <-> Provider relationship, i.e. client requesting some
     network functions from its provider;
   - Inter-domain, e.g. Domain A <-> Domain B relationship, i.e. one
     operator domain requesting some network functions from another
     operator domain, where "A" and "B" can be from same operator or
     different operators; or
   - Applications <-> Network relationship, i.e. an application (e.g.
     cluster of servers) requesting some functions from network, etc.

   The security functions offered by third party need Bi-directional
   periodic communications among multiple entities for policies
   negotiation, validation, potentially re-directing traffic to higher
   level security functions, etc. Therefore, the service requires
   programmatic interfaces or protocol exchange, whereas API is
   conventionally associated with functional calls on one system.

   The objective of the proposed work is to standardize the protocols
   (or the interface) and architecture for Requester and Provider to
   negotiate the functions needed as well as the associated attributes.

   The proposed protocols between requester and provider can be used
   for the following scenarios:



Dunbar, et al.          Expires March 25, 2015                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft          I2NSF Problem Statement          September 2014


     . A Client requests a certain network security function from a
        provider
     . The provider fulfills the request for example, by instantiating
        an instance of the service in question, or configures an
        additional rule in an already provisioned service.

  2. Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [RFC2119].

   In this document, these words will appear with that interpretation
   only when in ALL CAPS. Lower case uses of these words are not to be
   interpreted as carrying RFC-2119 significance.

   Cloud DC:   The data centers that are not on premises of enterprises
               yet have the compute/storage resources that can be
               requested or purchased by the enterprises. What the
               enterprises actually get is Virtual Data Centers.

   DC:         Data Center

   Domain:     The term "Domain" in this draft has different
               connotations in different scenarios:

               Client <-> Provider relationship, i.e. client requesting
                           some network functions from its provider;

               Domain A <-> Domain B relationship, i.e. one operator
                           domain requesting some network functions
                           from another operator domain; or

               Applications <-> Network relationship, i.e. an
                           application (e.g. cluster of servers)
                           requesting some functions from network, etc.







Dunbar, et al.          Expires March 25, 2015                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft          I2NSF Problem Statement          September 2014


   Virtual Network Function:  In the context of I2NSF, the term
               "Virtual Network Function" is used frequently to
               emphasize the point that the entities that consume the
               Network functions, mostly L4-L7 functions, don't own or
               host them. Those network functions can be achieved by
               physical appliances, or by VMs instantiated on common
               compute servers (i.e. the ETSI NFV defined Virtualized
               network functions).

   Virtual Security Function: a security function that can be requested
               by one domain but may be owned or managed by another
               domain.

   Cloud-based security functions: used interchangeably with the
               "Virtual Security Functions" in this draft.

   NBI:  Northbound Interface. "Northbound" can be ambiguous because
               "northbound" to entity A can be southbound to entity B.
               So we try to avoid using "northbound" in I2NSF.

  3. Use Case: Virtual Firewall Function On Demand in Cloud DCs

   Clients of a third party (or cloud) data center not only need
   virtual networks to interconnect their virtual compute/storage
   resources, but they also need virtual firewall services to enforce
   the proper communication policies. VPN clients, especially branch
   office access points, may need firewalls that are hosted by the VPN
   provider to be integrated with the VPN service.

   Per [NW-2011], A cloud-based firewall is different from an on-
   premise one (aside from its location) in three key areas:
   scalability, availability and extensibility.

      . Scalability: Cloud-based firewalls are designed to serve
         multiple customers and their increasing demand. Unlike with an
         on-premise firewall, upgrading a cloud-based firewall-e.g.,
         for greater throughput-should be transparent to enterprise
         users.
      . Availability: Cloud-based firewall providers tend to offer
         extremely high availability through their highly redundant and



Dunbar, et al.          Expires March 25, 2015                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft          I2NSF Problem Statement          September 2014


         resilient data centers. In contrast, most enterprises may not
         be able to offer "carrier-grade" high availability.
      . Extensibility: Enterprises looking for vendor diversity can
         subscribe to cloud-based firewalls from different providers.
         Furthermore, additional features can be added more seamlessly,
         transparently.

  4. Use Case: Security Functions provided to a Mobile Operator

   Maintaining security is challenging, especially in mobile
   environments, where all kinds of user devices (smartphones, pads,
   personal assistants, etc.) access applications located in the cloud.
   Not only are applications no longer hosted in contained data
   centers, (which have a higher chance of encountering various
   security threats), but also the mobile devices might not have the
   sophisticated processing power or expertise to run up-to-date
   security protection functions to guard against rapidly changing
   threats.

   Evolving threats to mobile networks can affect mobile devices, radio
   access networks (RANs), and applications hosted in cloud data
   centers.

   The trend is to have security functions delivered as a service from
   the provider, without requiring on-premise hardware or software
   maintenance.

   These security services often include authentication (e.g., the
   ability to authenticate employees to control the cloud services and
   data they have access to), anti-virus, anti-malware/spyware,
   intrusion detection, and security event management, among others.

   The security function offering can be between different domains of
   one operator or between subscribers to providers. Backhaul operators
   can offer the security function services to mobile operators.

   Security-as-a-Service to mobile environments offers a number of
   benefits, including:

     . Greater security expertise than typically available to mobile
        users,


Dunbar, et al.          Expires March 25, 2015                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft          I2NSF Problem Statement          September 2014


     . Flexibility of managing evolving threats
     . Ensuring service availability
     . Reducing deployment and operational costs
     . Effectively organizing groups of apps or users,
     . Constant virus definition updates.



  5. Problem Space
  5.1. Issues of the current Cloud-based Security Solutions

   Many vendors already offer Security as a Service in the cloud.
   However, all their solutions are proprietary, with different
   interfaces and different modes of operation. Some offerings follow a
   peer-to-peer model: i.e. requiring clients to peer with vendor
   provided functions hosted in the cloud. Some of the functions might
   be hosted in data centers geographically far away from the clients
   that need the functions, therefore requiring traffic to be hair-
   pinned to the remote data centers. A competing model requires
   clients to download their desired functions to local devices. In
   this model, it is difficult to maintain consistent software updates
   across all the devices. Consistency issues can exist across: (1)
   multiple regions for a single application; (2) multiple
   applications; and/or (3) multiple zones (e.g., between internal and
   perimeter zones).



   In addition, the current mode of operation for Security as a Service
   via a Cloud infrastructure does not have any common
   interfaces/mechanisms for clients or applications to verify if the
   required functions can fulfill the policies needed by the
   clients/applications. There is a lack of user-friendly service
   (policy) template.









Dunbar, et al.          Expires March 25, 2015                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft          I2NSF Problem Statement          September 2014


  5.2. Other problems

   Here are some other problems associated with Security Function on
   Demand that might be out of the scope of this proposed WG:

     . Diverse security services:

        The proposed WG might not be able to cover every possible
        security service.

     . Scalability:

        Not only diverse CPU/memory needed for different security
        functions can be difficult to manage, but the solution itself
        may have some limits, e.g. maximum number of firewall rules.

     . Availability:

        The VNF pool is to address the availability of virtualized
        network functions.

     . Converting policies to vendor-specific configurations
     . Dynamic features update



  5.3. The Benefits

   The goal of the proposed work is to establish an architectural
   framework and mechanisms for clients (or one domain) to request
   security functions from a network provider (or another domain). The
   framework allows the clients to view, request, and/or verify the
   security functions/solution offered by different vendors. This
   framework can make it easy for a cluster of devices requiring the
   similar security policies to have consistent policies across
   multiple sites.

   The network service providers, with their physical access to a vast
   number of enterprises and consumers, are very well positioned to
   provide the "Security Function on Demand" platform.  The providers


Dunbar, et al.          Expires March 25, 2015                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft          I2NSF Problem Statement          September 2014


   can act as security function brokers to their directly connected
   domains. They can offer a service catalog and standard mechanisms by
   which enterprises (or applications) can query request, or/and verify
   the needed security functions.

   With the standard protocols for clients to request the needed
   security functions, network operators can leverage their current VPN
   to enterprises and access to a vast population of end users to offer
   a set of consolidated Security solutions. The IETF can play an
   instrumental role in defining this common interface and framework
   for network operators.



  6. Related industry initiatives
  6.1. Related IETF WGs

   IETF SFC is about mechanism of chaining together service functions;
   VNFpool is about the reliability and availability of the virtualized
   network functions. But none of them address how service functions
   are requested, or how service functions are fulfilled.

   Both SFC and VNFpool don't cover in-depth specification (e.g. rules
   for the requested FW) for clients to request its needed functions.
   In SFC & VNFpool, FW function is a black box, that is treated in
   same way as Video Optimization function. SFC/VNFpool don't cover the
   negotiation part, e.g. Client needs Rule x/y/z for FW, but the
   Provider can only offer x/z.

   IETF SACM (Security Assessment and Continuous Monitoring) specifies
   the mechanisms to assess end point security. The end points can be
   routers, switches, clustered DB, installed piece of software. SACM
   is about "How to encode that policy in a manner where assessment can
   be automated". For examples:

       - a Solaris 10 SPARC or Window 7 system used in a environment
          that requires adherence to a policy of Mission Critical
          Classified.
       - rules like "The maximum password age must be 30 days" and
          "The minimum password age must be 1 day"



Dunbar, et al.          Expires March 25, 2015                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft          I2NSF Problem Statement          September 2014




   IETF midcom, nsis, pcp, (arguably) SOCKS have done some work that
   have some aspects related to or can be used by I2NSF.

  6.2. Relationship with ETSI NFV

   We believe that the I2NSF is one of the enabling tools for Network
   Security as a Service (NSaaS), which is a subset of VNF as a Service
   (VNFaaS) specified by ETSI NFV Group Specification Use Cases
   [gs_NFV]. The main benefits of virtualized network functions are
   increased flexibility to efficiently share the resources, and
   decreased setup and management costs. NFV defines the architecture
   to pool together many virtual network functions to be managed and
   consumed collectively.

   NFV, with its heavy representation from service provider side, can
   define more detailed service model for VNFaaS and setting
   requirement for IETF's narrowly scoped I2NSF interface/protocols.

  6.3. OpenStack Firewall/Security as a Service

   Open source projects like OpenStack and CloudStack have begun to
   tackle the issues but much work remains. The objective of this draft
   is to describe the problem set for which future architecture and
   solutions can be developed.

   OpenStack completed the Firewall as a Service project and specified
   the set of APIs for Firewall services:
   http://docs.openstack.org/admin-guide-
   cloud/content/fwaas_api_abstractions.html

   OpenStack has defined the APIs for managing Security Groups:
   http://docs.openstack.org/admin-guide-
   cloud/content/securitygroup_api_abstractions.html

   The attributes defined by OpenStack Firewall/Security as a Service
   are very primitive, even though they can be the basis of the
   information model for the I2NSF IETF initiative.




Dunbar, et al.          Expires March 25, 2015                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft          I2NSF Problem Statement          September 2014


  6.4.  Security as a Service by Cloud Security Alliance

   https://cloudsecurityalliance.org/research/secaas/#_get-involved

   SaaS by CSA is at the initial stage of defining the scope of work.

  6.5. Productive Eco-system with Open Source Communities

     Open-source initiatives are not to be considered as an alternative
     to formal standardization processes. On the contrary, they are
     complementary, with the former acting as an enabler and
     accelerator of the latter. Open-source provides an ideal mechanism
     to quick prototyping and validating contending proposals, and
     demonstrating the feasibility of disruptive ideas that could
     otherwise not be considered. In this respect, open-source
     facilitates the engagement in the standardization process of small
     (and typically more dynamic) players such as start-ups and
     research groups, that would see better opportunities of being
     heard and a clearer rewards to their efforts. An open-source
     approach is extremely useful as well for the production of open
     reference implementations of the standards at the same (or even
     faster) pace they are defined. The availability of such reference
     implementations translate into much simpler interoperability and
     conformance assessments for both providers and users, and can
     become the basis for incremental differentiation of a common
     solution, thus allowing a cooperative competition ("coopetition")
     model.

  7. Potential Solutions

   While it is too early to specify any solutions, some potential
   candidates are described just to prove that the identified problem
   is well bounded for the IETF to specify the needed solutions.

   The protocol needed for this negotiation may be somewhat correlated
   to the dynamic service parameter negotiation procedure [RFC7297].
   The CPP template documented in RFC7297, even though currently
   covering only Connectivity, could be extended as a basis for the
   negotiation procedure. Likewise, the companion CPNP protocol could
   be a candidate to proceed with the negotiation procedure.



Dunbar, et al.          Expires March 25, 2015                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft          I2NSF Problem Statement          September 2014


   The "security as a service" would be a typical example of the kind
   of (CPP-based) negotiation procedures that could take place between
   a corporate customer and a service provider. However, more security
   specific parameters have to be considered by this proposed work.



  8. Conclusion and Recommendation

   The I2NSF aims at documenting a high-level architecture that will
   describe the functional building blocks for the dynamic negotiation
   of security service parameters, the dynamic and subsequent
   allocation of network security resources and the operation of such
   resources, including means to assess that what has been allocated
   complies with what has been negotiated. The work to be conducted by
   the I2NSF WG also includes the documentation of use cases as well as
   the specification of information and data models that will provide
   the adequate level of abstraction. In addition, the I2NSF WG will
   analyze candidate protocols that may carry the information to be
   exchanged through the various interfaces (e.g., between a customer
   and a service provider, between the control plane and the data
   plane, etc.) for the purpose of network security resource
   negotiation, allocation and operation.



  9. Manageability Considerations

   TBD.

  10. Security Considerations

   TBD

  11. IANA Considerations

   This document requires no IANA actions. RFC Editor: Please remove
   this section before publication.





Dunbar, et al.          Expires March 25, 2015                [Page 15]

Internet-Draft          I2NSF Problem Statement          September 2014


  12. References
12.1. Normative References

   [RFC2119] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
             Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC7297] Boucadair, M., "IP Connectivity Provisioning Profile",
             RFC7297, April 2014.

12.2. Informative References

   [gs_NFV] ETSI NFV Group Specification, Network Functions
             Virtualizsation (NFV) Use Cases. ETSI GS NFV 001v1.1.1,
             2013.

   [Boucadair-framework] M. Boucadair, et al, "Differentiated Service
             Function Chaining Framework", < draft-boucadair-service-
             chaining-framework-00>; Aug 2013

   [Gartner-2013] E. Messmer, "Gartner: Cloud-based security as a
             service set to take off", Network World, 31 October 2013

   [NW-2011] J. Burke, "The Pros and Cons of a Cloud-Based Firewall",
             Network World, 11 November 2011

   [SC-MobileNetwork] W. Haeffner, N. Leymann, "Network Based Services
             in Mobile Network", IETF87 Berlin, July 29, 2013

   [Application-SDN] J. Giacomonni, "Application Layer SDN", Layer 123
             ONF Presentation, Singapore, June 2013

  13. Acknowledgments

   Acknowledgements to Andy Malis for his review and contributions.

   This document was prepared using 2-Word-v2.0.template.dot.








Dunbar, et al.          Expires March 25, 2015                [Page 16]

Internet-Draft          I2NSF Problem Statement          September 2014



Authors' Addresses
   Linda Dunbar
   Huawei Technologies
   5340 Legacy Drive, Suite 175
   Plano, TX 75024, USA
   Phone: (469) 277 5840
   Email: ldunbar@huawei.com

   Myo Zarny
   Goldman Sachs
   30 Hudson Street
   Jersey City, NJ 07302
   Email: myo.zarny@gs.com

   Christian Jacquenet
   France Telecom
   Rennes 35000
   France
   Email: Christian.jacquenet@orange.com


   Shaibal Chakrabarty
   US Ignite
   1776 Massachusetts Ave NW, Suite 601
   Washington, DC 20036
   Phone: (214) 708 6163
   Email: shaibalc@us-ignite.org

















Dunbar, et al.          Expires March 25, 2015                [Page 17]

