Network Working Group                                             P. Kim
Internet-Draft                              Korea Polytechnic University             
Expires: August 27, 2007                                Febrary 23, 2007
                                                          


       Authorizing Binding Mechanism to Reduce Binding Latency 
               during Mobile IPv6 Handover Procedure
              
                draft-pskim-fho-authbinding-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 23, 2007.


Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2007).


Abstract

   In Mobile IPv6 based IEEE 802.16e wireless networks, to reduce 
   authorizing binding latency, the return routability procedure and 
   the binding update & acknowledgement procedure are defined newly 
   with parameters specified by information on candidate networks where
   the mobile node can be attached newly, and cryptographic functions
   of authentication and encryption are also defined newly. The care-of 
   address configuration and the authorizing binding are performed 
   before actual handover for candidate networks where the mobile node 
   can be attached newly. Therefore, the proposed mechanism can make 
   fast authorizing binding, which can reduce binding latency between 
   two nodes and thus enhance throughput degradation caused by the 
   bidirectional tunneling. 
        
                
Kim   Authorizing Binding Mechanism to Reduce Binding Latency    [Page 1]

Internet-Draft         Authorizing Binding Mechanism         Febrary 2007

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Network Configuration  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   4.  New Authorizing Binding Mechanism  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   4.1   Tradeoff between Security and QoS in Mobile IPv6 Handover 
          Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   4.2   New Return Routability Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6 
   4.3   New Binding Update and Acknowledgement Procedure . . . . . .  9    
   5.  Operation Procedure of Proposed Mechanism  . . . . . . . . . . 10
   6.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
       Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
       Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . 12









































Kim   Authorizing Binding Mechanism to Reduce Binding Latency    [Page 2]

Internet-Draft         Authorizing Binding Mechanism         Febrary 2007


1.  Introduction

   
   Recently, the IEEE approved the 802.16e standards effort with the 
   avowed intent of increasing the use of broadband wireless access 
   (BWA) by taking advantage of the inherent mobility of wireless media
   [1].
   
   In the future, the Mobile IPv6 in [2] can be the L3 handover 
   solution for IEEE 802.16e wireless networks. Therefore, the need to 
   communicate efficiently on the move and to minimize the packet loss 
   caused by a handover is becoming increasingly important because 
   handover latency is unnaceptable for real-time IP services. The L3 
   handover latency in Mobile IPv6 is caused mainly by the movement d
   etection latency, the care-of address (CoA) configuration latency 
   and the authorizing binding latency as shown in Figure 1. These 
   latencies are inevitable in Mobile IPv6 because of its basic 
   operations. But the combined latency could be appreciable for 
   real-time applications and throughput sensitive applications.
   
   Until now, there are some efforts to reduce handover latency in 
   Mobile IPv6 based IEEE 802.16e wireless networks, especially in 
   movement detection phase and in new CoA configuration phase [3][4]. 
   Although packet loss between the mobile node (MN) and the 
   correspondent node (CN) can be minimized during a handover procedure
   using existing fast handover mechanisms [3][4], the bidirectional
   tunneling via the home agent cannot be avoided before the binding 
   procedure is completed between two nodes. As shown in [2], the 
   bidirectional tunneling via the home agent may not allow the  
   shortest communications path to be used, which can cause end-to-end
   delay between two nodes. In addition, this can also cause congestion
   at the home agent and home link. Moreover, the impact of any 
   possible failure of the home agent or networks on the path to or 
   from it can increase. Therefore, even if no packet loss occurs, two 
   nodes suffer from significant throughput degradation caused by the 
   bidirectional tunneling. In order to solve the mentioned problem, 
   the authorizing binding mechanism between the MN and the CN should 
   be completed within short time as possible. That is, the binding 
   latency should be minimized during the handover procedure. However, 
   as shown in [2], the return routability procedure and the binding
   update/ack procedure for the authorizing binding mechanism are 
   somewhat time-consuming and computationally burdensome since 
   cryptographic functions for authentication and encryption require 
   considerable computation and CPU processing time. This would be 
   serious when the MN is an embedded mobile platform whose processing 
   capability, power and resource are limited. Therefore, the 
   computation of cryptographic functions can cause the binding latency 
   between two nodes during the handover procedure.






Kim   Authorizing Binding Mechanism to Reduce Binding Latency    [Page 3]

Internet-Draft         Authorizing Binding Mechanism         Febrary 2007

   In this draft, the new authorizing binding mechanism is proposed to 
   reduce the binding latency between the MN and the CN during the 
   Mobile IPv6 handover procedure. To reduce authorizing binding 
   latency, the return routability procedure and the binding update & 
   acknowledgement procedure are defined newly with parameters 
   specified by information on candidate networks where the mobile node 
   can be attached newly, and cryptographic functions of authentication 
   and encryption are also defined newly. The care-of address 
   configuration and the authorizing binding are performed before 
   actual handover for candidate networks where the mobile node can be 
   attached newly. Therefore, the proposed mechanism can make fast 
   authorizing binding, which can reduce binding latency between two 
   nodes and thus enhance throughput degradation caused by the 
   bidirectional tunneling. 
  
  
   L2 HO Complete   Movement Detection   CoA Config    L3 HO Complete
       x------------------x------------------x------------------x           
       |                  |                  |                  |           
       |Movement Detection|CoA Configuration | Binding Latency  |           
       |     Latency      |    Latency       | between MN & CN  |           
       |<---------------->|<---------------->|<---------------->|           
       |                  |                  |                  |           
       |                                                        |           
       |<------------------------------------------------------>|           
                      Mobile IPv6 Handover Latency                          
                                                                            
                 Figure 1. Mobile IPv6 Handover Latency

2.  Requirements

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].

3.  Network Configuration

   As shown in Figure 2, this paper considers the Mobile IPv6 based 
   IEEE 802.16 wireless network which consists of only several access 
   routers (ARs) connected by several base stations (BSs). This network
   configuration is feasible because several ARs in the IEEE 802.16e 
   wireless network can cover quite a wide area where the MN can move. 
   Moreover, it is assumed that all ARs can share information on 
   candidate networks where the MN can be attached newly. This 
   information includes network prefixes, network identifiers (NIDs) of 
   candidate networks as shown in Figure 3. 

   The MN can acquire this information on candidate networks 
   from a specific message exchange. For example, when the MN is 
   booting, it sends a router information request message using all 
   routers multicast address to current subnet in order to acquire 
   network information on all ARs. In response to router information 
   request message, the AR on the current subnet sends a router 
   information reply message using network information as Figure 3. 

Kim   Authorizing Binding Mechanism to Reduce Binding Latency    [Page 4]

Internet-Draft         Authorizing Binding Mechanism         Febrary 2007


   Then, the MN receives this reply message and caches information on 
   all ARs. Note that this router information request and reply 
   procedure is performed once only at the booting time and thus is not 
   performed in real-time communication. In addition, it is assumed 
   that the BS can know its NID by a system administrator's presetting.
  
   Note that a change of BS on same subnet does not require a change of 
   AR because the handover between two BSs (i.e., between BS1 and BS2) 
   on same subnet can be carried out using link layer mobility without 
   IP mobility. The handover between two BSs is outside the scope of L3 
   handover mechanisms. However, a change of BS between different 
   subnets (i.e., between BS2 and BS3) requires a change of AR using IP 
   mobility, because the MN would be attaching to a different subnet. 
   In this case, a L3 handover mechanism would need to be invoked in 
   order to provide low handover latency between the two ARs. 
   Therefore, it should be required to know whether the MN changes BS 
   or AR. Note that this paper borrows all of the terminology from the 
   existing mechanism [2]-[4] and the IEEE 802.16e specification [1].

            BS3      BS                  BS        BS                 
              \      /                     \      /                    
              /------\                     /------\                    
             |   AR   |                   |  AR    |                   
              \------/                     \------/                    
              Subnet B                     Subnet D
               /        \                /        \
              /          \              /          \
             /            \            /            \
            /              \          /              \                   
         Subnet A             Subnet C               Subnet E                                          
        /--------\          /-----------\          /-----------\    
       |   AR     | ------ |     AR      |        |     AR      |   
        \--------/          \-----------/          \-----------/    
        /   |    \          /     |     \          /     |     \    
       /    |     \        /      |      \        /      |      \   
     BS1  BS2     BS      BS     BS      BS      BS     BS      BS

       Figure 1. Mobile IPv6 based IEEE 802.16e Wireless Network

                 Table 1. Information on Access Subnets
     --------------------------------------------------------------
      Subnet     NID     Network Prefix       Candidate Networks
     --------------------------------------------------------------
         A      0x01    3ffe:2e01:2a:101           B, C
     --------------------------------------------------------------
         B      0x02    3ffe:2e01:2a:102           A, C
     --------------------------------------------------------------
         C      0x03    3ffe:2e01:2a:103          A, B, D
     --------------------------------------------------------------
         D      0x04    3ffe:2e01:2a:104           C, E
     --------------------------------------------------------------       
         E      0x05    3ffe:2e01:2a:105             E
     --------------------------------------------------------------       
                     
Kim   Authorizing Binding Mechanism to Reduce Binding Latency    [Page 5]

Internet-Draft         Authorizing Binding Mechanism         Febrary 2007             
                     
                        
4.  New Authorizing Binding Mechanism
 
4.1  Tradeoff between Security and QoS in Mobile IPv6 Handover Procedure

   As shown in [2], during Mobile IPv6 handover procedure, the 
   bidirectional tunneling via the home agent cannot be avoided before 
   the binding procedure is completed between MN and CN. The 
   bidirectional tunneling via the home agent does not allow the 
   shortest communications path to be used, which can cause end-to-end 
   delay between two nodes. For example, a VoIP application is much 
   more sensitive to delays than its traditional data counterparts. 
   A few seconds¡¯ slowdown is negligible for downloading a file. 
   However, a mere 150-millisecond delay can turn a crisp VoIP call 
   into a garbled, unintelligent mess. In addition, this can also cause 
   congestion at the home agent and home link. Moreover, the impact of 
   any possible failure of the home agent or networks on the path to or 
   from it can increase.
   
   Therefore, even if no packet loss may occur using existing fast 
   handover mechanisms [3][4] in Mobile IPv6 based IEEE 802.16e 
   wireless networks, two nodes suffer from significant throughput 
   degradation caused by the bidirectional tunneling before the 
   authorizing binding procedure is completed. That is, the binding 
   procedure using cryptographic functions can help secure the Mobile 
   IPv6 communication between two nodes, but it also introduces 
   significant QoS issues such as delay, congestion, etc. This means 
   there is a tradeoff between security and QoS.

   In order to resolve above problem, the authorizing binding between 
   two nodes should be completed within short time as possible. 
   However, as shown in [1], the return routability (RR) procedure and 
   the binding update (BU) & binding acknowledgement (BA) procedure for 
   the authorizing binding mechanism are somewhat time-consuming and 
   computationally burdensome since cryptographic functions for 
   authentication and encryption require considerable computation time 
   and amount, which might introduce the binding latency. In 
   particular, if either the MN and/or CN are embedded mobile platforms 
   with limited resources (e.g., limited processing capability, power), 
   then this problem becomes more critical.

4.2  New Return Routability Procedure

   In this section, the RR procedure is newly defined with parameters 
   specified by network information on candidate networks. In addition, 
   cryptographic functions of authentication and encryption are also 
   defined newly for the new RR procedure.








Kim   Authorizing Binding Mechanism to Reduce Binding Latency    [Page 6]

Internet-Draft         Authorizing Binding Mechanism         Febrary 2007                     

  ¡à Four Messages for New RR Procedure

   Four messages for the new RR procedure are defined with parameters 
   specified by network information on candidate networks where the 
   MN can be attached newly. The MN sends a Home Test Init (HoTI) message
   to the CN (via the home agent) to acquire the home keygen token for 
   candidate networks. In the message, the filed of parameters can be 
   defined as follows:

	- Parameters for candidate networks :
		. NIDs
		. care-of addresses
		. home init cookies

    The MN generates home init cookies and care-of addresses for 
    candidates networks and then includes them in HoTI message as 
    parameters. 
    
    The MN sends a Care-of Test Init (CoTI) message to the CN (directly, 
    not via the home agent) to acquire the care-of keygen token for 
    candidate networks. In the message, the filed of parameters can be 
    defined as follows:

	- Parameters for candidate networks :
		. NIDs
		. care-of addresses
		. care-of init cookies

    The MN generates care-of init cookies and care-of addresses for 
    candidate networks and then includes them in CoTI message.

    The Home Test (HoT) message is sent in response to a HoTI message. 
    It is sent via the home agent. In the message, the filed of 
    parameters can be defined as follows:

	- Parameters for candidate networks :
		. NIDs
		. home init cookies
		. home keygen tokens
		. home nonce indices

    Home init cookies from the MN are returned in the HoT message, to 
    ensure that the message comes from a node on the route between the 
    home agent and the CN. Home nonce indices are delivered to the MN 
    to later allow the CN to efficiently find the nonce value that it 
    used in creating home keygen tokens. The CN generates home init 
    cookies, home keygen tokens and home nonce indices for candidate 
    networks and then includes them in HoT message as parameters. The 
    cryptic function to obtain home keygen tokens is shown in the 
    following subsection.





Kim   Authorizing Binding Mechanism to Reduce Binding Latency    [Page 7]

Internet-Draft         Authorizing Binding Mechanism         Febrary 2007                     

    The Care-of Test (CoT) message is sent in response to a CoTI 
    message. This message is not sent via the home agent, it is sent 
    directly to the MN. In the message, the filed of parameters can be 
    defined as follows:

	- Parameters for candidate networks :
		. NIDs
		. care-of init cookies
		. care-of keygen tokens
		. care-of nonce indices

    Care-of nonce indices are provided to identify the nonce used for 
    care-of keygen tokens. Home and care-of nonce indices may be the 
    same, or different, in HoT and CoT messages. The CN generates 
    care-of init cookies, care-of keygen tokens, care-of nonce indices 
    for candidate networks and then includes them in CoT as parameters.
    The cryptic function to obtain care-of keygen tokens is shown in 
    the following subsection.

    ¡à Processing Cryptographic Functions for New RR Procedure

    In HoT and CoT messages, nonces are random numbers used internally 
    by the CN in the creation of keygen tokens related to the RR 
    procedure. The CN has a secret key (Kcn) which must be a random 
    number, 20 octets in length. The CN generates secret keys as the 
    number of NIDs and the life time of Kcn should be same as a nonce, 
    so that nonce index can identify both the nonce and the Kcn. 
    
    Using the nonce and the Kcn, the keygen token (Kgt) is generated 
    by the CN in the RR procedure to enable the MN to compute the 
    necessary binding management key for BU and BA procedure. The 
    care-of Kgt is sent by the CN in the CoT message. The home Kgt 
    is sent by the CN in the HoT message. 

    When the CN receives the HoTI message, it generates home keygen 
    tokens for candidate networks. The home Kgt_NID for the 
    corresponding NID is computed as follows:
  
      home keygen token (Kgt_NID) :=
           First (64, HMAC_SHA1 (Kcn_NID, (HoA | nonce_NID | 0)))

    where | denotes concatenation. This concatenation to indicate
    bytewise concatenation, as in A | B.  This concatenation requires
    that all of the octets of the datum A appear first in the result,
    followed by all of the octets of the datum B. The final "0" inside
    the HMAC_SHA1 function is a single zero octet, used to distinguish 
    home and care-of cookies from each other. nonce_NID is the HoTI 
    nonce for the corresponding NID with the home nonce index. 

    When the CN receives the CoTI message, it generates care-of keygen 
    tokens for candidate networks. The care-of Kgt_NID for the 
    corresponding NID is computed as follows:
    
    
           
Kim   Authorizing Binding Mechanism to Reduce Binding Latency    [Page 8]

Internet-Draft         Authorizing Binding Mechanism         Febrary 2007                     

      care-of keygen token (Kgt_NID):=
           First (64, HMAC_SHA1 (Kcn_NID, (CoA_NID | nonce_NID | 1)))
   
   where the final "1" inside the HMAC_SHA1 function is a single octet 
   containing the hex value 0x01, and is used to distinguish home and 
   care-of cookies from each other.  

   The care-of KgtNID is formed from the first 64 bits of the MAC, and 
   sent directly to the MN at its care-of address. The care-of init 
   cookie from the CoTI message is returned to ensure that the message 
   comes from a node on the route to the CN.  nonce_NID is the HoTI 
   nonce for corresponding NID with the care-of nonce index.

4.3  New Binding Update and Acknowledgement Procedure

   When the MN has received both the HoT and CoT messages, the return 
   routability procedure is completed. And then, the BU & BA procedure
   is performed between MN and CN for the authorizing binding. 
   Therefore, in this section, the new BU and BA procedure is defined 
   with parameters specified by network information on candidate 
   networks where the MN can be attached newly. In addition, 
   cryptographic functions of authentication and encryption are also 
   defined newly for the new BU and BA procedure.

   ¡à BU and BA Messages

   The MN sends the BU message to the CN directly. In the BU message, 
   the filed of parameters can be defined as follows:

	- Parameters for candidate networks :
		. NIDs
		. home address
		. sequence number
		. home nonce indices
		. care-of nonce indices
		. binding update keys

    The BU contains home and care-of nonces, indicating to the CN which
    nonces to use to compute the binding management key. The MN 
    generates BU keys as the number of NIDs for candidate networks and 
    then includes them in the BU message as parameters. The cryptic 
    function to obtain BU keys is shown in the following subsection. 

    The BU is in some cases acknowledged by the CN. In the BA message, 
    the filed of parameters can be defined as follows:

	- Parameters for candidate networks :
		. NIDs
		. sequence number
		. binding ack keys

    The CN generates BA keys as the number of NIDs for candidate 
    networks and then includes them in the BA message. The cryptic 
    function to obtain BA keys is shown in the following subsection.

Kim   Authorizing Binding Mechanism to Reduce Binding Latency    [Page 9]

Internet-Draft         Authorizing Binding Mechanism         Febrary 2007      

    ¡à Processing Cryptographic Functions for New RR Procedure
    
    When the return RR is complete, the MN hashes the tokens together 
    to form a 20 octet binding management keys for candidate networks. 
    The binding management key (Kbm_NID) for the corresponding NID is 
    computed as follows:  

      Kbm_NID = SHA1 (home Kgt_NID | care-of Kgt_NID)

    Kbm_NID is a key used for the BU and BA procedure of corresponding 
    NID. The RR procedure provides a way to create a binding management 
    key. The BU may also be used to delete a previously established 
    binding. In this case, the care-of Kgt_NID is not used. Instead, 
    the Kbm_NID for the corresponding NID is generated as follows: 
    
      Kbm_NID = SHA1(home Kgt_NID)

    In the BU and BA procedure, BU keys and BA keys are required as the 
    number of NIDs, respectively. The BU key (Kbu_NID) for the 
    corresponding NID is computed as follows:
    
      Kbu_NID = First (96, HMAC_SHA1 (Kbm_NID, (CoA_NID | CN | BU)))

    and the BA key (Kba_NID) for the corresponding NID is computed as 
    follows:
    
      Kba_NID = First (96, HMAC_SHA1 (Kbm_NID, (CoA_NID | CN | BA)))    

5.  Operation Procedure of Proposed Mechanism

   To describe the operation procedure of the proposed mechanism, it 
   will be assumed that the MN moves from the home network 
   ¡®Network A¡¯ to the ¡®Network C¡¯ and then moves to the ¡®Network E¡¯. 

   For the proposed mechanism, when the MN is on the ¡®Network A¡¯, the 
   MN creates CoA and performs the new authorizing binding for 
   candidate networks ¡®Network C¡¯ and ¡®Network E¡¯ at appropriate time 
   using network information cached beforehand, such as network 
   prefixes, NIDs as shown in Figure 3. After the movement detection, 
   the direct communication between MN and CN can be started without 
   the CoA configuration and the authorizing binding on ¡®Network C¡¯. 
   Especially, the authorizing binding latency between two nodes can be 
   reduced remarkably because somewhat time-consuming and 
   computationally burdensome tasks are performed beforehand. On the 
   other hand, in the existing mechanism [2]-[4], these time-consuming 
   and computationally burdensome tasks for authorizing binding are 
   performed during the Mobile IPv6 handover procedure.
    
   Therefore, the proposed mechanism can make fast authorizing 
   binding, which can reduce binding latency between two nodes and
   thus enhance throughput degradation caused by the bidirectional 
   tunneling.  
 


Kim   Authorizing Binding Mechanism to Reduce Binding Latency   [Page 10]

Internet-Draft         Authorizing Binding Mechanism         Febrary 2007

6.  References

6.1 Normative

   [1] IEEE 802.16 TGe Working Document (Draft Standard), "Amendment 
       for Physical and Medium Access Control Layers for Combined Fixed 
       and Mobile Operation in Licensed Bands", 802.16e/D12, October 2005.         
   [2] Johnson, D.B., Perkins, C.E., Arkko, J.: Mobility Support in 
       IPv6. IETF RFC 3775, June 2004  
   [3] Jang, H. "Mobile IPv6 Fast Handovers over IEEE 802.16e Networks", 
       IETF Draft:draft-jang-mipshop-fh80216e-02.txt, Feb 2006.       
   [4] Koodli, R. "Fast Handovers for Mobile IPv6", IETF RFC 4068, Jul 
       2005.

6.2 Informative

    None


Authors' Addresses

   Pyungsoo Kim
   Department of Electronics Engineering,
   Korea Polytechnic University,
   2121 Jungwang-Dong, Shiheung City,
   Gyeonggi-Do  429-793
   KOREA

   Phone: +82 31 8041 0489
   EMail: pskim@kpu.ac.kr

Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.









Kim   Authorizing Binding Mechanism to Reduce Binding Latency   [Page 11]

Internet-Draft         Authorizing Binding Mechanism         Febrary 2007

Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.
           

Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).


























Kim   Authorizing Binding Mechanism to Reduce Binding Latency   [Page 12]