

Network Working Group                                        M. Mealling
Internet-Draft                                   Network Solutions, Inc.
Expires: May 18, 2001                                  November 17, 2000


                 URI Relationship Discovery via RESCAP
                     draft-mealling-uri-rdf-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents
   at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

  
     The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
     http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

     The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
     http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on May 18, 2001.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2000). All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   Many emerging Internet applications use URIs to identify various
   protocol components. In many of these cases it is possible for a URI
   to be used as a value that was created outside the context of that
   application. This document describes an architecture using RESCAP
   and RDF to allow an application to discover basic relationships
   between the URI in question and its Resource.

1. Introduction

   Uniform Resource Identifiers[1] are the simplest layer of
   identification in the Application Layer of the Internet. A given URI
   has one and only one Resource. If two strings are syntactically the
   same according to the URI syntax rules then they are considered to
   be the same URI and, by definition, those two strings identify the
   same Resource. This simple system is very powerful and flexible
   since it makes no determination about types of Resources, URI


Mealling                  Expires May 18, 2001                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft        URI Relationship Discovery           November 2000


   equivalence, relationshps between Resources, etc. Any system can
   specify its own rules. 

   The downside of this is that if an application decides to allow any
   URI to be included in a particular field or if an application comes
   across a URI 'in the wild', it has no way of being able to make
   resonable assumptions about what that URI identifies. Does it
   identify an abstraction? Is it some instance of some abstraction? Is
   it part of a container? Can it be used as a name or is it just a
   short term locator?

   In many cases these questions boil down to two concepts: 
   o  does the URI have some well known characteristic such as
      persistence, naming semantics, addressing semantics, 
   o  what is the relationship between the URI and other URIs that
      identify other Resources that have a strong relationship with
      this Resource. I.e. if this Resource is in a container, what is
      the URI for the container, if this Resource is an instance, what
      is its abstract Resource?)  

   The problem is finding a way to discovery these relationships given
   just the URI. This document proposes a solution based on URI
   Resolution using the Dynamic Delegation Discovery System to find a
   server to answer the questions and RESCAP to actually encode and ask
   the questions. The answers are encoded using the Resource
   Description Format. 

2. Expressing relationships with RDF

   RDF is a subject/predicate/object data model that is used to express
   relationships between Resources identified by URIs. The primary
   serialization syntax for the data model is XML. At this point
   defining an RDF Schema for these and other relationships is a task
   that needs much wider discussion. For now we will only attempt to
   list and classify some of the potential relationships that need to
   be exposed: 
      Identifier relationships: 
      *  Is this URI used as a name or locator?
      *  Is this URI globally available or do I need local information
         to use it?
      *  Is there a gateway available that can help me use this URI?
      *  Is this URI persistent?
      Resource relationships: 
      *  Is the Resource identified by this URI an abstract thing or an
         instance of one?
      *  If this Resource is an abstract Resource, can you give me an
         instance?
      *  If this Resource is an abstract Resource, can you give me an
         instance?


Mealling                  Expires May 18, 2001                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft        URI Relationship Discovery           November 2000


      *  Is this Resource a collection or part of one?
      *  If this Resource is a member of a collection, what is the URI
         for the collection?

3. Using RESCAP to retrieve the RDF

   While expressing these relationships is useful, there is still the
   issue of discovering how to ask those questions and to whom. This is
   where the DDDS URI Resolution application and RESCAP come into play.
   Using URI Resolution, an authoritative RESCAP server is located.
   Once located, this server is queried using RESCAP for the question,
   the result is the RDF relationships expressed above. 

References

   [1]  Berners-Lee, T., Fielding, R.T. and L. Masinter, "Uniform
        Resource Identifiers (URI): Generic Syntax", RFC 2396, August
        1998.

Author's Address

   Michael Mealling
   Network Solutions, Inc.
   505 Huntmar Park Drive
   Herndon, VA  22070
   US

   Phone: +1 770-921-2251
   EMail: michaelm@netsol.com
   URI:   http://www.netsol.com





















Mealling                  Expires May 18, 2001                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft        URI Relationship Discovery           November 2000


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2000). All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implmentation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph
   are included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Acknowledgement

   Funding for the RFC editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.



















Mealling                  Expires May 18, 2001                  [Page 4]

