


Network Working Group                                       Sang-ug Kang
Internet-Draft                           National Computerization Agency
Expires: July 1, 2005                                     Feburuary 2005


      Using Universal Content Identifier as Uniform Resource Names
                    draft-sangug-uci-urn-01.txt

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is subject to all provisions
   of section 3 of RFC 3667.  By submitting this Internet-Draft, each
   author represents that any applicable patent or other IPR claims of
   which he or she is aware have been or will be disclosed, and any of
   which he or she become aware will be disclosed, in accordance with
   RFC 3668.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html" 

   This Internet-Draft will expire on July 1, 2005.

Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) Statement

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, I certify that any applicable
   patent or other IPR claims of which I am aware have been disclosed, or
   will be disclosed, and any of which I become aware will be disclosed,
   in accordance with RFC 3668.

Abstract

   This document describes a Uniform Resource Name (URN) namespace for   
   the National Computerization Agency (NCA) for naming persistent 
   digital resources such as musics, videos, texts, images, e-books and 
   other types of digital resources produced or managed by NCA.


   
Sang-ug                   Expires July 1, 2005                  [Page 1]


Internet-Draft           URN Namespace for UCI            Feburuary 2005


1. Introduction

   NCA is a non-profit organization with a mandate to develop and   
   promote information infrastructure and manage public digital 
   contents in Korea and possibly worldwide. 
   NCA has been supervising digitalization projects with various 
   organizations. The contents involved in such projects include 
   millions of technical papers, cultural properties, educational
   materials, scientific research reports. Those organizations manage
   the digital contents in a standardized way set by NCA and provide
   users with various content services via internet.

   NCA wishes to issue globally unique and persistent IDs to digital 
   resources and assign relevant organizations as its registration 
   agencies under Universal Content Identifier (UCI) scheme. It is 
   beneficial for NCA, its registration agencies, and the value chain 
   players in e-commerce, to have the UCI URN namespace, under which all
   the contents and components NCA produces and manages are digitally 
   registered, identified and resolved.
   
   NCA has been developing and operating the UCI system that provides 
   registration, resolution, search, and administration functionalities.
   The functionalities are going to be added and modified once the use
   of UCI URN namespace is approved. NCA would like to assign unique, 
   permanent, and location-independent names based on the URNs for the
   resources it produces or manages. See http://www.nca.or.kr/eindex.htm
   for more information on NCA.

   This namespace specification is for a formal namespace.

2. Specification Template

   Namespace ID:

      "UCI"

   Registration Information:

      Registration Version Number: 1       Registration Date: 2004-07-xx

   Declared registrant of the namespace:

      Name       : Sang-ug Kang       
      Affiliation: National Computerization Agency       
      Address    : NCA Bldg. 77 Mookyo-Dong, Chung-Ku, Seoul, Korea       
      Phone      : +82 (2) 2131-0443       
      Email      : <sukang@nca.or.kr>       
      Web        : <http://www.nca.or.kr> or <http://home.uci.or.kr>



Sang-ug                   Expires July 1, 2005                  [Page 2]


Expires: July 1, 2005                                     Feburuary 2005


   Declaration of syntactic structure:

      The Namespace specific string of all URNs assigned by NCA conforms
      to the syntax defined in section 2.2. of RFC2141, "URN Syntax"[1]. 
      The syntax convention is described in the form of ABNF rules [2]
      as the following.                 
      
      UCI = prefix "-" instance *1(":" qualifier)
      
      prefix = 1*(alphaDigit) *1(":" 1*(alphaDigit)) 
               *1("+" 1*(alphaDigit))
      instance = 1*(trans / "%" HEXDIG HEXDIG)
      qualifier = head 1*(alphaDigit) *2("-" head 1*(alphaDigit))     
      trans = alphaDigit / other
      alphaDigit = ALPHA / DIGIT
      head = "C" / "R" / "F"             
      other = "(" / ")" / "+" / "," / "-" / "." / "=" / "@" /
              ";" / "$" / "_" / "!" / "*" / "'"       
      reserved = "%" / "/" / "?" / "#"

      The UCI identifier consists of two parts : prefix code and
      content code. The content code is also divided into instance code
      and qualifier code which is optional. A prefix code is given to a
      registration agency, subordinate registration agency, and/or its 
      registrants such as 'G3000+music', 'I600', 'I500+paper' and so 
      forth. A content code is issued to each individual digital 
      resource such as 'cii90007', '8987409' and so on.

   Relevant ancillary documentation:

      None.         
      
   Identifier uniqueness considerations:

      It is the responsibility of registration authority, or NCA, to
      guarantee the uniqueness of identifiers and the names of 
      subordinate naming authorities. For example, a 
      software tool developed and used by NCA checks if a UCI identifier
      is being reassigned and verifies that it is assigned to at most 
      one resource, during the registration process. 
     
   Identifier persistence considerations:

      Registration Agencies are all eligible to maintain the usability
      of the UCI URNs for a reasonably long period. As a government
      sponsored organization, NCA will operate a backup service and 
      make an effort to find a substitute in case a registration agency 
      becomes out of operation. 
        


Sang-ug                   Expires July 1, 2005                  [Page 3]


Expires: July 1, 2005                                     Feburuary 2005


   Process of identifier assignment:

      Assignment of UCI identifier is delegated to the registration 
      agencies. NCA appoints UCI registration agencies and provides its 
      namespace by assigning a unique registration agency code which is
      a part of NSS. Followed by the authorized namespace, each 
      registration agency sets its own identifier scheme that conforms
      to the UCI syntactic structure.
      
      An UCI for a digital resource is issued by the registration agency, 
      upon a request of a regitrant. The following is an example 
      identifier.
            
      e.g., urn:uci:I700-2987098
      
      where, I700 is a registration agency code and 2987098 is an
      identifier assigned to a digital content.

   Process for identifier resolution:

      Resolution is controlled by NCA and its delegatees. The list of 
      UCI registration agency codes is maintained by the regitration
      authority. Each registration agency maintains the list of
      subordinate registrant codes and identifiers registered to the
      registration agency. 
      
      Identifier resolution steps are as follows.
      
      - (Step1)Global resolution : NCA resolves which RA is dealing with
        the associated resource by parsing the registration agency code 
        of the UCI.
      - (Step2) Local resolution : The corresponding RA parses and 
        resolves the rest of the identifier 
 
      The global resolution is performed by UCI resolution server that 
      is open to public. (Currently http://rootadmin.uci.or.kr:9000/
      {UCI identifier} will give you resolution results.)

   Rules for Lexical Equivalence:

      The "prefix" is case-insensitive. So there will not be two 
      registration agencies whose names differ only in case. 
      
         urn:uci:{prefix code}:
         
      is case-insensitive for matches. Remainder of the identifier is 
      case-sensitive.    


  

Sang-ug                   Expires July 1, 2005                  [Page 4]


Expires: July 1, 2005                                     Feburuary 2005


   Conformance with URN Syntax:

      The UCI syntax fully conforms to RFC2141 syntax rules for both NSS
      and NID.

   Validation mechanism:

      Valid list of prefix code will be available via both on-line and
      off-line upon request. The validity of the rest of identifier can 
      be offered via on-line service. (Currently at http://rootadmin.
      uci.or.kr:9000/{UCI identifier} by typing a query UCI identifier)

   Scope:

      Global.   

3. Security Considerations

   There are no additional security considerations beyond those 
   normally associated with the use and resolution of URNs in general.
    
4.  Namespace Considerations

   The Korean government has been funding the UCI project with the 
   vision that it will be an essential component in realizing 
   interoperability of digital contents owned by individual institutes
   and organizations. The resolution service provided by NCA and its
   registration agencies via networks will play a central role in 
   achieving such a goal. Moreover, the resolution service is open to 
   the public without discrimination. 
   
   The assignment and use of identifiers is performed according to the
   rules established by NCA. It abides by the URN requirements and 
   syntax. Within a UCI namespace, a registration agency manages 
   subordinate namespaces and maintains the metadata of digital 
   contents. 
   
   For making the service available to the public, a global resolution 
   service is run by NCA through a service server and local resolution 
   service is provided by the corresponding registration agency. 

5.  Community Considerations

   The assignment and use of identifiers within the namespace are open 
   and the related rule is established by NCA. Registration agencies 
   are evaluated and selected fairly and shall have the responsibility 
   for processing registrant's requests for registering digital 
   contents. Registration authority and registration agencies shall 
   operate resolution servers for UCI namespace and subordinate


Sang-ug                   Expires July 1, 2005                  [Page 5]


Expires: July 1, 2005                                     Feburuary 2005


   namespaces, respectively. Digital content users can access to the 
   resolution servers to fetch resolution results. The reference 
   software is developed and resolution servers are now in operation.
    
6.  IANA Considerations

   This document requests the registration of the "UCI" namespace in 
   the IANA registry of URN NIDs.   

7.  Normative References

   [1]  Moats, R., "URN Syntax", RFC 2141, May 1997.

   [2]  Crocker, D. and P. Overell, "Augmented BNF for Syntax        
        Specifications: ABNF", RFC 2234, November 1997.
        
   [3]  Daigle, L., van Gulik, D., Iannella, R. and P. Faltstrom, "URN        
        Namespace Definition Mechanisms", BCP 33, RFC 2611, June 1999.

8.  Authors' Addresses

   Kang, Sang-ug    
   NCA Bldg. 77 Mookyo-Dong,    
   Joong-Ku, Seoul, 
   Korea

   Phone: 82-2-2131-0443
   EMail: sukang@nca.or.kr
 
9.  Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to   
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it   
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any 
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are   
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this   
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing   
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other   
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be 
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than 
   English.



Sang-ug                   Expires July 1, 2005                  [Page 6]


Expires: July 1, 2005                                     Feburuary 2005


   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be   
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assignees.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Acknowledgement

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the   
   Internet Society.