


Fax Working Group                                             Toru Maeda
Internet Draft                                                 CANON Inc
Expires: January  1999                                      28 July 1998



             Facsimile Applications for Internet Fax Full Mode

               draft-ietf-fax-fullmode-application-00.txt


Status of this memo

This document is an Internet-Draft. Internet-Drafts are working 
documents  of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas, 
and its working groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute 
working documents as Internet Drafts.

Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

To view the entire list of current Internet-Drafts, please check
the "1id-abstracts.txt" listing contained in the Internet-Drafts
Shadow Directories on ftp.is.co.za (Africa), ftp.nordu.net
(Northern Europe), ftp.nis.garr.it (Southern Europe), munnari.oz.au
(Pacific Rim), ftp.ietf.org (US East Coast), or ftp.isi.edu
(US West Coast).


Abstract

This memo explains Internet Fax Full Mode facsimile applications 
which can be implemented using the method of capability exchange in 
Internet Fax Full Mode.  These applications are the same as 
implemented in G3FAX using T.30 protocol. These applications will be 
implemented under the Internet Draft 'Extended MDN for Internet Fax 
Full Mode' or other capability exchange mechanism.















Maeda                      Expires  January   1999                Page 1

Facsimile Applications for IFAX Full Mode                   28 July 1998
Internet Draft

Table of Contents

1.      Introduction ...........................................3

2.      Polling ................................................6

3.      Subaddress and password ................................7

4.      Relay Broadcast ........................................8

5.      BFT   .................................................10

6.      Security ...... .......................................11

7.      Acknowledgments .......................................11

8.      References ............................................11

9.      Copyright..............................................12

10.     Author's Address ......................................12
































Maeda                      Expires  January   1999                 Page 2

Facsimile Applications for IFAX Full Mode                    28 July 1998
Internet Draft


1. Introduction

This memo explains Internet Fax Full Mode facsimile applications which 
can be implemented using the method of capability exchange in Internet 
Fax FullMode. These applications are the same as implemented in G3FAX 
using T.30 protocol.  These applications will be implemented under the 
Internet Draft "Extended MDN for Internet Fax Full Mode" [5] or other 
capability exchange mechanism.

It will be preferable to develop same facsimile application in Internet 
Fax Full Mode terminals as implemented in G3 facsimile.  A dual mode 
terminal which has Internet Fax Full Mode and G3 FAX mode can perform 
same applications received via Internet Fax Full Mode and G3 Mode.  
Those facsimile application are based on T.30 protocol and T.30 frames 
defined in ITU-T Recommendation T.30 [2].  These T.30 farmes are 
SUB (Subaddress), SEP (Selective Polling), PWD (Password), 
SID (Sender ID) and others.

These facsimile applications can be implemented using the method of 
capability exchange which is described in the Internet Draft "Extended 
MDN for Internet Fax Full Mode" [5]. 

An additional MIME content-type for BFT is required for the BFT 
application of Internet FAX Full Mode.

Internet FAX Full Mode which has capability exchange and confirmation 
is defined in ITU-T F.185 [3] and T.37 [4]. An extended MDN can be used 
to exchange Internet FAX recipient capabilities and to notify the 
sender of a message of any of several conditions that may occur after 
successful delivery, such as reception of the Internet FAX Full Mode 
or the recipient error in process of the Internet FAX Full Mode. An 
extended MDN will be used for terminal to terminal capabilities 
exchange and confirmation in Internet FAX Full Mode. 


The key words "MUST","MUST NOT","REQUIRED","SHALL","SHALL NOT",
"SHOULD","SHOULD NOT","RECOMENDED","MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [4].

	












Maeda                      Expires  January   1999                 Page 3

Facsimile Applications for IFAX Full Mode                    28 July 1998
Internet Draft


1.1 	Facsimile Applications

There are facsimile applications such as Polling, Subaddress and 
Password, Relay Broadcast and BFT are based on ITU-T Recommendation 
T.30 [2].  Frames used for these applications in T.30 are SUB (subaddress)
SEP(Selective Polling), PWD(Password), SID(Senders ID) and others.


  (a) Polling

  Polling means a IFAX FullMode terminal requests to another IFAX Full
  Mode terminal that the other IFAX FullMode terminal send a document 
  as TIFF-FX file that it is holding. Unlike normal sending and 
  receiving, in polling the receiver always requests the sender.  This 
  is called polling to receive a document. The sender sends the document 
  as TIFF-FX file in response to the polling by a request from the 
  receiver.  If the other IFAX FullMode terminal holding the document 
  under both a subaddress and password or only a subaddress or password. 
  Requesting IFAX FullMode terminal must send the subaddress and/or 
  password.


  (b) Subaddress and Password

  Subaddress is an application which a IFAX FullMode terminal send the 
  document as TIFF-FX file into the subaddress of a IFAX FullMode 
  terminal.  If the other IFAX FullMode terminal storing the document 
  under both a subaddress and password or only a subaddress or password. 
  Transmitting IFAX FullMode terminal must send the subaddress and/or 
  password with a document as TIFF-FX.


  (c) Relay Broadcasting

  In a relay broadcast, the originator IFAX FullMode terminal sends a 
  document over a long distance to another terminal called the relay 
  IFAX FullMode unit. After the relay IFAX FullMode unit receives the 
  document, it automatically sends the document to several other 
  terminal in the same locality with only one long distance transmission. 
  In a relay IFAX FullMode  terminal has the address list to broadcast 
  the message.  If the relay IFAX FullMode terminal control the address 
  list for broadcast under both a subaddress and password or only a 
  subaddress or password. the originator IFAX FullMode terminal must 
  send the subaddress and/or password with a document as TIFF-FX.








Maeda                      Expires  January   1999                 Page 4

Facsimile Applications for IFAX Full Mode                   28 July 1998
Internet Draft

  (d) BFT

  BFT is one of file transfer options in which the transmitter send file 
  to recipient. For technical description of BFT see T.434 [6],
  AnnexB/T.30 [2] and Appendix VI/T.30 [2]. File transfer is optional 
  feature of IFax which permits to transmit any data file with or 
  without additional information concerning the file to be transmitted 
  T.4 [7].  There are 4 transfer mode exist, such as Basic Transfer 
  Mode: (BTM), Document Transfer Mode: (DTM), Binary File Transfer Mode: 
  (BFT) and EDIFACT transfer: (EDI).


1.2 Method of capability exchange and confirmation

One of the method of Capability exchange and confirmation is defined in 
the Internet Draft "Extended MDN for Internet Fax Full Mode" [5].
Other method of capability exchange can be used for these applications.
This section describes about the method of capability exchange and 
confirmation in the Internet Draft "Extended MDN for Internet Fax Full 
Mode" [5].

A communication between Internet FAX Full Mode machines consists of 
two phases that are the capability exchange phase and the message 
transmission and confirmation phase. 

In the capability exchange phase, a sender of Internet FAX Full Mode 
sends a request for a Message Disposition Notification which is an 
empty mail message with a Disposition-Notification-To header.  A 
recipient of Internet FAX Full Mode must immediately return message 
with its capabilities using extended MDN. This is a change of behavior 
from the MDN. These capabilities are expressed using T.30 frame format
such as DIS frame.

In the message transmission and confirmation phase, based on this 
reply messages, the sender sends message, command data and confirmation 
request using a request for extended MDN.  The command data is expressed 
using T.30 frame format such as DCS frame.  Optional T.30 frames may be 
included in the extended MDN. The recipient must 
immediately returns confirmation message after the processing of image 
using extended MDN.  The confirmation message includes human readable 
message, completion code, total received page, error page numbers, 
partial or full received message and capabilities of recipient. 

Capability exchange phase and message transmission and confirmation 
phase are independent, and not required to succeeded. A sender may 
not perform capability exchange phase only when capabilities of the 
destination is registered in machine, before the sender performs the 
message transmission and confirmation phase for every transmission.

To Allow G3FAX applications such as Polling, Selective Polling,
Subaddress, Relay, Password, BFT and NSF(Manufacturer proprietary mode) 
based on ITU-T T.30 protocol [2].	

Maeda                      Expires  January   1999                 Page 5

Facsimile Applications for IFAX Full Mode                    28 July 1998
Internet Draft


2.  Polling

Polling is implemented for IFAX FullMode using optional subaddress 
and/or password in capability request.  Requesting terminal may use a 
subaddress for the polling mode or a specific document number 
to select data in transmitting terminal.   Requesting terminal 
may send a password to get data from transmitting terminal.


2.1 Method using capability exchange

There is 6 steps to receive a polling data.  To save protocol time, it 
is possible to cash a capability response and to start from Step-4.


  Step-1 Setup

  Set up polling image data in transmitting IFAX-FullMode terminal.
  Subaddress and password will be used to store the polling image data
  in transmitting IFAX-FullMode terminal.


  Step-2 Capability Request

  The Polling request terminal sends the capability request.


  Step-3 Capability Response

  The Polled Tx terminal replies its capability response indicating 
  polling data exist.


  Step-4 Polling Request

  The Polling request terminal sends polling request.
  Requesting terminal may send subaddress to select 
  data in called terminal.  Requesting terminal may send a password 
  to get data from transmitting terminal when password is required.


  Step-5 Message Transmission

  The Polling Tx terminal checks a subaddress and password.  When 
  these are valid, it sends the requested image data as TIFF-FX file.


  Step-6 Confirmation

  The Polling request terminal sends a confirmation when the data 
  is received.

Maeda                      Expires  January   1999                 Page 6

Facsimile Applications for IFAX Full Mode                    28 July 1998
Internet Draft


3. Subaddress and Password

Subaddress is an application which a IFAX FullMode terminal send data 
into the subaddress of a IFAX FullMode terminal. Transmitting terminal 
may use subaddress to select subaddress in receiving 
terminal.  Transmitting terminal may send a sender identity to be 
checked by receiving terminal for reception of the data.


3.1 Method using capability exchange

There is 5 steps to send image data into a subaddress with password.
To save protocol time, it is possible to cash capability response and 
to start from Step-4.

  Step-1 Setup

  Set up Subaddress and Password in the recipient IFAX-FullMode 
  terminal.


  Step-2 Capability Request

  The transmission terminal sends capability request.


  Step-3 Capability Response

  The recipient terminal replies its capabilities indicating Subaddress 
  and Password capability. 


  Step-4 Message Transmission

  The Tx terminal send image data as TIFF-FX file.
  Transmitting terminal may send subaddress to select subaddress 
  in receiving terminal.  Transmitting terminal may send sender identity 
  to be checked by receiving terminal for reception of the data.


  Step-5 Confirmation

  The recipient terminal checks subaddress and password.  When 
  these are valid, it receives the data as TIFF-FX file, and sends 
  confirmation.







Maeda                      Expires  January   1999                 Page 7

Facsimile Applications for IFAX Full Mode                    28 July 1998
Internet Draft


4. Relay Broadcast

In a relay broadcast, the originator IFAX FullMode terminal sends a 
document over a long distance to another terminal called the relay IFAX 
FullMode unit. After the relay IFAX FullMode unit receives the document, 
it automatically sends the document to several other terminal in the 
same locality with only one long distance transmission. If the relay 
IFAX FullMode terminal control the address list for broadcast under 
both a subaddress and password or only a subaddress or password. 
The originator IFAX FullMode terminal must send the subaddress and/or 
password with a document as TIFF-FX.  The originator terminal may send 
subaddress to select subaddress in relay terminal.  The 
originator terminal may send sender identity to be checked by relay 
terminal for reception of subaddress.


4.1 Method using capability exchange

There is 5 steps to send image data for relay broadcast.
To save protocol time, it is possible to cash capability response and 
to start from Step-4.


  Step-1 Setup

  Set up Subaddress and Password in the relay IFAX-FullMode 
  terminal.
  Set up broadcast address in the relay IFAX FullMode terminal.


  Step-2 Capability Request

  The originator IFAX FullMode terminal sends capability request to
  the Relay broadcast terminal.

  Step-3 Capability Response

  The relay terminal replies its capabilities indicating  
  capability.


  Step-4 Message Transmission

  The originator IFAX FullMode terminal send image data as TIFF-FX file.
  The originator terminal use subaddress and password to select subaddress 
  in receiving terminal.  The originator terminal may send subaddress 
  and password sender identity to be checked by receiving terminal for 
  reception of subaddress.




Maeda                      Expires  January   1999                 Page 8

Facsimile Applications for IFAX Full Mode                    28 July 1998
Internet Draft



  Step-5 Confirmation

  The recipient terminal checks subaddress and password.  When 
  these are valid, it receives the data as TIFF-FX file, and sends 
  confirmation.



  Step-7 Broadcast

  The recipient terminal broadcast the message to other IFAX using 
  sends report of relay.


  Step-6 Relay report

  The recipient terminal sends a report of relay to the originator IFAX 
  FullMode terminal.

































Maeda                      Expires  January   1999                 Page 9

Facsimile Applications for IFAX Full Mode                    28 July 1998
Internet Draft


5. BFT

BFT is one of file transfer options in which the transmitter send file 
to recipient. For technical description of BFT see T.434 [6], 
AnnexB/T.30 [2] and Appendix VI/T.30 [2]. File transfer is optional 
feature of IFax FullMode which permits to transmit any data file with 
or without additional information concerning the file to be transmitted 
T.4 [7]. BFT file is attached with new MIME type as bft.


5.1 Method using MDN capability exchange

There is 5 steps to send BFT data to send.
To save protocol time, it is possible to use a cash of capability 
response and to start from Step-4.


  Step-1 Setup

  Set up BFT data in Tx IFAX-FullMode terminal


  Step-2 Capability Request

  The transmission terminal sends capability request to the recipient 
  terminal.


  Step-3 Capability Response

  The recipient terminal replies its capabilities indicating BFT 
  capability.


  Step-4 BFT message transmission

  The BFT Tx terminal send BFT data as MIME attachment with new MIME 
  type.


  Step-5 Confirmation

  The recipient terminal checks BFT data and sends confirmation.









Maeda                      Expires  January   1999                Page 10

Facsimile Applications for IFAX Full Mode                    28 July 1998
Internet Draft


6.      Security


Password mechanism in G3 FAX mode may be not enough for sequrity in SMTP 
mechanism.  More security mechanism will be added for password.





7.      Acknowledgments










8.      References

[1]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement 
	Levels", RFC 2119, March 1997.

[2]  ITU-T (CCITT), "Procedures for Document Facsimile Transmission in 
	the General Switched Telephone Network ", ITU-T (CCITT)  
	Recommendation T.30.

[3]  ITU-T, "Internet Facsimile: Guidelines for the Support of the 
	Communication of Facsimile Documents", ITU-T Recommendation
 	F.185

[4]  ITU-T, "Procedures for the Transfer of Facsimile Data via Store 
	and Forward on the Internet", ITU-T Recommendation T.37

[5]  Maeda, T., Internet Draft "Extended MDN for Internet Fax Full Mode"
        22 May 1998.

[6]  ITU-T, "Binary File Transfer Format For the Telematic Services", 
        ITU-T Recommendation T.434

[7]  ITU-T, "Terminal Equipments and protocols for Telematic 
        Services", ITU-T Recommendation T.4







Maeda                      Expires  January   1999                Page 11

Facsimile Applications for IFAX Full Mode                    28 July 1998
Internet Draft


9.  Copyright

Copyright (C) The Internet Society (1997, 1998).  All Rights
Reserved.

This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished  to 
others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise  explain it 
or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied,  published and 
distributed, in whole or in part, without  restriction of any kind, 
provided that the above copyright notice  and this paragraph are 
included on all such copies and derivative  works.  However, this 
document itself may not be modified in any  way, such as by removing 
the copyright notice or references to the  Internet Society or other 
Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of developing 
Internet standards in which case the  procedures for copyrights defined 
in the Internet Standards  process must be followed, or as required to
translate it into languages other than English.

The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be 
revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

This document and the information contained herein is provided on an 
"AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING 
TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALLWARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR  IMPLIED, INCLUDING 
BUT NOT LIMITED TOANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN 
WILL NOTINFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED

WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


12.  Author's Address

Toru MAEDA
CANON Inc
3-30-2,Shimomaruko, Ohtaku,
Tokyo, Japan
 
Email:	maeda@ffm.canon.co.jp
Voice:	+81 3 3757 9738
Fax:	+81 3 3757 8205












Maeda                      Expires  January   1999                Page 12
