



Network Working Group                                         S. Leonard
Internet-Draft                                             Penango, Inc.
Intended status: Informational                         November 10, 2014
Expires: May 14, 2015


    A Uniform Resource Name (URN) Namespace for Resource Description
                     Framework (RDF) URI References
                        draft-seantek-rdf-urn-00

Abstract

   The Resource Description Framework contains nodes that are identified
   by URI references.  This document defines a URN specifically for RDF
   URI references.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on May 14, 2015.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2014 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.




Leonard                   Expires May 14, 2015                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                   RDF URN                   November 2014


1.  Introduction

   The Resource Description Framework [RDF] is a framework for
   representing information in the web.  RDF contains nodes that are
   identified by URI references.  The URI reference is basically an
   opaque string with semantics applied onto it by the RDF standard; RDF
   applications are not required or expected to dereference the URI.
   This document defines a URN specifically for identifying RDF URI
   references.  An RDF designer now has the option of choosing a short,
   memorable identifier without the cost of maintaining and relying upon
   a long-lived network location (such as an HTTP URL), and without the
   hassle of registering a URN namespace identifier via IETF Consensus.

   A name in the urn:rdf namespace uniquely and persistently identifies
   an abstract RDF URI reference node resource.  The abstract resource
   does not have any particular concrete representation (such as a type
   of content identified by Internet media type), although concrete
   representations may be associated with it.  Abstract parts of the
   abstract resource can be identified with fragment identifiers.

1.1.  Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119.

2.  Registration Template

Namespace ID:
   rdf

Registration Information:
   Version: 1
   Date: 2014-11-10

Declared registrant of the namespace:
   IETF

Declaration of syntactic structures:
   The structure of the Namespace Specific String is any
   valid XML name corresponding to the "Name" production in
   Section 2.3 of [XML] (production 5), with the following restrictions:
      1. The name MUST be at least four characters.
      2. Colons MAY be used as arbitrary intra-name dividers.
      3. Colons MUST NOT appear at the beginning or end of the name.
      4. Consecutive colons are PROHIBITED.
   and the following relaxation:
      5. The first part of the name preceding the first colon MAY



Leonard                   Expires May 14, 2015                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                   RDF URN                   November 2014


         be a whole decimal number as discussed in
         "Process of identifier assignment".
   When encoded in a URN, Unicode code points beyond U+007F
   are encoded as percent-encoded UTF-8. Conveniently, all XML name
   characters in the US-ASCII range are in the [RFC3986] unreserved set.

Relevant ancillary documentation:
   [RDF], [XML].

Identifier uniqueness considerations:
   Once a name is registered in the IANA registry, it is unique.

Identifier persistence considerations:
   Once a name is registered in the IANA registry, it is permanent.

Process of identifier assignment:
   Identifiers are registered with IANA on a First-Come, First-Served
   basis. One-character names and prefixes are RESERVED for further
   use. Two- and three-character names and prefixes are RESERVED
   for language tags and regional codes; however, those names
   have no such semantic content when used in an RDF URN. Whole number
   prefixes are RESERVED for IANA Private Enterprise Numbers.
   Registrants are free to register names with reserved two-character
   and three-character prefixes, such as "au:flag" or "en:us:ca:lax".
   Registrants are also free to register names with reserved whole
   number prefixes, such as "20:10-250".

Process for identifier resolution:
   The registration for a particular identifier MAY include
   any number of URIs that a URN resolver MAY use to resolve
   the URN to return specific resources (presumably
   application/rdf+xml). The registered URIs are not equivalent
   to the registered URN, so an RDF document that refers to that
   particular node MUST use the registered URN as the
   RDF URI reference.
   Fragments (delimited by the # character) are not considered
   part of the namespace-specific string, so a fragment would not
   affect lexical equivalence. Nevertheless, a urn: URI will likely be
   produced with a fragment component. For compatibility purposes,
   a URN resolver SHALL pass any [RFC3986] fragment component in the
   urn: URI through to the resolved URI if the registered URI
   does not have a fragment component. If the registered URI has
   a fragment component, a URN resolver SHALL NOT pass any [RFC3986]
   fragment component in the urn: URI; the fragment component
   SHALL be ignored.

Rules for Lexical Equivalence:
   The namespace-specific string (NSS) is compared case sensitively.



Leonard                   Expires May 14, 2015                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                   RDF URN                   November 2014


Conformance with URN Syntax:
   The URN of this namespace conforms to new URN Syntax
   [URNBIS], old URN syntax [RFC2141], and Uniform Resource Identifier
   (URI): Generic Syntax [RFC3986].

Validation mechanism:
   An RDF URN may be validated by looking it up in the IANA Registry.

Scope:
   Global.

3.  IANA Considerations

   This document requests the assignment of formal URN namespace ID
   "rdf".

   This document requests the creation of an IANA registry called
   "urn:rdf Names".  The registry is First-Come, First-Served [RFC5226].
   Each registration shall contain:

   a.  the name conforming to this document

       1)  in Unicode characters and

       2)  with characters beyond U+007F percent-encoded in UTF-8,

   b.  an optional description,

   c.  optional [RFC3986] conforming URIs that are not URNs that are to
       be used for URN resolution, and

   d.  contact information for the registrant.

   Registrants or their successors may update their entries from time to
   time.  The registration template SHALL be encoded in UTF-8.

   If a registrant attempts to register a name that is confusingly
   similar to other registered names (such as only differing by case, or
   differing by code points but generating the same or confusingly
   similar visual representations), the registrants of the prior names
   are to receive a warning notification of the impending registration.
   However, there is no protest mechanism; the registration will still
   succeed unless withdrawn by the registrant.  IANA SHOULD implement a
   modern algorithm to detect such confusingly similar names.

   If a registrant attempts to register a name that contains a whole
   number prefix, the registrant of the corresponding IANA Private
   Enterprise Number is to receive a warning notification of the



Leonard                   Expires May 14, 2015                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                   RDF URN                   November 2014


   impending registration.  However, there is no protest mechanism; the
   registration will still succeed unless withdrawn by the registrant.

4.  Security Considerations

   RDF processors use RDF URI references to identify nodes (subjects,
   predicates, and objects).  This document is not expected to introduce
   any additional security considerations beyond those inherent in RDF
   processing.

5.  References

5.1.  Normative References

   [RDF]      Klyne, G. and J. Carroll, "Resource Description Framework
              (RDF): Concepts and Abstract Syntax", World Wide Web
              Consortium Recommendation REC-rdf-concepts-20040210,
              February 2004,
              <http://www.w3.org/TR/2004/REC-rdf-concepts-20040210>.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC2141]  Moats, R., "URN Syntax", RFC 2141, May 1997.

   [RFC3986]  Berners-Lee, T., Fielding, R., and L. Masinter, "Uniform
              Resource Identifier (URI): Generic Syntax", STD 66, RFC
              3986, January 2005.

   [RFC5226]  Narten, T. and H. Alvestrand, "Guidelines for Writing an
              IANA Considerations Section in RFCs", BCP 26, RFC 5226,
              May 2008.

   [URNBIS]   Saint-Andre, P., "Uniform Resource Name (URN) Syntax",
              draft-ietf-urnbis-rfc2141bis-urn-07 (work in progress),
              January 2014.

   [XML]      Bray, T., Paoli, J., Sperberg-McQueen, M., Maler, E., and
              F. Yergeau, "Extensible Markup Language (XML) 1.0 (Fifth
              Edition)", World Wide Web Consortium Recommendation REC-
              xml-20081126, November 2008,
              <http://www.w3.org/TR/2008/REC-xml-20081126>.

5.2.  Informative References

   [RFC2276]  Sollins, K., "Architectural Principles of Uniform Resource
              Name Resolution", RFC 2276, January 1998.




Leonard                   Expires May 14, 2015                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                   RDF URN                   November 2014


Author's Address

   Sean Leonard
   Penango, Inc.
   5900 Wilshire Boulevard
   21st Floor
   Los Angeles, CA  90036
   USA

   Email: dev+ietf@seantek.com
   URI:   http://www.penango.com/








































Leonard                   Expires May 14, 2015                  [Page 6]
