INTERNET DRAFT  A Framework for Loop-free Convergence        Oct 2004 
 


 
                                                                        
Network Working Group                                         S. Bryant 
Internet Draft                                                 M. Shand 
Expiration Date: Apr 2005                                 Cisco Systems 
                                                                        
                                                               Oct 2004 
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                A Framework for Loop-free Convergence 
              <draft-bryant-shand-lf-conv-frmwk-00.txt> 
  
     
Status of this Memo  


   By submitting this Internet-Draft, we certify that any applicable 
   patent or other IPR claims of which we are aware have been 
   disclosed, or will be disclosed, and any of which we become aware 
   will be disclosed, in accordance with RFC 3668. 


   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as        
   Internet-Drafts. 


   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
   documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts 
   as reference material or to cite them other than a "work in 
   progress." 


   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html  


   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html 


Abstract  
   This draft describes mechanisms that may be used to prevent or to 
   suppress the formation of micro-loops when an IP or MPLS network 
   undergoes topology change due to failure, repair or management 
   action.        


Conventions used in this document  
     
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in 
   this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 
   [RFC2119]. 


 
Bryant, Shand              Expires Apr 2004                   [Page 1] 
  




INTERNET DRAFT  A Framework for Loop-free Convergence        Oct 2004 
 


Table of Contents 
1. Introduction........................................................3 


2. The Nature of Micro-loops...........................................4 


3. Micro-loop Control Strategies.......................................5 


4. Micro-loop Prevention...............................................5 
 4.1. Incremental Cost Advertisement..................................6 
 4.2. Single Tunnel Per Router........................................6 
 4.3. Distributed Tunnels.............................................8 
 4.4. Ordered SPFs....................................................8 
 4.5. Synchronised FIB Updates........................................9 
5. Loop Suppression....................................................9 


6. Loop mitigation....................................................10 


7. Compatibility Issues...............................................11 


8. IANA considerations................................................11 


9. Security Considerations............................................11 


10. Intellectual Property Statement...................................12 


11. Full copyright statement..........................................12 


12. Normative References..............................................12 


13. Informative References............................................13 


14. Authors' Addresses................................................13 
    

















 
Bryant, Shand              Expires Apr 2004                   [Page 2] 
  




INTERNET DRAFT  A Framework for Loop-free Convergence        Oct 2004 
 


    




1.     Introduction 


   When the topology of a network changes (due to link or router 
   failure, recovery or management action), the routers need to 
   converge on a common view of the new topology. During this process, 
   referred to as a routing transition, packet delivery between 
   certain source/destination pairs may be disrupted. This occurs due 
   to the time it takes for the topology change to be propagated 
   around the network plus the time it takes each individual router to 
   determine and then update the forwarding information base (FIB) for 
   the affected destinations. During this transition, packets are lost 
   due to the continuing attempts to use of the failed component, and 
   due to forwarding loops. Forwarding loops arise due to the 
   inconsistent FIBs that occur as a result of the difference in time 
   taken by routers to execute the transition process. This is a 
   problem that occurs in both IP networks and MPLS networks that use 
   LDP [LDP] as the label switched path (LSP) signaling protocol.  


   The service failures caused by routing transitions are largely 
   hidden by higher-level protocols that retransmit the lost data. 
   However new Internet services are emerging which are more sensitive 
   to the packet disruption that occurs during a transition. To make 
   the transition transparent to their users, these services require a 
   short routing transition. Ideally, routing transitions would be 
   completed in zero time with no packet loss. 


   Regardless of how optimally the mechanisms involved have been 
   designed and implemented, it is inevitable that a routing 
   transition will take some minimum interval that is greater than 
   zero. This has lead to the development of a TE fast-reroute 
   mechanism for MPLS [MPLS-TE]. Alternative mechanisms that might be 
   deployed in an MPLS network and mechanisms that may be used in an 
   IP network are work in progress in the IETF [IPFRR]. Any repair 
   mechanism may however be disrupted by the formation of micro-loops 
   during the period between the time when the failure is announced, 
   and the time when all FIBs have been updated to reflect the new 
   topology. 


   The disruptive effect of micro-loops is not confined to periods 
   when there is a component failure. Micro-loops can, for example, 
   form when a component is put back into service following repair. 
   Micro-loops can also form as a result of a network maintenance 
   action such as adding a new network component, removing a network 
   component or modifying a link cost. 


   There is an emerging need for extremely reliable networks, with 
   fast repair. However there is little point in providing this level 
   of reliability without also deploying mechanisms that prevent the 



 
Bryant, Shand              Expires Apr 2004                   [Page 3] 
  




INTERNET DRAFT  A Framework for Loop-free Convergence        Oct 2004 
 


   disruptive effects of micro-loops which may starve the repair or 
   cause congestion loss as a result of looping packets. 


   This framework provides a summary of the mechanisms that have been 
   proposed to address the micro-loop issue. 




2.    The Nature of Micro-loops 


   Micro-loops form during the periods when a network is reconverging 
   following a topology change, and are caused by inconsistent FIBs in 
   the routers. Micro-loops may occur over a single link between a 
   pair of routers that have each other as the next hop for a prefix. 
   Micro-loops may also form when a cycle of routers have the next 
   router in the cycle as a next hop for a prefix. Cyclic micro-loops 
   always include at least one link with an asymmetric cost, and/or at 
   least two symmetric cost link cost changes. 


   Micro-loops have two undesirable side-effects, congestion and 
   repair starvation. A looping packet consumes bandwidth until it 
   either escapes as a result of the re-synchronization of the FIBs, 
   or its TTL expires. This transiently increases the traffic over a 
   link by as much as 128 times, and may cause the link to congest. 
   This congestion reduces the bandwidth available to other traffic 
   (which is not otherwise affected by the topology change). As a 
   result the "innocent" traffic using the link experiences increased 
   latency, and is liable to congestive packet loss.  


   In cases where the link or node failure has been protected by a 
   fast re-route repair, the inconsistency in the FIBs prevents some 
   traffic from reaching the failure and hence being repaired. The 
   repair may thus become starved of traffic and hence become 
   ineffective. Thus in addition to the congestive damage, the repair 
   is rendered ineffective by the micro-loop. Similarly, if the 
   topology change is the result of management action the link could 
   have been retained in service throughout the transition (i.e. the 
   link acts as its own repair path), however, if micro-loops form, 
   they prevent productive forwarding during the transition. 


   Unless otherwise controlled, micro-loops may form in any part of 
   the network that forwards (or in the case of a new link, will 
   forward) packets over a path that includes the affected topology 
   change. The time taken to propagate the topology change through the 
   network, and the non-uniform time taken by each router to calculate 
   the new SPT and update its FIB may significantly extend the 
   duration of the packet disruption caused by the micro-loops. In 
   some cases a packet may be subject to disruption from microloops 
   which occur sequentially at links along the path, thus further 
   extending the period of disruption beyond that required to resolve 
   a single loop. 




 
Bryant, Shand              Expires Apr 2004                   [Page 4] 
  




INTERNET DRAFT  A Framework for Loop-free Convergence        Oct 2004 
 


3.    Micro-loop Control Strategies. 


   Micro-loop control strategies fall into three basic classes: 


     1. Micro-loop prevention  


     2. Micro-loop suppression 


     3. Micro-loop mitigation 


   A micro-loop prevention mechanism controls the re-convergence of 
   network in such a way that no micro-loops form. Such a micro-loop 
   prevention mechanism allows the continued use of any fast repair 
   method until the network has converged on its new topology, and 
   prevents the collateral damage that occurs to other traffic for the 
   duration of each micro-loop. These mechanisms normally extend the 
   duration of the re-convergence process. In the case of a fast    
   re-route repair this means that the network requires the repair to 
   remain in place longer than would otherwise be the case. This 
   causes extended problems to any traffic which is NOT repaired by an 
   imperfect repair (as does ANY method which delays re-convergence). 


   When a component is returned to service, or when a network 
   management action has taken place, this additional delay does not 
   cause traffic disruption, because there is no repair involved. 
   However the extended delay is undesirable because it leaves the 
   network vulnerable to multiple failures for a longer period.  


   A micro-loop suppression mechanism attempts to eliminate the 
   collateral damage done by micro-loops to other traffic. This may be 
   achieved by, for example, using a packet monitoring method, which 
   detects that a packet is looping and drops it. Such schemes make no 
   attempt to productively forward the packet throughout the network 
   transition. 


   A micro-loop mitigation scheme works by converging the network in 
   such a way that it reduces, but does not eliminate, the formation 
   of micro-loops. Such schemes cannot guarantee the productive 
   forwarding of packets during the transition. 




4.    Micro-loop Prevention 


   Five micro-loop prevention strategies have been proposed: 


        o Incremental cost advertisement 


        o Single Tunnel 


        o Distributed Tunnels 


        o Ordered SPF 
 
Bryant, Shand              Expires Apr 2004                   [Page 5] 
  




INTERNET DRAFT  A Framework for Loop-free Convergence        Oct 2004 
 


        o Synchronised FIBS 



4.1.     Incremental Cost Advertisement 


   When a link fails, the cost of the link is normally changed from 
   its assigned metric to "infinity". However it can be proved that: 
   if the link cost is increased in suitable increments, and the 
   network is allowed to stabilize before the next cost increment is 
   advertised, then no micro-loops will form. Once the link cost has 
   been increased to a value greater than that of the lowest 
   alternative cost around the link, the link may be disabled without 
   causing a micro-loop. 


   This approach has the advantage that it requires no change to the 
   routing protocol and hence will work in any network that uses a 
   link-state IGP. However the method can be extremely slow, 
   particularly if large metrics are used. For the duration of the 
   transition some parts of the network continue to use the old 
   forwarding path, and hence use any repair mechanism for an extended 
   period. In the case of a failure that cannot be fully repaired, 
   some destinations may become unreachable for an extended period. 


   Where the micro-loop prevention mechanism was being used to support 
   a fast re-route repair the network may be vulnerable to a second 
   failure for the duration of the controlled re-convergence. This is 
   because of the difficulty of producing non-conflicting repair 
   paths. 


   Where the micro-loop prevention mechanism was being used to support 
   a reconfiguration of the network the extended time is of less of an 
   issue. In this case, because the real forwarding path is available 
   throughout the whole transition, there is no conflict between 
   concurrent change actions throughout the network. 


   It will be appreciated that when a link is returned to service, its 
   cost is reduced in small steps from "infinity" to its final cost, 
   thereby providing similar micro-loop prevention during a       
   "good-news" event. 



4.2.     Single Tunnel Per Router 


   This mechanism works by creating an overlay network using tunnels 
   whose path is not effected by the topology change and carrying the 
   traffic affected by the change in that new network. When all the 
   traffic is in the new, tunnel based, network, the real network is 
   allowed to converge on the new topology. Because all the traffic 
   that would be affected by the change is carried in the overlay 
   network no micro-loops form. When all micro-loop preventing routers 
   have their tunnels in place, all the routers in the network are 
   informed of the change in the normal way, at which point      
   micro-loops may form within isolated islands of non-micro-loop 
 
Bryant, Shand              Expires Apr 2004                   [Page 6] 
  




INTERNET DRAFT  A Framework for Loop-free Convergence        Oct 2004 
 


   preventing routers. However, only traffic entering the network via 
   such routers can micro-loop. All traffic entering the network via a 
   micro-loop preventing router will be tunneled correctly to the 
   nearest repairing router, including, if necessary being tunneled 
   via a non-micro-loop preventing router, and will not micro-loop. 
   When all the non-micro-loop preventing routers have converged, the 
   micro-loop preventing routers can change from tunneling the packets 
   to forwarding normally according to the new topology. This 
   transition can occur in any order without micro-loops forming. 


   When a failure is detected (or a link is withdrawn from service), 
   the router adjacent to the failure issues a new ("covert") routing 
   message announcing the topology change. This message is propagated 
   through the network by all routers, but is only understood by 
   routers capable of using one of the tunnel based micro-loop 
   prevention mechanisms.  


   Each of the micro-loop preventing routers builds a tunnel to the 
   closest router adjacent to the failure. They then determine which 
   of their traffic would transit the failure and place that traffic 
   in the tunnel. When all of these tunnels are in place, the failure 
   is then announced as normal. Because these tunnels will be 
   unaffected by the transition, and because the routers protecting 
   the link will continue the repair (or forward across the link being 
   withdrawn), no traffic will be disrupted by the failure. When the 
   network has converged these tunnels are withdrawn, allowing traffic 
   to be forwarded along its new "natural" path. The order of tunnel 
   insertion and withdrawal is not important, provided that the 
   tunnels are all in place before the normal announcement is issued. 


    


   This method is faster then the incremental cost method because it 
   completes in fewer flood-SPF-FIBupdate cycles, and more importantly 
   completes in bounded time. 


   This technique has the disadvantage that it requires traffic to be 
   tunneled during the transition. This is an issue in IP networks 
   because not all router designs are capable of high performance IP 
   tunneling. It is also an issue in MPLS networks because the 
   encapsulating router has to know the labels set that the 
   decapsulating router is distributing. 


   A further disadvantage of this method is that it requires        
   co-operation from all the routers within the routing domain to 
   fully protect the network against micro-loops. However it can be 
   shown that these micro-loops will be confined to contiguous groups 
   of routers not executing this micro-loop prevention mechanism, and 
   that it will only affect traffic arriving at the network through 
   one of those routers.  


   It can be shown that this mechanism also works correctly when a 
   link is repaired or a new link added. 


 
Bryant, Shand              Expires Apr 2004                   [Page 7] 
  




INTERNET DRAFT  A Framework for Loop-free Convergence        Oct 2004 
 


   When a management change to the topology is required, again exactly 
   the same mechanism protects against micro-looping of packets by the 
   micro-loop preventing routers. 



4.3.     Distributed Tunnels 


   This is similar to the single tunnel per router approach except 
   that all micro-loop preventing routers calculate a set of link 
   failure paths using the methods described in [TUNNEL]. 


   This reduces the load on the tunnel endpoints, but the length of 
   time taken to calculate the repairs increases the convergence time. 


   This method suffers from the same disadvantages as the single 
   tunnel method. 



4.4.     Ordered SPFs 


   Micro loops occur when a node closer to the failed component 
   revises its routes to take account of the failure before a node 
   which is further away. By analyzing the reverse spanning tree over 
   which traffic is directed to the failed component, it is possible 
   to determine a strict ordering which ensures that nodes closer to 
   the root always process the failure after any nodes further away, 
   and hence micro loops are prevented. 


   When the failure has been announced, each router waits a multiple 
   of some time delay value. The multiple is determined by the nodes 
   position in the reverse spanning tree, and the delay value is 
   chosen to guarantee that a node can complete its processing within 
   this time. The convergence time may be reduced by employing a 
   signaling mechanism to notify the parent when all the children have 
   completed their processing, and hence when it was safe for the 
   parent to instantiate its new routes. 


   The property of this approach is therefore that it imposes a delay 
   which is bounded by the network diameter although in most cases it 
   will be much less. 


   When a link is returned to service the convergence process above is 
   reversed. A router first calculates the reverse spanning tree 
   rooted at the far end of the new link, and determines its distance 
   from the new link (in hops). It then waits a time that is 
   proportional to that distance before updating its FIB.  It will be 
   seen that network management actions can similarly be undertaken by 
   treating a cost increase in a manner similar to a failure and a 
   cost decrease similar to a restoration. 


   The ordered SPF mechanism requires all nodes in the domain to 
   operate according to these procedures, and the presence of non   
   co-operating nodes can give rise to loops for any traffic which 
 
Bryant, Shand              Expires Apr 2004                   [Page 8] 
  




INTERNET DRAFT  A Framework for Loop-free Convergence        Oct 2004 
 


   traverses them (not just traffic which is originated through them). 
   Without additional mechanisms these loops could remain in place for 
   a significant time. 


   It should be noted that this method requires per router ordering, 
   but not per prefix ordering. A router must wait its turn to update 
   its FIB, but it should then update its entire FIB. 


   Another way of viewing the operation of this method is to realize 
   that there is a horizon of routers affected by the failure. Routers 
   beyond the horizon do not send packets via the failure. Routers at 
   the horizon have a neighbor that does not send packets via the 
   failure. It is then obvious that routers on the horizon can use 
   that neighbor as a loop free alternate to the destination and can 
   update their FIBs immediately. Once these routers have updated 
   their FIBs, they move over the horizon and it is their neighbors 
   closer to the failure that becomes the new horizon routers. 


   Only routers within the horizon need to change their FIBs and hence 
   only those routers need to delay changing their FIBs. 



4.5.     Synchronised FIB Updates 


   Micro-loops form because of the asynchronous nature of the FIB 
   update process during a network transition. In many router 
   architectures it is the time taken to update the FIB itself that is 
   the dominant term. One approach would be to have two FIBs and, in a 
   synchronized action throughout the network, to switch from the old 
   to the new. 


   This approach has a number of major issues. Firstly two complete 
   FIBs are needed which may create a scaling issue and secondly a 
   suitable network wide synchronization method is needed. However, 
   neither of these are insurmountable problems. 


   Since the FIB change synchronization will not be perfect there may 
   be some interval during which micro-loops form. Whether this scheme 
   is classified as a micro-loop prevention mechanism or a micro-loop 
   avoidance mechanism within this taxonomy is therefore dependent on 
   the degree of synchronization achieved. 




5.    Loop Suppression 


   A micro-loop suppression mechanism recognizes that a packet is 
   looping and drops it. One such approach would be for a router to 
   recognize, by some means, that it had seen the same packet before. 
   It is difficult to see how sufficiently reliable discrimination 
   could be achieved without some form of per-router signature such as 
   route recording. A packet recognizing approach therefore seems 
   infeasible. 
 
Bryant, Shand              Expires Apr 2004                   [Page 9] 
  




INTERNET DRAFT  A Framework for Loop-free Convergence        Oct 2004 
 


   An alternative approach would be to recognize that a packet was 
   looping by recognizing that it was being sent back to the place 
   that it had just come from. This would work for the types of loop 
   that form in symmetric cost networks, but would not suppress the 
   cyclic loops that form in asymmetric networks. 


   The problem with this class of micro-loop control strategies is 
   that whilst they prevent collateral damage they do nothing to 
   enhance the productive forwarding of packets during the network 
   transition. 




6.    Loop mitigation 


   The only known loop mitigation approach is described in [ZININ]. A 
   micro-loop free Next-hop safety condition is defined: 


   After a topology change, it is safe for router X to switch to 
   neighbor Y as its next-hop for a specific destination if the path 
   through Y satisfies both of the following criteria: 


     1.   X considered Y as its loop-free neighbor based on the 
          topology before change AND 


     2.   X considers Y as its downstream neighbor based on the 
          topology after change. 


   Based on this criteria, routers are then classified into three 
   classes:  


   Type A routers: Routers unaffected by the change and also routers 
   whose next hop after the change satisfies the safety criteria. 


   Type B routers: Routers whose new primary next-hops after the 
   topology change do not satisfy the safety condition, but that have 
   at least one other neighbor that does. 


   Type C routers: All other routers. 


   Following a topology change, Type A routers immediately change to 
   the new topology. Type B routers immediately change to the next hop 
   that satisfies the safety criteria, even though this is not the 
   shortest path. Type B routers continue to use this path until all 
   Type C routers have switched to their new next hop. Type C routers 
   wait for the Type B routers to switch to their intermediate (safe) 
   next hop, and then change to their new next hop. 


   Simulations indicate that this approach produces a significant 
   reduction in the number of links that are subject to micro-looping. 
   However unlike all of the micro-loop prevention methods it is only 
   a partial solution. In particular, micro-loops may form on any link 
   joining a pair of type C routers. 


 
Bryant, Shand              Expires Apr 2004                  [Page 10] 
  




INTERNET DRAFT  A Framework for Loop-free Convergence        Oct 2004 
 


   Although type C routers delay their FIB update, they will however 
   route towards the failure during the time when the type B routers 
   are changing, and hence will continue to productively forward 
   packets provided that viable repair paths exist. 


   A backwards compatibility issue arises with the safe-next-hop 
   scheme. If a router is not capable of micro-loop control, it will 
   not correctly delay it's FIB update. If all such routers were type 
   A routers this loop migration mechanism would work as it was 
   designed. Alternatively, if all such incapable were type C routers, 
   the "covert" announcement mechanism used to trigger the tunnel 
   based schemes could be used to cause the A and B routers to 
   configure themselves, with the incapable and type C routers 
   delaying until they received the "real" announcement. 
   Unfortunately, these two approaches are mutually incompatible.  


   It should be noted that the classification of a router as type A, B 
   or C is a per-destination classification. Routers update their FIBs 
   in three phases. A router first updates destinations for which it 
   is classified as type A or type B, it then updates destinations for 
   which it is type C, and finally it corrects the temporary next hop 
   used for destinations for which it is type B. 




7.    Compatibility Issues 


   Deployment of any micro-loop control mechanism is a major change to 
   a network. Full consideration must be given to interoperation 
   between routers that are capable of micro-loop control, and those 
   that are not. Additionally there may be a desire to limit the 
   complexity of micro-loop control by choosing a method based purely 
   on its simplicity. Any such decision must take into account that if 
   a more capable scheme is needed in the future, its deployment will 
   be complicated by interaction with the scheme previously deployed. 




8.    IANA considerations 


   There are no IANA considerations that arise from this draft. 




9.    Security Considerations 


   All micro-loop control mechanisms raise significant security issues 
   which must be addressed in their detailed technical description. 






 
Bryant, Shand              Expires Apr 2004                  [Page 11] 
  




INTERNET DRAFT  A Framework for Loop-free Convergence        Oct 2004 
 


10.     Intellectual Property Statement 


 
   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any   
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed 
   to pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described 
   in this document or the extent to which any license under such 
   rights might or might not be available; nor does it represent that 
   it has made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  
   Information on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC 
   documents can be found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 


   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an   
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use 
   of such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository 
   at http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 


   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at       
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org. 


 



11.      Full copyright statement 


   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004). This document is subject 
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and 
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights. 


   This document and the information contained herein are provided on 
   an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE 
   REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND 
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, 
   EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT 
   THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR 
   ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A 
   PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 




12.     Normative References 


   There are no normative references. 






 
Bryant, Shand              Expires Apr 2004                  [Page 12] 
  




INTERNET DRAFT  A Framework for Loop-free Convergence        Oct 2004 
 


13.     Informative References 


   Internet-drafts are works in progress available from   
   <http://www.ietf.org/internet-drafts/> 


   [IPFRR]       Shand, M., "IP Fast-reroute Framework",  
                 <draft-ietf-rtgwg-ipfrr-framework-01.txt>, June 
                 2004, (work in progress). 


   [LDP]         Andersson, L., Doolan, P., Feldman, N., 
                 Fredette, A. and B. Thomas, "LDP 
                 Specification", RFC 3036,                       
                 January 2001. 


   MPLS-TE]      Ping Pan, et al, "Fast Reroute Extensions to 
                 RSVP-TE for LSP Tunnels",                 
                 <draft-ietf-mpls-rsvp-lsp-fastreroute-07.txt>, 
                 (work in progress). 


   [TUNNEL]      Bryant, S., Shand, M., "IP Fast Reroute using 
                 tunnels", <draft-bryant-ipfrr-tunnels-00.txt>, 
                 May 2004 (work in progress). 


   [ZININ]       Zinin, A., "Analysis and Minimization of 
                 Microloops in Link-state Routing Protocols", 
                 <draft-zinin-microloop-analysis-00.txt>, 
                 October 2004 (work in progress). 


 



14.    Authors' Addresses 


 
   Mike Shand 
   Cisco Systems, 
   250, Longwater, 
   Green Park, 
   Reading, RG2 6GB, 
   United Kingdom.             Email: mshand@cisco.com 


    


   Stewart Bryant 
   Cisco Systems, 
   250, Longwater, 
   Green Park, 
   Reading, RG2 6GB, 
   United Kingdom.             Email: stbryant@cisco.com 


    



 
Bryant, Shand              Expires Apr 2004                  [Page 13] 