





Network Working Group                                          D. Cooper
Internet-Draft                                                      NIST
Updates: 3281 (if approved)                           September 29, 2006
Expires: March 2007

      Authority Information Access Attribute Certificate Extension
                     draft-cooper-pkix-aiaac-00.txt

                          Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

Abstract

   This document updates RFC 3281 by specifying the use of the id-ad-
   caIssuers access method of the Authority Information Access extension
   in an attribute certificate (AC).  The Authority Information Access
   extension is defined in RFC 3280 and RFC 3281 specifies the use of
   the id-ad-ocsp access method of the Authority Information Access
   extension in attribute certificates.  When present in an attribute
   certificate, the id-ad-caIssuers access method provides a means of
   discovering and retrieving the public key certificate of the
   attribute certificate's issuer.





Cooper                     Expires March 2007                   [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                   AIA AC               September 29, 2006


Table of Contents

   1  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
   1.1  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
   2  Authority Information Access AC Extension . . . . . . . . 3
   3  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   3.1  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   3.2  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   4  Intellectual Property Rights  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   5  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   6  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   7  Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   Full Copyright Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6

1  Introduction

   [RFC 3281] specifies the validation of attribute certificates.  As
   part of the validation process, the verifier must ensure that the
   attribute certificate (AC) signature is cryptographically correct and
   must verify the AC issuer's entire public key certificate (PKC)
   certification path in accordance with [RFC 3280].

   Methods of finding the PKC of the AC issuer are currently available,
   such as through an accessible directory location.  Directory lookup
   requires existence and access to a directory that has been populated
   with all of the necessary certificates.

   [RFC 3280] provides for discovery of certificates needed to construct
   a certification path through the Authority Information Access
   extension, where the id-ad-caIssuers access method may specify one or
   more accessLocation fields that reference CA certificates associated
   with the certificate containing this extension.

   This document enables the use of the id-ad-caIssuers access method of
   the Authority Information Access extension in ACs, enabling an AC
   checking application to use the access method (id-ad-caIssuers) to
   locate certificates that may be used to verify the signature on the
   attribute certificate.

1.1  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC 2119].







Cooper                     Expires March 2007                   [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                   AIA AC               September 29, 2006


2  Authority Information Access AC Extension

   This section defines the use of the id-ad-caIssuers access method of
   the Authority Information Access extension in an attribute
   certificate.  The syntax and semantics defined in [RFC 3280] for the
   certificate extension are also used for the AC extension.

   This extension MUST NOT be marked critical.

   This extension MUST be identified by the extension object identifier
   (OID) defined in RFC 3280 (1.3.6.1.5.5.7.1.1), and the
   AuthorityInfoAccessSyntax MUST be used to form the extension value.
   For convenience, the ASN.1 [X.680] definition of the Authority
   Information Access extension is repeated below.

   id-pe-authorityInfoAccess OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::= { id-pe 1 }

   AuthorityInfoAccessSyntax  ::=
           SEQUENCE SIZE (1..MAX) OF AccessDescription

   AccessDescription  ::=  SEQUENCE {
           accessMethod          OBJECT IDENTIFIER,
           accessLocation        GeneralName  }

   id-ad OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::= { id-pkix 48 }

   id-ad-caIssuers OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::= { id-ad 2 }

   id-ad-ocsp OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::= { id-ad 1 }


   When the id-ad-caIssuers access method is used in an AC, at least one
   instance of AccessDescription SHOULD specify an accessLocation that
   is an HTTP [RFC 1738] or Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (LDAP)
   [RFC 4516] Uniform Resource Identifier (URI).

   Where the information is available via HTTP or FTP, accessLocation
   MUST be a uniformResourceIdentifier and the URI MUST point to a
   certificate containing file.  The certificate file MUST contain
   either a single Distinguished Encoding Rules (DER) [X.690] encoded
   certificate (indicated by the .cer file extension) or a collection of
   certificates (indicated by the .p7c file extension):

      .cer   A single DER encoded certificate as specified in
             [RFC 2585].

      .p7c   A BER or DER "certs-only" CMS message as specified
             in [RFC 2797].



Cooper                     Expires March 2007                   [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                   AIA AC               September 29, 2006


   Conforming applications that support HTTP or FTP for accessing
   certificates MUST be able to accept .cer files and SHOULD be able to
   accept .p7c files.

   HTTP server implementations accessed via the URI SHOULD use the
   appropriate MIME content-type for the certificate containing file.
   Specifically, the HTTP server SHOULD use the content-type
   application/pkix-cert [RFC 2585] for a single DER encoded certificate
   and application/pkcs7-mime [RFC 2797] for "certs-only" CMS messages.
   Consuming clients may use the MIME type and file extension as a hint
   to the file content, but should not depend solely on the presence of
   the correct MIME type or file extension in the server response.

   When the accessLocation is a directoryName, the information is to be
   obtained by the application from whatever directory server is locally
   configured.  When the AC issuer is not a CA, as required by [RFC
   3281], the desired certificate is stored in the userCertificate
   attribute as specified in [RFC 4523].  When the AC issuer is also a
   CA, the desired certificate may be stored in the cACertificate and/or
   crossCertificatePair attributes.  The protocol that an application
   uses to access the directory (e.g., DAP or LDAP) is a local matter.

   Where the information is available via LDAP, the accessLocation
   SHOULD be a uniformResourceIdentifier.  The URI MUST specify a
   distinguishedName and attribute(s) and SHOULD specify a host name
   (e.g., ldap://ldap.example.com/cn=example%20AA,dc=example,dc=com?
   userCertificate;binary).  Omitting the host name (e.g.,
   ldap:///cn=example%20AA,dc=example,dc=com?userCertificate;binary) has
   the effect of specifying the use of whatever LDAP server is locally
   configured.  The URI MUST list appropriate attribute descriptions for
   one or more attributes holding certificates or cross-certificate
   pairs.

3  References

3.1  Normative References


   [RFC 1738]  Berners-Lee, T., L. Masinter and M. McCahill, "Uniform
               Resource Locators (URL)", RFC 1738, December 1994.

   [RFC 2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
               Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC 2585]  Housley, R. and P. Hoffman, "Internet X.509 Public Key
               Infrastructure Operational Protocols: FTP and HTTP", RFC
               2585, May 1999.




Cooper                     Expires March 2007                   [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                   AIA AC               September 29, 2006


   [RFC 2797]  Myers, M., X. Liu, J. Schaad and J. Weinstein,
               "Certificate Management Messages over CMS", RFC 2797,
               April 2000.

   [RFC 3280]  Housley, R., W. Polk, W. Ford and D. Solo, "Internet
               X.509 Public Key Infrastructure Certificate and
               Certificate Revocation List (CRL) Profile", RFC 3280,
               April 2002.

   [RFC 3281]  Farrell, S. and R. Housley, "An Internet Attribute
               Certificate Profile for Authorization", RFC 3281, April
               2002.

   [RFC 4516]  Smith, M. and T. Howes, "Lightweight Directory Access
               Protocol (LDAP): Uniform Resource Locator", RFC 4516,
               June 2006.

   [RFC 4523]  Zeilenga, K., "Lightweight Directory Access Protocol
               (LDAP) Schema Definitions for X.509 Certificates", June
               2006.

3.2  Informative References

   [X.680]     ITU-T Recommendation X.680 (2002) | ISO/IEC 8824-1:2002,
               Information technology - Abstract Syntax Notation One
               (ASN.1): Specification of basic notation.

   [X.690]     ITU-T Recommendation X.690 (2002) | ISO/IEC 8825-1:2002,
               Information technology - ASN.1 encoding rules:
               Specification of Basic Encoding Rules (BER), Canonical
               Encoding Rules (CER) and Distinguished Encoding Rules
               (DER).

4  Intellectual Property Rights

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this



Cooper                     Expires March 2007                   [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                   AIA AC               September 29, 2006


   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at ietf-
   ipr@ietf.org.

5  Security Considerations

   Implementers should be aware of risks involved if the Authority
   Information Access extensions of corrupted attribute certificates
   contain links to malicious code.  Implementers should always take the
   steps of validating the retrieved data to ensure that the data is
   properly formed.

6  IANA Considerations

   Extensions in certificates are identified using object identifiers.
   The objects are defined in an arc delegated by IANA to the PKIX
   Working Group.  No further action by IANA is necessary for this
   document or any anticipated updates.

7  Authors' Addresses

   David Cooper
   National Institute of Standards and Technology
   100 Bureau Drive, Mail Stop 8930
   Gaithersburg, MD 20899-8930
   USA

   EMail:  david.cooper@nist.gov

Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.




Cooper                     Expires March 2007                   [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                   AIA AC               September 29, 2006


   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  In addition, the
   ASN.1 modules presented may be used in whole or in part without
   inclusion of the copyright notice.  However, this document itself may
   not be modified in any way, such as by removing the copyright notice
   or references to the Internet Society or other Internet
   organizations, except as needed for the purpose of developing
   Internet standards in which case the procedures for copyrights
   defined in the Internet Standards process shall be followed, or as
   required to translate it into languages other than English.





































Cooper                     Expires March 2007                   [Page 7]
