



Network Working Group                                         M. Boutier
Internet-Draft                                             J. Chroboczek
Intended status: Standards Track       IRIF, University of Paris-Diderot
Expires: May 1, 2021                                    October 28, 2020


                    Source-Specific Routing in Babel
                  draft-ietf-babel-source-specific-07

Abstract

   Source-specific routing (also known as Source-Address Dependent
   Routing, SADR) is an extension to traditional next-hop routing where
   packets are forwarded according to both their destination and their
   source address.  This document describes an extension for source-
   specific routing to the Babel routing protocol.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on May 1, 2021.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2020 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.



Boutier & Chroboczek       Expires May 1, 2021                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft      Source-Specific Routing in Babel        October 2020


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction and background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Specification of Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  Data Structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     3.1.  The Source Table  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     3.2.  The Route Table . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     3.3.  The Table of Pending Seqno Requests . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   4.  Data Forwarding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   5.  Protocol Operation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     5.1.  Protocol Messages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     5.2.  Wildcard Messages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   6.  Compatibility with the base protocol  . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     6.1.  Loop-avoidance  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     6.2.  Starvation and Blackholes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   7.  Protocol Encoding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     7.1.  Source Prefix sub-TLV . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     7.2.  Source-specific Update  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     7.3.  Source-specific (Route) Request . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     7.4.  Source-Specific Seqno Request . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   8.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   9.  Security considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   10. Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   11. References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
     11.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
     11.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11

1.  Introduction and background

   The Babel routing protocol [BABEL] is a distance vector routing
   protocol for next-hop routing.  In next-hop routing, each node
   maintains a forwarding table which maps destination prefixes to next
   hops.  The forwarding decision is a per-packet operation which
   depends on the destination address of the packets and on the entries
   of the forwarding table.  When a packet is about to be routed, its
   destination address is compared to the prefixes of the routing table:
   the entry with the most specific prefix containing the destination
   address of the packet is chosen, and the packet is forwarded to the
   associated next-hop.  Next-hop routing is a simple, well understood
   paradigm that works satisfactorily in a large number of cases.

   Source-specific routing [SS-ROUTING], or Source Address Dependent
   Routing (SADR), is a modest extension to next-hop routing where the
   forwarding decision depends not only on the destination address but
   also on the source address of the packet being routed, which makes it
   possible for two packets with the same destination but different
   source addresses to be routed following different paths.  The



Boutier & Chroboczek       Expires May 1, 2021                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft      Source-Specific Routing in Babel        October 2020


   forwarding tables are extended to map pairs of prefixes (destination,
   source) to next hops.  When multiple entries match a given packet,
   the one with the most specific destination prefix is chosen, and, in
   the case of equally specific destination prefixes, the one with the
   most specific source prefix.

   The main application of source-specific routing is a form of
   multihoming known as multihoming with multiple addresses.  When using
   this technique in a network connected to multiple providers, every
   host is assigned multiple addresses, one per provider.  When a host
   sources a packet, it picks one of its addresses as the source
   address, and source-specific routing is used to route the packet to
   an edge router that is connected to the corresponding provider, which
   is compatible with [BCP84].  Unlike classical multihoming, this
   technique is applicable to small networks, as it does not require the
   use of provider-independent addresses, or cause excessive growth of
   the global routing table.  More details are given in [SS-ROUTING].

   This document describes a source-specific routing extension for the
   Babel routing protocol [BABEL].  This involves minor changes to the
   data structures, which must include a source prefix in addition to
   the destination prefix already present, and some changes to the
   Update, Route Request and Seqno Request TLVs, which are extended with
   a source prefix.  The source prefix is encoded using a mandatory sub-
   TLV ([BABEL] Section 4.4).

2.  Specification of Requirements

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
   BCP 14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

3.  Data Structures

   A number of the conceptual data structures described in Section 3.2
   of [BABEL] contain a destination prefix.  This specification extends
   these data structures with a source prefix.  Data from the original
   protocol, which do not specify a source prefix, are stored with a
   zero length source prefix, which matches exactly the same set of
   packets as the original, non-source-specific data.

3.1.  The Source Table

   Every Babel node maintains a source table, as described in [BABEL]
   Section 3.2.5.  A source-specific Babel node extends this table with
   the following field:



Boutier & Chroboczek       Expires May 1, 2021                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft      Source-Specific Routing in Babel        October 2020


   o  The source prefix specifying the source address of packets to
      which this entry applies.

   The source table is now indexed by triples of the form (prefix,
   source prefix, router-id).

   Note that the route entry contains a source (see sections 2 and 3.2.5
   of [BABEL]) which itself contains a source prefix.  These are two
   very different concepts that should not be confused.

3.2.  The Route Table

   Every Babel node maintains a route table, as described in [BABEL]
   Section 3.2.6.  Each route table entry contains, among other data, a
   source, which this specification extends with a source prefix as
   described above.  The route table is now indexed by triples of the
   form (prefix, source prefix, neighbour), where the prefix and source
   prefix are obtained from the source.

3.3.  The Table of Pending Seqno Requests

   Every Babel node maintains a table of pending seqno requests, as
   described in [BABEL], Section 3.2.7.  A source-specific Babel node
   extends this table with the following entry:

   o  The source prefix being requested.

   The table of pending seqno requests is now indexed by triples of the
   form (prefix, source prefix, router-id).

4.  Data Forwarding

   In next-hop routing, if two routing table entries overlap, then one
   is necessarily more specific than the other; the "longest prefix
   rule" specifies that the most specific applicable routing table entry
   is chosen.

   With source-specific routing, there might no longer be a most
   specific applicable entry: two routing table entries might match a
   given packet without one necessarily being more specific than the
   other.  Consider for example the following routing table:

             destination                source     next-hop
       2001:DB8:0:1::/64                  ::/0            A
                    ::/0     2001:DB8:0:2::/64            B

   This specifies that all packets with destination in 2001:DB8:0:1::/64
   are to be routed through A, while all packets with source in



Boutier & Chroboczek       Expires May 1, 2021                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft      Source-Specific Routing in Babel        October 2020


   2001:DB8:0:2::/64 are to be routed through B.  A packet with source
   2001:DB8:0:2::42 and destination 2001:DB8:0:1::57 matches both
   entries, although neither is more specific than the other.  A choice
   is necessary, and unless the choice being made is the same on all
   routers in a routing domain, persistent routing loops may occur.
   More details are given in Section IV.C of [SS-ROUTING].

   A Babel implementation MUST choose routing table entries by using the
   so-called destination-first ordering, where a routing table entry R1
   is preferred to a routing table entry R2 when either R1's destination
   prefix is more specific than R2's, or the destination prefixes are
   equal and R1's source prefix is more specific than R2's.  (In other
   words, routing table entries are compared using the lexicographic
   product of the destination prefix ordering by the source prefix
   ordering.)

   In practice, this means that a source-specific Babel implementation
   must take care that any lower layer that performs packet forwarding
   obey this semantics.  More precisely:

   o  If the lower layers implement the destination-first ordering, then
      the Babel implementation SHOULD use them directly;

   o  If the lower layers can hold source-specific routes, but not with
      the right semantics, then the Babel implementation MUST either
      silently ignore any source-specific routes, or disambiguate the
      routing table by using a suitable disambiguation algorithm (see
      Section V.B of [SS-ROUTING] for such an algorithm);

   o  If the lower layers cannot hold source-specific routes, then a
      Babel implementation MUST silently ignore any source-specific
      routes.

5.  Protocol Operation

   This extension does not fundamentally change the operation of the
   Babel protocol, and we therefore only describe differences between
   the original protocol and the extended protocol.

   In the original protocol, three TLVs carry a destination prefix:
   Updates, Route Requests and Seqno Requests.  This specification
   extends these messages so that they may carry a Source Prefix sub-
   TLV, as described in Section 7 below.  The sub-TLV is marked as
   mandatory, so that an unextended implementation will silently ignore
   the whole enclosing TLV.  A node obeying this specification MUST NOT
   send a TLV with a zero-length source prefix: instead, it sends a TLV
   with no Source Prefix sub-TLV.  Conversely, an extended
   implementation MUST interpret an unextended TLV as carrying a source



Boutier & Chroboczek       Expires May 1, 2021                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft      Source-Specific Routing in Babel        October 2020


   prefix of zero length.  Taken together, these properties ensure
   interoperability between the original and extended protocols (see
   Section 6 below).

5.1.  Protocol Messages

   This extension allows three TLVs of the original Babel protocol to
   carry a source prefix: Update TLVs, Route Request TLVs and Seqno
   Request TLVs.

   In order to advertise a route with a non-zero length source prefix, a
   node sends a source-specific Update, i.e., an Update with a Source
   Prefix sub-TLV.  When a node receives a source-specific Update
   (prefix, source prefix, router-id, seqno, metric) from a neighbour
   neigh, it behaves as described in [BABEL] Section 3.5.4, except that
   the entry under consideration is indexed by (prefix, source prefix,
   neigh) rather than just (prefix, neigh).

   Similarly, when a node needs to send a Request of either kind that
   applies to a route with a non-zero length source prefix, it sends a
   source-specific Request, i.e., a Request with a Source Prefix sub-
   TLV.  When a node receives a source-specific Request, it behaves as
   described in Section 3.8 of [BABEL], except that the request applies
   to the Route Table entry carrying the source prefix indicated by the
   Source Prefix sub-TLV.

5.2.  Wildcard Messages

   In the original protocol, the Address Encoding value 0 is used for
   wildcard messages: messages that apply to all routes, of any address
   family and with any destination prefix.  Wildcard messages are
   allowed in two places in the protocol: wildcard retractions are used
   to retract all of the routes previously advertised by a node on a
   given interface, and wildcard Route Requests are used to request a
   full dump of the Route Table from a given node.  Wildcard messages
   are intended to apply to all routes, including routes decorated with
   additional data and AE values to be defined by future extensions, and
   hence this specification extends wildcard operations to apply to all
   routes, whatever the value of the source prefix.

   More precisely, a node receiving an Update with the AE field set to 0
   and the Metric field set to infinity (a wildcard retraction) MUST
   apply the route acquisition procedure described in Section 3.5.4 of
   [BABEL] to all of the routes that it has learned from the sending
   node, whatever the value of the source prefix.  A node MUST NOT send
   a wildcard retraction with an attached source prefix, and a node that
   receives a wildcard retraction with a source prefix MUST ignore it.




Boutier & Chroboczek       Expires May 1, 2021                  [Page 6]

Internet-Draft      Source-Specific Routing in Babel        October 2020


   Similarly, a node that receives a route request with the AE field set
   to 0 (a wildcard route request) SHOULD send a full routing table
   dump, including routes with a non-zero length source prefix.  A node
   MUST NOT send a wildcard request that carries a source prefix, and a
   node receiving a wildcard request with a source prefix MUST ignore
   it.

6.  Compatibility with the base protocol

   The protocol extension defined in this document is, to a great
   extent, interoperable with the base protocol defined in [BABEL] (and
   all previously standardised extensions).  More precisely, if non-
   source-specific routers and source-specific routers are mixed in a
   single routing domain, Babel's loop-avoidance properties are
   preserved, and, in particular, no persistent routing loops will
   occur.

   However, this extension is encoded using mandatory sub-TLVs,
   introduced in [BABEL], and therefore is not compatible with the older
   version of the Babel Routing Protocol [RFC6126] which does not
   support such sub-TLVs.  Consequently, this extension MUST NOT be used
   with routers implementing RFC 6126, otherwise persistent routing
   loops may occur.

6.1.  Loop-avoidance

   The extension defined in this protocol uses a new Mandatory sub-TLV
   to carry the source prefix information.  As discussed in Section 4.4
   of [BABEL], this encoding ensures that non-source-specific routers
   will silently ignore the whole TLV, which is necessary to avoid
   persistent routing loops in hybrid networks.

   Consider two nodes A and B, with A source-specific announcing a route
   to (D, S).  Suppose that B (non-source-specific) merely ignores the
   source prefix information when it receives the update rather than
   ignoring the whole TLV, and re-announces the route as D.  This re-
   announcement reaches A, which treats it as (D, ::/0).  Packets
   destined to D but not sourced in S will be forwarded by A to B, and
   by B to A, causing a persistent routing loop:

       (D,S)                 (D)
        <--                 <--
     ------ A ----------------- B
              -->
             (D,::/0)






Boutier & Chroboczek       Expires May 1, 2021                  [Page 7]

Internet-Draft      Source-Specific Routing in Babel        October 2020


6.2.  Starvation and Blackholes

   In general, the discarding of source-specific routes by non-source-
   specific routers will cause route starvation.  Intuitively, unless
   there are enough non-source-specific routes in the network, non-
   source-specific routers will suffer starvation, and discard packets
   for destinations that are only announced by source-specific routers.

   A simple yet sufficient condition for avoiding starvation is to build
   a connected source-specific backbone that includes all of the edge
   routers, and announce a (non-source-specific) default route towards
   the backbone.

7.  Protocol Encoding

   This extension defines a new sub-TLV used to carry a source prefix:
   the Source Prefix sub-TLV.  It can be used within an Update, a Route
   Request or a Seqno Request TLV to match a source-specific entry of
   the Route Table, in conjunction with the destination prefix natively
   carried by these TLVs.

   Since a source-specific routing entry is characterized by a single
   destination prefix and a single source prefix, a source-specific
   message contains exactly one Source Prefix sub-TLV.  A node MUST NOT
   send more than one Source Prefix sub-TLV in a TLV, and a node
   receiving more than one Source Prefix sub-TLV in a single TLV MUST
   ignore this TLV.  It MAY ignore the whole packet.

7.1.  Source Prefix sub-TLV

    0                   1                   2                   3
    0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
   |   Type = 128  |    Length     |  Source Plen  | Source Prefix...
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-

   Fields:

   Type      Set to 128 to indicate a Source Prefix sub-TLV.

   Length    The length of the body, in octets, exclusive of the Type
             and Length fields.

   Source Plen  The length of the advertised source prefix.  This MUST
             NOT be 0.

   Source Prefix  The source prefix being advertised.  This field's size
             is (Source Plen)/8 octets rounded upwards.



Boutier & Chroboczek       Expires May 1, 2021                  [Page 8]

Internet-Draft      Source-Specific Routing in Babel        October 2020


   The contents of the Source Prefix sub-TLV are interpreted according
   to the AE of the enclosing TLV.  If a TLV with AE equal to 0 contains
   a Source Prefix sub-TLV, then the whole TLV MUST be ignored.
   Similarly, if a TLV contains multiple Source Prefix sub-TLVs, then
   the whole TLV MUST be ignored.

   Note that this sub-TLV is a mandatory sub-TLV.  Therefore, as
   described in Section 4.4 of [BABEL], the whole TLV MUST be ignored if
   that sub-TLV is not understood (or malformed).  Otherwise, routing
   loops may occur (see Section 6.1).

7.2.  Source-specific Update

   The source-specific Update is an Update TLV with a Source Prefix sub-
   TLV.  It advertises or retracts source-specific routes in the same
   manner as routes with non-source-specific Updates (see [BABEL]).  A
   wildcard retraction (Update with AE equal to 0) MUST NOT carry a
   Source Prefix sub-TLV.

   Babel uses a stateful compression scheme to reduce the size taken by
   destination prefixes in update TLVs (see Section 4.5 of [BABEL]).
   The source prefix defined by this extension is not compressed.  On
   the other hand, compression is allowed for the destination prefixes
   carried by source-specific updates.  As described in Section 4.5 of
   [BABEL], unextended implementations will correctly update their
   parser state while otherwise ignoring the whole TLV.

7.3.  Source-specific (Route) Request

   A source-specific Route Request is a Route Request TLV with a Source
   Prefix sub-TLV.  It prompts the receiver to send an update for a
   given pair of destination and source prefixes, as described in
   Section 3.8.1.1 of [BABEL].  A wildcard request (Route Request with
   AE equals to 0) MUST NOT carry a Source Prefix sub-TLV; if a wildcard
   request with a Source Prefix sub-TLV is received, then the request
   MUST be ignored.

7.4.  Source-Specific Seqno Request

   A source-specific Seqno Request is a Seqno Request TLV with a Source
   Prefix sub-TLV.  It requests the receiving node to perform the
   procedure described in Section 3.8.1.2 of [BABEL], but applied to a
   pair of a destination and source prefix.








Boutier & Chroboczek       Expires May 1, 2021                  [Page 9]

Internet-Draft      Source-Specific Routing in Babel        October 2020


8.  IANA Considerations

   IANA has allocated sub-TLV number 128 for the Source Prefix sub-TLV
   in the Babel sub-TLV types registry.

9.  Security considerations

   The extension defined in this document adds a new sub-TLV to three
   TLVs already present in the original Babel protocol, and does not
   change the security properties of the protocol itself.  However, the
   additional flexibility provided by source-specific routing might
   invalidate the assumptions made by some network administrators, which
   could conceivably lead to security issues.

   For example, a network administrator might be tempted to abuse route
   filtering (Appendix C of [BABEL]) as a security mechanism.  Unless
   the filtering rules are designed to take source-specific routing into
   account, they might be bypassed by a source-specific route, which
   might cause traffic to reach a portion of a network that was thought
   to be protected.  Similarly, a network administrator might assume
   that no route is more specific than a host route, and use a host
   route in order to direct traffic for a given destination through a
   security device (e.g., a firewall); source-specific routing
   invalidates this assumption, and in some topologies announcing a
   source-specific route might conceivably be used to bypass the
   security device.

10.  Acknowledgments

   The authors are grateful to Donald Eastlake and Joel Halpern for
   their help with this document.

11.  References

11.1.  Normative References

   [BABEL]    Chroboczek, J. and D. Schinazi, "The Babel Routing
              Protocol", Internet Draft draft-ietf-babel-rfc6126bis-20,
              September 2020.

   [BCP84]    Baker, F. and P. Savola, "Ingress Filtering for Multihomed
              Networks", BCP 84, RFC 3704, March 2004.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997.





Boutier & Chroboczek       Expires May 1, 2021                 [Page 10]

Internet-Draft      Source-Specific Routing in Babel        October 2020


   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017.

11.2.  Informative References

   [RFC6126]  Chroboczek, J., "The Babel Routing Protocol", RFC 6126,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC6126, April 2011,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6126>.

   [SS-ROUTING]
              Boutier, M. and J. Chroboczek, "Source-Specific Routing",
              August 2014.

              In Proc.  IFIP Networking 2015.  A slightly earlier
              version is available online from http://arxiv.org/
              pdf/1403.0445.

Authors' Addresses

   Matthieu Boutier
   IRIF, University of Paris-Diderot
   Case 7014
   75205 Paris Cedex 13
   France

   Email: boutier@irif.fr


   Juliusz Chroboczek
   IRIF, University of Paris-Diderot
   Case 7014
   75205 Paris Cedex 13
   France

   Email: jch@irif.fr















Boutier & Chroboczek       Expires May 1, 2021                 [Page 11]
