



NMRG                                                      K. Pentikousis
Internet-Draft                                                      EICT
Intended status: Informational                              M. Sifalakis
Expires: April 30, 2015                              University of Basel
                                                        October 27, 2014


               Autonomic Networking Definitions Revisited
                     draft-pentikousis-nmrg-andr-01

Abstract

   This document revisits the autonomic networking terminology
   established in peer-reviewed literature, aiming to contribute to the
   ongoing discussion in the IRTF NMRG about how to move forward with
   standardizing various autonomic networking aspects.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 30, 2015.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2014 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.



Pentikousis & Sifalakis  Expires April 30, 2015                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft      Autonomic Networking Definitions        October 2014


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  Operational Considerations and Outlook  . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     3.1.  New Deployment Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     3.2.  Programmable Network Elements and Functions . . . . . . .   6
     3.3.  Autonomic Planes  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     3.4.  DevOps  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   4.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   5.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   6.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   7.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9

1.  Introduction

   The IRTF Network Management Research Group (NMRG) has been working on
   a set of definitions for autonomic networking.  Defining and agreeing
   on autonomic networking terminology is not an easy task as discussed
   in [TAN].  In general, autonomic operation is associated with a range
   of properties, such as self-configuration, self-healing, self-
   optimization, and self-protection [ACDawn].  It is worth pointing out
   that although there is some implicit consensus within the autonomic
   computing community on the key properties/attributes, in the
   autonomic networking community this is not necessarily the case.  In
   the past, the common ground between different projects and different
   contexts of operation was the presence of self-* properties, without
   converging to a minimum set or different levels of autonomic behavior
   or where this behavior needs to be manifested.

   Behringer et al.  [I-D.irtf-nmrg-autonomic-network-definitions]
   describe a set of design goals and non-goals for autonomic networking
   and introduce a model reference architecture in the context of future
   IETF standardization [I-D.behringer-autonomic-control-plane].

   Prior to this recent effort at the NMRG, autonomic networking has
   been the focus of several research projects over the last decade.
   For example, Bouabene et al.  [ANA] detail an autonomic network
   architecture (ANA).  Nguengang et al.  [UMFSpec] propose a unified
   management framework (UMF) which has autonomic properties and
   functions at its core.  Chaparadza et al.  [SelfFI] introduce an
   elegant and "standardizable" [sic] generic autonomic networking
   architecture (GANA) which they propose to be adopted as a reference
   model.  GANA was indeed further elaborated under the auspices of ETSI
   as a group specification [GANA].  This list of earlier work in only
   indicative to the breadth of research in this area over the last
   decade.  However, standardization remains an open question and



Pentikousis & Sifalakis  Expires April 30, 2015                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft      Autonomic Networking Definitions        October 2014


   deployment has been limited to specific mechanisms only
   [I-D.irtf-nmrg-an-gap-analysis].

   We concur with Behringer et al.
   [I-D.irtf-nmrg-autonomic-network-definitions] that for most of the
   work in IETF it suffices to define autonomic behaviour at the node
   level.  However, recent standardization efforts in the IETF, such as,
   for example, I2RS [I-D.ietf-i2rs-problem-statement], SFC
   [I-D.ietf-sfc-problem-statement], ABNO
   [I-D.farrkingel-pce-abno-architecture], SUPA
   [I-D.pentikousis-supa-mapping], and LIME to name a few, and new
   research groups at the IRTF (SDNRG and proposed NFVRG), indicate that
   one may consider that the NMRG should perhaps dig a bit deeper before
   finalizing the definitions and goals document.  In particular, one
   could reconsider the aspects of defining node-level autonomicity
   only.

   This document revisits the autonomic networking definitions proposed
   earlier in the peer-reviewed literature Section 2 ,and relates them
   with such recent developments aiming to assist in the definition of
   coherent terminology in this emerging area of standardization at the
   IETF.

2.  Definitions

   After some thorough analysis and discussion, Schmid et al.  [TAN] put
   forward the following definition, which captures in a concrete and
   concise manner the essence of autonomicity:

      An Autonomic System is a system that operates and serves its
      purpose by managing its own self without external intervention
      even in case of environmental changes.

   Note that the authors explicitly define autonomicity at the system
   level, not at the node level.  They go on to list the minimum set of
   properties that an autonomic system should possess.  Namely, an
   autonomic system is

   o  automatic, i.e. it can "self-control its internal functions and
      operations"

   o  adaptive, i.e. it can change its "configuration, state and
      functions", and

   o  aware, i.e. it can "monitor its operational context".

   In principle, an autonomic system could wholly replace a non-
   autonomic one.  In practice, however, real-world deployments will



Pentikousis & Sifalakis  Expires April 30, 2015                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft      Autonomic Networking Definitions        October 2014


   include legacy network elements and services as well as new autonomic
   ones.

   A salient paper in the autonomic networking area is [FOCALE], in
   which Strassner et al. lay the foundation for an autonomic network
   architecture.  We will not delve into the details of FOCALE, but we
   do note that the authors define three types of managed components
   depending on their autonomic capabilities.  In the remainder of this
   document we consider that FOCALE "components" equate to network
   resources as defined in [I-D.irtf-sdnrg-layer-terminology], i.e. each
   network resource is a "physical or virtual component available within
   a system", and build on the definitions further.

   In this sense, legacy equipment can be seen as autonomically unaware
   resources, and can only be managed using traditional mechanisms.  In
   practice, field equipment could be upgraded to support certain
   autonomic features, thus becoming autonomically-aware managed network
   resources.  This type of network element would typically require a
   mediation layer as suggested in [FOCALE] or at the very least certain
   system software updates.  Finally, a deployment could include fully
   autonomically-enabled network resources.  FOCALE explicitly aims to
   "accommodate legacy components" and foresees the deployment of an
   autonomic manager "that orchestrates the behaviour of other autonomic
   components in the system."

   Figure 1 illustrates a simple sketch of an autonomic networking
   control loop, based on Fig. 2 of [FOCALE].  In short, an autonomic
   manager gathers data from the managed resource(s), evaluates the
   current state, compares it with the desired one, and configures the
   managed resource as necessary.  As illustrated, this simple system
   possess the minimum set of properties introduced above.


                            +---------------------+
    (Maintenance Loop)      | Actual vs. desired  |  Autonomic manager
            +-------------->| state evaluation    |
            |               | and decision making |
            |               +---------o-----------+
            v                         |
    +----------------+                | New configuration
    | Data gathering |                | (Adjustment Loop)
    +----------------+                |
            ^                         v
            |                +------------------+
            +----------------o Managed resource |
                             +------------------+

      Figure 1: Simple sketch of an autonomic networking control loop



Pentikousis & Sifalakis  Expires April 30, 2015                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft      Autonomic Networking Definitions        October 2014


   Of course, all three types of network resources (autonomically-
   unaware, -aware, and -enabled) need to be managed.  One viable
   approach is proposed by Nguengang et al.  [UMFSpec] who describe an
   architecture based on the definition of two types of management
   systems depending on the capacity of the underlying nodes, namely an
   Enhanced Legacy Management System (ELMS) or a Future Management
   System (FMS).  In this context, it is worth considering the
   approaches taken in other disciplines.  For example, in aviation,
   auto-navigation systems solve this challenge by means of distributed
   consensus among an odd-number of controllers/manager that
   independently carry out the tasks of data gathering and state
   evaluation, and then make an election for each decision.  On the
   other hand, bio-inspired systems have emergent coordination (of
   managers) following principles such as entropy or mass action.

   Finally, autonomic properties are highly desirable in the context of
   new mobile architectures.  For example, Barth and Kuehn [SON4G]
   discuss the need for self-* properties in the context of small cell
   deployments in 4G/LTE, while Hamalainen et al.  [LTESON] and provide
   a comprehensive guide and handy references to the efforts in 3GPP
   along these lines.

3.  Operational Considerations and Outlook

   This section briefly describes emerging operational considerations
   that in the author's view should be taken into account as we move
   forward with autonomic networking standardization in the IETF and
   IRTF context.

3.1.  New Deployment Models

   Strassner et al.  [FOCALE] highlight that an important goal of
   autonomics is "making the life of the user easier by changing the
   focus from a computer-centric to a task-centric model".  Deployment
   of new network technologies is typically a time-consuming, labour-
   intensive and cumbersome task.  In the past, we have seen that if the
   newly designed infrastructure cannot be managed satisfactorily
   adverse results, such as service launch delays, may be inevitable.
   As we move forward with new deployment models which are oriented
   towards softwarized and cloudified network functions, autonomic
   networking principles may prove invaluable.

   As per [TAN], autonomic systems are by design programmable, which
   bodes well with the emerging deployment models which emphasize
   agility and shorter technology introduction cycles.  We argue that
   autonomic networking definitions, goals and gap analysis within the
   context of IETF standardization should take this more into
   consideration.  Further, recent initiatives such as SUPA



Pentikousis & Sifalakis  Expires April 30, 2015                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft      Autonomic Networking Definitions        October 2014


   [I-D.pentikousis-supa-mapping] point towards infrastructures which
   are managed through intent (generic policies), for instance, as
   opposed to network element specific configuration.

3.2.  Programmable Network Elements and Functions

   Although the development of models such as FoRCES [RFC5812] coincided
   with the core of the above-mentioned autonomic networking research
   literature, by and large, the two areas did not cross-pollinate.  It
   appears that as SDN and NFV principles reach a wider audience of
   researchers and practitioners, fully programmable network elements
   and functions could be further introduced in autonomic networking
   architectures.  Indeed, moving towards a "task-centric model" relates
   well with other efforts in IETF such as SFC
   [I-D.ietf-sfc-problem-statement]

3.3.  Autonomic Planes

   Recent work at the SDNRG [I-D.irtf-sdnrg-layer-terminology]
   highlighted the need for the wider SDN community to think in terms of
   control, management, and operational planes comprehensiveness and
   complementarity.  As we have seen above, earlier work in autonomic
   networking has been primarily focusing on management aspects (cf.
   [UMFSpec]), while recent work in NMRG is focusing on standardizing an
   autonomic networking control plane
   [I-D.behringer-autonomic-control-plane].

   For an autonomic plane, there is the challenge on "which
   functionality to place where".  For example, one could consider an
   architecture in which all three planes have autonomic features.
   Alternatively, one could adopt a knowledge plane approach [KP2003]
   establishing a separate, virtual/logical plane.  A way forward could
   be to consider autonomics in NMRG in the context of programmable
   networks and through a more comprehensive manner.

3.4.  DevOps

   John et al.  [NSC] elaborate on the concept of continuous network
   service delivery.  In this context, the authors argue for the need of
   programmable observation points which could be inserted in a dynamic
   service chain on demand.  They expect that future service provider
   DevOps would require new management technologies "based on the
   experience from data centers" thus "addressing the challenges of
   dynamic service chaining".  This bodes well with the model
   illustrated in Figure 1 and we could expect more results in this
   direction in the future.





Pentikousis & Sifalakis  Expires April 30, 2015                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft      Autonomic Networking Definitions        October 2014


4.  Acknowledgements

   This document would not have been possible without the stimulating
   discussion during the NMRG meeting at IETF 90 in Toronto.  Many
   thanks to all participants.

5.  IANA Considerations

   This memo includes no request to IANA.

6.  Security Considerations

   This document does not propose a new network architecture or protocol
   and as such does not have any impact on the security of the Internet.

   Autonomic networking introduces a range of opportunities for formal
   verification techniques which could increase trustworthiness,
   although this is clearly beyond the scope of this first version of
   this document.  Interested readers should consult [ACSec] for an
   early exploration of the issues at hand in the context of autonomic
   computing.

7.  Informative References

   [ACDawn]   Ganek, A. G., and T. A. Corbi, "The dawning of the
              autonomic computing era", IBM systems Journal, 42(1), 5-18
              , 2003.

   [ACSec]    Chess, D. M., Palmer, C. C., and S. R. White, "Security in
              an autonomic computing environment", IBM systems Journal,
              42(1), 107-118 , 2003.

   [ANA]      Bouabene, G., Jelger, C., Tschudin, C., Schmid, S.,
              Keller, A., and M. May, "The autonomic network
              architecture (ANA)", Journal on Selected Areas in
              Communications, 28(1), 4-14 IEEE, 2003.

   [FOCALE]   Strassner, J., Agoulmine, N., and E. Lehtihet, "FOCALE: A
              novel autonomic networking architecture", Proc. Latin
              American Autonomic Computing Symposium (LAACS), Campo
              Grande, Brazil, July 2006.

   [GANA]     ETSI GS AFI 002, , "Autonomic network engineering for the
              self-managing Future Internet (AFI): GANA Architectural
              Reference Model for Autonomic Networking, Cognitive
              Networking and Self-Management.", April 2013.





Pentikousis & Sifalakis  Expires April 30, 2015                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft      Autonomic Networking Definitions        October 2014


   [I-D.behringer-autonomic-control-plane]
              Behringer, M., Bjarnason, S., BL, B., and T. Eckert, "An
              Autonomic Control Plane", draft-behringer-autonomic-
              control-plane-00 (work in progress), June 2014.

   [I-D.farrkingel-pce-abno-architecture]
              King, D. and A. Farrel, "A PCE-based Architecture for
              Application-based Network Operations", draft-farrkingel-
              pce-abno-architecture-13 (work in progress), October 2014.

   [I-D.ietf-i2rs-problem-statement]
              Atlas, A., Nadeau, T., and D. Ward, "Interface to the
              Routing System Problem Statement", draft-ietf-i2rs-
              problem-statement-04 (work in progress), June 2014.

   [I-D.ietf-sfc-problem-statement]
              Quinn, P. and T. Nadeau, "Service Function Chaining
              Problem Statement", draft-ietf-sfc-problem-statement-10
              (work in progress), August 2014.

   [I-D.irtf-nmrg-an-gap-analysis]
              Jiang, S., Carpenter, B., and M. Behringer, "Gap Analysis
              for Autonomic Networking", draft-irtf-nmrg-an-gap-
              analysis-02 (work in progress), October 2014.

   [I-D.irtf-nmrg-autonomic-network-definitions]
              Behringer, M., Pritikin, M., Bjarnason, S., Clemm, A.,
              Carpenter, B., Jiang, S., and L. Ciavaglia, "Autonomic
              Networking - Definitions and Design Goals", draft-irtf-
              nmrg-autonomic-network-definitions-04 (work in progress),
              October 2014.

   [I-D.irtf-sdnrg-layer-terminology]
              Haleplidis, E., Pentikousis, K., Denazis, S., Salim, J.,
              Meyer, D., and O. Koufopavlou, "SDN Layers and
              Architecture Terminology", draft-irtf-sdnrg-layer-
              terminology-04 (work in progress), October 2014.

   [I-D.pentikousis-supa-mapping]
              Pentikousis, K., Lin, J., and Y. Zha, "SUPA Configuration
              and Policy Mapping", draft-pentikousis-supa-mapping-00
              (work in progress), September 2014.

   [KP2003]   Clark, D. D., Partridge, C. , et al., "A Knowledge Plane
              for the Internet", Proc. SIGCOMM, Karlsruhe, Germany ACM,
              August 2003.





Pentikousis & Sifalakis  Expires April 30, 2015                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft      Autonomic Networking Definitions        October 2014


   [LTESON]   Hamalainen, S., Sanneck, H., and C. Sartori, "LTE Self-
              Organising Networks (SON): Network Management Automation
              for Operational Efficiency", John Wiley & Sons , 2012.

   [NSC]      John, W., Pentikousis, K., et al., "Research directions in
              network service chaining", Proc. SDN for Future Networks
              and Services (SDN4FNS), Trento, Italy IEEE, November 2013.

   [RFC5812]  Halpern, J. and J. Hadi Salim, "Forwarding and Control
              Element Separation (ForCES) Forwarding Element Model", RFC
              5812, March 2010.

   [SON4G]    Barth, U., and E. Kuehn, "Self-organization in 4G mobile
              networks: Motivation and vision", Proc. 7th International
              Symposium on Wireless Communication Systems (ISWCS), York,
              UK, pp. 731-735, IEEE, September 2010.

   [SelfFI]   Chaparadza, R., Papavassiliou, S., et al., "Creating a
              viable Evolution Path towards Self-Managing Future
              Internet via a Standardizable Reference Model for
              Autonomic Network Engineering", Future Internet Assembly
              (pp. 136-147) IOS Press, 2009.

   [TAN]      Schmid, S., Sifalakis, M., and D. Hutchison, "Towards
              autonomic networks", Proc. Autonomic Networking, LNCS
              4195, pp. 1-11 Springer, 2006.

   [UMFSpec]  Nguengang, G. (ed.), et al., "UMF Specifications, Release
              1", FP7-UNIVERSELF-Deliverable D2.1 , July 2011.

Authors' Addresses

   Kostas Pentikousis
   EICT GmbH
   EUREF-Campus Haus 13
   Torgauer Strasse 12-15
   10829 Berlin
   Germany

   Email: k.pentikousis@eict.de











Pentikousis & Sifalakis  Expires April 30, 2015                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft      Autonomic Networking Definitions        October 2014


   Manolis Sifalakis
   University of Basel
   Bernoullistrasse 16
   4056 Basel
   Switzerland

   Email: sifalakis.manos@unibas.ch












































Pentikousis & Sifalakis  Expires April 30, 2015                [Page 10]
