


Network Working Group                                       M. Wasserman
Internet-Draft                                                ThingMagic
Expires: May 22, 2008                                  November 19, 2007


        An Analysis of Centrally Assigned Unique Local Addresses
                  draft-mrw-6man-ulac-analysis-01.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on May 22, 2008.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

Abstract

   There has been discussion within the IETF IPv6 community for some
   time regarding whether or not to define Centrally Assigned Unique
   Local Addresses (ULA-Cs).  Although many arguments both for and
   against the definition of ULA-Cs have been raised and repeated, our
   discussions have not resulted in consensus about whether or not to
   define this new address type.  This document will summarize the
   arguments for and against the allocation of ULA-Cs, in an attempt to
   help the IETF IPv6 community reach a decision on this issue.




Wasserman                 Expires May 22, 2008                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft               ULA-C Analysis                November 2007


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  The Benefits of ULA-Cs  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
     2.1.  Greater Assurance of Uniqueness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     2.2.  Accountability  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     2.3.  Reverse DNS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   3.  The Costs of ULA-Cs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
     3.1.  Address Space Consumption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
     3.2.  New Registration Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   4.  Other Concerns about ULA-Cs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
     4.1.  Lack of Value . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
     4.2.  Wrong Way to Influence Registry Policy  . . . . . . . . . . 6
     4.3.  Architecturally Flawed  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
     4.4.  Use as Globally Routed Provider Independent Addresses . . . 7
     4.5.  Enabling IPv6 NAT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   5.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   6.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   7.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
     7.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
     7.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements  . . . . . . . . . . 9




























Wasserman                 Expires May 22, 2008                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft               ULA-C Analysis                November 2007


1.  Introduction

   Unique Local Addresses (ULAs) are defined in RFC 4193 [RFC4193],
   which defines a local assignment method to be used for half of the
   ULA address space.  RFC 4193 reserves the other half of the ULA space
   for ULAs that are assigned using another assignment method, without
   specifying what method would be used.

   ULAs are largely targeted at fulfilling the need for local, Internet
   Service Provider (ISP)-independent prefixes that can be used on
   isolated networks, internal networks and VPNs.  Enterprise
   administrators do not want to use Provider Assigned addresses for
   these purposes, because they want to avoid the need to renumber their
   internal, private networks when they change ISPs, or when their ISPs
   merge with other ISPs or restructure their address allocations.

   Locally Assigned ULAs are generated within the local enterprise,
   either by the network administrator or by a piece of networking
   equipment, using a random number generator.  These addresses are
   probabilistically unique, in the sense that it is extremely unlikely
   that there will be an overlap within any reasonably small number of
   Centrally Assigned ULA prefixes.

   Locally Assigned ULAs meet most of the local addressing needs that
   have been expressed, and their probabilistic uniqueness represents a
   significant advantage over the overlapping private address space
   available in IPv4.  However, there have been some arguments that we
   should also define a centrally assigned set of ULAs (ULA-Cs), to meet
   some needs that are not fully handled by the locally allocated ones.

   The IETF IPv6 community (originally represented by the IPv6 WG, but
   now represented by the IPv6 Maintenance (6man) WG) has not been able
   to achieve consensus, over a period of several years, regarding
   whether or not to define ULA-Cs to inhabit the other half of the ULA
   address space.  The document has been written in an attempt to
   clearly document the different sides of this issue, in the hope that
   we can achieve a consensus decision on how to proceed.


2.  The Benefits of ULA-Cs

   To understand the benefits of Centrally Assigned ULAs in a world that
   already has Locally Assigned ULAs available, we need to discuss what
   features Centrally Assigned ULAs will provide that are not already
   covered by Locally Assigned ULAs.  These benefits stem from the
   differences between Locally Assigned and Centrally Assigned ULAs: the
   greater certainty that ULA-Cs will be unique, the publicly
   accountable nature of the registration, and the ability for ULA-Cs to



Wasserman                 Expires May 22, 2008                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft               ULA-C Analysis                November 2007


   be registered in the reverse DNS.

2.1.  Greater Assurance of Uniqueness

   In some cases, local enterprise networks extend beyond the boundaries
   of a single enterprise, connecting a set of trading partners, or
   connecting a business and its customers, to a single private network.
   Many of these inter-enterprise private networks exist today, and they
   can be quite large in some cases.

   In cases where ULA prefixes are used for these large, private, inter-
   enterprise networks, it is important that the ULA prefix assigned to
   the private network does not conflict with any of the prefixes used
   internally by the participating enterprises, including the prefixes
   used by those enterprises on other private inter-enterprise networks
   with overlappign membership.  To ensure that this requirement is met,
   some network administrators would prefer to use prefixes, such as
   ULA-Cs, that have a greater probability of uniqueness than Locally
   Assigned ULAs.

2.2.  Accountability

   ULA-Cs are assigned by a central registry that keeps a record of the
   assignment.  This means that if a conflict does arise where two
   enterprises are using the same Centrally Assigned ULA prefix, it is
   possible for an enterprise administrator to prove that the prefix was
   assigned to his/her company, and that his/her enterprise has the
   right to use it.

   The use of Centrally Assigned ULAs also has some advantages for
   tracking the source of any local traffic that may leak into another
   enterprise network or onto the Internet.  Because the prefix has been
   centrally assigned, it should be possible to check who owns the
   prefix and contact the owner about the problem.

2.3.  Reverse DNS

   One of the major advantages of Centrally Assigned ULAs over Locally
   Assigned ULAs is that it is possible for the Centrally Assigned ULA
   prefixes to be populated in the global Reverse DNS.  Since these
   addresses may be routed across private networks between enterprises,
   it isn't reasonable to assume that all of the nodes on a private
   network will be configured to use a single DNS server that can run
   "two-faced" DNS to reflect the internal addresses.  In these cases,
   it may be valuable to have these addresses populated in the global
   Reverse DNS tree.  This would be possible with ULA-Cs, because of
   their centrally-assigned nature.




Wasserman                 Expires May 22, 2008                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft               ULA-C Analysis                November 2007


3.  The Costs of ULA-Cs

   This section attempts to summarize the costs associated with the
   definition of ULA-Cs.  Additional concerns regarding the definition
   of ULA-Cs are covered in the following section.

3.1.  Address Space Consumption

   From an address space perspective, there is little or no cost to
   defining ULA-Cs.  RFC 4193 allocates the prefix FCOO::/7 to be used
   for Unique Local Addresses.  One half of that space (the prefix
   FD00::/8) is allocated for Locally Assigned ULAs, while the other
   half of the space (the prefix FC00::/8) is reserved for ULAs that use
   another assignment method.  The ULA-C draft proposes that remaining
   half of that space (the FC00::/8 prefix) should be used for Centrally
   Assigned ULAs.

3.2.  New Registration Method

   ULA-Cs would require an additional type of address registration,
   which would involve some costs to the larger Internet community.
   However, if there is any signficant demand for ULA-Cs, it is likely
   that these costs could be recouped from the ULA-C registration fees.


4.  Other Concerns about ULA-Cs

   In addition to the costs associated with defining ULA-Cs, a number of
   concerns have been raised regarding the value of ULA-C prefixes and
   how they might be used or abused.  This section attempts to summarize
   those concerns.

4.1.  Lack of Value

   Although there are some benefits of ULA-Cs listed in Section 2, it
   has been argued that the benefits of ULA-Cs are not sufficient to
   warrant the corresponding complexity that will be added to the IPv6
   standard or the effort of setting up a centralized registration
   mechanism.  The vast majority of the benefits that can be obtained
   using ULA-Cs can also be obtained using Locally Assigned ULAs, which
   are already defined and do not require any central registration
   process.  In most cases where enterprise administrators argue that
   they need a higher likelihood of uniqueness, it is not actually the
   case that their application will substantially benefit from the
   different between probabilistic uniqueness and more deterministic
   uniqueness.





Wasserman                 Expires May 22, 2008                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft               ULA-C Analysis                November 2007


4.2.  Wrong Way to Influence Registry Policy

   It has been argued that it is inappropriate and/or ineffective for
   the IETF to attempt to influence address registration policies
   through the publication of an RFC that creates a new address space
   with defined registration policies.

   There is no technical advantage, and there may be some architectural
   disadvantages (see Section 4.3), to allocating a prefix for globally
   unique addresses with specific registration policies.  If the
   Internet community believes that it is both useful and wise to freely
   assign globally unique prefixes for local use, registry policies
   could be updated to make such assignments from the regular IPv6
   address space.  There is no guarantee that any address prefixes that
   are assigned by the registries will be routable on the global
   Internet.  Routing is achieved through separate agreements with ISPs.
   So there is no reason to allocate a new block of IPv6 address space
   to remove that non-existent guarantee.

   Furthermore, there is no direct connection between the publication of
   and RFC and the implementation of an address registration service.
   So, while it might be useful for the IETF to publish an RFC
   describing needs for a specific type of registration service, an RFC
   describing ULA-Cs would not directly result in the availability of a
   corresponding registration service.

   So, publishing an RFC that assigns an address prefix for ULA-Cs is
   not necessary for the allocation of globally unique local addresses,
   nor will it be sufficient to ensure that the registration function
   described in the document becomes available.

4.3.  Architecturally Flawed

   It has been argued that associating routing behavior with specific
   address prefixes is architecturally unsound and has caused problems
   in the past.  For example, IETF statements that the IPv4 address
   block 240/4 would not be globally routable lead to the implementation
   of default routing filters that have complicated the allocation of
   those addresses as part of the global IPv4 address space.  However,
   this argument only loosely applies to the definition of ULA-Cs.  We
   will not avoid the allocation of address prefixes with associated
   routing behaviour by deciding not to define ULA-Cs, as the address
   space that would be used for ULA-Cs has already been allocated in RFC
   4193.







Wasserman                 Expires May 22, 2008                  [Page 6]

Internet-Draft               ULA-C Analysis                November 2007


4.4.  Use as Globally Routed Provider Independent Addresses

   There is a widely-held view in the Internet operations community that
   ULA-Cs will end-up being routed across the Internet and will,
   effectively, result in the unlimited allocation of globally routed
   Provider Independent (PI) addresses.  Since these addresses would not
   be allocated by ISPs in an aggregable fashion, it is expected that
   they would result in separate per-enterprise routes in the global
   routing table, as PI addresses from the IPv4 "swamp space" do today.
   If ULA-Cs were widely used in this fashion, the global routing tables
   for IPv6 could become large enough to compromise the stability of the
   Internet.

4.5.  Enabling IPv6 NAT

   Some have argued that the definition of ULA-Cs will provide a
   suitable set of addresses for use behind an IPv6-to-IPv6 NAT box, and
   that we should not define these addresses to avoid that situation.
   However, ULA-Cs provide no significant benefits to NAT installations
   that cannot be achieved with Locally Assigned ULAs, so it is unlikely
   that defining ULA-Cs will have much effect, in either direction, on
   whether enterprises decide to use NAT for IPv6 networks.


5.  Security Considerations

   This document analyzes the tradeoffs involved in whether or not to
   define a new IPv6 local address type called Centrally Allocated ULAs
   (ULA-Cs).  Security considerations regarding ULAs, in general, can be
   found in RFC 4193 [RFC4193], and security considerations regarding
   Centrally Assigned ULAs, in particular, can be found in the ULA-C
   draft [I-D.ietf-ipv6-ula-central].


6.  Acknowledgements

   This document was written using the xml2rfc tool described in RFC
   2629 [RFC2629].


7.  References

7.1.  Normative References

   [I-D.ietf-ipv6-ula-central]
              Hinden, R., "Centrally Assigned Unique Local IPv6 Unicast
              Addresses", draft-ietf-ipv6-ula-central-02 (work in
              progress), June 2007.



Wasserman                 Expires May 22, 2008                  [Page 7]

Internet-Draft               ULA-C Analysis                November 2007


   [RFC4193]  Hinden, R. and B. Haberman, "Unique Local IPv6 Unicast
              Addresses", RFC 4193, October 2005.

7.2.  Informative References

   [RFC2629]  Rose, M., "Writing I-Ds and RFCs using XML", RFC 2629,
              June 1999.


Author's Address

   Margaret Wasserman
   ThingMagic
   One Broadway, 5th Floor
   Cambridge, MA  02142
   USA

   Phone: +1 781 405-7464
   Email: margaret@thingmagic.com
   URI:   http://www.thingmagic.com































Wasserman                 Expires May 22, 2008                  [Page 8]

Internet-Draft               ULA-C Analysis                November 2007


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Wasserman                 Expires May 22, 2008                  [Page 9]


