Service Location Working Group                              Erik Guttman
INTERNET DRAFT                                     Sun Microsystems, Inc
                                                         11 October 1999

                     The Service Agent Service Type
                  draft-guttman-svrloc-sa-scheme-00.txt


Status of This Memo

   This document is a submission by the Service Location Working Group
   of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF).  Comments should be
   submitted to the srvloc@corp.home.net mailing list.

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC 2026 [1].

   This document is an Internet-Draft.  Internet-Drafts are working
   documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas,
   and its working groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at
   any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as ``work in progress.''

     The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
     http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

     The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
     http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.
 

   To view the entire list of current Internet-Drafts, please check
   the ``1id-abstracts.txt'' listing contained in the Internet-Drafts
   Shadow Directories on ftp.is.co.za (Africa), ftp.nordu.net (Northern
   Europe), ftp.nis.garr.it (Southern Europe), munnari.oz.au (Pacific
   Rim), ftp.ietf.org (US East Coast), or ftp.isi.edu (US West Coast).

   Distribution of this memo is unlimited.


Abstract

   This document describes the Service Agent service type.  Service
   Agents are one of three types of agents used in the Service Location
   Protocol, Version 2 [1].  The Service Agent advertises all services
   on a given host which have been enabled to use SLPv2.

1. Introduction

   This document provides a Service Template for Service Agents. 
   Service templates are defined in [2].  

   SLPv2 may be used to discover Service Agents.  This template defines
   the attributes which SLP User Agents may use to select the
   appropriate service agent for its needs.




Guttman                   Expires 11 April 2000                [Page  1]

Internet Draft        The Service Agent Service Type        11 June 1999


2. The "service agent" Service Type

  Name of Submitter = "Erik Guttman" <erik.guttman@sun.com>
  Language of Template = en
  Security Considerations = See section 3, below.
  Template Text:
  -------------------------template begins here-----------------------
  template-type=service-agent

  template-version=0.1

  lang=en

  template-description=
    This defines the service-agent service type.  This service is
    used by SLPv2 User Agents to do service discovery in the absense
    of SLPv2 Directory Agents.  By discovering all SLPv2 Service
    Agents, the User Agents know both their locations (so they may
    send unicast requests to them) and the scopes they support.
    Service Agent discovery and the use of service:service-agent
    URLs is defined in [1].

  template-url-syntax=
    url-path= ; The URL of the service agent.  Defined in [1].

  service-type=string M L
  ; The service types advertised by the Service Agent

  --------------------------template ends here------------------------



3. Security Considerations

  Authentication of Service Agent URLs is possible within the context
  of SLPv2 [1].  Service Agent URLs may be used by SLPv2 UAs.  The
  use of the service information included in this template allows UAs
  to select a subset of all SLPv2 SAs.  If SLPv2 security mechanisms
  are not used, the UAs will have no guarantee these services actually
  conform to the selected subset.


References:

  [1] E. Guttman, C. Perkins, J. Veizades, M. Day.  Service Location 
      Protocol. RFC 2608, June 1999. 

  [2] E. Guttman, C. Perkins, J. Kempf, Service Templates and service:
      URLs.  RFC 2609, June 1999.




Guttman                 Expires 21 December 1998               [Page  2]

Internet Draft        The Service Agent Service Type        21 June 1998


Author Contact Information:

     Erik Guttman
     Sun Microsystems
     Eichhoelzelstr. 7
     74915 Waibstadt Germany

     Erik.Guttman@sun.com
     +49 7263 911 701

Full Copyright Statement

      Copyright (C) The Internet Society (1999).  All Rights Reserved.

      This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
      others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
      or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
      and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
      kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
      included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
      document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
      the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
      Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
      developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
      copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
      followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
      English.

      The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
      revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

      This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
      "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
      TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
      BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
      HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
      MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE."


















Guttman                   Expires 11 April 1998                [Page  3]

