

MMUSIC Working Group                                    M. Garcia-Martin
Internet-Draft                                              M. Willekens
Intended status: Informational                    Nokia Siemens Networks
Expires: November 30, 2007                                         P. Xu
                                                     Huawei Technologies
                                                            May 29, 2007


Multiple Packetization Times in the Session Description Protocol (SDP):
                           Problem Statement
           draft-garcia-mmusic-multiple-ptimes-problem-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on November 30, 2007.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

Abstract

   This document provides a problem statement with respect to the
   presence of a single packetization time (ptime) attribute in SDP
   media descriptions that contain several unrelated codecs.





Garcia-Martin, et al.   Expires November 30, 2007               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft  Multiple ptimes in SDP: problem statement       May 2007


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   3.  Conclusion and next steps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   4.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   5.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   6.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
     6.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
     6.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements  . . . . . . . . . . 8







































Garcia-Martin, et al.   Expires November 30, 2007               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft  Multiple ptimes in SDP: problem statement       May 2007


1.  Introduction

   The Session Description Protocol (SDP) [RFC4566] provides a protocol
   for describing multimedia sessions for the purposes of session
   announcement, session invitation, and other forms of multimedia
   session initiation.  A session description in SDP includes the
   session name and purpose, the media comprising the session,
   information needed to receive the media (addresses, ports, formats,
   etc.), and some other information.

   In the SDP media description part, the m-line contains the media type
   (e.g. audio), a transport port, a transport protocol (e.g.  RTP/AVP)
   and a media format description which depends on the transport
   protocol.

   For the transport protocol RTP/AVP or RTP/SAVP, the media format sub-
   field can contain a list of RTP payload type numbers.  See RTP
   Profile for Audio and Video Conferences with Minimal Control
   [RFC3551], Table 4.  For example: "m=audio 49232 RTP/AVP 3 15 18"
   indicates the audio encoders GSM, G.728 and G.729.

   Further, the media description part can contain additional attribute
   lines that complement or modify the media description line.  Of
   interest for this memo are the 'ptime' and 'maxptime' attributes.
   According to RFC 4566 [RFC4566], the 'ptime' attribute gives the
   length of time in milliseconds represented by the media in a packet,
   and the 'maxptime' gives the maximum amount of media that can be
   encapsulated in each packet, expressed as time in milliseconds.
   These attributes modify the whole media description line, which can
   contain an extensive list of payload types.  In other words, these
   attributes are not specific to a given codec.

   RFC 4566 [RFC4566] also indicates that it should not be necessary to
   know ptime to decode RTP or vat audio since the 'ptime' attribute is
   intended as a recommendation for the encoding/packetisation of audio.
   However, once more, the existing 'ptime' attribute defines the
   desired packetization time for all the payload types defined in the
   corresponding media description line.

   End-devices can be configured with different codecs and for each
   codec a different packetization time can be indicated.  However,
   there is no clear way to exchange this type of information between
   different user agents and this can result in lower voice quality,
   network problems or performance problems in the end-devices.







Garcia-Martin, et al.   Expires November 30, 2007               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft  Multiple ptimes in SDP: problem statement       May 2007


2.  Problem Statement

   The packetization time is an important parameter which helps in
   reducing the packet overhead.  Many voice codecs use a certain frame
   length to determine the coded voice filter parameters and try to find
   a certain optimum between the perceived voice quality (measured by
   the Mean Option Score (MOS) factor), and the required bitrate.  When
   a packet oriented network is used for the transfer, the packet header
   induces an additional overhead.  As such, it makes sense to try to
   combine different voice frame data in one packet (up to a Maximum
   Transmission Unit (MTU)) to find a good balance between the required
   network resources, end-device resources and the perceived voice
   quality influenced by packet loss, packet delay, jitter.  When the
   packet size decreases, the bandwidth efficiency is reduced.  When the
   packet size increases, the packetization delay can have a negative
   impact on the perceived voice quality.

   The RTP Profile for Audio and Video Conferences with Minimal Control
   [RFC3551], Table 1, indicates the frame size and default
   packetization time for different codecs.  The G.728 codec has a frame
   size of 2,5 msec/frame and a default packetization time of 20 msec/
   packet.  For G.729 codec, the frame size is 10 msec/frame and a
   default packetization time of 20 msec/packet.

   When more and more telephony traffic is carried over IP-networks, the
   quality as perceived by the end-user should be no worse as the
   classical telephony services.  For VoIP service providers, it is very
   important that endpoints receive audio with the best possible codec
   and packetization time.  In particular, the packetization time
   depends on the selected codec for the audio communication and other
   factors, such as the Maximum Transmission Unit (MTU) of the network
   and the type of access network technology.

   As such, the packetization time is clearly a function of the codec
   and the network access technology.  During the establishment of a new
   session or a modification of an existing session, an endpoint should
   be able to express its preference with respect to the packetization
   time for each codec.  This would mean that the creator of the SDP
   prefers the remote endpoint to use certain packetization time when
   sending media with that codec.

   RFC 4566 [RFC4566] provides the means for expressing a packetization
   time that affects all the payload types declared in the media
   description line.  So, there are no means to indicate the desired
   packetization time on a per payload type basis.  Implementations have
   been using proprietary mechanisms for indicating the packetization
   time per payload type, leading to lack of interoperability in this
   area.  One of these mechanisms is the 'maxmptime' attribute, defined



Garcia-Martin, et al.   Expires November 30, 2007               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft  Multiple ptimes in SDP: problem statement       May 2007


   in the ITU-T Recommendation V.152 [ITU.V152], which "indicates the
   supported packetization period for all codec payload types".  Another
   one is the 'mptime' attribute, defined in the PacketCable Network-
   Based Call Signaling Protocol Specification [PKT.PKT-SP-EC-MGCP],
   which indicates "a list of packetization period values the endpoint
   is capable of using (sending and receiving) for this connection".
   While all have similar semantics, there is obviously no
   interoperability between them, creating a nightmare for the
   implementor who happens to be defining a common SDP stack for
   different applications.

   A few RTP payload format descriptions, such as RFC 3267 [RFC3267],
   RFC 3016 [RFC3016], and RFC 3952 [RFC3952] indicate that the
   packetization time for such payload should be indicated in the
   'ptime' attribute in SDP.  However, since the 'ptime' attribute
   affects all the payload formats included in the media description
   line, it would not be possible to create a media description line
   that contains all the mentioned payload formats and different
   packetization times.  The solutions range from considering a single
   packetization time for all the payload types, or creating a media
   description line that contains a single payload type.

   The issue of a given packetization for a specific codec has been
   captured in past RFCs.  For example, RFC 4504 [RFC4504] contains a
   set of requirements for SIP telephony devices.  Section 3.8 in that
   RFC also provides background information for the need of
   packetization time, which could be set by either the user or the
   administrator of the device, on a per codec basis.  However, once
   more, if several payload formats are offered in the same media
   description line in SDP, there is no way to indicate different
   packetizations per payload format..


3.  Conclusion and next steps

   This memo advocates for the need of a standard mechanism to indicate
   the packetization time on a per codec basis, allowing the creator of
   SDP to include several payload formats in the same media description
   line with different packetization times.

   This memo encourage discussion in the MMUSIC WG mailing list in the
   IETF.  The ultimate goal is to define a standard mechanism that
   fulfils the requirements highlighted in this memo.


4.  Security Considerations

   This memo discusses a problem statement and requirements.  As such,



Garcia-Martin, et al.   Expires November 30, 2007               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft  Multiple ptimes in SDP: problem statement       May 2007


   no protocol that can suffer attacks is defined.


5.  IANA Considerations

   This document does not request IANA to take any action.


6.  References

6.1.  Normative References

   [RFC4566]  Handley, M., Jacobson, V., and C. Perkins, "SDP: Session
              Description Protocol", RFC 4566, July 2006.

6.2.  Informative References

   [ITU.V152]
              ITU-T, "Procedures for supporting voice-band data over IP
              networks.", ITU-T Recommendation V.152, January 2005.

   [PKT.PKT-SP-EC-MGCP]
              PacketCable, "PacketCable Network-Based Call Signaling
              Protocol Speciication", PacketCable PKT-SP-EC-MGCP-I11-
              050812, August 2005.

   [RFC3016]  Kikuchi, Y., Nomura, T., Fukunaga, S., Matsui, Y., and H.
              Kimata, "RTP Payload Format for MPEG-4 Audio/Visual
              Streams", RFC 3016, November 2000.

   [RFC3267]  Sjoberg, J., Westerlund, M., Lakaniemi, A., and Q. Xie,
              "Real-Time Transport Protocol (RTP) Payload Format and
              File Storage Format for the Adaptive Multi-Rate (AMR) and
              Adaptive Multi-Rate Wideband (AMR-WB) Audio Codecs",
              RFC 3267, June 2002.

   [RFC3551]  Schulzrinne, H. and S. Casner, "RTP Profile for Audio and
              Video Conferences with Minimal Control", STD 65, RFC 3551,
              July 2003.

   [RFC3952]  Duric, A. and S. Andersen, "Real-time Transport Protocol
              (RTP) Payload Format for internet Low Bit Rate Codec
              (iLBC) Speech", RFC 3952, December 2004.

   [RFC4504]  Sinnreich, H., Lass, S., and C. Stredicke, "SIP Telephony
              Device Requirements and Configuration", RFC 4504,
              May 2006.




Garcia-Martin, et al.   Expires November 30, 2007               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft  Multiple ptimes in SDP: problem statement       May 2007


Authors' Addresses

   Miguel A. Garcia-Martin
   Nokia Siemens Networks
   P.O.Box 6
   Nokia Siemens Networks, FIN  02022
   Finland

   Email: miguel.garcia@nsn.com


   Marc Willekens
   Nokia Siemens Networks
   Belgium

   Email: marc.willekens@nsn.com


   Peili Xu
   Huawei Technologies
   Bantian
   Longgang, Shenzhen  518129
   China

   Email: xupeili@huawei.com


























Garcia-Martin, et al.   Expires November 30, 2007               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft  Multiple ptimes in SDP: problem statement       May 2007


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Garcia-Martin, et al.   Expires November 30, 2007               [Page 8]

