


Network Working Group                                         RFC Editor
Internet-Draft                                                   USC/ISI
Intended status: Informational                              May 20, 2008
Expires: November 21, 2008


              RFC Editor Proposal for Handling RFC Errata
                   draft-rfc-editor-errata-process-01

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on November 21, 2008.

Abstract

   This document describes a web-based process for handling the
   submission, verification, and posting of errata for the RFC Series.
   The main concepts behind this process are (1) distributing the
   responsibility for verification to the appropriate organization or
   person for each RFC stream, and (2) using a Web portal to automate
   the book-keeping for handling errata.









RFC Editor              Expires November 21, 2008               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft             RFC Errata Process                   May 2008


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.1.  Background on RFC Errata . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Proposed Errata Process Using the Web Portal . . . . . . . . .  4
     2.1.  Reporting Errata . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     2.2.  Initial Notification Message . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     2.3.  Verifying Errata . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     2.4.  Posting Errata . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     2.5.  Errata Announcements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   3.  Role of the RFC Editor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   4.  Transition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   5.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   6.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   7.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   Appendix A.  Possibilities for Posting Errata  . . . . . . . . . . 11
   Appendix B.  Errata Processing before the Web Portal . . . . . . . 12
   Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 14
































RFC Editor              Expires November 21, 2008               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft             RFC Errata Process                   May 2008


1.  Introduction

   This document describes a new set of the procedures and mechanisms
   for handling RFC errata, to improve efficiency and accountability of
   errata processing.  The main concepts are (1) distributing
   responsibility for errata verification to the appropriate body or
   person for each RFC stream, and (2) using a Web portal to automate
   the book-keeping task for verifying and posting errata.

   The errata process assumes the organization of RFC publication into
   four document streams [RFC4844]: (1) the IETF stream, which includes
   both working group and individual submissions, (2) the IAB stream,
   (3) the IRTF stream, and (4) the Independent Submission stream.  We
   propose that personnel representing each stream be responsible for
   verifying the errata reported for that stream's RFCs.  In particular,
   we propose that one or more stream-specific parties (SSPs) be
   designated with responsibility for verifying errata for each stream.

   At the organizational level, the SSPs might be:

   o  IESG for IETF documents

   o  IAB for IAB documents

   o  IRSG for IRTF documents

   o  RFC Editor/Editorial Board for Independent Submissions

   The IETF stream could be considered to be subdivided by area, so that
   each Area Director could be an SSP for RFCs originating in that area.
   The RFC publication process maintains the AD contact information for
   each RFC, so errata reports for RFCs in the IETF document stream
   could be sent to the appropriate ADs.

1.1.  Background on RFC Errata

   The RFC Editor began to collect and post RFC errata in 2000.  The
   idea was to discourage readers from repeatedly pointing out the same
   typos in published RFCs.  This evolved into the errata verification
   and posting process described in Appendix B, which was a manually
   operated, email-based task.

   Unfortunately, our understanding of the errata problem was wrong in
   several ways.  The number of errors reported turned out to be
   significantly greater than anticipated, and the process of vetting
   and posting required more human resources.

   Another issue with errata is that some of the reported errors are not



RFC Editor              Expires November 21, 2008               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft             RFC Errata Process                   May 2008


   simply editorial, but rather correct technical contents of RFCs.  A
   savvy implementer of the specification can often, but not always,
   figure out what was intended by the RFC as published, but technical
   errors should be announced somehow.  Furthermore, posting technical
   errata for Standards Track documents should always involve the IESG,
   as a matter of correct process.  Technical errata may require much
   review and discussion among the author(s), Area Directors, and other
   interested parties.  (See [HOW_TO_REPORT] for guidelines regarding
   editorial vs. technical classification.)

   We note that allowing technical errata is a slippery slope: there may
   be a temptation to use errata to "fix" protocol design errors, rather
   than publishing new RFCs that update the erroneous documents.  In
   general, an erratum is intended to report an error in a document,
   rather than an error in the design of the protocol or other entity
   defined in the document, but this distinction may be too imprecise to
   avoid hard choices.  For the IETF stream, these choices should be
   made by the IESG, and are discussed in their proposed guidelines on
   errata processing [IESG-Err-Proc].

   In summary, errata have become a much larger, more complex, and more
   important issue than they were originally.  This proposal attempts to
   address these problems.


2.  Proposed Errata Process Using the Web Portal

   To manage and automate the reporting, verifying, and posting of
   errata, the RFC Editor has transitioned to a Web application
   ("portal").  This Web portal allows for a more uniform reporting
   process, eases communication among the parties responsible for
   verification, and automates the posting of errata as soon as they are
   reported.

   There are four possible states for an erratum under this proposal:

   1.  Reported - The erratum has been reported but is unverified.

   2.  Verified - The erratum has been edited as necessary and verified.

   3.  Rejected - The erratum was redundant or incorrect and has been
       discarded.

   4.  Archived - The erratum is not a necessary update to the RFC.
       However, it should be considered in future revisions of the RFC.
       (Note that this state is not yet available; it is pending the
       IESG's statement regarding errata processing [IESG-Err-Proc].)




RFC Editor              Expires November 21, 2008               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft             RFC Errata Process                   May 2008


   Currently, Reported and Verified errata are posted (see Section 2.4
   for more details).

   For more information on the states and their definitions, and the
   guidelines by which the IESG intends to classify errata into the the
   above states, see [IESG-Err-Proc].

   The Web interface supports the following functions:

   1.  Retrieve -- display all posted errata for a specific RFC number
       or display a particular erratum by its errata ID number.

   2.  Report -- report a new erratum, as described below.  (See
       [HOW_TO_REPORT] for up-to-date instructions on reporting a new
       erratum.)

   3.  Edit/Verify/Reject -- used by an SSP to edit the contents of an
       erratum and change its state.

   The following sections describe the proposed process in more detail.

2.1.  Reporting Errata

   A member of the Internet community (the "reporter") navigates to the
   RFC errata page [ERRATA_PAGE] and enters the RFC number of the
   document containing the error.  All earlier errata for that RFC are
   displayed, and the reporter is asked to check that the erratum does
   not already appear in the full list of errata for any given RFC.
   This should help prevent multiple reports of the same error.

   The user then reports the erratum using a Web form to create a report
   record in the RFC errata database.  The report is composed of
   information provided by the reporter, and is supplemented by data
   drawn from the primary RFC Editor database.  The erratum report
   record includes the following fields:

   This information is requested from the reporter:

             RFC #
             Type [editorial, technical]
             Reporter name
             Reporter email address
                (Note that the address is provided for communication
                purposes with the relevant SSPs and authors, but it is
                not displayed in the online errata report.)
             Section #
             Original text
             Corrected text



RFC Editor              Expires November 21, 2008               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft             RFC Errata Process                   May 2008


             Notes

   The above information is supplemented by information pulled from the
   database:

             Errata ID number
             RFC title and associated draft string (if available)
             Publication Date
             Author(s)
             Category ("status") of RFC
             Source (Working Group Name, IAB, IRTF, or INDEPENDENT)
             Area (for IETF stream)
             Stream (IETF, IAB, IRTF, or INDEPENDENT)
             Verifying Party (SSP Identity)
             URL to the distinct erratum report

   Generally, we want the reporter to enter a new erratum using the
   Original and Corrected Text fields, as this allows for easier
   verification.  The free-text Notes field can be used for providing
   rationale or for describing those errata that cannot easily be put
   into the Original/Corrected format.

   The Report page allows a set number of reports (i.e., 4) for the same
   RFC to be submitted at the same time, using the Original/Corrected
   form.  By having the user separate the errata entries, the SSP should
   have an easier time verifying each entry.  We also hope that this
   encourages users to submit only the most valuable errata.

   The reporter is asked to make a judgment on the errata type --
   technical vs. editorial.  If the reporter has both editorial and
   technical errors in the same RFC, the two classes of errata must be
   entered as separate reports.  This initial classification is useful
   to the SSP; for example, it might allow technical errata to be
   processed with higher priority than editorial errata, and it allows
   the RFC Editor to monitor editorial errata to note frequent editorial
   errors that could possibly lead to improvements in the editorial
   process.

   We expect that the reporter will usually make the right technical/
   editorial classification, with the aid of published guidelines (see
   [HOW_TO_REPORT]).  However, in case of misclassification by the
   reporter, the SSP can fix it when logged in as a verifier.

2.2.  Initial Notification Message

   Submitting the report triggers an email notification message to the
   appropriate SSP, the RFC author(s), and the RFC Editor.  Including
   them all as addressees in one message facilitates cooperation in



RFC Editor              Expires November 21, 2008               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft             RFC Errata Process                   May 2008


   verifying the error.

   The message includes the information listed in Section 2.1.  The SSP
   could forward the notification email further; for example, an Area
   Director might forward it to the chair of the responsible working
   group, if it still exists.

   In the case of early RFCs for which the RFC Editor does not have
   associated stream or area information, the reports will be sent to
   the IESG (as a whole) and the authors.

   Author email addresses are often out of date.  In these cases, the
   relevant SSPs have the option of seeking current author contact
   information or relying on other individuals with knowledge of the
   subject matter to help determine the validity of the errata.

2.3.  Verifying Errata

   The initial notification message starts the verification process.
   The SSP and the authors are expected to determine the validity of the
   reported erratum, by whatever procedure the SSP or the stream owner
   determines.  The RFC Editor does not intend to (normally) track the
   verification process.  The SSP, not the author(s) or the RFC Editor,
   has final responsibility for verifying or rejecting each report.
   This helps to avoid a great deal of complexity and confusion.

   Each SSP has a login account on the errata portal to edit errata
   records as necessary.  The SSP identity is added to the record and
   the individual is able to edit, verify, or reject each erratum.

   The Notes field allows users to submit information in any fashion
   they like, so there is a possibility of multiple errors being
   reported in this field.  The SSP is able to edit the record and split
   it into multiple records to maintain one record per erratum, as
   necessary.

   Based on experience, we know that some errata reports will require
   significant email discussion between the reporter and the author(s)
   and/or SSPs (in particular, the IESG) before the final decision on a
   record can be made.  The final outcome will be captured in the errata
   entry, and any controversy or explanatory material can be recorded in
   the Notes field.

2.4.  Posting Errata

   As soon as an erratum is submitted, it is available online, i.e., it
   is posted as described below.  The erratum entry is marked Reported
   until its state is updated by verifiers as described above.



RFC Editor              Expires November 21, 2008               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft             RFC Errata Process                   May 2008


   In this document, posting an erratum means that it is:

   1.  Available from the RFC errata page:
       http://www.rfc-editor.org/errata.php.

   2.  Linked to from the results of the RFC search engine:
       http://www.rfc-editor.org/rfcsearch.html.

   3.  Linked to from some HTML versions of the RFC.  For example, see
       http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2119.

   The state of errata determines whether they are posted.  Currently,
   Reported and Verified errata are posted, and Rejected errata are not
   posted.  However, this can be altered to improve the errata display
   for readers and implementers.  For example, Rejected and Archived
   errata could be hidden behind a link (as has been suggested).

   The order in which errata are displayed for a single RFC (e.g.,
   Verified Technical, Reported Technical, Verified Editorial, Reported
   Editorial) also can be altered to improve the usability.

   It sometimes happens that there are errata for errata, i.e., earlier
   postings must be altered.  In this case, the RFC Editor can do the
   update as requested by an SSP or can grant an SSP temporary write
   access to the record to be updated.

   There are other possibilities for errata posting that should be
   considered by the community; see Appendix A.

2.5.  Errata Announcements

   If the SSP feels the errata is important enough, they might want to
   submit a note to the ietf-announce and rfc-dist list.  However, we do
   not believe it is necessary to inundate the ietf-announce list with
   mail each time an errata is verified, rejected, or edited.


3.  Role of the RFC Editor

   The role of the RFC Editor in errata processing is to:

   1.  Operate the Web portal.

   2.  Maintain the errata database.

   3.  Make changes in previously posted errata at the request of the
       corresponding SSP, or give the SSP temporary write access to the
       record.



RFC Editor              Expires November 21, 2008               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft             RFC Errata Process                   May 2008


   4.  Act as SSP for Independent Submissions.

   5.  Send periodic nudge messages to SSPs for errata that are in the
       Reported state.

   6.  Track SSP and community requests for various features that will
       make the job of reporting and verifying errata more efficient.


4.  Transition

   Errata from the original errata page have been made available from
   the new Web portal.  Generally, they are marked Verified without
   listing the name of the verifier, as this information was not
   associated with the errata records until November 2007.

   Errata that were posted in the pending file (as described in
   Appendix B) have been made available from the Web portal and are
   marked as Reported or Verified, as appropriate.  Lists of unverified
   reports have been sent to the appropriate SSPs for review and
   verification.


5.  Security Considerations

   It is necessary to have access control for errata reports.  A
   logged-in SSP is able to edit, verify, or reject any errata report on
   an RFC that is the product of their stream.  However, we propose that
   once the SSP has submitted an erratum's final state (Verified or
   Rejected) and the record entry has been committed to the errata
   database, the SSP will lose write access to it.  This is a safety
   feature to prevent inadvertent or malicious changes to the database,
   even if the passwords for some SSP logins may become fairly widely
   known.  However, the RFC Editor will always have write access to
   posted entries and can make later changes if necessary.

   The RFC Editor has chosen to use HTTPS as a reasonably secure login
   mechanism.  Also, the RFC Editor has obtained a signed certificate
   from a CA for the errata verification pages, so that SSPs have
   confidence that they are logging into the RFC Editor site.


6.  IANA Considerations

   There are no IANA considerations for this document.






RFC Editor              Expires November 21, 2008               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft             RFC Errata Process                   May 2008


7.  Informative References

   [ERRATA_PAGE]    RFC Editor, "RFC Errata", February 2008,
                    <http://www.rfc-editor.org/errata.php>.

   [HOW_TO_REPORT]  RFC Editor, "How to Report Errata", February 2008,
                    <http://www.rfc-editor.org/how_to_report.html>.

   [IESG-Err-Proc]  "Proposed IESG Statement Regarding RFC Errata for
                    IETF Stream RFCs", Work in Progress, April 2008.

   [RFC4844]        Daigle, L. and Internet Architecture Board, "The RFC
                    Series and RFC Editor", RFC 4844, July 2007.






































RFC Editor              Expires November 21, 2008              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft             RFC Errata Process                   May 2008


Appendix A.  Possibilities for Posting Errata

   Choosing any of these possibilities for posting errata should be
   decided by the IETF community and its governing bodies.

   1.  Brian Carpenter has suggested an approach similar to that used by
       W3C: Add a URL to every published RFC that points to its errata
       (if any).

         For W3C examples, see:

            http://www.w3.org/TR/2004/REC-xmlschema-2-20041028/ and

            http://www.w3.org/TR/2006/REC-xml-names-20060816

         They include the text:

            "Please refer to the <errata> for this document, which may
             include some normative corrections."

         where <errata> is a hyperlink to the list of all errata or a
         page that says:

            "There are no errata to this document yet."

       Similarly, a URL could be added to all (future) RFCs pointing to
       where the relevant errata are posted.

   2.  Another possibility would be to add new errata files to the RFC
       repository, e.g., with names of the form: rfcnnnn.err.txt.  Such
       a file would contain all the errata for the corresponding RFC.

   3.  As mentioned in Section 2.4, there are HTML versions of RFCs with
       errata links; these are currently hosted by tools.ietf.org, but
       they could be made available on the RFC Editor Web site as well.
















RFC Editor              Expires November 21, 2008              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft             RFC Errata Process                   May 2008


Appendix B.  Errata Processing before the Web Portal

   The following is a summary of the RFC Editor errata verification and
   posting process prior to the deployment of the Web portal in November
   2007.  The RFC Editor used to:

   o  Review email and relevant RFCs to ensure that the reported errata
      actually appeared in the RFCs as available from
      http://www.rfc-editor.org/.  This does not mean that the errata
      were reviewed and deemed correct, only that the reported erronous
      text appears in the RFC (i.e., without judgment about the reports
      correctness).

   o  Disentangle multiple errors reported in one message.

   o  Check that each error has not already been posted.

   o  Attempt to determine whether the errata are editorial or
      technical.

   o  Forward each erratum report to the author(s) of the published RFC.

   o  Track bounce messages (contact information for authors is often
      out of date) and try to find current contact information.

   o  Forward the message to the relevant ADs if we were unable to find
      current author contact information.

   o  Track follow-up email.

   o  Figure out how to post when reporters/authors do not submit errata
      in the original/new format.  This is often a problem when
      reporters submit email claiming an error, but do not offer
      corrective text.

   o  Post verified errata and discard rejected errata.

   There were three possible states for processing an erratum:

   1.  Reported - the erratum has been reported but is unverified.

   2.  Verified - the erratum has been edited as necessary and verified.

   3.  Rejected - the erratum was redundant or incorrect and has been
       discarded.

   Generally speaking, an erratum was posted when it was verified.
   (Note that "posted" here means available online from the original RFC



RFC Editor              Expires November 21, 2008              [Page 12]

Internet-Draft             RFC Errata Process                   May 2008


   errata page; the list of posting locations in Section 2.4 includes
   those developed after 2000.)  The exceptions were the "pending
   errata", whose processing was delayed as described below.

   During 2006, the RFC Editor was understaffed for the growing load of
   RFCs to be published (see
   http://www.rfc-editor.org/num_rfc_year.html).  To catch up, the RFC
   Editor suspended all activities not directly related to RFC
   publication.  As a result, more than a year's worth of errata reports
   had not been verified or posted.  As resources allowed, the RFC
   Editor provided the following interim measures:

   1.  Made available, from the RFC Editor Web site, a mailbox text file
       (mbox format) of all errata-related email (ftp://
       ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/pending-errata/pending-errata.msgs).

   2.  For those few errata that did get added to the errata database,
       marked them UNVERIFIED.


Author's Address

   RFC Editor
   USC/ISI
   4676 Admiralty Way
   Marina del Rey, CA  90292
   USA

   Email: rfc-editor@rfc-editor.org






















RFC Editor              Expires November 21, 2008              [Page 13]

Internet-Draft             RFC Errata Process                   May 2008


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.











RFC Editor              Expires November 21, 2008              [Page 14]


