



Internet Engineering Task Force                                 S. Jiang
Internet-Draft                              Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd
Intended status: Informational                                  R. Zhang
Expires: November 10, 2014                                 China Telecom
                                                             May 9, 2014


               COllaborative NETwork (CONET) Gap Analysis
               draft-jiang-intarea-conet-gap-analysis-00

Abstract

   In order to efficiently distinguish ICPs' traffic, a new network
   operation model - COllaborative NETwork is proposed.  The traffic
   recognization is based on traffic of ICPs' products actively carries
   collaborative identifiers that both ISPs and ICPs reach consensus in
   a coordination way.  This document analyzes the tecnical gap between
   the current network functions and required network capability to
   support COllaborative NETwork.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on November 10, 2014.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2014 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must



Jiang & Zhang           Expires November 10, 2014               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft     Collaborative Network Gap Analysis           May 2014


   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

   This document may contain material from IETF Documents or IETF
   Contributions published or made publicly available before November
   10, 2008.  The person(s) controlling the copyright in some of this
   material may not have granted the IETF Trust the right to allow
   modifications of such material outside the IETF Standards Process.
   Without obtaining an adequate license from the person(s) controlling
   the copyright in such materials, this document may not be modified
   outside the IETF Standards Process, and derivative works of it may
   not be created outside the IETF Standards Process, except to format
   it for publication as an RFC or to translate it into languages other
   than English.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Overview of Technical Consideratins . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  Traffic Identifiers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   4.  Collaboration between ICPs and ISPs . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   5.  Identifying Traffics between End Users and Network  . . . . .   7
   6.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   7.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   8.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   9.  Change log [RFC Editor: Please remove]  . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   10. References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     10.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     10.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10

1.  Introduction

   While the Internet traffic is continually growing, more and more
   Internet Content Providers (ICPs) realize the essentiality and
   advantages to cooperate with Internet Service Providers (ISPs).  In
   order to serve their users better, ICPs raise an emerging requirement
   that the traffic of their products needs to be treated differently,
   both in traffic handling process and traffic accounting process.
   [I-D.fan-intarea-conet-ps-uc] has described such requirement and use
   cases in details.

   The biggest technical challenge that network operators have to face
   is to distinguish the traffic in a finer granularity.  Nowadays, DPI
   (Deep Packet Inspection) or DFI (Deep Flow Inspection) devices have
   been widely used in identifying application information of the
   traffic flows.  However, they are expensive for both operational cost



Jiang & Zhang           Expires November 10, 2014               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft     Collaborative Network Gap Analysis           May 2014


   and time consumption.  They are not be able to interact with real-
   time network operations.  A better approach would be traffic of ICPs'
   products carries traffic identifiers that the network entities of
   ISPs can easily recognise.  The traffic identifers must be consistent
   in collaboration between ISPs and ICPs.  This approach is called
   COllaborative NETwork (CONET) in this document.

   This document analyzes the technical gap between the current network
   functions and required network capability to support CONET.

2.  Overview of Technical Consideratins

   Overall, there are three technical aspects that need to be considered
   in CONET, listed below.  This section gives analysis to each aspects.

   o  A traffic identifier.

   o  An ICP notify/negotiate traffic identifiers and the desired
      processing way regarding to both traffic handling and traffic
      accounting with an ISP.  The policies of traffic processing need
      to be propagated and network entities need to be configured
      correspondently within an ISP network.

   o  An end user host or application notify/negotiate their traffic
      identifiers to/with network.

   Note: the application-level communication between ICP servers and
   their client applications on end user hosts, including dynamically
   deciding the traffic identifier that end user hosts may embed in
   packets, is out of scope.  This document focuses on the network and
   transport layers only.

3.  Traffic Identifiers

   The precondition that a traffic flow can be differentiately handling
   is that it can recognized by the network entities.  In this document,
   the character in data packet that is used to distinguish a traffic
   flow or a type/category of traffic flow is called traffic identifier.
   There are a few requirements for traffic identifiers:

   o  Traffic identifiers must be stable, at least for a lifetime of
      flow.

   o  Traffic identifiers should be easy to be inspectd by network
      entities.

   o  Traffic identifiers should accurately distinguish traffic flow or
      a type/category of traffic flow.



Jiang & Zhang           Expires November 10, 2014               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft     Collaborative Network Gap Analysis           May 2014


   o  Traffic identifiers must be trustable and protected against any
      tampers occuring during transportation.

   o  Some traffic identifiers may be convergencable in order to reduce
      the management complexity on stateful records/policies.

   o  Some traffic identifiers may dynamically decide in the run time.
      Its decision may involve dynamic involve ISPs, ICPs and end user
      devices.

   o  Some traffic identifiers may not be set by the traffic initiators.
      A intermediate node, for example a CPE or an igress router, may
      remark or set new traffic identifier based on its traffic
      recognition.

   o  Some traffic identifiers may be meaningful cross administrative
      boundaries.

   [I-D.fan-intarea-conet-ps-uc] analyzes two current used traffic
   identifiers: application-level characteristic information used by DPI
   and IP addresses of ICP servers.  Each of them has a few issues,
   summaried as below:

   o  Application-level characteristic information used by DPI.
      Accuracy of application identification cannot be guaranteed.  The
      ability highly depends on vendors.  The computing resource
      consumption is very high.  Furthermore, the usage of TLS [RFC5246]
      and HTTPS [RFC2818] is increasing the difficulties of DPI.

   o  IP addresses of ICP servers.  More granular traffic handling
      cannot be satisfied because a single server may hold multiple
      services that need to be distinguished.  Cache/CDN uses different
      IP addresses, which may be also shared with other ICPs.

   There are also other traffic identifiers or components that may
   compose traffic identifiers:

   o  IP addresses of end user devices.  They are nature identifers that
      can distinguish the communication node.  However, one end user
      node would have many traffics.  CONET requires to recognite only
      these traffics associated with certain ICPs.  So, only IP
      addresses of end user devices are not suffient.  Furthermore, many
      end user devices may be assigned private IPv4 addresses.  These
      addresses are replaced by pulic IPv4 addresses after Network
      Address Translator (NAT, [RFC3022]).

   o  Port numbers.  They are useful to distinguish flows/services from
      the same node.  However, it cannot be used to identify network



Jiang & Zhang           Expires November 10, 2014               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft     Collaborative Network Gap Analysis           May 2014


      traffics independently.  It must be used together with identifiers
      that distinguish nodes.

   o  Flow labels [RFC6437].  It is only available in IPv6 traffic.  It
      is changed for every flow.  Like port numbers, flow labels cannot
      be used to identify network traffics independently.  Normally, it
      is used as triple-tuple with source and destination address.
      Because it is encoded in the IPv6 fixed header, it is easier to
      recognite than port numbers.  However, another disadvantage of
      flow label is that it is not protected, particularly, there is no
      mechanism to validate its integrity.

   o  DiffServ Field (Differentiated Services Field, [RFC2474]).  It was
      defined to identify the differentiated services that network
      should apply on the packets.  It is the explicit result for
      network entities to apply different handling policies accordingly.
      However, the precondition DiffServ field can be used is that there
      is strong trust relatioship between the nodes that set DiffServ
      Field and network entities.

   Each of the abovementioned traffic identifiers has there own suitable
   scenarios and limitations.  New traffic identifiers may be difined in
   the future.

   For many scenarios, the combination of abovementioned traffic
   identifiers may be used.  The 5-tuple (source IP address, destination
   IP address, source port number, destination port number, IP protocol
   number) is the most common used traffic identifier to identify a flow
   accurately in IP layer.  However, 5-tuple itself is not tighty
   assicated with upper-layer applications or contents.  There are
   mapping gaps to use 5-tuple to identify traffics relevant to a
   certain ICP or its certain services.  Another issue of 5-tuple is it
   is not convergencable.  Managing numerous 5-tuple may be a big burden
   for ISPs.  Furthermore, the existing of NATs change the 5-tuple of
   traffic in the way.  Consequently, the traffic identifiers assoicated
   with IPv4 addresses have to very complicated management issues.

4.  Collaboration between ICPs and ISPs

   Firstly, an ICP need to reach consistent with an ISP on traffic
   identifiers, which network would recognite the ICP traffic
   accordingly.

   Then, the ICP notify the specific traffic identifiers, which may have
   multiple categories, and the desired policies associated with each
   traffic categories, to the ISP.  Then the ISP network can apply these
   policies when actual traffics happen.




Jiang & Zhang           Expires November 10, 2014               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft     Collaborative Network Gap Analysis           May 2014


   The notification process between ICPs and ISPs should be dynamical
   through a protocol/interface.  In 3GPP mobile network, Rx interface
   [Rx-3GPP] has been defined to allow interaction between ICPs and ISPs
   using Diameter [RFC6733], and AF-Application-identifier AVP has also
   been defined to indicate the particular service that the AF
   (Application Function) service session belongs to.  This information
   may be used by the PCRF (Policy and Charging Rule Function) to
   differentiate QoS for different application services.

   However, currently few ICPs have support Diameter protocol.
   Considering ICP is more familiar with XML based protocol, 3GPP is
   working on the solutions for an XML based protocol (e.g. SOAP,
   Restful HTTP, etc.) over Rx interface between the AF and the PCRF
   [XML_AF_PCRF].

   With in an ISP network, Traffic management policy must be propagated
   to network entities that actually handle traffics.  In 3GPP mobile
   network, Gx interface [Gx-3GPP] has been defined to enable PCRF
   autonomically configures matching rules regarding to a certain
   traffic on GGSN/P-GW.

   BroadBand Forum has also defined the Broadband Policy Control
   Framework [BPCF] that meets the similar function of Rx and Gx
   interfaces in the fixed broadband networks.

   This model has two limitations as below:

   1.  Some ICPs may have one server address, but with different sub-
       content behind that server address.  Because current PCRF only
       focus on 5-tuple traffic description, it may be difficult to
       support fine-grained traffic identification.

   2.  Because of lacking involvement from end user devices/
       applications, user clients will be difficult to be identified if
       they are behind NAT (they have NATed IPv4 addresses).  Even by
       correlating the authentication process which could send user
       information to PCRF, it will still make the whole process very
       complicated.

   Another major issue is that this model is ISP-orientied.  ICP
   traffics commonly cross multiple ISP networks.  Hence, an ICP may
   have to work with multiple ISPs independently.  The traffic handling
   across different administration domain may be different, giving the
   possibility that different ISPs may use different traffic identifiers
   and different policies.  When there was a traffic issue, such as high
   latency or packet lost, it may be a challenge for the ICP to find out
   which network has problem.




Jiang & Zhang           Expires November 10, 2014               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft     Collaborative Network Gap Analysis           May 2014


5.  Identifying Traffics between End Users and Network

   Recognition of the traffic from ICP servers to end users may not be
   very difficult giving the natural convergency.  However, when an end
   user host or application initiates traffic towards ICP contents,
   particularly some contents may be obtained cache/CDN deployed in the
   network, it is needed for the end user host or application actively
   notifiying its traffic to the network.

   The traffic identifiers used by end user host or application:

   o  may be authorised and assigned by the ICPs after application-level
      authentication or out-of-band authentication.  Then, these traffic
      identifiers would be carried by packets.

   o  may be dynamically decided by the negotiation between the end user
      host or application and the network.  Out-of-band controlling
      policies, including network authentication and authorization, may
      also be notified/negotiated together.

   o  may just describe the traffic characters, and leave the network to
      recognite them, then mapped into other traffic identifiers that
      meaningful and explicit within the network.

   There are many exisiting protocols that may be extended to realize
   the out-of-band controlling mechanism.  However, these exisiting
   protocols was designed to serve their own purposes and scenarios.
   Defining a new dedicated protocol may also be an opinion.

   o  Resource ReSerVation Protocol (RSVP, [RFC2205]) is a resource
      reservation setup protocol.  However, so far, that is mainly used
      among network entities.  Next Steps in Signaling (NSIS, [RFC4080])
      provides duplicated function as RSVP.  It is not widely deployed.

   o  Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol ([RFC2131], [RFC3315]) was
      designed to provide information, including assigning host IP
      address, from network to hosts.  It is a one-way information
      provisioning protocol.  It does not provide authentication and
      information protection function.

   o  Radius [RFC2865] and Diameter [RFC6733] provides an
      Authentication, Authorization and Accounting for network access.

   Currently, there is no many in-band mechanisms, in which traffic
   identifier that the end user devices/applications set up is carried
   within packets.  In-band mechanisms is able to traverse
   administration domains, and it is possible the traffic gets identical
   handling.  The precondition of in-band mechanisms is that the



Jiang & Zhang           Expires November 10, 2014               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft     Collaborative Network Gap Analysis           May 2014


   integrity of traffic identifiers can be validated by network
   entities.

6.  Security Considerations

   A trust relationship should be established among end users, ICPs and
   ISPs.  The authentication and authorization for end user access
   should be as easy as possible.  OAUTH protocol [RFC6749] & OpenID
   [OpenID] may be adopted.

   Traffic identifiers with packets should be protocted against any
   tampers occuring during transportation.

   The protocol that used to notify/negotiate their traffic identifiers
   to/with network should be protected.

7.  IANA Considerations

   This document includes no request to IANA.

8.  Acknowledgements

   Valuable comments were received from Peng Fan, Farooq Bari, Weihua
   Qiao and Hui Deng.

   This document was produced using the xml2rfc tool [RFC2629].

9.  Change log [RFC Editor: Please remove]

   draft-jiang-intarea-conet-gap-analysis-00: original version,
   2014-05-09.

10.  References

10.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2131]  Droms, R., "Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol", RFC
              2131, March 1997.

   [RFC2205]  Braden, B., Zhang, L., Berson, S., Herzog, S., and S.
              Jamin, "Resource ReSerVation Protocol (RSVP) -- Version 1
              Functional Specification", RFC 2205, September 1997.

   [RFC2474]  Nichols, K., Blake, S., Baker, F., and D. Black,
              "Definition of the Differentiated Services Field (DS
              Field) in the IPv4 and IPv6 Headers", RFC 2474, December
              1998.




Jiang & Zhang           Expires November 10, 2014               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft     Collaborative Network Gap Analysis           May 2014


   [RFC2865]  Rigney, C., Willens, S., Rubens, A., and W. Simpson,
              "Remote Authentication Dial In User Service (RADIUS)", RFC
              2865, June 2000.

   [RFC3022]  Srisuresh, P. and K. Egevang, "Traditional IP Network
              Address Translator (Traditional NAT)", RFC 3022, January
              2001.

   [RFC3315]  Droms, R., Bound, J., Volz, B., Lemon, T., Perkins, C.,
              and M. Carney, "Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol for
              IPv6 (DHCPv6)", RFC 3315, July 2003.

   [RFC4080]  Hancock, R., Karagiannis, G., Loughney, J., and S. Van den
              Bosch, "Next Steps in Signaling (NSIS): Framework", RFC
              4080, June 2005.

   [RFC5246]  Dierks, T. and E. Rescorla, "The Transport Layer Security
              (TLS) Protocol Version 1.2", RFC 5246, August 2008.

   [RFC6437]  Amante, S., Carpenter, B., Jiang, S., and J. Rajahalme,
              "IPv6 Flow Label Specification", RFC 6437, November 2011.

   [RFC6733]  Fajardo, V., Arkko, J., Loughney, J., and G. Zorn,
              "Diameter Base Protocol", RFC 6733, October 2012.

   [RFC6749]  Hardt, D., "The OAuth 2.0 Authorization Framework", RFC
              6749, October 2012.

10.2.  Informative References

   [BPCF]     BroadBand Forum Technical Report 134, "Broadband Policy
              Control Framework", July 2012.

   [Gx-3GPP]  3GPP Work Item 13029, "Gx reference point for Policy and
              Charging Control", July 2008.

   [I-D.fan-intarea-conet-ps-uc]
              Fan, P. and H. Deng, "CONET (Collaborative Network)
              Problem Statement and Use Cases", draft-fan-intarea-conet-
              ps-uc-00 (work in progress), March 2014.

   [OpenID]   OpenID Foundation, "OpenID Authentication 2.0 - Final",
              December 2007, <http://specs.openid.net/auth/2.0>.

   [RFC2629]  Rose, M., "Writing I-Ds and RFCs using XML", RFC 2629,
              June 1999.

   [RFC2818]  Rescorla, E., "HTTP Over TLS", RFC 2818, May 2000.



Jiang & Zhang           Expires November 10, 2014               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft     Collaborative Network Gap Analysis           May 2014


   [Rx-3GPP]  3GPP Technical Specification 29.214, "Policy and charging
              control over Rx reference point", July 2008.

   [XML_AF_PCRF]
              3GPP Technical Report 29.817, "Study on eXtensible Markup
              Language (XML) based access of the Application Function
              (AF) to the Policy and Charging Rules Function (PCRF)",
              March 2014.

Authors' Addresses

   Sheng Jiang
   Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd
   Q14, Huawei Campus, No.156 Beiqing Road
   Hai-Dian District, Beijing, 100095
   P.R. China

   Email: jiangsheng@huawei.com


   Rong Zhang
   China Telecom
   No.109 Zhongshandadao avenue
   Guangzhou  510630
   China

   Email: zhangr@gsta.com
























Jiang & Zhang           Expires November 10, 2014              [Page 10]
