



pre-workgroup                                                  J. Fenton
Internet-Draft                                       Cisco Systems, Inc.
Expires:  April 24, 2006                                October 21, 2005


    Analysis of Threats Motivating DomainKeys Identified Mail (DKIM)
                      draft-fenton-dkim-threats-01

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 24, 2006.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).

Abstract

   This document provides an analysis of some threats against Internet
   mail that are intended to be addressed by signature-based mail
   authentication, in particular DomainKeys Identified Mail.  It
   discusses the nature and location of the bad actors, what their
   capabilities are, and what they intend to accomplish via their
   attacks.






Fenton                   Expires April 24, 2006                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft            DKIM Threat Analysis              October 2005


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  The Bad Actors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3.  Capabilities of the Bad Actors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     3.1.  General capabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     3.2.  Advanced capabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   4.  Location of the Bad Actors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     4.1.  Externally-located Bad Actors  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     4.2.  Within Claimed Originator's Administrative Unit  . . . . .  6
     4.3.  Within Recipient's Administrative Unit . . . . . . . . . .  6
   5.  Representative Bad Acts  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     5.1.  Use of Arbitrary Identities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     5.2.  Use of Specific Identities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
       5.2.1.  Exploitation of Social Relationships . . . . . . . . .  8
       5.2.2.  Identity-Related Fraud . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
       5.2.3.  Reputation Attacks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   6.  Attacks on Message Signing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     6.1.  Unsigned Messages  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     6.2.  Use of Throw-Away Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     6.3.  Message Replay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     6.4.  Control of Key Management  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   7.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   8.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   9.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   Appendix A.  Glossary  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   Appendix B.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   Appendix C.  Edit History  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 14





















Fenton                   Expires April 24, 2006                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft            DKIM Threat Analysis              October 2005


1.  Introduction

   DomainKeys Identified Mail (DKIM) [I-D.allman-dkim-base] defines a
   simple, low cost, and effective mechanism by which email messages can
   be cryptographically signed, permitting a signing domain to claim
   responsibility for the use of a given email address.  Message
   recipients can verify the signature by querying the signer's domain
   directly to retrieve the appropriate public key, and thereby confirm
   that the message was attested to by a party in possession of the
   private key for the signing domain.

   Once the attesting party or parties have been established, the
   recipient may evaluate the message in the context of additional
   information such as locally-maintained whitelists, shared reputation
   services, and/or third-party accreditation.  The description of these
   mechanisms is outside the scope of this effort.  By applying a
   signature, a good player will be able to associate a positive
   reputation with the message, in hopes that it will receive
   preferential treatment by the recipient.

   This effort is not intended to address threats associated with
   message confidentiality nor does it intend to provide a long-term
   archival signature.


2.  The Bad Actors

   The problem space being addressed by DKIM is characterized by a wide
   range of attackers in terms of motivation, sophistication, and
   capabilities.

   At the low end of the spectrum are bad actors who may simply send
   email, perhaps using one of many commercially available tools, which
   the recipient does not want to receive.  These tools may or may not
   falsify the origin address of messages, and may, in the future, be
   capable of generating message signatures as well.

   At the next tier are what would be considered "professional" senders
   of unwanted email.  These attackers would deploy specific
   infrastructure, including Mail Transfer Agents (MTAs), registered
   domains and possibly networks of compromised computers ("zombies") to
   send messages, and in some cases to harvest addresses to which to
   send.  These senders often operate as commercial enterprises and send
   messages on behalf of third parties.

   The most sophisticated and financially-motivated senders of messages
   are those who stand to receive substantial financial benefit, such as
   from an email-based fraud scheme.  These attackers can be expected to



Fenton                   Expires April 24, 2006                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft            DKIM Threat Analysis              October 2005


   employ all of the above mechanisms and in addition attacks on
   Internet infrastructure itself, such as DNS cache-poisoning attacks
   and IP routing attacks via compromised network routing elements.


3.  Capabilities of the Bad Actors

3.1.  General capabilities

   In general, the bad actors described above should be expected to have
   access to the following:

   1.  An extensive corpus of messages from domains they might wish to
       impersonate

   2.  Knowledge of the business aims and model for domains they might
       wish to impersonate

   3.  Access to public key and associated authorization records
       published by the domain

   and the ability to do at least some of the following:

   1.  Submit messages to MTAs at multiple locations in the Internet

   2.  Construct arbitrary message headers, including those claiming to
       be mailing lists, resenders, and other mail agents

   3.  Sign messages on behalf of potentially-untraceable domains under
       their control

   4.  Generate substantial numbers of either unsigned or apparently-
       signed messages which might be used to attempt a denial of
       service attack

   5.  Resend messages which may have been previously signed by the
       domain

   6.  Transmit messages using any envelope information desired

3.2.  Advanced capabilities

   As noted above, certain classes of bad actors may have substantial
   financial motivation for their activities, and therefore should be
   expected to have more capabilities at their disposal.  These include:

   1.  Manipulation of IP routing.  This could be used to submit
       messages from specific IP addresses or difficult-to-trace



Fenton                   Expires April 24, 2006                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft            DKIM Threat Analysis              October 2005


       addresses, or to cause diversion of messages to a specific
       domain.

   2.  Limited influence over portions of DNS using mechanisms such as
       cache poisoning.  This might be used to influence message
       routing, or to cause falsification of DNS-based key or policy
       advertisements.

   3.  Access to significant computing resources, perhaps through the
       conscription of worm-infected "zombie" computers.  This could
       allow the bad actor to perform various types of brute-force
       attacks.

   4.  Ability to "wiretap" some existing traffic, perhaps from a
       wireless network.

   Either of the first two of these mechanisms could be used to allow
   the bad actor to function as a man-in-the-middle between sender and
   recipient, if that attack is useful.


4.  Location of the Bad Actors

   In the following discussion, the term "administrative unit", taken
   from [I-D.crocker-email-arch], is used to refer to a portion of the
   email path that is under common administration.  The originator and
   recipient typically develop trust relationships with the
   administrative units that send and receive their email, respectively,
   to perform the signing and verification of their messages.

   Bad actors or their proxies can be located anywhere in the Internet.
   Bad actors within the administrative unit of the claimed originator
   and/or recipient domain have capabilities beyond those elsewhere, as
   described in the below sections.  Bad actors can also collude by
   acting in multiple locations simultaneously (a "distributed bad
   actor").

4.1.  Externally-located Bad Actors

   DKIM focuses primarily on bad actors located outside of the
   administrative units of the claimed originator and the recipient.
   These administrative units frequently correspond to the protected
   portions of the network adjacent to the originator and recipient.  It
   is in this area that the trust relationships required for
   authenticated message submission do not exist and do not scale
   adequately to be practical.  Conversely, within these administrative
   units, there are other mechanisms such as authenticated message
   submission that are wasier to deploy and more likely to be used than



Fenton                   Expires April 24, 2006                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft            DKIM Threat Analysis              October 2005


   DKIM.

   External bad actors are usually attempting to exploit the "any to
   any" nature of email which motivates most recipient MTAs to accept
   messages from anywhere for delivery to their local domain.  They may
   generate messages without signatures, with incorrect signatures, or
   with correct signatures from domains with little traceability.  They
   may also pose as mailing lists, greeting cards, or other agents which
   legitimately send or re-send messages on behalf of others.

4.2.  Within Claimed Originator's Administrative Unit

   Bad actors in the form of rogue or unauthorized users or malware-
   infected computers can exist within the administrative unit
   corresponding to a message's origin address.  Since the submission of
   messages in this area generally occurs prior to the application of a
   message signature, DKIM is not directly effective against these bad
   actors.  Defense against these bad actors is dependent upon other
   means, such as proper use of firewalls, and mail submission agents
   that are configured to authenticate the sender.

   In the special case where the administrative unit is non-contiguous
   (e.g., a company that communicates between branches over the external
   Internet), DKIM signatures can be used to distinguish between
   legitimate externally-originated messages and attempts to spoof
   addresses in the local domain.

4.3.  Within Recipient's Administrative Unit

   Bad actors may also exist within the administrative unit of the
   message recipient.  These bad actors may attempt to exploit the trust
   relationships which exist within the unit.  Since messages will
   typically only have undergone DKIM verification at the administrative
   unit boundary, DKIM is not effective against messages submitted in
   this area.

   For example, the bad actor may attempt to apply a header such as
   Authentication-Results [I-D.kucherawy-sender-auth-header] which would
   normally be added (and spoofing of which would be detected) at the
   boundary of the administrative unit.  This could be used to falsely
   indicate that the message was authenticated successfully.

   As in the originator case, these bad actors are best dealt with by
   controlling the submission of messages within the administrative
   unit.  Depending on the characteristics of the administrative unit,
   cryptographic methods may or may not be needed to accomplish this.





Fenton                   Expires April 24, 2006                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft            DKIM Threat Analysis              October 2005


5.  Representative Bad Acts

   One of the most fundamental bad acts being attempted is the delivery
   of messages which are not authorized by the alleged originating
   domain.  As described above, these messages might merely be unwanted
   by the recipient, or might be part of a confidence scheme or a
   delivery vector for malware.

5.1.  Use of Arbitrary Identities

   This class of bad acts includes the sending of messages which aim to
   obscure the identity of the actual sender.  In some cases the actual
   sender might be the bad actor, or in other cases might be a third-
   party under the control of the bad actor (e.g., a compromised
   computer).

   DKIM is effective in mitigating against the use of addresses not
   controlled by bad actors, but is not effective against the use of
   addresses they control.  In other words, the presence of a valid DKIM
   signature does not guarantee that the signer is not a bad actor.  It
   also does not guarantee the accountability of the signer, since that
   is limited by the extent to which domain registration requires
   accountability for its registrants.  However, accreditation and
   reputation systems can be used to enhance the accountability of DKIM-
   verified addresses and/or the likelihood that signed messages are
   desirable.

5.2.  Use of Specific Identities

   A second major class of bad acts involves the assertion of specific
   identities in email.

   Note that some bad acts involving specific identities can sometimes
   be accomplished, although perhaps less effectively, with similar
   looking identities that mislead some recipients.  For example, if the
   bad actor is able to control the domain "examp1e.com" (note the "one"
   between the p and e), they might be able to convince some recipients
   that a message from admin@examp1e.com is really admin@example.com.
   Similar types of attacks using internationalized domain names have
   been hypothesized where it could be very difficult to see character
   differences in popular typefaces.  Similarly, if example2.com was
   controlled by a bad actor, the bad actor could sign messages from
   bigbank.example2.com which might also mislead some recipients.  To
   the extent that these domains are controlled by bad actors, DKIM is
   not effective against these attacks, although it could support the
   ability of reputation and/or accreditation systems to aid the user in
   identifying them.




Fenton                   Expires April 24, 2006                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft            DKIM Threat Analysis              October 2005


5.2.1.  Exploitation of Social Relationships

   One reason for asserting a specific origin address is to encourage a
   recipient to read and act on particular email messages by appearing
   to be an acquaintance or previous correspondent that the recipient
   might trust.  This tactic has been used by email-propagated malware
   which mail themselves to addresses in the infected host's address
   book.  In this case, however, the sender's address may not be
   falsified, so DKIM would not be effective in defending against this
   act.

   It is also possible for address books to be harvested and used by an
   attacker to send messages from elsewhere.  DKIM would be effective in
   mitigating these acts by limiting the scope of origin addresses for
   which a valid signature can be obtained when sending the messages
   from other locations.

5.2.2.  Identity-Related Fraud

   Bad acts related to email-based fraud often, but not always, involve
   the transmission of messages using specific origin addresses of other
   entities as part of the fraud scheme.  The use of a specific address
   of origin sometimes contributes to the success of the fraud by
   convincing the recipient that the message was actually sent by the
   alleged sender.

   To the extent that the success of the fraud depends on or is enhanced
   by the use of a specific origin address, the bad actor may have
   significant financial motivation and resources to circumvent any
   measures taken to protect specific addresses from unauthorized use.

5.2.3.  Reputation Attacks

   Another motivation for using a specific origin address in a message
   is to harm the reputation of another, commonly referred to as a "joe-
   job".  For example, a commercial entity might wish to harm the
   reputation of a competitor, perhaps by sending unsolicited bulk email
   on behalf of that competitor.  It is for this reason that reputation
   systems must be based on an identity that is, in practice, fairly
   reliable.

   Reputation attacks of this sort are sometimes based on the
   retransmission (often referred to as a "replay") of a legitimately
   sent message.  DKIM provides little protection against such acts,
   although the key used to sign the original instance of the message
   can be revoked, which limits the time window available for such
   attacks.  Other reputation attacks, involving the fabrication and
   transmission of a fictitious message, are addressed by DKIM since the



Fenton                   Expires April 24, 2006                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft            DKIM Threat Analysis              October 2005


   bad actor would not, without inside assistance, be able to obtain a
   valid signature for the fabricated message.


6.  Attacks on Message Signing

   Bad actors can be expected to exploit all of the limitations of
   message authentication systems.  They are also likely to be motivated
   to degrade the usefulness of message authentication systems in order
   to hinder their deployment.  Some representatives of these categories
   of bad acts are described below.  Additional postulated attacks are
   described in the Security Considerations section of [I-D.allman-dkim-
   base].

6.1.  Unsigned Messages

   Messages without signatures may be sent in an effort to exploit the
   incremental deployment of message signatures.  In many cases, a
   recipient may not be able to make a determination about unsigned
   messages from a domain, and therefore will need to accept the message
   (although perhaps at a lower delivery priority).  This situation is
   mitigated by the use of the DKIM Sender Signing Policy (SSP)
   [I-D.allman-dkim-ssp] that indicates whether or not a given domain
   signs all of its messages.  Nevertheless, the possibility of
   signature breakage due to legitimate modification of the message may
   limit the ability of SSP to dictate harsh treatment of messages
   without valid signatures.

   Messages with invalid signatures may also be introduced by bad
   actors.  The intent may be to make the message appear as though it
   was legitimately sent, but "broken" in transit, i.e. that the message
   was modified, rendering the signature invalid.  At least until the
   causes of signature breakage are well understood, messages with
   invalid signatures need to be evaluated as if the invalid signature
   isn't present at all.

6.2.  Use of Throw-Away Addresses

   Bad actors may also introduce messages with valid signatures on
   behalf of domains they control, perhaps "throw-away" domains
   registered under false pretenses which are difficult to trace.  In
   other words, the existence of a message signature does not imply that
   the message is "good".  The use of such domains will undoubtedly give
   rise to domain-based accreditation and reputation systems.  Until
   these are available, local reputation, mostly in the form of
   whitelists, can be maintained by domains to improve the
   deliverability of email from domains with which they have business or
   other relationships.



Fenton                   Expires April 24, 2006                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft            DKIM Threat Analysis              October 2005


   Accreditation and reputation, or even local whitelists, require a
   reliable identity on which to base their assertion, and in the case
   of reputation on which to base any feedback reports.  Message signing
   provides an identity which is intended to be sufficiently reliable
   for this purpose, and it (or some other reliable mechanism) is
   necessary for accreditation and reputation systems to operate.

   Modification of messages by mailing lists and other legitimate agents
   requires that a mechanism be created for signing of messages by other
   than the originating domain.  This provides a bad actor with an
   additional avenue through which it might attempt to circumvent
   message authentication.  A bad actor might attempt to pose as a
   mailing list which modifies a message and adds its own signature
   taking responsibility for the message.  If this signature is from an
   untraceable domain, little assertion of the legitimacy of the message
   is provided by this signature.  For this reason, accreditation,
   reputation, and local reputation in the form of white lists is at
   least as important for these signatures from third parties as they
   are for origination address signatures.

6.3.  Message Replay

   Message replay is a term used to describe the retransmission of
   already-signed messages.  Here the bad actor obtains an account with
   a domain such as a consumer ISP, and sends an undesirable message to
   an external address controlled by the bad actor or an accomplice.
   That message, having now obtained a signature, is forwarded to other
   recipients without the authorization of the signing domain.  It is
   closely related to one of the reputation attacks described above.

   This bad act is basically indistinguishable from a number of
   acceptable acts, such as the transparent forwarding of messages by a
   recipient to multiple addresses.  For this reason, DKIM is not
   particularly effective at detecting and eliminating this bad act.
   Prompt key revocation may mitigate this problem; however, since
   verification typically occurs as messages are received by recipient
   domains, time is of the essence.

   Other means to mitigate this bad act include the use of content
   filtering on messages being signed, and business models which enforce
   more accountability for subscribers whose messages are to be signed
   by DKIM.

6.4.  Control of Key Management

   In cases where the Bad Actor is in control of the DNS zone for a
   domain's keyspace subdomain (_domainkey), or is able to influence the
   records in that zone, message signing may present a new opportunity



Fenton                   Expires April 24, 2006                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft            DKIM Threat Analysis              October 2005


   to interfere with the receipt of legitimate messages or to sign
   messages not illegitimately.  This could occur if the DNS provider
   for the domain is not reliable or if the security measures used by
   the DNS provider are breached by the bad actor.  DKIM is fully
   dependent on the key information which it is provided by DNS, so
   independent means such as audits of the key records would be required
   to mitigate this threat.


7.  IANA Considerations

   This document defines no items requiring IANA assignment.


8.  Security Considerations

   This document describes the security threat environment in which
   DomainKeys Identified Mail (DKIM) is expected to provide some
   benefit.

9.  Informative References

   [I-D.allman-dkim-base]
              Allman, E., "DomainKeys Identified Mail (DKIM)",
              draft-allman-dkim-base-00 (work in progress), July 2005.

   [I-D.allman-dkim-ssp]
              Allman, E., "DKIM Sender Signing Policy",
              draft-allman-dkim-ssp-00 (work in progress), July 2005.

   [I-D.crocker-email-arch]
              Crocker, D., "Internet Mail Architecture",
              draft-crocker-email-arch-04 (work in progress),
              March 2005.

   [I-D.kucherawy-sender-auth-header]
              Kucherawy, M., "Message Header for Indicating Sender
              Authentication Status",
              draft-kucherawy-sender-auth-header-02 (work in progress),
              May 2005.


Appendix A.  Glossary

   Origin address - The address on an email message, typically the RFC
   2822 From:  address, which is associated with the alleged author of
   the message and is displayed by the recipient's MUA as the source of
   the message.



Fenton                   Expires April 24, 2006                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft            DKIM Threat Analysis              October 2005


Appendix B.  Acknowledgements

   The author wishes to thank Phillip Hallam-Baker, Eliot Lear, Tony
   Finch, Dave Crocker, Barry Leiba, Arvel Hathcock, Eric Allman, and
   Jon Callas for valuable suggestions and constructive criticism of
   earlier versions of this draft.


Appendix C.  Edit History

   Changes since -00 draft:

   o  Changed beginning of introduction to make it consistent with -base
      draft.

   o  Clarified reasons for focus on externally-located bad actors.

   o  Elaborated on reasons for effectiveness of address book attacks.

   o  Described attack time windows with respect to replay attacks.

   o  Added discussion of attacks using look-alike domains.

   o  Added section on key management attacks.



























Fenton                   Expires April 24, 2006                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft            DKIM Threat Analysis              October 2005


Author's Address

   Jim Fenton
   Cisco Systems, Inc.
   MS SJ-24/2
   170 W. Tasman Drive
   San Jose, CA  95134-1706
   USA

   Phone:  +1 408 526 5914
   Email:  fenton@cisco.com
   URI:







































Fenton                   Expires April 24, 2006                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft            DKIM Threat Analysis              October 2005


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Fenton                   Expires April 24, 2006                [Page 14]


