Megaco                                                              B. Rosen 
Internet Draft                                                      Marconi 
Document: draft-rosen-megaco-atm-package-00.txt                     February 2001 
Category: Informational                                                     
 
 
                            Megaco ATM Package 
 
 
Status of this Memo 
 
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with all provisions 
      of Section 10 of RFC2026 [1].  
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force 
   (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other groups may also 
   distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts. Internet-Drafts are draft 
   documents valid for a maximum of six months and may be updated, replaced, or 
   obsoleted by other documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet- 
   Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."  
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt  
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
    
1. Abstract 
    
   Defines a Package for ATM bearer management for Megaco/H.248  
    
    
2. Conventions used in this document 
    
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", 
   "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be 
   interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [2]. 
    
    
3. ATM Package 
        
      PackageID: atm (0x00xx)  
      Version: 1  
      Extends: Network Package version 1  
        
      This package is used to support cell based multimedia data  
      transfer by ATM.  
        
   3.1 Properties  
        
      None  
        
   3.2 Events  
       
     3.2.1 VC Change 
  
<Lastname>                 Category - Expiration                         1 
                           Megaco ATM Package                February 2001 
 
 
      Event name: VCChange 
       
      EventID: 0x01 
    
      Description: This event occurs whenever a change to VC occurs.  
      For example VC has been established or a VC has been modified. 
    
      EventsDescriptor Parameters: 
    
        Type 
        ---------- 
        Parameter Name: Type 
    
        ParameterID: 0x01 
    
        Type: Enumeration 
    
        Possible values: 
           All, [0x00] All Bearer Events 
           Est, [0x01] Bearer Established 
           Mod, [0x02] Bearer Modified 
           Cut, [0x03] Bearer Cut-through 
           Mfail, [0x04] Bearer Modification Failure 
       Note: For release indication see: General Package H.248 Sect  
       E.1.2 Cause Event. 
    
        Description: This is used to request the MG to notify it of a  
        VC event. 
    
      ObservedEventsDescriptor Parameters: 
    
        Type 
        ---------- 
        Parameter Name: Type 
    
        ParameterID: 0x01 
    
        Type: Enumeration 
    
        Possible values: 
          Est, [0x01] Bearer Established 
          Mod, [0x02] Bearer Modified 
          Cut, [0x03] Bearer Cut-through 
          Mfail, [0x04] Bearer Modification Failure 
        Note: For release indication, see General Package H.248 Sect  
        E.1.2 Cause Event. 
    
        Description: This is used to indicate why the VC Change was  
        generated by the MG. 
     
    3.2.2 Profile Element Transition  
      EventID: pftrans, 0x0001  
       
  
Rosen                         Informational            Expires August, 2001 
                           Megaco ATM Package                February 2001 
 
 
      This event is used with AAL2 adaptation only.  Indicates a change  
      in the profile element sent.  Profile elements indicating silence  
      should not trigger this event.  
        
      EventDescriptor parameters  
        
      None  
        
      ObservedEventsDescriptor parameters  
        
           Profile Element  
           ----------  
           ParameterID: pfelmt, 0x01  
             
           Type: integer.  
             
           Possible values: a row number in a profile table to which  
           the switch is made. Rows are counted downward, beginning  
           from 1.  
             
   3.3 Signals  
        
      None  
        
   3.4 Statistics  
        
      Cells Sent  
      ------------  
      StatisticID: cs (0x0004)  
        
      Type: double  
        
      Possible Values: any 64 bit integer   
        
      Cells Received  
      ----------------  
      StatisticID: cr (0x0005)  
        
      Type: double  
        
      Possible Values: any 64 bit integer   
        
      Cell Loss  
      -----------  
      StatisticID: cl (0x0006)  
        
      If the termination represents a VCC, this is the total number of  
      ATM cells lost, in the direction towards the gateway.  
      If the termination represents a CID within an AAL2, it is the  
      number of AAL2 common part sublayer (CPS) packets lost, in the  
      direction towards the gateway. For other terminations, or if  
      these losses cannot be assessed, then the MG omits this 
      parameter. 
  
Rosen                         Informational            Expires August, 2001 
                           Megaco ATM Package                February 2001 
 
 
        
      Type: double  
        
      Possible Values: any 64 bit integer  
        
      Jitter  
      ------  
      StatisticID: jit (0x0007)  
        
      If the termination represents a VCC, this is the interarrival  
      jitter for ATM cells. If the termination represents a CID within  
      an AAL2 VCC, this is the interarrival jitter for AAL2 common part  
      sublayer (CPS) packets. If this cannot be determined, then it is  
      omitted.  
        
      Delay  
      -----  
      StatisticID:delay (0x0008)  
        
      Average cell transmission delay. This requires the use of ATM 
      performance monitoring techniques. If it is not possible to  
      assess this delay, it is omitted. 
    
   3.5 Procedures  
        
   Terminations representing VCCs are placed in a special context.  
   The contextId of that context may be specified by a profile, or by provisioning.  
   PVCs known to the MG would appear in that context at boot time.  An SVC is created 
   by Adding an appropriate (ephemeral) termination to that context.  An SVC is torn 
   down by Subtracting the termination from the Context.  For AAL1 or AAL2 VCCs, 
   terminations are created with the Add command specifying the channel identifier in 
   the CID field of the SDP or Annex C and referencing the VPI/VCI of the VCC the 
   channel is part of.  For AAL1 VCCs, channels not assigned such a termination are 
   idle.   
       
    
4. Acknowledgments 
    
   This work is based on the MGCP package draft by Rajesh Kumar of Cisco Systems.  
   The VC Change event is modeled after the BNCChange 
   Event of ITU-T Q.1950. 
    
    
5. Author's Addresses 
    
   Brian Rosen 
   Marconi 
   1000 FORE Drive 
   Warrendale PA 15086  USA 
   Phone: +1 724 742 6826 
   Email: brian.rosen@marconi.com 
    
  
Rosen                         Informational            Expires August, 2001 
                           Megaco ATM Package                February 2001 
 
 
    
Full Copyright Statement 
 
   "Copyright (C) The Internet Society (date). All Rights Reserved. This document and 
   translations of it may be copied and furnished to others, and derivative works 
   that comment on or otherwise explain it or assist in its implmentation may be 
   prepared, copied, published and distributed, in whole or in part, without 
   restriction of any kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this 
   paragraph are included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this 
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing the copyright 
   notice or references to the Internet Society or other Internet organizations, 
   except as needed for the purpose of developing Internet standards in which case 
   the procedures for copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be 
   followed, or as required to translate it into 
    
    
 
      
Rosen                         Informational            Expires August, 2001 