
   ENUM Working Group                                                J. Yu 
   Internet Draft                                                  NeuStar 
   Document: draft-yu-enumservice-sms-smpp-00.txt               April 2008 
   Category: Standards Track                                               
    
    
    IANA Registration for an Enumservice Subtype "smpp" under Type "sms", 
          and Information and IANA Registration for URI Type "smpp" 
                     draft-yu-enumservice-sms-smpp-00.txt 
    
   Status of this Memo 
    
      By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any   
      applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware   
      have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes   
      aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79. 
       
      Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering   
      Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that   
      other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-   
      Drafts. 
       
      Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
      months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
      at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as 
      reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
       
      The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at   
      http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt. 
       
      The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at   
      http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
       
      This Internet-Draft will expire on October 3, 2008. 
       
      Copyright Notice 
       
         Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008). 
       
       
   Abstract 
       
      This document registers an enumservice subtype "smpp" under the 
      existing type "sms" using the URI scheme "smpp" as per the IANA 
      registration process defined in RFC 3761 [2] and draft-ietf-enum-
      enumservices-guide-07 [6] and registers a new URI type "smpp:" 
      according to the URI registration procedure in RFC 4395 [8]. 
       
      This enumservice subtype indicates that the remote resource 
      identified by the URI scheme can receive short messages using the 
      Short Message Peer-to-Peer Protocol (SMPP) [7]. 
       


     
   Yu              Standards Track - Expires October 3, 2008            1
   IANA Registration for an Enumservice Subtype "smpp" under   April 2008 
   Type "sms", and Information and IANA Registration for URI Type "smpp" 
    
   Table of Contents 
    
      1.  Conventions Used in this Document  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2 
      2.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2 
      3.  Abbreviations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 
      4.  Formal Syntax  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 
      5.  Use of smpp: URI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 
      6.  Example  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6 
      7.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6 
      8.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7 
      8.1 IANA Enumservice Registration for "smpp" . . . . . . . . . . 7 
      8.2 IANA Registration Information for URI "smpp:"  . . . . . . . 8 
      9.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9 
      9.1 Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9 
      9.2 Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10 
    
    
   1. Conventions Used in this Document 
       
      The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
      "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
      document are to be interpreted as described in BCP 14, RFC 2119 [1]. 
       
       
   2. Introduction 
       
      ENUM (E.164 Number Mapping) [2] is a system that transforms 
      E.164 [3] telephone numbers into domain names and then uses 
      the Domain Name System (DNS) [4] and Naming Authority Pointer 
      (NAPTR) [5] resource records to query for the services or 
      resources that are available for a specific domain name.  
          
      This document registers an enumservice subtype "smpp" under 
      the existing type "sms" according to the guidelines given in 
      RFC 3761 [2] and draft-ietf-enum-enumservices-guide-07 [6], to 
      be used for provisioning an NAPTR resource record to indicate 
      that the remote resource identified by the URI scheme can 
      receive short messages using the Short Message Peer-to-Peer 
      Protocol (SMPP) [7].  This document also registers an IANA URI 
      type "smpp" per the requirements of RFC 4395 [8].  
          
      The purpose of the registered enumservice subtype and URI 
      scheme is to enable service providers to exchange the short 
      message traffic over IP using the widely supported SMPP.  
        
      SMPP sessions can be established over TCP/IP or X.25 connections.  
      This document discusses only the TCP/IP case.  Several radio access 
      technologies are used by the mobile networks worldwide, the way the 
      Global system for Mobile Communications (GSM) systems handle the 

     
   Yu              Standards Track - Expires October 3, 2008            2
   IANA Registration for an Enumservice Subtype "smpp" under   April 2008 
   Type "sms", and Information and IANA Registration for URI Type "smpp" 
    
      short message delivery [9,10] is used in this document to simplify 
      the discussions.   
       
      For a mobile-originated short message, the Mobile-services 
      Switching Center (MSC) or Serving GPRS Support Node (SGSN) that 
      serves the sender submits the short message to the Service Center 
      (SC) in the sender's home network via the Interworking MSC for 
      Short Message Service (SMS-IWMSC).  A successful short message 
      delivery to a mobile user involves the SC and Gateway MSC for Short 
      Message Service (SMS-GMSC) in the sender's home network that 
      queries the Home Location Register (HLR) in the receiver's home 
      network via Signaling System Number 7 (SS7) to retrieve information 
      about the MSC and/or SGSN that currently serve(s) the receiver 
      followed by the short message delivery to the MSC or SGSN via SS7.  
      This document uses the Short Message Service Center (SMSC) to avoid 
      mentioning the SMS-GMSC, SMS-IWMSC and SC to simplify the 
      discussions. 
       
       
   3. Abbreviations 
       
     3GPP      3rd Generation Partnership Project 
     BNF       Backus-Naur Form 
     DNS       Domain Name System 
     GPRS      General Packet Radio Service 
     GSM       Global System for Mobile communications 
     GW        Gateway 
     HLR       Home Location Register 
     ID        Identifier; Identity 
     ITU-T     International Telecommunication Union - Telecommunication 
     MNP       Mobile Number Portability 
     MSC       Mobile-services Switching Center 
     NAPTR     Naming Authority Pointer 
     SC        Service Center 
     SGSN      Serving GPRS Support Node 
     SMPP      Short Message Peer-to-Peer Protocol 
     SMS       Short Message Service 
     SMS-GMSC  Gateway MSC for SMS 
     SMS-IWMSC Interworking MSC for SMS 
     SMSC      Short Message Service Center 
     SS7       Signaling System Number 7 
     URI       Uniform Resource Identifier 
     VPN       Virtual Private Network 
       
       
   4. Formal Syntax 
       
      The following syntax specification uses the augmented Backus-Naur 
      Form (BNF) as described in RFC 5234 [11]. 
       
     
   Yu              Standards Track - Expires October 3, 2008            3
   IANA Registration for an Enumservice Subtype "smpp" under   April 2008 
   Type "sms", and Information and IANA Registration for URI Type "smpp" 
    
        smpp-uri       = "smpp:"  [user "@" ] hostpart *(";" parameter)  
                           [headers] 
        user           = userid / telephone-subscriber 
        userid         = *urlchar 
        parameter      = attribute ["=" value] 
         
      "hostpart" and "headers" are imported from RFC 3261 [12], 
      "telephone-subscriber" is imported from RFC 3966 [13], "urlchar" is 
      imported from RFC 3986 [14], and "attribute" and "value" are 
      imported from RFC 2045 [15]. 
       
       
   5. Use of smpp: URI 
       
      There are at least five cases where some network entities in the 
      mobile networks that deal with short message delivery may want to 
      retrieve the smpp: URI via ENUM queries so as to deliver the short 
      messages via SMPP/IP instead of SS7. 
         
      a. An SMS hub provider that receives a short message from the 
        originating network can send an ENUM query to retrieve the smpp: 
        URI for the destination mobile telephone number.   If the 
        destination mobile telephone number is served by a mobile 
        operator (identified by the information in the host part of the 
        URI) that uses this SMS hub provider's service, the SMS hub 
        provider can use the information in the smpp: URI to terminate 
        the short message via SMPP/IP.   If the destination mobile 
        telephone number is served by a mobile operator that does not 
        use this SMS hub provider's service, the SMS hub provider simply 
        forwards the short message to the SMS hub provider that can 
        reach the destination mobile operator. 
       
      b. The SMSC in the sender's home network that receives a short 
        message from the sender can send an ENUM query to see if the 
        home operator that serves the destination mobile telephone 
        number has an SMS Gateway (GW) (e.g., SMS Router [16]) that can 
        receive all the mobile-terminated short messages via SMPP/IP.  
        If the smpp: URI is found and SMPP sessions with the remote 
        resource are allowed, the short message is delivered to the SMS 
        Gateway via SMPP/IP.  Otherwise, the SMSC handles the short 
        message as is done today except that it may send the ENUM query 
        as is described in case #c after it receives the positive 
        response from the HLR. 
       
      c. The SMSC in the sender's home network that has queried the HLR 
        associated with the destination mobile telephone number and 
        received the E.164 number associated with the MSC and/or SGSN 
        that currently serve(s) the destination mobile telephone number 
     
   Yu              Standards Track - Expires October 3, 2008            4
   IANA Registration for an Enumservice Subtype "smpp" under   April 2008 
   Type "sms", and Information and IANA Registration for URI Type "smpp" 
    
        can send an ENUM query to see if the MSC or SGSN can receive the 
        short messages via SMPP/IP.  If the smpp: URI is found and SMPP 
        sessions with the remote resource are allowed, the short message 
        is delivered via SMPP/IP.  Otherwise, the short message is 
        delivered via SS7. 
       
      d. The SMS GW mentioned in case #b above that receives an incoming 
        short message via SS7 or IP and wants to send the short message 
        to the MSC or SGSN that currently serves the destination mobile 
        telephone number can send an ENUM query to see if that MSC or 
        SGSN can receive the short messages via SMPP/IP.  If the smpp: 
        URI is found and SMPP sessions with the remote resource are 
        allowed, the short message is delivered via SMPP/IP.  Otherwise, 
        the short message is delivered via SS7.  Certainly, the SMS GW 
        can deliver the message via IP if the destination device 
        supports the capabilities specified in [17,18].  
       
      e. The MSC or SGSN serving the sender can use the E.164 number 
        associated with the sender's home SMSC to send an ENUM query to 
        see if that SMSC can receive short messages via SMPP/IP.  If the 
        smpp: URI is found and SMPP sessions with the remote resource 
        are allowed, the short message is delivered via SMPP/IP.  
        Otherwise, the short message is delivered via SS7. 
    
      ENUM queries may not be needed for countries that do not support 
      mobile number portability (MNP) because the prefix of the 
      destination mobile telephone number and locally provisioned data 
      may be sufficient to identify the remote entity/resource and 
      whether the remote entity/resource supports SMPP/IP.  When the 
      destination mobile telephone number is subject to MNP and ENUM 
      provides MNP-corrected responses, the querier can use ENUM query to 
      see if the response contains the smpp: URI. 
       
      For the five cases above, case #a is the most likely case to happen 
      because the SMS hub providers currently use SMPP to communicate 
      with the originating SMSC, with each other, and/or with the 
      destination SMS GW.  But they use databases and other operator-
      specific information to identify the destination operator and the 
      destination SMS GW. 
       
      More and more operators may deploy the SMS GWs to receive all 
      incoming mobile-terminated short messages for reasons stated in 
      [16] or for delivering the message over IP [17,18].  When that 
      happens, more SMSCs may send ENUM queries to see if they can 
      retrieve the smpp: URI in the ENUM responses so as to deliver the 


     
   Yu              Standards Track - Expires October 3, 2008            5
   IANA Registration for an Enumservice Subtype "smpp" under   April 2008 
   Type "sms", and Information and IANA Registration for URI Type "smpp" 
    
      short messages via SMPP/IP without querying the HLR and delivering 
      the short messages via SS7. 
       
      Cases #c, #d and #e may happen when many MSCs and SGSNs support 
      SMPP/IP. 
       
      An SMPP message is acknowledged immediately when received; 
      therefore, the SMPP mechanism that requests for notification on 
      actual message delivery should be used so as not to impact the 
      message delivery status reporting mechanism that is available when 
      the short message is delivered via SS7. 
         
    
   6. Example 
       
      $ORIGIN 4.3.2.1.4.3.4.1.7.5.1.e164enum.net. 
          NAPTR 10 100 "u" "E2U+sms:smpp" 
               "!^.*!smpp:smsgw1.mnoX.3gppnetwork.org!" . 
       
      In this example, an smpp: URI is returned in the ENUM response.  The 
      querying node, if supporting SMPP and having established business 
      relationship and prior exchange of security information (e.g., 
      system ID and password for SMPP session setup) for sending the short 
      messages via SMPP with the remote domain, can retrieve the IP 
      address for "smsgw1.mnoX.3gppnetwork.org" via DNS, establish the 
      SMPP session over TCP/IP if not yet established, and send the short 
      message via SMPP to that IP address.  
       
       
   7. Security Considerations 
    
      Use of the "sms:smpp" Enumservice shall either be within a service 
      provider's internal network, or on a private basis between one or 
      more parties.  It is assumed that this Enumservice value defined in 
      this document is used in an environment where entities are trusted 
      and general public or attackers are not supposed to have access to 
      the DNS resource records containing the smpp: URI. 
       
      The initial purpose of this Enumservice value and the smpp: URI is 
      to indicate that the remote resource can receive short messages 
      using SMPP, it is recommended that only the "hostpart" appears in 
      the URI or the international telephone number with the leading "+" 
      appear in the "user" field so as not to convey user-specific 
      information in the smpp: URI. 
       
      The entity that has the authoritative answer to an ENUM query may 
      execute the access control based on the source IP address of the 
      ENUM query and return an appropriate error code (e.g., "refused") if 

     
   Yu              Standards Track - Expires October 3, 2008            6
   IANA Registration for an Enumservice Subtype "smpp" under   April 2008 
   Type "sms", and Information and IANA Registration for URI Type "smpp" 
    
      the querier is not authorized to establish an SMPP session with the 
      remote resource. 
       
      Frame Relay and Virtual Private Network (VPN) connections are 
      usually used to establish the SMPP sessions and each SMPP session is 
      authorized by verifying the system ID and password at the session 
      setup time.   Those security related measures should be used.   
       
       
   8. IANA Considerations 
       
      This document registers the "smpp" Enumservice using the subtype  
      "smpp" under the existing type "sms" in the Enumservice registry 
      described in the IANA considerations in RFC 3761 [2] and draft-ietf-
      enum-enumservices-guide-07 [6].   This document also registers with 
      the IANA the URI "smpp:" per RFC 4395 [8].  Details of the two 
      registrations can be found in the Sections 8.1 and 8.2 below. 
          
       
   8.1. IANA Enumservice Registration for "smpp" 
       
      Enumservice Name: "smpp" 
       
      Enumservice Class: Application 
       
      Enumservice Type: "sms" 
       
      Enumservice subtype: "smpp" 
       
      URI scheme: "smpp" 
       
      Functional Specification: This Enumservice indicates that the 
        resource identified by the associated URI scheme is capable of 
        receiving a short message using the SMPP protocol [7].   
         
      Security Considerations: See Section 7 of this document. 
       
      Intended Usage: COMMON 
       
      Registration Document: This document contains all the information 
        needed for the registration of this enumservice subtype value. 
       
      Author: James Yu (see Author's Address Section for author contact 
        detail) 
       
      Further Information: See Section 5 of this document. 
       
       
   8.2. IANA Registration Information for URI "smpp:" 
       
      URI scheme name: The name of the URI is "smpp:". 
       
     
   Yu              Standards Track - Expires October 3, 2008            7
   IANA Registration for an Enumservice Subtype "smpp" under   April 2008 
   Type "sms", and Information and IANA Registration for URI Type "smpp" 
    
      Status: The intended status is Permanent.   
       
        SMPP is used by network entities operated by the 
        carriers/operators, inter-carrier vendors and the service 
        providers.  Use of this URI should be either be within a service 
        provider's or carrier's/operator's internal network, or on a 
        private basis between one or more parties using a variety of 
        security mechanisms to prevent the general public access.   The 
        records described herein should not be part of the e164.arpa or 
        any other portion of the Internet DNS tree when returned in the 
        ENUM response. 
         
      URI scheme syntax: 
         
        smpp-uri       = "smpp:" [user "@" ] hostpart *(";" parameter)  
                           [headers] 
        user           = userid / telephone-subscriber 
        userid         = *urlchar 
        parameter      = attribute ["=" value] 
         
        "hostpart" and "headers" are imported from RFC 3261 [12], 
        "telephone-subscriber" is imported from RFC 3966 [13], "urlchar" 
        is imported from RFC 3986 [14], and "attribute" and "value" are 
        imported from RFC 2045 [15]. 
         
      URI scheme semantics: The initial purpose of defining the smpp: URI 
        is to return the host information in the smpp: URI of the ENUM 
        response to identify the remote resource that can receive short 
        messages via SMPP/IP.   This URI is not intended to be used in 
        other protocols (e.g., SIP Request-URI) for addressing and routing 
        purposes, at least for the purpose of this document.  The URI 
        scheme syntax provides the extension mechanism to add parameters 
        and headers in the future for other uses of this URI. 
       
      Encoding considerations: US-ASCII characters are included in the URI 
        without any conversion.   Non-US-ASCII characters MUST be percent-
        encoded as described in Section 2.1 of RFC 3986 [14]. 
         
      Intended usage: The smpp: URI identifies an entity that can receive 
        short messages using the SMPP protocol.  The "host" part of the 
        URI can be used to locate the IP address of that entity. 
       
      Applications and/or protocols which may use this URL scheme name: 
        The smpp: URI is intended to be used by entities that communicate 
        with each other using the SMPP protocol.  An entity that has a 
        short message to deliver and wants to find out if the remote 
        entity that deals with the destination telephone number can make 
        an ENUM query to see if such a URI is returned in the ENUM 
        response. 
       
      Interoperability considerations:  The URI is designed to be used 
        specifically for nodes in the trusted systems that query private 
        ENUM implementations (e.g., Carrier ENUM). 
     
   Yu              Standards Track - Expires October 3, 2008            8
   IANA Registration for an Enumservice Subtype "smpp" under   April 2008 
   Type "sms", and Information and IANA Registration for URI Type "smpp" 
    
         
      Security considerations: See Section 7 of this document. 
       
      Person and email address to contact for further information: See the 
        Author's Address Section of this document for author's contact 
        information. 
       
      Author/change controller: This scheme is registered under the IETF 
        tree.  As such, the IETF maintains change control. 
       
      References: See Sections 5 and 8.1 of this document and [7], [9] and 
      [10] in Section 9 of this document. 
         
    
   9. References 
         
    
   9.1. Normative References 
       
       [1] S. Bradner, "Key Words for Use in RFC's to Indicate Requirement 
          Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997. 
       
       [2] P. Faltstrom and M. Mealling, "The E.164 to Uniform Resource 
          Identifiers (URI) Dynamic Delegation Discovery System (DDDS) 
          Application (ENUM)", RFC 3761, April 2004. 
       
       [3] ITU-T, "The International Public Telecommunication Numbering 
          Plan", Recommendation E.164, May 1997. 
       
       [4] P. Mockapetris, "Domain Names - Concepts and Facilities", RFC 
          1034, November 1987. 
       
       [5] M. Mealling, "Dynamic Delegation Discovery System (DDDS) Part 
          Four: The Uniform Resource Identifiers (URI)", RFC 3404, October 
          2002.  
       
       [7] SMPP Forum, "Short Message Peer-to-Peer Protocol (SMPP) 
          Specification Version 5.0-Draft 09", May 8, 2002. 
       
       [8] T. Hansen, et al., "The Guidelines and Registration Procedures 
          for New URI Schemes", RFC 4395, February 2006. 
       
      [11] D. Crocker and P. Overell, "Augmented BNF for Syntax 
          Specifications: ABNF", RFC 5234, January 2008. 
       
      [12] J. Rosenberg, et al., RFC3261, "SIP: Session Initiation 
          Protocol", June 2002. 
       
      [13] H. Schulzrinne, "The tel URI for Telephone Numbers", RFC 3966, 
          December 2004. 
       
      [14] T. Berners-Lee, et al., "Uniform Resource Identifiers (URI) : 
          Generic Syntax", RFC 3986, January 2005. 
     
   Yu              Standards Track - Expires October 3, 2008            9
   IANA Registration for an Enumservice Subtype "smpp" under   April 2008 
   Type "sms", and Information and IANA Registration for URI Type "smpp" 
    
       
      [15] N. Freed and N.S. Borenstein, "Multipurpose Internet Mail 
          Extensions (MIME) Part One: Format of Internet Message Bodies", 
          RFC 2045, November 1996. 
       
       
   9.2. Informative References 
       
       [6] B. Hoeneisen, et al., "IANA Registration of Enumservices: Guide, 
          Template and IANA Considerations", draft-ietf-enum-enumservices-
          guide-08, March 2008.                    
       
       [9] 3GPP TS 23.040 v7.0.1, "3rd Generation Partnership Project; 
          Technical Specification Group Core Network and Terminals; 
          Technical realization of the Short Message Service (SMS) 
          (Release 7)", March 2007. 
       
      [10] 3GPP TS 29.002 v7.9.0, "3rd Generation Partnership Project; 
          Technical Specification Group Core Network and Terminals; Mobile 
          Application Part (MAP specification; (Release 7)", September 
          2007. 
       
      [16] 3GPP TS 23.840 v7.1.0, "3rd Generation Partnership Project; 
          Technical Specification Group Core Network and Terminals; Study 
          into routeing of MT-SMs via the HPLMN; (Release 7)", March 2007. 
       
      [17] 3GPP TS 24.341 v7.2.0, "3rd Generation Partnership Project; 
          Technical Specification Group Core Network and Terminals; 
          Support of SMS over IP networks; Stage 3 (Release 7)", December 
          2007. 
       
      [18] 3GPP TS 23.811 v1.2.1, "3rd Generation Partnership Project; 
          Technical Specification Group Core Network and Terminals; 
          Service Level Interworking for Messaging Services; Stage 2 
          (Release 8)", February 2008. 
       
       
   Author's Address 
       
      James Yu 
      NeuStar, Inc. 
      46000 Center Oak Plaza 
      Sterling, VA 20166 
      U.S.A. 
      Phone: +1-571-434-5572 
      Email: james.yu@neustar.biz 
    
       





     
   Yu              Standards Track - Expires October 3, 2008           10
   IANA Registration for an Enumservice Subtype "smpp" under   April 2008 
   Type "sms", and Information and IANA Registration for URI Type "smpp" 
    
       
   Full Copyright Statement 
       
      Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008). 
       
      This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions 
      contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors 
      retain all their rights. 
       
      This document and the information contained herein are provided on 
      an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE 
      REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE 
      IETF TRUST AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL 
      WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY 
      WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE 
      ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS 
      FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
       
       
   Intellectual Property 
       
      The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any   
      Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed 
      to pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described 
      in this document or the extent to which any license under such 
      rights might or might not be available; nor does it represent that 
      it has made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  
      Information on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC 
      documents can be found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 
       
      Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
      assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
      attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use 
      of such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
      specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository 
      at http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 
       
      The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
      copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
      rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
      this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at ietf-
      ipr@ietf.org. 
       
       
   Acknowledgment 
       
      Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF 
      Administrative Support Activity (IASA). 





     
   Yu              Standards Track - Expires October 3, 2008           11