

                                                             Angela Chiu 
                                                         Celion Networks 
                                                                         
                                                             John Strand 
                                                                    AT&T 
   Internet Draft 
   Document: draft-chiu-strand-unique-olcp-02.txt          Robert Tkach 
   Expiration Date: August 2001                         Celion Networks 
    
                                                          James Luciani 
                                                             Tollbridge  
    
 
       Features and Requirements for The Optical Layer Control Plane 
    
    
Status of this Memo 
    
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026. Internet-Drafts are 
   Working documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its 
   areas, and its working groups.  Note that other groups may also 
   distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
   at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt. 
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
    
Abstract 
    
   Advances in the Optical Layer control plane are critical to ensure 
   that the tremendous amount of bandwidth generated by DWDM technology 
   be provided to upper layer services in a timely, reliable, and cost 
   effective fashion. This document describes some unique features and 
   requirements for the Optical Layer control plane that protocol 
   designers need to take into consideration.  
    
    
1.        Introduction 
    
    
   Chiu/Strand                                                [Page 1] 
    
                                    
                      Features and Requirements         February 2001  
                 For The Optical Layer Control Plane 
                                    
   The confluence of technical advances and service needs has focused 
   intense interest on optical networking.  Dense Wave Division 
   Multiplexing (DWDM) is allowing unprecedented growth in raw optical 
   bandwidth; new cross-connect technologies promise the ability to 
   establish very high bandwidth connections within milliseconds; and 
   the insatiable appetite of the Internet for high capacity ``pipes∆∆ 
   has caused transport network operators to tear up their forecasts 
   and add optical capacity as fast as they can.   
    
   Critical to these advances are improvements to the "Optical Layer 
   Control Plane" -the software used to determine routings and 
   establish and maintain connections. Traditional centralized 
   transport operations systems (OS∆s) are widely acknowledged to be 
   incapable of scaling to meet exploding demand or establishing 
   connections as rapidly as needed.  Consequently much attention has 
   been paid recently to new control plane architectures based on data 
   networking protocols such as MPLS and OSPF/IS-IS), under the 
   Generalized MPLS (GMPLS) umbrella.  These architectures feature 
   distributed routing and control logic, auto discovery and self 
   inventorying, and many other advantages. OSPF/IS-IS provides a 
   constraint-based routing capability that takes bandwidth 
   availability into account. 
    
   The potential of these new architectures for optical networking is 
   enormous; however, to be successful they need to be adapted to the 
   specific technological, service, and business context characteristic 
   of optical networking. In order to identify some of the enhancements 
   necessary in GMPLS to make it applicable to optical networks, this 
   document attempts to describe several aspects of optical networking 
   which differ from those in the data networking environment inspiring 
   these new architectures: 
    
     - Section 2 describes some distinctive technological and 
       networking aspects of optical networking that will constrain 
       routing in an optical network, and  
      
     - Section 3 gives a transport network operator∆s perspective on 
       business and operational realities that optical networks are 
       likely to face which are unlike those in data networking. 
    
   Particular emphasis is placed on the multihop optical network 
   problem. We most definitely are not claiming that these differences 
   are fatal to these new architectures, only that the new 
    
   Chiu/Strand et al                                          [page 2] 
 
                                    
                      Features and Requirements         February 2001  
                 For The Optical Layer Control Plane 
                                    
   architectures must be built upon a detailed appreciation of the 
   unique characteristics of the optical world.  
    
2.   Constraints On Routing 
    
   Optical Layer routing is less insulated from details of physical 
   implementation than routing in higher layers.  In this section we 
   give examples of constraints arising from the design of network 
   elements, from the accumulation of signal impairments, and from the 
   need to guarantee the physical diversity of some circuits. 
    
2.1       Reconfigurable Network Elements 
    
   Control plane architectural discussions (e.g., [Awduche99]) usually 
   assume that the only software reconfigurable network element is an 
   optical layer cross-connect (OLXC).  There are however other 
   software reconfigurable elements on the horizon, specifically 
   tunable lasers and receivers and reconfigurable optical add-drop 
   multiplexers (OADM∆s).  These elements are illustrated in the 
   following simple example, which is modeled on announced Optical 
   Transport System (OTS) products: 
                
                 +                                       + 
     ---+---+    |\                                     /|    +---+--- 
     ---| A |----|D|          X              Y         |D|----| A |--- 
     ---+---+    |W|     +--------+     +--------+     |W|    +---+--- 
          :      |D|-----|  OADM  |-----|  OADM  |-----|D|      : 
     ---+---+    |M|     +--------+     +--------+     |M|    +---+--- 
     ---| A |----| |      |      |       |      |      | |----| A |--- 
     ---+---+    |/       |      |       |      |       \|    +---+--- 
                 +      +---+  +---+   +---+  +---+      + 
                  D     | A |  | A |   | A |  | A |      E 
                        +---+  +---+   +---+  +---+ 
                         | |    | |     | |    | | 
    
         Figure 2-1: An OTS With OADM's - Functional Architecture 
    
   In Fig.2-1, the part that is on the inner side of all boxes labeled 
   "A" defines an all-optical subnetwork. From a routing perspective 
   two aspects are critical: 
     - Adaptation: These are the functions done at the edges of the 
       subnetwork that transform the incoming optical channel into the 
       physical wavelength to be transported through the subnetwork. 
     - Connectivity: This defines which pairs of edge Adaptation 
       functions can be interconnected through the subnetwork. 
    
    
   Chiu/Strand et al                                          [page 3] 
 
                                    
                      Features and Requirements         February 2001  
                 For The Optical Layer Control Plane 
                                    
   In Fig. 2-1, D and E are DWDM∆s and X and Y are OADM∆s. The boxes 
   labeled "A" are adaptation functions. They map one or more input 
   optical channels assumed to be standard short reach signals into a 
   long reach (LR) wavelength or wavelength group which will pass 
   transparently to a distant adaptation function. Adaptation 
   functionality which affects routing includes: 
     - Multiplexing: Either electrical or optical TDM may be used to 
       combine the input channels into a single wavelength.  This is 
       done to increase effective capacity:  A typical DWDM might be 
       able to handle 100 2.5 Gb/sec signals (250 Gb/sec total) or 50 
       10 Gb/sec (500 Gb/sec total); combining the 2.5 Gb/sec signals 
       together thus effectively doubles capacity. After multiplexing 
       the combined signal must be routed as a group to the distant 
       adaptation function. 
     - Adaptation Grouping: In this technique, groups of k (e.g., 4) 
       wavelengths are managed as a group within the system and must be 
       added/dropped as a group. We will call such a group an 
       "adaptation grouping". Another term frequently used is "wave 
       group". 
     - Laser Tunability: The lasers producing the LR wavelengths may 
       have a fixed frequency, may be tunable over a limited range, or 
       be tunable over the entire range of wavelengths supported by the 
       DWDM. Tunability speeds may also vary. Note that tunable 
       receivers are becoming a reality and for certain applications. 
    
   Connectivity between adaptation functions may also be limited: 
     - As pointed out above, TDM multiplexing and/or adaptation 
       grouping by the adaptation function forces groups of input 
       channels to be delivered together to the same distant adaptation 
       function. 
     - Only adaptation functions whose lasers/receivers are tunable to 
       compatible frequencies can be connected. 
     - The switching capability of the OADM∆s may also be constrained.  
       For example: 
          o There may be some wavelengths that can not be dropped at 
            all. 
          o There may be a fixed relationship between the frequency 
            dropped and the physical port on the OADM to which it is 
            dropped. 
          o OADM physical design may put an upper bound on the number 
            of adaptation groupings dropped at any single OADM. 
    
   For a fixed configuration of the OADM∆s and adaptation functions 
   connectivity will be fixed: Each input port will essentially be 
   hard-wired to some specific distant port.  However this connectivity 
   can be changed by changing the configurations of the OADM∆s and 
   adaptation functions. For example, an additional adaptation grouping 
   might be dropped at an OADM or a tunable laser retuned. In each case 
   the port-to-port connectivity is changed.  
    
   Chiu/Strand et al                                          [page 4] 
 
                                    
                      Features and Requirements         February 2001  
                 For The Optical Layer Control Plane 
                                    
    
   This capability can be expected to be under software control. Today 
   the control would rest in the vendor-supplied Element Management 
   system (EMS), which in turn would be controlled by the operator∆s 
   OS∆s.  However in principle the EMS could participate in the routing 
   process. The constraints on reconfiguration are likely to be quite 
   complex, dependent on the vendor design and also on exactly what 
   line cards have been deployed. Thus the state information needed for 
   routing  is likely to be voluminous and possibly vendor specific. 
   However it is very desirable to solve these issues, possibly by 
   advertising only an abstraction of the complex configuration options 
   to the external world via the control plane. 
    
2.2       Wavelength Routed All-Optical Networks 
    
   The optical networks presently being deployed may be called "opaque" 
   ([Tkach98]): each link is optically isolated by transponders doing 
   O/E/O conversions. They provide regeneration with retiming and 
   reshaping, also called 3R, which eliminated transparency to bit 
   rates and frame format. These transponders are quite expensive and 
   they also constrain the rapid evolution to new services - for 
   example, they tend to be bit rate and format specific.  Thus there 
   are strong motivators to introduce "domains of transparency" - all-
   optical subnetworks - larger than an OTS. 
 
   The routing of lightpaths through an all-optical network has 
   received extensive attention. (See [Yates99] or [Ramaswami98]).  
   When discussing routing in an all-optical network it is usually 
   assumed that all routes have adequate signal quality. This may be 
   ensured by limiting all-optical networks to subnetworks of limited 
   geographic size which are optically isolated from other parts of the 
   optical layer by transponders.  This approach is very practical and 
   has been applied to date, e.g. when determining the maximum length 
   of an Optical Transport System (OTS).  Furthermore operational 
   considerations like fault isolation also make limiting the size of 
   domains of transparency attractive. 
    
   There are however reasons to consider contained domains of 
   transparency in which not all routes have adequate signal quality.  
   From a demand perspective, maximum bit rates have rapidly increased 
   from DS3 to OC-192 and soon OC-768 (40 Gb/sec). As bit rates 
   increase it is necessary to increase power.  This makes impairments 
   and nonlinearities more troublesome. From a supply perspective, 
   optical technology is advancing very rapidly, making ever-larger 
   domains possible. In this section we assume that these 
   considerations will lead to the deployment of a domain of 
   transparency that is too large to ensure that all potential routes 
   have adequate signal quality for all circuits. Our goal is to 
    
   Chiu/Strand et al                                          [page 5] 
 
                                    
                      Features and Requirements         February 2001  
                 For The Optical Layer Control Plane 
                                    
   understand the impacts of the various types of impairments in this 
   environment. 
 
2.2.1     Problem Formulation 
    
   We consider a single domain of transparency. We wish to route a 
   unidirectional circuit from ingress client node X to egress client 
   node Y. At both X and Y, the circuit goes through an O/E/O 
   conversion which optically isolates the portion within our domain.  
   We assume that we know the bit rate of the circuit. Also, we assume 
   that the adaptation function at X applies some Forward Error 
   Correction (FEC) method to the circuit. We also assume we know the 
   launch power of the laser at X.  
 
   Impairments can be classified into two categories, linear and 
   nonlinear (See [Tkach98] for more on impairment constraints). Linear 
   effects are independent of signal power and affect wavelengths 
   individually. Amplifier spontaneous emission (ASE), polarization 
   mode dispersion (PMD), and chromatic dispersion are examples. 
   Nonlinearities are significantly more complex: they generate not 
   only dispersion on each channel, but also crosstalk between 
   channels.  
    
   In the remainder of this section we first outline how two key linear 
   impairments (PMD and ASE) might be handled by a set of analytical 
   formulae as additional constraints on routing.  We next discuss how 
   the remaining constraints might be approached. Finally we take a 
   broader perspective and discuss the implications of such constraints 
   on control plane architecture and also on broader constrained domain 
   of transparency architecture issues. 
    
2.2.2     Polarization Mode Dispersion 
    
   For a transparent fiber segment, the general rule for the PMD 
   requirement is that the time-average differential time delay between 
   two orthogonal state of polarizations should be less than a% of the 
   bit duration. (A typical value for a is 10 [ITU]. More aggressive 
   designs to compensate for PMD may allow higher than 10%. This would 
   be a system parameter known to the routing process.) This results in 
   a upper bound on the maximum length of an M-fiber-span transparent 
   segment, which is inverse proportion to the square of bit rate and 
   fiber PMD parameter where a fiber span in a transparent network 
   refers to a segment between two optical amplifiers (The detailed 
   equation is omitted due to the format constraint). For typical 
   fibers with PMD parameter of 0.5 picosecond per square root of km, 
   based on the constraint, the maximum length of the transparent 
   segment should not exceed 400km and 25km for bit rates of 10Gb/s and 
   40Gb/s, respectively. With newer fibers assuming PMD parameter 
   equals to 0.1 picosecond per square root of km, the maximum length 
    
   Chiu/Strand et al                                          [page 6] 
 
                                    
                      Features and Requirements         February 2001  
                 For The Optical Layer Control Plane 
                                    
   of the transparent segment should not exceed 10000km and 625km for 
   bit rates of 10Gb/s and 40Gb/, respectively. In general, the PMD 
   requirement is not an issue for most types of fibers at 10Gb/s or 
   lower bit rate. But it will become an issue at bit rates of 40Gb/s 
   and higher.  
    
2.2.3     Amplifier Spontaneous Emission  
    
   ASE degrades the signal to noise ratio. An acceptable optical SNR 
   level (SNRmin) which depends on the bit rate and transmitter-
   receiver technology (e.g., FEC) needs to be maintained at the 
   receiver. It also includes all the margins for those impairments 
   that are not treated explicitly as described in the following 
   subsection. In order to satisfy this requirement, vendors often 
   provide some general engineering rule in terms of maximum length of 
   the transparent segment and number of spans. For example, current 
   transmission systems are often limited to up to 6 spans with 80km 
   long in each. Startups have announced ultra long haul systems that 
   are claimed to be able to support up to thousands of km. Although 
   these general rules are helpful in network planning, more detailed 
   information on the SNR reduction in each component should be used to 
   determine whether the SNR level through a given transparent segment 
   is within the required value. This would provide flexibility in 
   provisioning or restoring a lightpath through a transparent 
   subnetwork. Here, we assume that the average optical power launched 
   at the transmitter is known as P. The lightpath from the transmitter 
   to the receiver goes through M optical amplifiers, with each 
   introducing some noise power. Unity gain can be used at all 
   amplifier sites to maintain constant signal power at the input of 
   each span to minimize noise power and nonlineararity. A constraint 
   on the maximum number of spans can be obtained [Kaminow97] which is 
   proportional to P and inverse proportional to SNRmin, optical 
   bandwidth B, amplifier gain G-1 and spontaneous emission factor n of 
   the optical amplifier. (Again, the detailed equation is omitted due 
   to the format constraint.) Let∆s take a typical example. Assuming 
   P=4dBm, SNRmin=20dB with FEC, B=12.5GHz, n=2.5, G=25dB, based on the 
   constraint, the maximum number of spans is at most 10. However, if 
   FEC is not used and the requirement on SNRmin becomes 25dB, the 
   maximum number of spans drops down to 3. 
    
2.2.4     Other Impairments 
 
   Other Polarization Dependent Impairments Other polarization-
   dependent effects besides PMD influence system performance. For 
   example, many components have polarization-dependent loss (PDL) 
   [Ramaswami98] which accumulates in a system with many components on 
   the transmission path. The state of polarization fluctuates with 
   time, and it is generally required to maintain the total PDL on the 
   path to be within some acceptable limit, typically 1dB margin in 
   OSNR. 
    
   Chiu/Strand et al                                          [page 7] 
 
                                    
                      Features and Requirements         February 2001  
                 For The Optical Layer Control Plane 
                                    
    
   Chromatic Dispersion  In general this impairment can be adequately 
   (but not optimally) compensated for on a per-link basis, and/or at 
   system initial setup time. 
    
   Crosstalk Since crosstalk in the system affects Q which is a measure 
   of the electrical signal-to-noise ratio assuming Gaussian noise 
   statistics, it can be factored in with some margin in Q. As a 
   result, one can increase the OSNR requirement by some modified 
   margin. 
    
   Nonlinear Impairments It seems unlikely that these can be dealt with 
   explicitly in a routing algorithm because they lead to constraints 
   that can couple routes together and lead to complex dependencies, 
   e.g. on the order in which specific fiber types are traversed. Note 
   that different fiber types (standard single mode fiber, dispersion 
   shifted fiber, dispersion compensated fiber, etc.) have very 
   different effects from nonlinear impairments. A full treatment of 
   the nonlinear constraints would likely require very detailed 
   knowledge of the physical infrastructure, including measured 
   dispersion values for each span, fiber core area and composition, as 
   well as knowledge of subsystem details such as dispersion 
   compensation technology. This information would need to be combined 
   with knowledge of the current loading of optical signals on the 
   links of interest to determine the level of nonlinear impairment.  
   Alternatively, one could assume that nonlinear impairments are 
   bounded and result in X dB margin in the required OSNR level for a 
   given bit rate, where X for performance reasons would be limited to 
   1 or 2 dB, consequently setting a limit on the maximum number of 
   spans. For the approach described here to be useful, it is desirable 
   for this span length limit to be longer than that imposed by the 
   constraints which can be treated explicitly. When designing a DWDM 
   transport system, there are tradeoffs between signal power launched 
   at the transmitter, span length, and nonlinear effects on BER that 
   need to be considered jointly. Here, we assume that an X dB margin 
   is obtained after the transport system has been designed with a 
   fixed signal power and maximum span length for a given bit rate. 
   Further work is required to determine the validity of this approach. 
   However, it is possible that there could be an advantage in 
   designing systems which are less aggressive with respect to 
   nonlinearities, and therefore somewhat sub-optimal, in exchange for 
   improved scalability, simplicity and flexibility in routing and 
   control plane design. 
    
2.2.5     Implications For Routing and Control Plane Design 
    
     - Additional state information will be required by the routing 
       algorithm for each type of impairment that has the potential of 
       being limiting for some routes. 
      
    
   Chiu/Strand et al                                          [page 8] 
 
                                    
                      Features and Requirements         February 2001  
                 For The Optical Layer Control Plane 
                                    
     -  It is likely that the physical layer parameters do not change 
       value rapidly and could be stored in some database; however 
       these are physical layer parameters that today are frequently 
       not known at the granularity required. If the ingress node of a 
       lightpath does path selection these parameters would need to be 
       available at this node. 
 
     - The specific constraints required in a given situation will 
       depend on the design and engineering of the domain of 
       transparency; for example it will be important to know whether 
       chromatic dispersion has been dealt with on per-link basis, and 
       whether the domain is operating in a linear or nonlinear regime. 
 
     - In situations where only PMD and/or ASE impairments are 
       potentially binding the optimal routing problem as two 
       constraints OSPF algorithm enhancements will be needed. However, 
       it is likely that relatively simple heuristics could be used in 
       practice. 
    
   Additionally, routing in an all-optical network without wavelength 
   conversion raises several additional issues: 
 
     - Since the route selected must have the chosen wavelength 
       available on all links, this information needs to be considered 
       in the routing process. This is discussed in [Chaudhuri00], 
       where it is concluded that advertising detailed wavelength 
       availabilities on each link is not likely to scale. Instead they 
       propose an alternative method which probes along a chosen path 
       to determine which wavelengths (if any) are available. This 
       would require a significant addition to the routing logic 
       normally used in OSPF. 
      
     - Choosing a path first and then a wavelength along the path is 
       known to give adequate results in simple topologies such as 
       rings and trees ([Yates99]).  This does not appear to be true in 
       large mesh networks under realistic provisioning scenarios, 
       however.  Instead significantly better results are achieved if 
       wavelength and route are chosen simultaneously.  This approach 
       would however also have a significant affect on OSPF. 
      
2.3       Diversity 
    
   "Diversity" is a relationship between lightpaths. Two lightpaths are 
   said to be diverse if they have no single point of failure. In 
   traditional telephony the dominant transport failure mode is a 
   failure in the interoffice plant, such as a fiber cut inflicted by a 
   backhoe.  
    
    
   Chiu/Strand et al                                          [page 9] 
 
                                    
                      Features and Requirements         February 2001  
                 For The Optical Layer Control Plane 
                                    
   Why is diversity a unique problem that needs to be considered for 
   optical networks? So far, data network operators have relied on 
   their private line providers to ensure diversity and so have not had 
   to deal directly with the problem. GMPLS makes the complexities 
   handled by the private line provisioning process, including 
   diversity, part of the common control plane and so visible to all.  
    
   To determine whether two lightpath routings are diverse it is 
   necessary to identify single points of failure in the interoffice 
   plant. To do so we will use the following terms: A fiber cable is a 
   uniform group of fibers contained in a sheath.  An Optical Transport 
   System will occupy fibers in a sequence of fiber cables. Each fiber 
   cable will be placed in a sequence of conduits - buried honeycomb 
   structures through which fiber cables may be pulled - or buried in a 
   right of way (ROW).  A ROW is land in which the network operator has 
   the right to install his conduit or fiber cable.  It is worth noting 
   that for economic reasons, ROW∆s are frequently obtained from 
   railroads, pipeline companies, or thruways.  It is frequently the 
   case that several carriers may lease ROW from the same source; this 
   makes it common to have a number of carriers∆ fiber cables in close 
   proximity to each other. Similarly, in a metropolitan network, 
   several carriers might be leasing duct space in the same RBOC 
   conduit.  There are also "carrier's carriers" - optical networks 
   which provide fibers to multiple carriers, all of whom could be 
   affected by a single failure in the "carrier's carrier" network. 
    
   In a typical intercity facility network there might be on the order 
   of 100 offices that are candidates for OLXC∆s. To represent the 
   inter-office fiber network accurately a network with an order of 
   magnitude more nodes is required.  In addition to Optical Amplifier 
   (OA) sites, these additional nodes include: 
     - Places where fiber cables enter/leave a conduit or right of way; 
     - Locations where fiber cables cross; 
     - Locations where fiber splices are used to interchange fibers 
       between fiber cables. 
    
   An example of the first might be: 
    
      
    
   Chiu/Strand et al                                         [page 10] 
 
                                    
                      Features and Requirements         February 2001  
                 For The Optical Layer Control Plane 
                                    
                                       A                 B 
              A-------------B                 \             / 
                                                \         / 
                                                  X-----Y 
                                                /         \ 
              C-------------D                 /             \ 
                                            C                 D 
       
      (a) Fiber Cable Topology       (b) Right-Of-Way/Conduit Topology 
    
                Figure 2-2:  Fiber Cable vs. ROW Topologies 
    
   Here the A-B fiber cable would be physically routed A-X-Y-B and the 
   C-D cable would be physically routed C-X-Y-D.   This topology might 
   arise because of some physical bottleneck: X-Y might be the Lincoln 
   Tunnel, for example, or the Bay Bridge. 
    
   Fiber route crossing (the second case) is really a special case of 
   this, where X and Y coincide.  In this case the crossing point may 
   not even be a manhole; the fiber routes might just be buried at 
   different depths. 
    
   Fiber splicing (the third case) often occurs when a major fiber 
   route passes near to a small office. To avoid the expense and 
   additional transmission loss only a small number of fibers are 
   spliced out of the major route into a smaller route going to the 
   small office.  This might well occur in a manhole or hut.  An 
   example is shown in Fig. 2-3(a), where A-X-B is the major route, X 
   the manhole, and C the smaller office.  The actual fiber topology 
   would then look like Fig. 2-3(b), where there would typically be 
   many more A-B fibers than A-C or C-B fibers, and where A-C and C-B 
   might have different numbers of fibers. (One of the latter might 
   even be missing.) 
    
                    C                             C 
                    |                           /   \ 
                    |                         /       \ 
                    |                       /           \ 
             A------X------B              A---------------B 
    
        (a) Fiber Cable Topology         (b) Fiber Topology 
    
               Figure 2-3.  Fiber Cable vs Fiber Topologies 
    
    
   Chiu/Strand et al                                         [page 11] 
 
                                    
                      Features and Requirements         February 2001  
                 For The Optical Layer Control Plane 
                                    
   The imminent deployment of ultra-long (>1000 km) Optical Transport 
   Systems introduces a further complexity: Two OTS's could interact a 
   number of times.  To make up a hypothetical example: A New York - 
   Atlanta OTS and a Philadelphia - Orlando OTS might ride on the same 
   right of way for x miles in Maryland and then again for y miles in 
   Georgia. They might also cross at Raleigh or some other intermediate 
   node without sharing right of way. 
    
   Diversity is often equated to routing two lightpaths between a 
   single pair of points, or different pairs of points so that no 
   single route failure will disrupt them both. This is too simplistic, 
   for a number of reasons: 
    
     - A sophisticated client of an optical network will want to derive 
       diversity needs from his/her end customers' availability 
       requirements. These often lead to more complex diversity 
       requirements than simply providing diversity between two 
       lightpaths. For example, a common requirement is that no single 
       failure should isolate a node or nodes. If a node A has single 
       lightpaths to nodes B and C, this requires A-B and A-C to be 
       diverse. In real applications, a large data network with N 
       lightpaths between its routers might describe their needs in an 
       NxN matrix, where (i,j) defines whether lightpaths i and j must 
       be diverse.  
      
     - Two circuits that might be considered diverse for one 
       application might not be considered diverse for in another 
       situation. Diversity is usually thought of as a reaction to 
       interoffice route failures.  High reliability applications may 
       require other types of failures to be taken into account. Some 
       examples: 
          o Office Outages: Although less frequent than route failures, 
            fires, power outages, and floods do occur.  Many network 
            managers require that diverse routes have no (intermediate) 
            nodes in common.  In other cases an intermediate node might 
            be acceptable as long as there is power diversity within 
            the office. 
          o Shared Rings: Many applications are willing to allow 
            "diverse" circuits to share a SONET ring-protected link; 
            presumably they would allow the same for optical layer 
            rings. 
          o Disasters: Earthquakes and floods can cause failures over 
            an extended area.  Defense Department circuits might need 
            to be routed with nuclear damage radii taken into account. 
    
   Chiu/Strand et al                                         [page 12] 
 
                                    
                      Features and Requirements         February 2001  
                 For The Optical Layer Control Plane 
                                    
     - Conversely, some networks may be willing to take somewhat larger 
       risks.  Taking route failures as an example: Such a network 
       might be willing to consider two fiber cables in heavy duty 
       concrete conduit as having a low enough chance of simultaneous 
       failure to be considered "diverse". They might also be willing 
       to view two fiber cables buried on opposite sides of a railroad 
       track as being diverse because there is minimal danger of a 
       single backhoe disrupting them both even though a bad train 
       wreck might jeopardize them both. 
           
   These considerations strongly suggest that the routing algorithm 
   should be sensitive to the types of threat considered unacceptable 
   by the requester. Note that the impairment constraints described in 
   the previous section may eliminate some of the long circuitous 
   routes sometimes needed to provide diversity. This would make it 
   harder to find many diverse paths through an all-optical network 
   than an opaque one. 
     
   [Chaudhuri00] introduced the term "Shared Risk Link Group" (SRLG) to 
   describe the relationship between two non-diverse links.  The above 
   discussion suggests that an SRLG should be characterized by 2 
   parameters: 
     - Type of Compromise: Examples would be shared fiber cable, shared 
       conduit, shared ROW, shared optical ring, shared office without 
       power sharing, etc.) 
     - Extent of Compromise:  For compromised outside plant, this would 
       be the length of the sharing. 
    
   Two links could be related by many SRLG's (AT&T's experience 
   indicates that a link may belong to over 100 SRLG's, each 
   corresponding to a separate fiber group. Each SRLG might relate a 
   single link to many other links. For the optical layer, similar 
   situations can be expected where a link is an ultra-long (3000 km) 
   OTS). The mapping between links and different types of SRLG∆s is in 
   general defined by network operators based on the definition of each 
   SRLG type. Since SRLG information is not yet ready to be 
   discoverable by a network element and does not change dynamically, 
   it need not be advertised with other resource availability 
   information by network elements. It could be configured in some 
   central database and be distributed to or retrieved by the nodes, or 
   advertised by network elements at the topology discovery stage. On 
   the other hand, in order to be able to perform distribute path 
   selection at each node that satisfies certain diverse routing 
    
   Chiu/Strand et al                                         [page 13] 
 
                                    
                      Features and Requirements         February 2001  
                 For The Optical Layer Control Plane 
                                    
   criterion, each network element may need to propagate the 
   information of number of channels available for each channel type 
   (e.g., OC48, OC192) on each channel group, where channel group is 
   defined as a set of channels that are routed identically and should 
   be given unique identification. Each channel group can be mapped 
   into a sequence of fiber cables while each fiber cable can belong to 
   multiple SRLG∆s based on their definitions.  
    
2.4       Other Unique Features of Optical Networks 
    
   There are other major differences between optical networks and IP 
   networks that have significant impacts on the design of the Optical 
   Layer control plane. They include the following two areas. 
    
     - Bi-directionality: In an IP network, Label Switched Paths (LSPs) 
       are inherently unidirectional. However, current transport 
       networks are bi-directional oriented, mostly due to the 
       evolution of two-way transmission in Public Switched Telephone 
       Network and by SONET/SDH line protection schemes [Doverspike00]. 
       This often requires the bi-directional connections provided by 
       the optical layer to use the same numbered channel in each 
       direction. As a result, a channel contention problem may occur 
       between two bi-directional request traveling in opposite 
       directions. Signaling mechanisms have been proposed to resolve 
       this type of contention [Ashwood00].  
      
     - Protection and restoration: In an IP network, when a backup LSP 
       is pre-established to protect against failure(s) on a working 
       LSP, the backup LSP does not occupy any physical resources 
       before a failure occurs. However, in an optical network, a pre-
       established optical connection for backup does occupy the ports 
       and channels on the path of the connection. This can be used for 
       the 1+1 protection, but not for shared mesh protection. Instead 
       with shared mesh protection, the backup path can be pre-selected 
       with or without the associated channels being chosen prior to 
       any failure, then cross-connect ports/channels physically after 
       a failure on the working path has been detected. See 
       [Doverspike00] for more detailed discussions on various 
       protection/restoration schemes. 
    
2.4  Discussion and Summary 
    
   Dealing with diversity seems to be an unavoidable requirement on 
   optical layer routing. It requires dealing with additional 
    
   Chiu/Strand et al                                         [page 14] 
 
                                    
                      Features and Requirements         February 2001  
                 For The Optical Layer Control Plane 
                                    
   constraints in the routing process but most importantly requires 
   additional state information to be available to the routing process. 
      
   The physical constraints of optical technology apply inside an all-
   optical ``domains of transparency∆∆.  Today∆s OTS is a simple 
   ``domain of transparency∆∆ consisting of WDM Mux/Demuxers and 
   Optical Amplifiers.  Because an OTS is not easily reconfigurable 
   these constraints are dealt with at the time of installation and 
   don∆t complicate routing and the control plane. 
    
   As domains of transparency become both larger and software 
   reconfigurable as discussed earlier, these physical constraints on 
   connectivity and transmission quality become increasingly of concern 
   to the control plane.   It is important to note that at present this 
   evolution is largely technology driven:  vendors pushing the 
   technology envelope are competing fiercely to provide solutions 
   which have higher capacity, can go further all-optically, are more 
   reconfigurable, and are more cost-effective.  Routing constraints, 
   which are essentially a by-product of this competitive dynamic, may 
   well become more complex. As vendors pursue their diverse visions it 
   is quite plausible that the optical layer of the future will be made 
   up of heterogeneous technologies which differ significantly in their 
   routing implications. 
    
   What are the control plane architecture choices in such an 
   eventuality? Alternative approaches that deserve consideration are: 
    
     - Per-Domain Routing: In this approach each domain could have its 
       own tuned approach to routing. Inter-domain routing would be 
       handled by a multi-domain or hierarchical protocol that allowed 
       the hiding of local complexity.  Single vendor domains might 
       have proprietary intra-domain routing strategies. This approach 
       has the advantage of providing carriers a flexible way to digest 
       technologies and subnetworks that for whatever reason are not 
       using a standard intra-domain routing protocol. 
      
     - Enforced Homogeneity: The capabilities of the control plane 
       would impose constraints on system design and network 
       engineering.  As examples: If control plane protocols did not 
       deal with non-linear impairments carriers would require their 
       vendors to provide transport systems where these constraints 
       were never binding. Transmission engineers could be required to 
       only deploy domains where every possible route met all 
       constraints not handled explicitly by the control plane even if 
       the cost penalties were severe. 
 
     - Additional Regeneration: At (selected) OLXC∆s within a domain of 
       transparency, the control plane could insert O/E/O regeneration 
       into routes with transmission problems. This might make all 
    
   Chiu/Strand et al                                         [page 15] 
 
                                    
                      Features and Requirements         February 2001  
                 For The Optical Layer Control Plane 
                                    
       routes feasible again, but at the cost of additional cost and 
       complexity and with some loss of rate and format transparency. 
 
     - Standardized Intra-Domain Routing Protocol: The examples 
       discussed in Section 2 suggest that a single standardized 
       protocol which tries to deal with the full range of possible 
       topological and transmission constraints will be extremely 
       complex and will require a lot of state information. However 
       when combined with limited application of the two previous 
       approaches it might be more plausible. 
    
   Given the complexity of physical and connectivity impairments and 
   diversity requirements, a valid question to ask is whether a 
   centralized routing model, where routing is done centrally using a 
   centralized database with a global network view would be better than 
   the distributed model favored in the Internet. Here, we provide some 
   pros and cons on each model.  
    
   To the extent that the per-domain routing approach just discussed is 
   used, the choice of model might be different depending on the 
   characteristics of the domain.  For example, in a domain like Fig. 
   2-1 it seems likely that a centralized model is more appropriate 
   because network elements like tunable lasers and reconfigurable 
   OADM's seem on the surface to be unlikely peers to much more complex 
   devices like OXC's or routers. On the other hand, a purely "opaque" 
   domain where impairment constraints play no role in routing would 
   appear to be an excellent candidate for the distributed model. 
    
   In the context of the complexities discussed in this paper, a 
   centralized model has some advantages: 
    
     - Information such as SRLG∆s and performance parameters which 
       change infrequently and are unlikely to be amenable to self-
       discovery could reside in a central database and would not need 
       to be advertised. 
      
     - Routing dependencies among circuits (to ensure diversity, for 
       example) is more easily handled centrally when the circuits do 
       not share terminals since the necessary state information should 
       be more easily accessible in a centralized model.  
 
     - Pre-computation of restoration paths and other computations that 
       can benefit from the use of global state information may also 
       benefit from centralization. 
    
   There are, of course, significant disadvantages to the centralized 
   model when compared to a distributed model:  
    
     - If rapid restoration is required, it is not possible to rely on 
       a centralized routing system to compute a recovery path for each 
    
   Chiu/Strand et al                                         [page 16] 
 
                                    
                      Features and Requirements         February 2001  
                 For The Optical Layer Control Plane 
                                    
       failed lightpath on demand after a failure has been detected.  
       The distributed model arguably will not have this problem. 
      
     - The centralized approach is not consistent with the distributed 
       routing philosophy prevalent in the Internet. The reasons which 
       drove the Internet∆s architecture-scalability, the inherent 
       problems with hard state information, etc.-are largely relevant 
       to optical networking. In addition there is the major 
       disadvantage that a centralized approach would seem to preclude 
       integrated routing across the IP and optical boundary. 
    
   A related issue is whether routes should be pre-computed. It has 
   been suggested, for example, that all routes (or at least a large 
   number) be pre-computed and stored in a central database. This 
   potentially might allow more sophisticated algorithms to be used to 
   filter out the routes violating transmission constraints. There are 
   however serious disadvantages (in addition to the disadvantages of 
   the centralized model given above): 
    
     - In a large national network there are just too many routes that 
       might be needed, by orders of magnitude. This is particularly 
       true when diversity constraints and restoration routing may 
       force weird routings. 
     - Every time any parameter changes anywhere in the network all 
       routes using the impacted resource will need to be reexamined. 
    
    
3.        Business and Operational Realities 
    
   The Internet technologies being applied to define the new Optical 
   Layer control plane evolved in a very different business and 
   operational environment than that of today's transport network 
   provider. The differences need to be clearly understood and dealt 
   with if the new control plane is going to be a success. The Optical 
   Interworking Forum, one of the principal standards groups in this 
   area, has recently formed a Carrier Subgroup to provide guidance 
   from this perspective for their standards activities.  
    
   In this section we touch on two aspects of this problem: Business 
   Models and the management of the introduction of new technology. 
    
3.1       Business Models 
    
   The cost of providing gigabit connections is expected to drop 
   rapidly, but will still require dedicated use of expensive and 
   periodically scarce capacity and equipments.  Therefore the ability 
   to control network access, and to measure and bill for usage, will 
    
   Chiu/Strand et al                                         [page 17] 
 
                                    
                      Features and Requirements         February 2001  
                 For The Optical Layer Control Plane 
                                    
   be critical. Also, lightpath connections are expected to have quite 
   long holding times (weeks-months) compared to LSPs in an IP network.  
   Therefore the collection of usage data and the nature of the 
   connection establishment process have very different characteristics 
   in the Optical Network than in an IP network. 
    
   In addition, industry revenues from legacy services (voice and 
   private line) are expected to dwarf those from IP transport for the 
   next few years. ?? John: could you find a reference from RHK? 
   Meeting the needs of these services and migrating them to the 
   operator∆s newer service platforms will also be a critical need for 
   operators with extensive embedded revenues.  Thus the needs of 
   services based on SONET/SDH, Ethernet, ATM, etc. will need to be 
   given attention.  In addition most operators hope that they will 
   have many different ISP's and Intranets as customers. Thus the 
   customer base for most operators will be quite diverse. 
    
   Another area of prime concern is Operations Systems (OS∆s). The 
   opportunity to create a thinner and more nimble network management 
   plane by off-loading many provisioning and data-basing functions 
   onto a vendor-provided control plane and/or Element Management 
   System (EMS) holds the promise of large and immediate benefits to 
   operators in the form of reduced software development and more rapid 
   deployment of new functionality.  This is a critical area to achieve 
   scalability.  
    
   In the short term the principal benefits of the proposed control 
   plane are two: rapid provisioning and a reduction in the cost and 
   complexity of OS∆s and operations. Both of these benefits require 
   that circuits be controlled end-to-end by the new control plane, for 
   otherwise the provisioning times will be determined by those of the 
   older, much slower segments and OS costs and OS and operations 
   complexity may actually go up because of the need to interwork the 
   old and the new worlds. To avoid this the capabilities of the new 
   control plane need to be available end-to-end as soon as possible.  
   This will put a premium on the rapid development of standards for 
   interworking across trust boundaries, for example between Local 
   Exchange Carrier's and national networks. 
    
3.2       Managing The Introduction Of New Technology 
    
   We expect optical layer hardware technology to continue to evolve 
   very rapidly, with a very real possibility of additional 
   "disruptive" advances. The analog nature of optical technology 
    
   Chiu/Strand et al                                         [page 18] 
 
                                    
                      Features and Requirements         February 2001  
                 For The Optical Layer Control Plane 
                                    
   compounds this problem for the control planes because these advances 
   are likely to be accompanied by complex technology-specific 
   constraints on routing and functionality. (Sections 2.1 and 2.2 
   above provide examples of this.)  An architecture which allows the 
   gradual and seamless introduction of new technologies into the 
   network without time-consuming and costly changes to embedded 
   technologies and especially control planes is highly desirable. 
    
   When compared to the IP experience several distinctions stand out: 
     - The optical layer control plane seems more likely to be buffeted 
       by hardware changes than is the IP control plane. 
     - Optical layer innovations are currently being driven by start-up 
       companies, with product innovation well ahead of the standards 
       process.  Efforts at control plane standardization are much less 
       mature than comparable IP efforts.  This is a matter of 
       considerable concern because neither rapid provisioning nor the 
       operational improvements desired are likely if each vendor has a 
       proprietary control plane, with interworking between vendors 
       (and hence between networks, in most cases) left as a problem 
       for operators' OS's to solve. 
      
3.3       Service Framework Suggestions 
    
   For the reasons given above and others, we expect that the best 
   model for an optical layer control plane within a trust domain is 
   one that pays heavy attention to the management of heterogeneous  
   technologies and associated service capabilities. This might be done 
   by hiding complexities in subnetworks. These subnetworks would then 
   advertise only a standardized abstraction of their connectivity, 
   capacity, and functionality capabilities. Hopefully this would allow 
   even disruptive technologies such as all-optical subnetworks to be 
   introduced with a minimum of impact on preexisting parts of the 
   trust domain. 
    
   Each network operator will have a need to define "branded" services 
   - bundles of service functionality and SLA's with a specific price 
   structure. In a heterogeneous network it will be necessary to map a 
   customer request for such a "branded" service onto the specific 
   capabilities of each subnetwork. This suggests a hierarchical model, 
   decisions about these mappings, and also about policies for peering 
   with other networks and overall management of the service offerings 
   available to specific customers managed centrally but application of 
   these policies handled at the local or subnetwork level. 
    
    
   Chiu/Strand et al                                         [page 19] 
 
                                    
                      Features and Requirements         February 2001  
                 For The Optical Layer Control Plane 
                                    
4.        Security Considerations 
    
   The solution developed to address the requirements defined in this 
   document must address security aspects. 
    
5.        Acknowledgments 
    
   This document has benefited from discussions with Michael Eiselt and 
   Mark Shtaif. 
 
References: 
    
   [Ashwood00] Ashwood-Smith, P. et al., "MPLS Optical/Switching 
   Signaling Functional Description", Work in Progress, draft-ashwood-
   generalized-mpls-signaling-00.txt. 
    
   [Awduche99] Awduche, D. O., Rekhter, Y., Drake, J., and Coltun, R., 
   "Multi-Protocol Lambda Switching: Combining MPLS Traffic Engineering 
   Control With Optical Crossconnects", Work in Progress, draft-
   awduche-mpls-te-optical-01.txt. 
    
   [Chaudhuri00] Chaudhuri, S., Hjalmtysson, G., and Yates, J., 
   "Control of Lightpaths in an Optical Network", Work in Progress, 
   draft-chaudhuri-ip-olxc-control-00.txt. 
    
   [Doverspike00] Doverspike, R. and Yates, J., "Challenges For MPLS in 
   Optical Network Restoration", IEEE Communication Magazine, February, 
   2001. 
    
   [ITU] ITU-T Doc. G.663, Optical Fibers and Amplifiers, Section 
   II.4.1.2. 
    
   [Kaminow97] Kaminow, I. P. and Koch, T. L., editors, Optical Fiber 
   Telecommunications IIIA, Academic Press, 1997. 
    
   [Moy98] Moy, John T., OSPF: Anatomy of an Internet Routing Protocol, 
   Addison-Wesley, 1998. 
 
   [Ramaswami98] Ramaswami, R. and Sivarajan, K. N., Optical Networks: 
   A Practical Perspective, Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, 1998. 
    
   [Tkach98] Tkach, R., Goldstein, E., Nagel, J., and Strand, J., 
   "Fundamental Limits of Optical Transparency", Optical Fiber 
   Communication Conf., Feb. 1998, pp. 161-162. 
    
   Chiu/Strand et al                                         [page 20] 
 
                                    
                      Features and Requirements         February 2001  
                 For The Optical Layer Control Plane 
                                    
    
   [Yates99] Yates, J. M., Rumsewicz, M. P. and Lacey, J. P. R., 
   "Wavelength Converters in Dynamically-Reconfigurable WDM Networks", 
   IEEE Communications Surveys, 2Q1999 (online at 
   www.comsoc.org/pubs/surveys/2q99issue/yates.html). 
    
Authors' Addresses: 
    
   Angela Chiu 
   AT&T Labs 
   200 Laurel Ave., Rm A5-1F06  
   Middletown, NJ 07748 
   Phone:(732) 420-9057 
   Email: alchiu@att.com 
    
   John Strand 
   AT&T Labs 
   200 Laurel Ave., Rm A5-1D06  
   Middletown, NJ 07748 
   Phone:(732) 420-9036 
   Email: jls@att.com 
    
   Robert Tkach 
   Celion Networks 
   1 Shiela Dr., Suite 2  
   Tinton Falls, NJ 07724 
   Phone:(732) 747-9909 
   Email: bob.tkach@celion.com 
    
   James Luciani 
   PO Box 1010 
   Concord, MA 01742 
   Phone:(978) 266-2854 
   james_luciani@mindspring.com 
    
   Chiu/Strand et al                                         [page 21] 
 