 
 
 
 
 
Internet Engineering Task Force                             Mike Pierce
INTERNET DRAFT                                                    Artel
Expires October, 2002
                                                               Don Choi
                                                                   DISA

                                                             April 2002



   Requirements for Assured Service Capabilities in Voice over IP


            draft-pierce-sipping-assured-service-02.txt


Status of This Memo 
   
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 
   
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet Drafts. 
   
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
   
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed a
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/lid-abstracts.text 
   
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html 
   







Pierce                    Expires October 2002                 [Page 1]

Internet Draft    Requirements for Assured Service in VoIP    April 2002


Copyright Notice
   
   Copyright (c) Internet Society 2002.  All rights reserved. 
   Reproduction or translation of the complete documents, but not of
   extracts, including this notice, is freely permitted. 
   

Abstract
   
   Assured Service refers to the set of capabilities used to ensure that
   mission critical communications are setup and remain connected. This
   memo describes the requirements for such capabilities in support of
   specific networks such as those used by the US military and
   government.
 

  
Table of Contents
   
   0.   Changes  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   1.   Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.   Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   3.   High Level Requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   4.   Functional Requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   4.1  Precedence Level Marking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   4.2  Authentication/Authorization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   4.3  Preferential Treatment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   4.4  Diversion if Not Answered  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   4.5  Notifications to Preempted Party . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   4.6  Acknowledge by Preempted Party . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   4.7  Protection of Signaling Information from Disclosure  . . . . 7
   4.8  Accounting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   5.   Current Situation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   5.1  IPv4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   5.2  DiffServ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   5.3  IntServ/RSVP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   5.4  MPLS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   5.5  SIP  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   6.   Possible Approaches  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
   6.1  Precedence Level Marking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
   6.2  Authentication/Authorization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   6.2.1  Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   6.2.2  Authentication Procedures  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   6.2.3  Authorization Procedures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   6.3  Preferential Treatment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   6.4  Diversion  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   6.5  Notification to Preempted Party  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   6.6  Acknowledge by Preempted Party . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   6.7  Protection of Signaling Information  . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   7.   Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   7.1  Authentication/authorization of User Access  . . . . . . . . 13
   7.2  Security of Signaling Information  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   7.3  Security of Routing Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14

Pierce                    Expires October 2002                 [Page 2]


Internet Draft    Requirements for Assured Service in VoIP    April 2002

   8.   IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   9.   References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   10.  Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   Full Copyright Statement  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   
   
0.   Changes
   
   01 Indicated informative material which would not be a part of final.
   Moved some to Annex.
    
   02 Removed material to draft-pierce-sipping-pref-treat-examples-00
   and draft-pierce-sipping-assured-service-arch-00.
   Added requirement to maintain records of use of service.
 
  
1.   Introduction
   
   Throughout many decades of evolution of the telephony network and its
   supporting protocols, there has been a need to provide special
   services to a limited subset of the users and calls within a network
   or domain in order to ensure completion of important calls. Examples
   of this need have been in support of emergency traffic for natural
   disasters, network restoration traffic, and high priority traffic in
   a military network. Provision of the required capabilities with the
   signaling protocols and within the switching systems has been defined
   in a number of national and international standards, most notably a
   service referred to as Multi-Level Precedence and Preemption as
   defined in an American National Standard [T1.619] in the US and in
   corresponding ITU-T Recommendations [I.255.3, Q.735.3, and Q.955.3].
   In addition, a service called High Probability of Completion (HPC)
   was defined in [T1.631] and, most recently, two ITU-T Recommendations
   define the requirements for the International Emergency Preference
   Scheme (IEPS) [E.106] and the International Emergency Multimedia
   Service (IEMS) [F.706].
   
   Other drafts submitted to the IETF have addressed aspects of MLPP and
   IEPS. Some of these are [Polk1], which discusses some of the possible
   solutions for MLPP within IP; [Folts], which presents the functional
   requirements, features, and objectives for the Emergency
   Telecommunications Service (ETS); and [Carlberg], which provides a
   framework for IEPS for telephony over IP.
   
   MLPP was the solution to providing Assured Service capabilities
   within the circuit switched environment. It is essential that
   equivalent Assured Service capabilities are defined and implemented
   for the packet-based, connectionless environment of the Internet, and
   specifically SIP. Without these capabilities, SIP can not be used for
   those applications which require such capabilities, and is less than
   optimal for many other uses.
   
   This memo builds on these references and identifies the specific
   requirements for Assured Service capabilities in support of these
   specific types of environments.  The term "Assured Service" is used

Pierce                    Expires October 2002                 [Page 3]

Internet Draft    Requirements for Assured Service in VoIP    April 2002


   to refer to the required capabilities, rather than the previous terms
   of MLPP or IEPS, since the envisioned set of capabilities and
   protocols to achieve them are not expected to be the same as those
   previously defined services.
   
   Although these requirements are derived from previous military and
   government applications, many of the same requirements and
   capabilities may be applied for non-military or government networks,
   for example, in support of commercial network restoration efforts. A
   presentation in the TEWG at London [Ash] demonstrated real-life
   situations from the past in which total network failures required
   extensive efforts, presumably including communication via other
   unaffected networks, to bring the affected network back on line. If
   one considered a situation in which the very network which had failed
   was needed to carry the network management traffic required to get it
   back on line, it would be hard to imagine how it could ever be
   brought back up in the face of overwhelming customer attempts.
   Capabilities would be required to give priority to the network
   management traffic, even to the extent of blocking all non-emergency
   traffic for a period of time.
   
   
2.   Background
   
   In the circuit switched environment, specific circuits or channels
   were used for each call. These were typically 64 kbit/s channels
   which were a part of a TDM transmission structure. Later developments
   used packet/cell based transport instead of dedicated 64 kbit/s
   channels, however, the effect was the same. There was still a
   dedicated transport capacity assigned for each call.
   
   Assured Service in the circuit switched environment may be provided
   by one or more of the following techniques. Note that the
   capabilities included within IEPS [E.106], are included here for
   reference but not dealt with further in this memo. They are further
   dealt with in [Folts]:
   
      - Giving priority to return of dial tone (IEPS).
   
      - Marking of signaling messages for better handling, for example,
        being last to be dropped in case of congestion in the signaling
        network (HPC).
   
      - Extra routing possibilities for higher priority calls. (IEPS)
   
      - Exemption from restrictive management controls (IEPS) such as
        hard-to-reach codes and code gapping.
   
      - Reservation of specific facilities (trunks) for higher priority
        traffic (IEPS).
   
      - Higher priority calls may preempt existing lower priority calls,
        causing the network to release the lower priority call to free

Pierce                    Expires October 2002                 [Page 4]


Internet Draft    Requirements for Assured Service in VoIP    April 2002


        up resources for immediate reuse by the higher priority call
        (MLPP).
   
   Identification of traffic authorized to use one or more of these
   techniques may be via the following methods:
   
      - Calls placed from physical lines or devices authorized for its
        use
   
      - Calls placed to specific telephone numbers or blocks of numbers
   
      - Entry of a special ID code and PIN from any telephone device
   
   
3.   High Level Requirements
   
   While the existing requirements and capabilities have been developed
   with the circuit switched environment in mind, many are directly
   applicable to the packet environment and specifically the Voice over
   IP application being defined using SIP. Some of the capabilities need
   to be adapted or modified for application in the packet mode
   environment. In addition, there will likely be new techniques which
   can be defined specifically for the SIP case.
   
   At a high level, the Assured Service requirements can be stated as
   the need to ensure that mission critical voice-mode calls get set up
   and remain connected.
   
   
4.   Functional Requirements
   
   The functional requirements for Assured Service being detailed here
   are specifically those needed to support the US government
   requirements, primarily for the military environment. This memo
   concentrates on those portions mentioned in Section 2 which are
   derived from the requirements for MLPP as defined in [T1.619].
   
   Many of these requirements are the same as, or very similar to, those
   of the IEPREP work as described in [Baker].
   
   The basic requirements can be defined as follows;
   
4.1  Precedence Level Marking
   
   It must be possible for the originator to select and signal one of
   five precedence levels for a call, with the call defaulting to the
   lowest if none is specified. It must be possible to carry this call
   associated precedence level though the IP network. It must be
   possible to deliver the originally signaled precedence level to the
   called party.
   
4.2  Authentication/Authorization
   

Pierce                    Expires October 2002                 [Page 5]


Internet Draft    Requirements for Assured Service in VoIP    April 2002


   It must be possible to verify that the calling party is authorized to
   use the Assured Service and the requested precedence level value and
   to take the appropriate action if the calling party attempts to use a
   higher level. The preferred action is to reject the call, and send an
   indication of the reason to the caller.
   
4.3  Preferential Treatment
   
   It must be possible to provide preferential treatment to higher
   precedence calls in relation to lower precedence calls. Examples of
   preferential treatments are:
   
      - reservation of network resources for precedence calls
   
      - usage of higher Call Acceptance limits for higher precedence
        calls
   
      - preferential queuing of signaling messages based on precedence
        level
   
      - preferential queuing of user data packets based on precedence
        level
   
      - discarding of packets of lower precedence call
   
      - preemption of one or more existing calls of lower precedence
        level
   
      - preemption of some of the resources being used by a call of
        lower precedence level
   
      - preemption of the reservation of resources being held for other
        traffic
   
   Possible methods of providing Preferential Treatment using the
   provisions of this memo, as well as other existing IETF protocols,
   are described in [Pierce1].
   
4.4  Diversion if Not Answered
   
   If a precedence call (one higher that the lowest level) does not
   answer within a designated time or the called party is busy with a
   call of equal or higher precedence such that an indication of the new
   call can not be given to the intended called party, the call must be
   diverted to a predetermined alternate party. In general, this must
   operate similar to a normal "Call Forwarding on No Answer" service.
   
4.5  Notifications to Preempted Party
   
   All preempted parties must be provided with a distinct notification
   informing them that their call has been preempted.
   
4.6  Acknowledge by Preempted Party

Pierce                    Expires October 2002                 [Page 6]


Internet Draft    Requirements for Assured Service in VoIP    April 2002


   
   When an existing call is preempted for delivery of a higher
   precedence call to the same party, after the party is notified that a
   new call is being presented, the party must acknowledge the
   preemption before the new call is connected. That is, there must be a
   positive acknowledgement before any audio information is transferred
   in either direction.
   
4.7  Protection of Signaling Information from Disclosure
   
   Although protection is not actually an integral part of the Assured
   Service functionality, it is specifically identified here since this
   capability is always required in those networks which are assumed to
   be the primary users of Assured Service.
   
   It is required that sensitive information not be made available to
   non-secure portions of the network or to any non-secure network
   through which the traffic passes. It is also important that it not be
   accessible by users connected to the network. This non-disclosure
   requirement especially applies to information which is used to
   control link state routing protocols based on knowledge of the
   current traffic load at each precedence level on each route.
   
   Further, it is desirable that the precedence information regarding
   each call (as well as the other information such as calling/called
   party identity) be protected from disclosure to the greatest extent
   possible.
   
4.8  Accounting
   
   Proper administration of the Assured Service capability requires that
   use of the service can be reviewed after the fact for potential
   abuse. Therefore, it is required that appropriate records be kept of
   calls made, including the calling and called parties identity, time
   of the call, and the precedence level used. This is similar to the
   requirements for accounting (for billing purposes) for other services
   in a commercial environment.
   
5.   Current Situation
   
   Current support for Assured Service within various IETF defined
   protocols and ongoing initiatives is not considered to be sufficient.
   
5.1  IPv4
   
   Although support for the traditional five precedence levels was
   included in the TOS field of IPv4 from the earliest days, support for
   this field is not universal, and it only provides packet level
   priority. It does not provide call setup priority or control of call
   retention.
   
5.2  DiffServ
   

Pierce                    Expires October 2002                 [Page 7]


Internet Draft    Requirements for Assured Service in VoIP    April 2002


   Within DiffServ, Assured Forwarding defined in RFC 2597 provides four
   classes and three drop precedences for each class. One of these
   classes would be used for the signaling messages for session
   establishment and release. It is unknown if there has been any
   proposal to utilize multiple drop precedence levels for various
   signaling messages, as is being done with the equivalent call control
   messages in ISUP for SS#7.
   
   Expedited Forwarding defined in RFC 3246 is intended for voice, but
   it treats all such voice packets the same. It does not define
   multiple drop precedences as AF does.
   
5.3  IntServ/RSVP
   
   Although RSVP includes mention of preemption of existing reservations
   in favor of other higher priority ones, it does not provide detailed
   procedures for doing so. In principle, it should be straightforward
   to do so. However, it is not believed that the procedures required
   for establishment of a path using RSVP, and the additional procedures
   that would be necessary for preemption of an existing path, would
   allow this to be useful for the provision of Assured Service
   capabilities to individual calls.
   
5.4  MPLS
   
   Since MPLS is fundamentally a means to emulate circuit-mode operation
   by establishment of a "path" which then functions like a
   "connection", the principles of priority and preemption could be
   applied to the setup and retention of this path the same as they are
   in the circuit-mode environment. RFC 2702 describes the requirements
   for such capabilities as applied to "traffic trunks". However, it
   uses the term "traffic trunk" to refer to a facility which is
   established to carry an aggregate of traffic, i.e., many telephone
   calls. This is the equivalent of a "trunk group" in standard
   telephony terminology [T1.523]. Because of the extensive procedures
   that are required to establish and remove such a Label Switched Path,
   it is believed that this prevents MPLS from being used to setup paths
   for individual calls.
   
   MPLS may be applicable for the establishment of the equivalent of
   dedicated trunk groups between switching entities (if such entities
   were to exist in the SIP network architecture). Each of these "trunk
   groups" or "traffic trunks" could exist to support a specific
   precedence level of traffic between two points and could be setup
   using the procedures defined in [RFC3212] or those in [RFC3209].
   These documents allow the signaling of the required five levels of
   precedence as well as separate setup and holding priorities.
   
5.5  SIP
   
   SIP [RFC2543] defines four tokens for priority levels to be used to
   control call setup, however, they do not equate to the levels
   required for Assured Service. It should also be noted that no

Pierce                    Expires October 2002                 [Page 8]


Internet Draft    Requirements for Assured Service in VoIP    April 2002


   explicit ordering of these four defined values (emergency, urgent,
   normal, non-urgent) can be found.
   
   The proposed Resource Priority Header [Polk2] provides for the five
   precedence levels required for per call marking.
   
   Security is discussed in the revision to RFC 2543 [SIP-2543bis], but
   it has been recognized in various Working Group discussions that
   security for all aspects of call control needs to be considered in a
   unified manner. Security for each individual component of call setup
   and release can not be designed separately.
   
   The procedure being proposed for authorization of call set-up and
   media allocation [SIP-CALL-AUTH] appears to be too time consuming to
   expect it to occur each time a user attempts to place a telephone
   call, especially a high-priority one. The probable delay in
   establishing this authorization would be contrary to the goals and
   requirements for Assured Service. Use of this type of procedure would
   require that preferential treatments also be applied to all message
   interactions and proxy processing of the sequence of messages
   required for the authorization. Overloads of the proxies responsible
   for the Call Authorization would prevent or unacceptably delay setup
   of the high precedence call.
   
   
6.   Possible Approaches
   
   The following identify possible approaches to meeting the
   requirements stated above. This section is included in the draft to
   stimulate discussion on ways of meeting the requirements, but is not
   expected to be included in the final version when it is advanced
   toward RFC status.
   

6.1  Precedence Level Marking
   
   The approaches to be used for precedence level marking may need to be
   different for each of the following cases:
   
   A. Individual call setup:
   
   There needs to be a definition of a field to be carried in SIP which
   identifies the precedence levels of 0-4 of the call setup. Currently,
   the US military uses five values which have specific meanings (as
   currently defined in MLPP) and the standard may reflect these
   meanings. However, it is preferable to provide easy support for other
   network applications which utilize a different number of levels or
   different meanings.
   
   The specification may allow more than 5 levels. There is no need for
   the 65k levels defined in [RFC2751] nor is there currently a
   requirement to carry the separate preemption and defending priorities
   of [RFC2751] or the separate setup and holding priorities proposed in

Pierce                    Expires October 2002                 [Page 9]


Internet Draft    Requirements for Assured Service in VoIP    April 2002


   [RFC3212] and [RFC3209].
   
   [Polk2] is expected to result in a specification which satisfies this
   requirement.
   
   B. Packet forwarding:
   
   To support preferential treatment on the packet transfer level, the
   current lack of priority levels in  Expedited Forwarding PHBs of
   DiffServ will need additional capabilities to provide the required
   functionality. Just as Assured Forwarding includes multiple drop
   precedences for each class, there should be multiple drop precedences
   for EF, which is intended for voice. In fact, voice transport is more
   tolerable to dropped packets than many of the intended uses of AF
   classes. 
   
   (It should be emphasized again that such multiple "drop precedence"
   levels for EF would not provide an actual priority forwarding
   mechanisms per packet, e.g., priority queuing of some packets ahead
   of other within that EF class, just as there is no such capability
   included within the AF PHB definition.)
   
   In order to provide the required preferential treatments for the five
   call precedence levels, it is required to provide five corresponding
   drop precedence levels for the voice packet handling.
   
   C. Trunk group establishment:
   
   For MPLS, RFC 2702 defines the idea of a "traffic trunk" for which a
   priority may be signaled by the label distribution protocol in order
   to establish telephony "trunk groups". If LDP is used for label
   distribution, the priority defined in [RFC3212] should be used. If
   RSVP is used for label distribution, the priority defined in
   [RFC3209] should be used.
   
   It should be noted that the traditional definition of a "trunk group"
   does not include the notion of a "priority" associated with a trunk
   group. The priority is only associated with individual calls placed
   on that trunk group. It is possible that the routing logic could
   reserve a trunk group for higher priority traffic, but this is also
   not the normal application, since it wastes facilities during periods
   when very little high priority traffic exists and it can not support
   the heavier load of high priority traffic when conditions cause such
   a high volume.
   
6.2  Authentication/Authorization
   
   This draft uses the following definitions from draft-ietf-aaa-
   transport-05:
   
   Authentication: The act of verifying a claimed identity, in the form
   of a pre-existing label from a mutually known name space, as the
   originator of a message (message authentication) or as the end-point

Pierce                    Expires October 2002                 [Page 10]


Internet Draft    Requirements for Assured Service in VoIP    April 2002


   of a channel (entity authentication).
   
   Authorization: The act of determining if a particular right, such as
   access to some resource, can be granted to the presenter of a
   particular credential.
   
6.2.1  Architecture
   
   In many other cases besides call setup for Assured Service it is also
   necessary to perform authentication and authorization. Appropriate
   security mechanisms have already been defined which may be used.
   
   Refer to draft-pierce-assured-service-arch for a discussion of the
   architecture required to support the authentication/authorization
   requirements.
   
   
6.2.2  Authentication Procedures
   
   It is essential that a framework for security for SIP be established
   that allows a security association to be established between a user's
   terminal and their dedicated SIP proxy at the time of an initial
   registration. This initial registration, which includes
   authentication, may require an extensive number of messages and
   interactions with numerous network elements, including a Policy
   Server, and may require a rather large time as a password is
   verified. This registration and authentication would normally be done
   when a terminal is turned on, activated, or places the first call.
   This reduces the need to apply preferential treatment procedures to
   the authentication process.
   
   For the purpose of Assured Service provision, as with other SIP-based
   services, it is expected that Authentication may be performed based
   on the entry of an ID and password or the use of terminal resident
   biometrics (e.g., iris scan) so that permission to use the services
   can be associated with an individual, not a device. Once registration
   is done, this permission is then associated with the device.
   
6.2.3  Authorization Procedures
   
   Authorization per call must consist only of added fields/information
   within the normal messages used for basic call setup as defined in
   [SIP-2543bis].
   
6.3  Preferential Treatment
   
   The preferential treatments would not be standardized unless they
   require signaling between network elements. Currently, most
   treatments envisioned are local matters within a proxy or router.
   Consideration of preferential treatments depends on the case:
   
   A. Per call:
   

Pierce                    Expires October 2002                 [Page 11]


Internet Draft    Requirements for Assured Service in VoIP    April 2002


   Preemption of existing calls, if done, would require coordination
   between network elements, and therefore protocol standards,
   especially if distinct actions are expected to reserve the preempted
   resources for setup of the higher precedence call.
   
   It is not expected that network initiated preemption of calls
   (sessions) within the IP environment will be necessary. Instead,
   sufficient preferential treatment can be provided by applying higher
   call admission control limits and lower drop precedence procedures to
   higher precedence calls. Examples of these procedures are shown in
   draft-pierce-sipping-pref-treat-examples-00
   B. Packet Level:
   
   Current capabilities of DiffServ, with additional code points for
   drop precedences, will provide the necessary preferential treatments
   regarding packet transfer, including indications of  discard
   priority. 
   
   C. MPLS/RSVP Paths:
   
   There should be no need for preemption of MPLS/RSVP established
   traffic trunks (trunk groups) as described in [RFC2702] and
   [RFC2205]. The required capability should be provided by mechanisms
   to reduce the traffic engineering limits placed on lower priority
   trunk groups (even by reducing to zero) to allow the capacity to be
   used for the establishment of higher priority calls in other traffic
   engineered traffic trunks.
   
6.4  Diversion
   
   Diversion should be based on procedures that are developed for a Call
   Forwarding on No Answer type service. However, it should not be
   dependent on a timing performed by the original called party. Again,
   this must be a function of the terminating proxy.
   
6.5  Notification to Preempted Party
   
   Notification to the preempted party should follow whatever is done
   for notifications for any network-initiated release. Since it is
   expected that actual call preemption will only be needed in the
   circuit mode environment, the gateway between it and the IP
   environment should deal with such preemption by application of the
   required notification (in-band) to the IP side.
   
6.6  Acknowledge by Preempted Party
   
   Acknowledge by the preempted party (before connection of a new call)
   should follow whatever is done for normal call presentation, that is,
   the new call must be acknowledged before any audio is transferred in
   either direction between end users.
   
6.7  Protection of Signaling Information
   

Pierce                    Expires October 2002                 [Page 12]


Internet Draft    Requirements for Assured Service in VoIP    April 2002


   See Section 7.
   


   
7.   Security Considerations
   
7.1  Authentication/authorization of User Access
   
   Discussions within SIP are beginning to identify the need to
   authenticate/authorize all access to capabilities, since virtually
   any function could be misused resulting in harm to the network or to
   other users. Because Assured Service is intended to provide an
   authorized user with better service than other users, including the
   potential of actually preempting resources, it is even more important
   to authenticate/authorize the user's access to the Assured Service
   capabilities.
   
   [SIP-2543bis] describes the use of a stateless challenged-based
   mechanism for authentication in which a proxy server or user agent
   may challenge the initiator of a request to provide assurance of
   their identity. For real-time needs such as placing telephone calls,
   especially those for which Assured Service capabilities are being
   applied, such a challenge-based system will likely be too slow, or
   would itself be hampered by the very network condition which requires
   Assured Service be applied. Pre-establishment of security
   associations is required, in order to allow for the timely exchange
   of security information needed to perform authentication/
   authorization of individual actions.
   
7.2  Security of Signaling Information
   
   The need to protect signaling information from disclosure is
   independent from the provision of Assured Service. Military/
   government networks have long been built on the premise that such
   information needed to be protected. Bulk encryption of signaling
   links (as well as the user data channels) between secure switches
   provided much of this protection. In addition, the Signal Transfer
   Points of the SS#7 network could be secured against unauthorized
   access. It should be noted that commercial networks are now beginning
   to recognize the need for the same protection.
   
   In the IP environment, the signaling packets as well as the user data
   traverse many routers and could be accessed by unauthorized persons
   at any one of them. While the contents of the individual signaling
   messages could be hidden by encryption of the request and response
   for end-to-end protection of information, the header must be visible
   to intermediate routers. It is preferable to not require decryption/
   encryption at each router. The approach has been to encrypt the
   contents of the signaling message but not the headers which are
   needed by the routers. However, the headers themselves may contain
   sensitive information such as precedence level and called party
   identification.

Pierce                    Expires October 2002                 [Page 13]


Internet Draft    Requirements for Assured Service in VoIP    April 2002


   
   [SIP-2543bis] describes the transport and network layer security
   methods which may be used to protect signaling traffic.
   

7.3  Security of Routing Data
   
   Of more concern than the information about an individual call is the
   information normally needed by Link State routing logic used by an
   originating device to select a route though an entire network. Such a
   routing function requires knowledge of the state (busy or not) of
   various portions of the network. When Assured Service based on
   precedence levels is added, this requires that the routing point also
   know the current loading of various precedence levels for each
   portion of the network. Especially in a large network, this is highly
   sensitive information and must not be revealed to unauthorized
   network elements.
   
   It should be noted that the constraint-based LSP setup proposed in
   [RFC3212] depends on the routing point knowing this information.
   
   
8.   IANA Considerations
   
   It is not expected that there will be any IANA involvement in support
   of Assured Service beyond what is described in [Polk2]. 
   
   
9.   References
   
   [T1.523] ANSI T1.523-2001, "Telecommunications Glossary".
   
   [T1.619] ANSI T1.619-1992 (R1999), "Multi-Level Precedence and
   Preemption (MLPP) Service, ISDN Supplementary Service Description".
   
   [T1.619a] ANSI T1.619a-1994 (R1999), "Addendum to MLPP".
   
   [T1.631] ANSI T1.631-1993 (R1999), "Telecommunications - Signalling
   System No. 7 (SS7) - High Probability of Completion (HPC) Network
   Capability".
   
   [E.106] ITU-T Recommendation E.106 (2000), "International Emergency
   Preference Scheme (IEPS)".
   
   [F.706] ITU-T Recommendation F.706 (draft), "International Emergency
   Multimedia Service".
   
   [I.255.3] ITU-T Recommendation I.255.3 (1990), "Multilevel precedence
   and preemption service (MLPP)".
   
   [Q.735.3] ITU-T Recommendation Q.735.3 (1993), "Description for
   community of interest supplementary services using SS No. 7 -
   Multilevel precedence and preemption (MLPP)".

Pierce                    Expires October 2002                 [Page 14]


Internet Draft    Requirements for Assured Service in VoIP    April 2002


   
   [Q.955.3] ITU-T Recommendation Q.955.3 (1993), "Description for
   community of interest supplementary services using DSS1 - Multilevel
   precedence and preemption (MLPP)".
   
   [RFC2205] RFC 2205, "Resource ReSerVation Protocol (RSVP)", September
   1997
   
   [RFC2597] RFC 2597, "Assured Forwarding PHB Group", June 1999.
   
   [RFC3246] RFC 3246, "An Expedited Forwarding PHB", March 2002.
   
   [RFC2702] RFC 2702, "Requirements for Traffic Engineering Over MPLS", 
   September 1999.
   
   [RFC2751] RFC 2751, "Signaled Preemption Priority Policy Element",
   January 2000.
   
   [RFC3209] RFC 3209, "RSVP-TE: Extensions to RSVP for LSP Tunnels",
   December 2001.
   
   [RFC3212] RFC 3212, "CR-LDP: Constraint-based LSP Setup using LDP",
   January 2002.
   
   [SIP-CALL-AUTH] draft-ietf-sip-call-auth-04, "SIP Extension for Media
   Authorization", February 2002.
      
   [SIP-2543bis] draft-ietf-sip-rfc2543bis-09, "SIP: Session Initiation
   Protocol" (revision), February 2002.
   
   [Ash] draft-ash-mpls-diffserv-te-alternative-02, "Alternative
   Technical Solution for MPLS DiffServ TE", Jerry Ash, August 2001.
   
   [Baker] draft-baker-ieprep-requirements-00, "IEPS Requirement
   Statement", February 2002.
   
   [Carlberg] draft-ietf-ieprep-framework-00, "Framework for Supporting
   IEPS in IP Telephony", Ken Carlberg, February 2002.
   
   [Folts] draft-folts-ieprep-white-paper-00, "Emergency
   Telecommunications Service in Next-Generation Networks", Hal Folts,
   February 2002.
   
   [Pierce1] draft-pierce-sipping-pref-treat-examples-00, "Examples for
   Provision of Preferential Treatment in Voice over IP", April 2002.
   
   [Polk1] draft-polk-mlpp-over-ip-01, "Multi-Level Precedence and
   Preemption over IP", James Polk, November 2001.
   
   [Polk2] draft-polk-sipping-resource-00, "SIP Communications Resource
   Priority Header", February 2002.
   


Pierce                    Expires October 2002                 [Page 15]


Internet Draft    Requirements for Assured Service in VoIP    April 2002


10.  Authors' Addresses
   
   Michael Pierce
   Artel
   1893 Preston White Drive
   Reston, VA 20191
   Phone: +1 410.817.4795
   Email: pierce1m@ncr.disa.mil
   
   Don Choi
   DISA
   5600 Columbia Pike
   Falls Church, VA 22041-2717
   Phone: +1 703.681.2312
   Email: choid@ncr.disa.mil
   
   
   
Full Copyright Statement
   
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002).  All Rights Reserved.
   
   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published,
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.
   
   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.
   
   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY and THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE disclaim all warranties, express or implied, including but
   not limited to any warranty that the use of the information herein
   will not infringe any rights or any implied warranties of
   merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose.
   








Pierce                    Expires October 2002                 [Page 16]
