






Internet Draft                                                J. Cuellar
Document: draft-cuellar-geopriv-scenarios-01.txt              Siemens AG

                                                               J. Morris
                                       Center for Democracy & Technology

                                                                T. Kanai
                                                    Fujitsu Laboratories

Expires in six months                                      November 2002

                            Geopriv Scenarios


Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002). All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   This document describes location-based service scenarios for Geopriv.
   It complements the Geopriv Requirements document by providing a set
   of examples in which the Geopriv Location Object (LO) may be used.
   Thus this documents serves as a basis to discuss and analyze the
   security (authentication, authorization, integrity and
   confidentiality) and privacy issues and requirements associated with
   location-based services.  To be useful, these scenarios include
   details of location computation, which helps to identify the entities
   involved on an abstract level and where privacy issues like control,
   consent, access, and security arise.

Cuellar, Morris, Kanai         Geopriv Scenarios                      1

Expires in six months                                           Nov 2002


Table of Contents

   1. Overview........................................................3
   2. Conventions used in this document...............................4
   3. Terminology.....................................................4
      3.1. Foundational Definitions...................................4
         3.1.1. Location Information (LI) and Sighting................4
         3.1.2. The Location Object...................................5
         3.1.3. Location Object vs. Using Protocol....................6
         3.1.4. Trusted vs. Non-trusted Data Flows....................6
      3.2. Geopriv Entities and Functions.............................7
         3.2.1. Primary Geopriv Entities..............................7
         3.2.2. Secondary Geopriv Entities............................8
         3.2.3. Geopriv Data Storage Functions........................9
      3.3. Privacy Policies and Rules.................................9
      3.4. Identifiers, Authentication and Authorization.............10
         3.4.1. Identifiers..........................................10
         3.4.2. Authentication.......................................11
         3.4.3. Authorization........................................11
   4. Three Frameworks to Classify Use Cases and Scenarios...........12
      4.1. Classifications Push, Pull, Translate.....................12
         4.1.1. Push Model...........................................13
         4.1.2. Pull Model...........................................13
         4.1.3. Translate/Query Model................................13
      4.2. Overlap of Geopriv Roles (Classif. A-1 through A-9).......14
      4.3. Initial Location Computation (Classif. B-1 through B-12)..15
   5. Services From a User Point of View.............................16
      5.1. Network Management and Computer Services..................16
         5.1.1. Location Based Charging or Billing...................17
         5.1.2. Enhanced Call Routing................................17
         5.1.3. Ubiquitous computing applications....................17
      5.2. Emergency and Security Services...........................17
         5.2.1. Emergency Call Services..............................17
         5.2.2. Emergency Alert and other Public Safety Services.....18
         5.2.3. Evacuation navigation service........................18
         5.2.4. Location-based services to drivers...................18
         5.2.5. Tracking services for Security.......................18
      5.3. Resource Management Services..............................18
         5.3.1. Tracking services for Resource Management............18
         5.3.2. Package Tracking.....................................19
         5.3.3. Taxi dispatch system - location of the customer......19
         5.3.4. Taxi dispatch system - location of the taxi..........19
      5.4. Geographic Based Content Services.........................19
         5.4.1. Navigation...........................................20
         5.4.2. City Sightseeing.....................................20
         5.4.3. Mobile Yellow Pages..................................20

Cuellar, Morris, Kanai         Geopriv Scenarios                      2

Expires in six months                                           Nov 2002

         5.4.4. Traffic Monitoring...................................20
         5.4.5. Traffic jam information..............................20
      5.5. Content Provider-Initiated Information Services...........21
         5.5.1. Location Dependent Content Broadcast.................21
      5.6. Entertainment and Community Services......................21
         5.6.1. Mobile Communities...................................21
         5.6.2. Gaming...............................................21
         5.6.3. Presence Services....................................21
         5.6.4. Locate a Person......................................21
         5.6.5. Rendezvous service...................................21
      5.7. Management and Activation Interfaces......................22
   6. Scenarios......................................................22
      6.1. Scenario 1................................................22
      6.2. Scenario 2................................................22
      6.3. Scenario 3................................................23
      6.4. Scenario 4................................................24
      6.5. Scenario 5................................................25
      6.6. Scenario 6................................................26
      6.7. Scenario 7................................................27
      6.8. Scenario 8................................................28
   7. Implications and Conclusions...................................29
   8. Security Considerations........................................30
   9. Acknowledgements...............................................30
   10. References....................................................31
   11. Author's Addresses............................................31
   12. Full Copyright Statement......................................31

1. Overview

   Location based systems are an emerging field, and all possible
   services or relationships cannot be identified or even imagined
   today.  Over the next few years, location based services and
   applications are likely to come in a huge array of shapes, sizes,
   structures, paradigms, and approaches.  This document attempts to
   articulate the range and types of applications that are possible
   using location services, although the use cases and scenarios below
   are unavoidably incomplete.

   This document includes 4 main sections below.  Section 3 contains
   terminology and definitions, largely drawn from the similar section
   in the Geopriv Requirements draft.  Section 4 advances three
   different and incomplete (individually or collective) analytical
   frameworks with which to consider geopriv uses and scenarios.
   Section 5 lists, and briefly discusses, a range of possible use
   cases.  Section 6 looks at a subset of these use cases
   diagrammatically, in an effort to identify the entities and data
   flows involved.



Cuellar, Morris, Kanai         Geopriv Scenarios                      3

Expires in six months                                           Nov 2002

2. Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC-2119].

3. Terminology

   The terminology and definitions detailed below include both (1)
   primary or essential terms used in the Requirements document, and (2)
   secondary terms that provide additional detail about the usage model
   envisioned for the geopriv Location Object.  One definition NOT
   currently included in the Requirements document is:

      Service Initiator:
         Entity that initiates the service and submits a request to
         disclose the Location Information to the Location Seeker.

   In most cases, this entity will overlap with one of the entities
   defined below, such as the Target, the Rule Maker, or the Location
   Seeker.


3.1. Foundational Definitions

3.1.1. Location Information (LI) and Sighting

   The focus of the geopriv working group is on information about a
   Target's location that is NOT based on generally or publicly
   available sources, but instead on private information provided or
   created by a Target, a Target's Device, or a Target's network or
   service provider:

      Location Information (LI):
         A relatively specific way of describing where a Device is
         located and that is (a) derived or computed from information
         generally not available to the general public (such as
         information mainly available to a network or service provider),
         (b) determined by a Device that may be not generally publicly
         addressable or accessible, or (c) input or otherwise provided
         by a Target.

   As examples, LI could include (a) information calculated by
   triangulating on a wireless signal with respect to cell phone towers,
   (b) longitude and latitude information determined by a Device with
   GPS (global positioning satellite) capabilities, or (c) information
   manually entered into a cell phone or laptop by a Target in response
   to a query.

   Excluded from this definition is the determination of location
   information wholly without the knowledge or consent of the Target (or
   the Target's network or access service provider), based on generally


Cuellar, Morris, Kanai         Geopriv Scenarios                      4

Expires in six months                                           Nov 2002

   available information such as an IP or e-mail address.  In some cases
   information like IP address can enable someone to estimate (at least
   roughly) a location.  Commercial services exist that offer to provide
   rough location information based on IP address.  Currently, this type
   of location information is typically less accurate and has a coarser
   granularity than the type of location information addressed in this
   document.  Although this type of location computation still raises
   significant potential privacy and public policy concerns, such
   scenarios are generally outside the scope of this document.

   Within any given location-based transaction, the INITIAL
   determination of location (and thus the initial creation of Location
   Information) is termed a Sighting:

      Sighting:
         The initial determination of location based on non-public
         information (as discussed in the definition of Location
         Information), and the initial creation of Location Information.

   Some variant of the sighting information is included in the Location
   Object.  Abstractly, it consists of two separate data fields:

              (Identifier, Location)

   where Identifier is the identifier assigned to a Target being
   sighted, and Location is the current position of that Target being
   sighted.  Not all entities may have access to exactly the same piece
   of sighting information.  A sighting may be transformed to a new
   sighting pair:

              (Identifier-1, Location-1)

   before it is provided by a Location Sighter or Location Server to
   another Location Recipient (for instance, another Location Server).
   In this case, Identifier-1 may be Pseudonym, and Location-1 may have
   less accuracy or granularity than the original value.

3.1.2. The Location Object

   A main goal of the geopriv working group is to define a Location
   Object (LO), to be used to convey both Location Information and basic
   privacy-protecting instructions:

      Location Object (LO): This data contains the Location Information
         of the Target, and other fields including an identity or
         pseudonym of the Target, time information, core privacy
         policies, authenticators, etc.  Most of the fields are
         optional, including the Location Information itself.

   Nothing is said about the semantics of a missing field.  For
   instance, a partially filled object MAY be understood implicitly as
   the request to complete it.  Or, if no time information is included,


Cuellar, Morris, Kanai         Geopriv Scenarios                      5

Expires in six months                                           Nov 2002

   this MAY implicitly mean "at the current time" or "at a very recent
   time", but it could be interpreted in a different way, depending on
   the context.

3.1.3. Location Object vs. Using Protocol

   The security and privacy enhancing mechanisms used to protect the LO
   are of two types:  First, the Location Object definition MUST include
   (optional) fields or mechanisms used to secure the LO as such.  The
   LO MAY be secured, for example, using cryptographic checksums or
   encryption as part of the LO itself.

   Second, the "using protocol" (that is, the protocol that uses the
   Location Object) may also provide security mechanisms to securely
   transport the Location Object.
   The "using protocol" is the protocol that uses (creates, reads or
   modifies) the Location Object.  A protocol that just transports the
   LO as a string of bits, without looking at them (like an IP storage
   protocol could do), is not a using protocol, but only a transport
   protocol.  Nevertheless, the entity or protocol that caused the
   transport protocol to move the LO is responsible of the correct
   distribution, protection, usage, retention, and storage of the LO.

   The security mechanisms of the Location Object itself are to be
   preferred.  The using protocol has to obey the privacy and security
   instructions coded in the Location Object and in the corresponding
   Policy Rules regarding the transmission and storage of the LO in
   order to ensure that the rules established by the Rule-Maker are
   observed.  Other requirements on the using protocol are out of the
   scope of this document.  <Open Issue: "One Message" Transfer Issue.
   The requirements discussed in this document do not preclude a single
   message/packet transmission of location, but this is not an explicit
   requirement>.

3.1.4. Trusted vs. Non-trusted Data Flows

   Location information can be used in very different environments.  In
   some cases the participants will have longstanding relationships,
   while in others participants may have discrete interactions with no
   prior contractual or other contact.

   The different relationships raise different concerns for the
   implementation of privacy rules, including the need to communicate
   privacy policies.  A public Rule Repository, for example, may be
   unnecessary in a trusted environment where more efficient methods of
   addressing privacy issues exist.  The following terms distinguish
   between the two basic types of data flows:

      Trusted Data Flow:
         A data flow that is governed by a pre-existing contractual
         relationship that addresses location privacy.



Cuellar, Morris, Kanai         Geopriv Scenarios                      6

Expires in six months                                           Nov 2002

      Non-trusted Data Flow:
         The data flow is not governed by a pre-existing contractual
         relationship that addresses location privacy.


3.2. Geopriv Entities and Functions

   The entities of a geopriv application or transaction may be given
   explicit roles:

3.2.1. Primary Geopriv Entities

   Certain entities and roles are involved in most (and in some cases
   all) geopriv transactions:
      Target:
         The entity whose location is desired by the Location Seeker.
         In many cases the Target will be the human "user" of a Device
         or an object such as a vehicle or shipping container to which
         the Device is attached.  In some instances the Target will be
         the Device itself.

      Device:
         The technical device the location of which is tracked as a
         proxy for the location of a Target.  A Device might, for
         example, be a cell phone, a Global Positioning Satellite (GPS)
         receiver, a laptop equipped with a wireless access Device, or a
         transmitter that emits a signal that can be tracked or located.
         In some situations, such as when a Target manually inputs
         location information (perhaps with a web browser), the Target
         is effectively performing the function of a Device.

      Rule Maker:
         The individual or entity that has the authorization to set the
         applicable privacy policies and rules.  In many cases this will
         be the owner of the Device, and in other cases this may be the
         user who is in possession of the Device.  For example, parents
         may control what happens to the location information derived
         from a child's cell phone. A company, in contrast, may own and
         provide a cell phone to an employee but permit the employee to
         set the privacy rules.

      Location Seeker (LSeek):
         An individual or entity who seeks to receive location data
         about a Target.

   A Location Seeker may act in one or more of the following more
   specialized roles: as the Location Sighter, a Location Server, or as
   an Ultimate Location Recipient:

      Location Sighter (LoSi), or Location Data-Source
         The original source of the sighting of a Target in a given
         transaction.


Cuellar, Morris, Kanai         Geopriv Scenarios                      7

Expires in six months                                           Nov 2002


      Location Server (LServ), or Intermediate Location Recipient:
         A Device or entity that provides access to Location Information
         (possibly after processing or altering it) in accordance with
         the privacy policies of the Rule Maker.  Some location tracking
         scenarios may involve a Target, Device, or Device user
         performing the function of a Location Server.

      Ultimate Location Recipient (ULR):
         An individual or entity who receives location data about a
         Target and does not transmit the location information or
         information based on the Target's location (such as driving
         directions to or from the Target) to any party OTHER than the
         Target or the Rule Maker.

3.2.2. Secondary Geopriv Entities

      Certain entities and functions are present or involved in only a
         subset of geopriv transactions:

      Unintended Target:
         A person or object tracked by proximity to the Target. This
         special case most frequently occurs if the Target is not a
         person.  For example, the Target may be a rental car equipped
         with a GPS Device, used to track car inventory.  The rental
         company may not care about the driver's location, but the
         driver's privacy is implicitly affected.  Geopriv may or may
         not protect or affect the privacy of Unintended Targets, but
         the impact on Unintended Targets should be acknowledged.

      Data Transporter:
         An entity or network that receives and forwards data without
         processing or altering it.  A Data Transporter could
         theoretically be involved in almost any transmission between a
         Device and a Location Server, a Location Server and a second
         Location Server, or a Location Server and an Ultimate Location
         Recipient.  Some location tracking scenarios may not involve a
         Data Transporter.

      Initial Access Provider (IAP):
         The entity that provides the initial network access or other
         data communications services essential for the operation of
         communications functions of the Device or computer equipment in
         which the Device operates.  Often, the IAP -- which will be a
         wireless carrier, an Internet Service Provider, or an internal
         corporate network -- will be identical to the LoSi.  In other
         cases the IAP has a "dumb" LoSi, one that transmits geopriv
         data but does not implement or use any part of the geopriv
         Location Object.  Other cases may involve no IAP at all or the
         IAP is only a Data Transporter.




Cuellar, Morris, Kanai         Geopriv Scenarios                      8

Expires in six months                                           Nov 2002

3.2.3. Geopriv Data Storage Functions

      Within the geopriv framework, certain data may be stored in
         various functional entities:

      Private Rule Storage
         A private storage used to store private (authenticated, but not
         signed) or public (signed) policies, identifiers, keys, and
         perhaps also requests.  Private Rule Storage could be operated
         by a Device, a Location Server, or a third party service
         provider.

      Public Policy Repository:
         A repository where signed policies are stored.

      Location Storage:
         A Device or entity that stores raw or processed Location
         Information for any period of time longer than the duration
         necessary to complete an immediate transaction regarding the
         LI.

   The existence and data storage practices of Location Storage is
   crucial to privacy considerations, because this may influence what
   Location Information could eventually be revealed (through later
   distribution, technical breach, or legal processes).


3.3. Privacy Policies and Rules

   Privacy Policies are rules that regulate an entity's activities with
   respect to location and other information, including, but not limited
   to, the collection, use, disclosure, and retention of location
   information.  Such rules are generally based on fair information
   practices, as detailed in (for example) the OECD Guidelines on the
   Protection of Privacy and Transporter Flows of Personal Data [OECD].

      Privacy Policy or Privacy Rule:
         A rule or set of rules that regulate an entity's activities
         with respect to location information, including the collection,
         use, disclosure, and retention of location information.  In
         particular, the policy describes how location information may
         be used by an entity and which transformed location information
         may be released to which entities under which conditions.
         Policies must be obeyed; they are not advisory.

   A full set of Privacy Rules will likely include both rules that have
   only one possible technical meaning, and rules that will be affected
   by a locality's prevailing laws and customs.  For example, a
   distribution rule of the form "my location can only be disclosed to
   the owner of such credentials and in such accuracy" has clear-cut
   implications for the protocol that uses the LO. But other rules, like
   retention or usage policies, may have unclear technical consequences

Cuellar, Morris, Kanai         Geopriv Scenarios                      9

Expires in six months                                           Nov 2002

   for the protocol or for the involved entities.  For example,  the
   precise scope of a retention rule stating "you may not store my
   location for more than 2 days" may in part turn on local laws or
   customs.

   The Privacy Policies of the Rule Maker regarding the location of the
   Target may be accessible to a Location Server in Private or Public
   Rules Repositories, or they may be carried by the Location Object, or
   they may be presented by the Location Seeker as capabilities or
   tokens:

      Public Rule:
         A policy, digitally signed by the Rule Maker, and stored in a
         Policy Repository for the use of one or several Location
         Servers.

      Private Rule:
         An authenticated policy, consented by the Rule Maker, and
         stored in Private Rule Storage for the private use of  a
         limited set of Location Servers.

      Geopriv Token:
         A token or ticket issued and secured (authenticated or signed)
         by the Rule Maker to a Location Seeker, expressing the explicit
         consent of the Rule Maker to access his location information.
         This Geopriv Token is thus, logically, a rule of the Rule
         Maker.


3.4. Identifiers, Authentication and Authorization

   This subsection introduces terms and concepts used in the
   Requirements Section.

3.4.1. Identifiers

   Anonymity is the property of being not identifiable (within a set of
   subjects).  Anonymity serves as the base case for privacy: without
   the ability to remain anonymous, individuals cannot control their own
   privacy.  Unlinkability ensures that a user may make multiple uses of
   resources or services without others being able to link these uses
   together.  Unlinkability requires that entities are unable to
   determine whether the same user caused certain specific operations in
   the system. [ISO99]: A pseudonym is simply a bit string which is
   unique as ID and is suitable to be used for end-point authentication.

      Unlinked Pseudonym:
         A pseudonym where the linking between the pseudonym and its
         holder is, at least initially, not known to anybody with the
         possible exception of the holder himself or a trusted server of
         the user.  See [Pfi01] (there the term is called Initially
         Unlinked Pseudonym)


Cuellar, Morris, Kanai         Geopriv Scenarios                     10

Expires in six months                                           Nov 2002


   The use of Unlinked Pseudonyms is necessary to obtain anonymity.  But
   also it is necessary to change the used pseudonyms regularly, because
   identifying the user behind an unlinked pseudonym can be very simple.

   In order to remain anonymous, an entity may use private identifiers.
   Private identifiers convey less information than public identities,
   because they are meaningful to a smaller number of entities and in
   use for a shorter duration.  Thus if A discloses a private identifier
   to B, B is less likely to associate this information with a known
   individual or entity than if a public identifier was disclosed.

      Short-lived Identifier:
         An identifier that is used only for one or a limited number of
         "sessions".

   Using protocols should be able to handle LOs with identifiers, LOs
   without identifiers, and LOs with pseudonyms. The identity of the
   requester may be irrelevant in some cases, whereas the identity of
   the Target may be irrelevant in others.

      Entity-Identifier:
         The names used by the geopriv entities to identify,
         authenticate or authorize themselves to other entities.
         Policies also use entity-identifiers to express which Location
         Seekers may receive which transformed sighting information.

3.4.2. Authentication

   The word authentication is used in different meanings.  Some assert
   that authentication associates an entity with a more or less well-
   known identity.  This basically means that if A authenticates another
   entity B as being "id-B", then the label "id-B" is not a pseudonym,
   but a persistent or at least linkable identity of the entity.  In
   this case, the label "id-B" is called a publicly known identifier,
   and the authentication is "explicit":

      Explicit Authentication:
         The act of verifying a claimed identity as the sole originator
         of a message (message authentication) or as the end-point of a
         channel (entity authentication). Moreover, this identity is
         easily linked back to the real identity of the entity in
         question, for instance being a pre-existing static label from a
         predefined name space (telephone number, name, etc.).

3.4.3. Authorization

      Authorization
         The act of determining if a particular right, such as access to
         some resource, can be granted to the presenter of a particular
         credential.


Cuellar, Morris, Kanai         Geopriv Scenarios                     11

Expires in six months                                           Nov 2002

   Depending on the type of credential, authorization may imply Explicit
   Authentication or not.



4. Three Frameworks to Classify Use Cases and Scenarios

   There are many different ways to conceptualize or classify the
   possible Geopriv scenarios.  Among the possible approaches can be:

     A. How is the location information transaction being triggered: is
        it a "push" or a "pull" model, or a "query" to translate a
        location or find a location in a context?
     B. What are the relevant entities, devices, and roles, and how do
        they interrelate and (often) overlap?
     C. What entity first has control over the initial sighted data, and
        over the initial computation and distribution of the location
        information?
     D. What service is being provided from the point of view of the
        user?

   The first three of these approaches are discussed briefly in this
   section.  The fourth approach û the use cases from the user's
   perspective û are listed in Section 5, with references back to the
   three classification schemes discussed in this section.

   Again, none of those classifications alone is fully sufficient to
   identify the full range of possible location services.  Other ways to
   consider the possible uses and scenarios are discussed in Section 7.


4.1. Classifications Push, Pull, Translate

   One classification of scenarios is according to who is the Service
   Initiator and whether the service triggering is done on demand or on
   subscription mode, and if the Rule Maker is granted positioning
   consent or not.  Target, Rule Maker, a Location Seeker, or another
   party may trigger the actions, depending on the service being
   provided.  They may be triggered on demand or as a periodical
   subscription (periodical updates).  Also it is possible for location
   services to support conditional positioning.  Under these conditions,
   an application that is granted conditional positioning authorization
   must notify and obtain positioning authorization from the Rule Maker
   of the Target prior to performing the positioning process.  The Rule
   Maker is able to accept or reject the positioning attempt.

   In Japan for instance, all major mobile carriers provide the
   following types of well-known commercial services:

        1. "Here I am!" (Subscribers may send their location information
           to other subscribers or to Internet users via e-mail or other
           means.)


Cuellar, Morris, Kanai         Geopriv Scenarios                     12

Expires in six months                                           Nov 2002

        2. "Where is he/she?" (Carriers tell users where someone is
           located.)
        3. "Where am I?" service (Carriers tell subscribers where they
           are located on a map.)

   Those three correspond roughly to 3 query modes described below: Push
   Model, Pull Model, and Translate/Query Model.  Note than many
   scenarios will involve both Push and Translate, or both Pull and
   Translate.

4.1.1. Push Model

   In the Push Model, the Target typically acts as the Location
   Initiator (instead of responding to a request).  For example, after
   locating himself, the Target may send his location to the Ultimate
   Location Recipient or another Location Seeker.  Similarly, the Target
   may ask a Location Sighter to locate the Target and transmit the
   location to a ULR or other Location Seeker.

4.1.2. Pull Model

   In the Pull Model, a Location Seeker wants to know where a given
   Target is, and thus is the Service Initiator.  As one example of the
   Pull Model, a Location Server:

        1.   receives Location Information from the Location Sighter or
             from another Location Server,

        2.   receives, directly or through a repository or a trusted
             third party, the Privacy Policies associated with the
             Target,

        3.   accepts services requests from Location Seekers (including
             other Location Servers),

        4.   matches the location request to the policies for the Target
             and processes the Location Information accordingly, and

        5.   returns Location Information (sometimes filtered) of the
             Target.

4.1.3. Translate/Query Model

   Those are services where some entity (such as a Target or other
   Location Seeker) provides Location Information and obtains a function
   of that information as response.  For instance, he may want to
   translate a location from one format to another (say from coordinates
   to civil), or to see in a map where certain coordinates are, or given
   the distance from a point to 2 or more fixed locations, to find the
   possible locations of the point.




Cuellar, Morris, Kanai         Geopriv Scenarios                     13

Expires in six months                                           Nov 2002

   This service may be invoked by a mobile Target that knows where he
   is, or where he plans to be this afternoon, but needs additional
   information about the location or needs the location in a different
   format.

   In one example, a Target knows his location (say, using a GPS chip),
   but not in the form that he needs it (say, as a street address).  In
   this case, the Target asks an external Location Server to translate
   the information to a street address or position on a map.  The
   Location Server obtains the location from the Location Sighter (which
   is the Target itself), converts the Location Information to the
   requested form, and sends it back to the Location Seeker (also the
   Target).


4.2. Overlap of Geopriv Roles (Classif. A-1 through A-9).

   As quickly becomes clear even in the example in the preceding
   section, in many scenarios the different Geopriv entities overlap.
   Sometimes a Device is a proxy for a Target, and sometimes the Device
   is the Target.  In some cases, the Rule Maker and the Target are the
   same individual or entity; in other cases, they are different.  If
   the Target/Device knows his location (through GPS, for example), the
   Target/Device may well also be the Location Sighter.  If the Target's
   Device has the capabilities and bandwidth, that Device may also serve
   as the Location Server, or may rely on an external Location Server.

   The following is a somewhat arbitrary and incomplete breakdown of
   different overlaps among the Geopriv roles (where LocServ stands for
   Location Server, LoSi for Location Sighter, and Sinitiator for
   Service Initiator):

     A-1: LocServ = Rule Maker = Target = LoSi,  ULR = SInitiator
     A-2: LocServ = Rule Maker = Target,  LoSi,  ULR = Sinitiator
     A-3: LocServ,  Rule Maker = Target = LoSi = ULR = SInitiator
     A-4: LocServ,  Rule Maker = Target = LoSi,  ULR = SInitiator
     A-5: LocServ,  Rule Maker = Target,  LoSi,  ULR = SInitiator
     A-6: LocServ,  Rule Maker,  Target,  LoSi,  ULR,  SInitiator
     A-7: LocServ,  Rule Maker = ULR = SInitiator,  Target = LoSi
     A-8: LocServ = Rule Maker = Target = SInitiator,  LoSi,  ULR
     A-9: LocServ = LoSi,  Rule Maker = SInitiator,  Target = ULR

   For instance in group A-1 there are 2 physical entities (one entity
   is the Location Server, Rule Maker, Target and Location Sighter,
   while the other entity has the roles of Ultimate Location Recipient
   and Service Initiator).  In A-5 there are 4 different physical
   entities (only the Rule Maker and the Target are the same).  The A-6
   group has different entities playing the 6 roles.

   Where possible in the use cases listed in Section 5 below, the
   classifications A-1 through A-9 will be given for each use case.



Cuellar, Morris, Kanai         Geopriv Scenarios                     14

Expires in six months                                           Nov 2002


4.3. Initial Location Computation (Classif. B-1 through B-12)

   The location computation process contains two steps: 1) obtaining raw
   data about the Target's location, and 2) deriving or computing the
   Target's location using this raw data.  One example of such a
   location computation process is signal triangulation.  The raw data
   (Step 1) includes the direction a cell phone is from certain cell
   towers and where those cell towers are located.  Given this
   information, one can compute the cell phone's location (Step 2).

   Thus two important questions raised by the initial location
   computation scenarios are (a) which entity has control over the raw
   data, and (b) the site of the location computation.  On the first
   question (who has control over the raw data), there are two main
   likely answers: the Target's Device or the Target's (wired or
   wireless) Initial Access Provider (IAP).  In this framework, if the
   Target cannot control the dissemination of the raw data (such as with
   a cell phone that transmits information from a GPS chip to the
   wireless carrier without regard to the user's preferences), then the
   correct value would be the IAP.

   For the second question (the site of the initial location
   computation), there are three main likely answers: the Target's
   Device, the IAP of the Target's Device, or a third party who is
   neither the Target nor the IAP.

   In considering the use cases and scenarios set out later in this
   document, it is important to consider which entities have access to
   the raw data, to ensure that those entities comply with the relevant
   Privacy Policies.

   In addition to the two questions raised in this classification, there
   is value in noting a third question: whether the scenario involves a
   a Device (and Target) that are mobile or fixed.  Although in many
   (perhaps most) the functioning of the Geopriv Location Object will
   not depend on whether a scenario if fixed or mobile, in considering
   the scenarios it is instructive to acknowledge the existence of the
   fixed scenarios.

   The three questions and their possible values yield a total of 12
   basic scenarios, as illustrated below:

       mobility    - mobility of the Device
       raw data    - who controls or has access to raw location data
       computation - who performs the location computation
       IAP         - Initial Access Provider for the Target's Device
       Target      - the Target or the Target's Device
       >           - direction of raw data flow
       >>          - direction of processed location data flow




Cuellar, Morris, Kanai         Geopriv Scenarios                     15

Expires in six months                                           Nov 2002

   [Class] [mobility]  [raw data]     [computation]

     B-1    fixed        target -->-+-- target ------->>
                                    |
     B-2    fixed                   +-- IAP ---------->>
                                    |
     B-3    fixed                   +-- third party -->>

     B-4    fixed        IAP ----->-+-- target ------->>
                                    |
     B-5    fixed                   +-- IAP ---------->>
                                    |
     B-6    fixed                   +-- third party -->>

     B-7    mobile       target -->-+-- target ------->>
                                    |
     B-8    mobile                  +-- IAP ---------->>
                                    |
     B-9    mobile                  +-- third party -->>

     B-10   mobile       IAP ----->-+-- target ------->>
                                    |
     B-11   mobile                  +-- IAP ---------->>
                                    |
     B-12   mobile                  +-- third party -->>


   Where possible in the use cases listed in Section 5 below, the
   classifications B-1 through B-12 will be given for each use case.


5. Services From a User Point of View

   There is a huge diversity of possible location based services that
   may be offered.  This section describes a sample of the possible
   location services, grouping them into rough and somewhat arbitrary
   categories.  Many of the services listed below will be commercial
   services offered by network access providers or third parties.

   Where possible, the most appropriate classification designations from
   Section 4 above are offered for each use case.  In some cases, the
   classifications offered are not the only possible classification for
   the service.  <Note: This classification is significantly incomplete
   in this draft.>


5.1. Network Management and Computer Services

   Most wireless service providers (which act as the Initial Access
   Providers in the Geopriv context) already use extensive location
   based services for internal operations, such as location assisted
   handover, traffic and coverage measurement, O&M related tasks,


Cuellar, Morris, Kanai         Geopriv Scenarios                     16

Expires in six months                                           Nov 2002

   network planning, network QoS improvements, improved radio resource
   management, etc.  Assuming that the information is entirely internal
   within a single network, privacy implications are likely governed by
   laws or contract, and many of the location services would be outside
   of the scope of Geopriv.

5.1.1. Location Based Charging or Billing

   This location based service can be used to charge users (for example,
   for wireless access) depending on the their location.  Different
   rates may be applied at country clubs, golf courses, or shopping
   malls.  This service may apply also for instance to business groups,
   which obtain preferential rates within corporate campuses.  In many
   cases, subscribers should be notified of the zone or billing rate
   currently applicable, and be notified when the rate changes.
   Depending on implementation, this type of service may or may not come
   within the scope of Geopriv.

5.1.2. Enhanced Call Routing

   This service allows user calls to be routed to the closest service
   client based on the location of the originating and terminating point
   of the call.  The user may for instance dial a feature or service
   code to invoke the service (*GAS for closest gas station, etc).  ECR
   services may be offered, for example, through menu driven access that
   allows users to interactively select from a variety of services.

   If the implementation of the location based aspects of this service
   is entirely within a single wireless network provider, then this
   service may not utilize Geopriv.  Even within one network, however,
   Geopriv may offer an effective way to implement this type of service.
   Similar forms of this service offered by third parties are discussed
   below.

5.1.3. Ubiquitous computing applications

   The determination of access to bandwidth, devices and information
   sources and sinks can utilize location information.  Location can
   provide information about the devices that are available to the user,
   which allows determination of what will be effective means of
   communicating with him/her.


5.2. Emergency and Security Services

5.2.1. Emergency Call Services

   This location based service supplies location information to an
   emergency service provider to assist them in their response.  This
   service is mandatory in some jurisdictions, for instance in the
   United States for mobile voice providers (E911 service).



Cuellar, Morris, Kanai         Geopriv Scenarios                     17

Expires in six months                                           Nov 2002

   This service could arise with either the Push or Pull Models, and
   conceivably in almost any of the classifications A-1 through A-9 and
   B-1 through B-12.

5.2.2. Emergency Alert and other Public Safety Services

   Emergency Alert Services are used to notify subscribers within a
   specific geographic location of emergency alerts, including tornado
   or flooding warnings, evacuation instructions, police information
   broadcast, etc.

   This service could arise with either the Push or Pull Models, and
   conceivably in almost any of the classifications A-1 through A-9 and
   B-1 through B-12.

5.2.3. Evacuation navigation service

   In case of an emergency in a hotel, such as fire, the hotel initiates
   a navigation service to tell its customers about the evacuation
   routes.  Each room has a mobile Device, similar to a PDA, with
   positioning functionality.  A customer leaves his room along with the
   PDA.  The system obtains customer's current location through the PDA
   and displays the safest evacuation route on it.

   The hotel is the Service Initiator, and both the Target and Ultimate
   Location Recipient are the Device.

5.2.4. Location-based services to drivers

   Assistance for vehicle breakdown (Emergency Roadside Service) and
   personalized information on traffic conditions.  This service may be
   used in complement to an enhanced call routing service, which calls
   the nearest Emergency Roadside Service of a certain type and delivers
   the location information of the Target to the Roadside Service.  This
   could be used for the purpose of dispatching service agents.

5.2.5. Tracking services for Security

   The Rule Maker wants to protect his car with a location provider
   anti-theft device or to track the position of his children (or a
   pet).  The network may provide the last known location and timestamp.
   If information is unavailable in real-time, a reason may be provided.



5.3. Resource Management Services

5.3.1. Tracking services for Resource Management

   This service allows the tracking of location and status of specific
   service group users.  One example is a supervisor in the role of Rule
   Maker and main Location Recipient who manages a delivery service and


Cuellar, Morris, Kanai         Geopriv Scenarios                     18

Expires in six months                                           Nov 2002

   needs to know the location and status of employees.  The supervisor
   may also be able to relay messages to the employees or other people
   involved in the service (for instance, customers).  Another example
   is an enterprise tracking the location of vehicles (cars, trucks,
   etc.) and use location information to optimize services (Fleet
   Management).

5.3.2. Package Tracking

   A delivery company (Rule Maker) launches a service to notify a
   customer 'C' (ULR) about a package 'B' (Target) that it is now at the
   closest hub.  The sighting might be triggered by an employee of the
   delivery company, or by the sender or the receiver of the package.

   This service could arise with either the Push or Pull Models, and
   most likely in classifications A-6.


5.3.3. Taxi dispatch system û location of the customer

   A customer calls a taxi company for a taxi by his cellular.  A
   dispatch operator initiates their taxi dispatch system to find the
   most appropriate taxi.  First, the system obtains customer's current
   location from a Location Sighter (maybe a cellular carrier).  Then it
   searches the closest and available taxi based on location information
   that he has.  When it finds one, it displays a map around the
   customer to the taxi driver.


5.3.4. Taxi dispatch system û location of the taxi

   After a customer calls a taxi company for a taxi and the dispatch
   operator already knows his location, it searches the closest and
   available taxi based on location information.  This is an particular
   example of a Target Information Disclosure Service.  This kind of
   service inputs Location Information and outputs a Target ID (or
   processed information).  In our case the Location Server should have
   a functionality to obtain a Target ID (a taxi) by using the Location
   Information of the customer.  When it finds a taxi, it displays a map
   around the customer to the taxi driver

   Note: the location of the customer is sent or the taxi, but the
   location of the taxi is sent (by LoSi) to the Operator, the taxi
   knows his own location.


5.4. Geographic Based Content Services

   Location based information services allow subscribers to access
   information for which the information is filtered and tailored based
   on the location of the requesting user.  Subscribers will likely



Cuellar, Morris, Kanai         Geopriv Scenarios                     19

Expires in six months                                           Nov 2002

   initiate service requests on demand, but such services may be
   triggered automatically when certain user-set conditions are met.

5.4.1. Navigation

   The purpose of the navigation application is to provide directions to
   guide the target to his/her destination.  Depending on the context
   this could be driving or walking directions, traffic update, public
   transport services, or others.  The information may be in the form of
   plain text, SMS messages, symbols with text information (e.g.
   distances and turns), voice, or symbols on a map display.

   For example, a user is driving a car with a navigation Device which
   can access to the Internet.  He initiates an online navigation
   service from the Device to get the fastest route to his destination.
   The online system obtains his location with the Device.  Then
   searches traffic information around him and finds the fastest route.
   And it shows a direction on his Device.  This approach would be have
   the A-3 classification.

5.4.2. City Sightseeing

   City Sightseeing would enable the delivery of location specific
   information to a tourist.  Such information might describe historical
   sites, providing navigation directions between sites, facilitate
   finding the nearest museum, bank, airport, bus terminal, restroom
   facility, etc.

5.4.3. Mobile Yellow Pages

   Mobile Yellow Pages services provide the user with the address and
   phone number of the nearest location of a certain type or all
   locations within a chosen area (e.g. all Chinese restaurants within
   three kilometers).

   The information can be provided to the users in text format (e.g.
   name of the restaurant, address and telephone number) or in graphical
   format (map showing the location of the user and the restaurants).

5.4.4. Traffic Monitoring

   Mobiles in automobiles on freeways may be sampled to determine
   average velocity of vehicles.

5.4.5. Traffic jam information

   This is a particular case of an Area Information Disclosure Service.
   This service type, a variant of the Target Information Disclosure
   Services, comprehends services which input Area information, instead
   of Location, and output a Target ID (or processed information).




Cuellar, Morris, Kanai         Geopriv Scenarios                     20

Expires in six months                                           Nov 2002

   A traffic information system inputs area information (e.g.  location
   with range) to a Location Server.  Then the Location Server returns
   number of targets which are within the area right now.


5.5. Content Provider-Initiated Information Services

   Another form of location based information services can transmit
   information to users based on their location, but at the request or
   initiation of entities other than the user.  Users will likely need
   to subscribe or opt in to the services (and thus the services are in
   some ways user initiated).  The delivery of such services may be
   triggered automatically when certain user-set conditions are met.

5.5.1. Location Dependent Content Broadcast

   The main characteristic of this service category is that the network
   automatically broadcasts information to terminals in a certain
   geographical area. The information may be broadcast to all terminals
   in a given area, or only to members of specific group (perhaps only
   to members of a specific organization). The user may disable the
   functionality totally from the terminal or select only the
   information categories that the user is interested in.  An example of
   such a service may be localized advertising; merchants could
   broadcast coupons and advertisements to people passing by.



5.6. Entertainment and Community Services

5.6.1. Mobile Communities

   Find friends or share my position with my friends and interact

5.6.2. Gaming

   Play games based on playersÆ location.

5.6.3. Presence Services

5.6.4. Locate a Person

   I initiate a service to know where a friend is.

5.6.5. Rendezvous service

   A user initiates a rendezvous service from his cellular.  The system
   obtains his current location from a Location Sighter, maybe a
   cellular carrier.  The system sends his friend an e-mail to describe
   how to reach him.




Cuellar, Morris, Kanai         Geopriv Scenarios                     21

Expires in six months                                           Nov 2002

5.7. Management and Activation Interfaces

   <tbd>

6. Scenarios

6.1. Scenario 1

   Target Seeks Own Location with GPS Device with Computing Power

   In this very simple example, the Target wishes to know his/her
   location using GPS, and has a device that is capable of processing
   the raw data to determine a useful location.  The location is derived
   as follows: the device receives transmissions from GPS satellites,
   and internally computes and displays the location.  This is a wholly
   closed system.

       One Way GPS Satellites
                 |
                 V
       +------------------------------------------+
       | GPS Device with processing power:        |
       |                                          |
       |  Rule Maker = Target = Location Seeker   |
       |      = Ultimate Location Recipient       |
       |                                          |
       +------------------------------------------+

   In this closed system no external entity is granted access to
   location information.  This minimizes the privacy concerns.  But,
   because the device can be lost, stolen or accessed through legal
   process, questions about data retention and data security remain.
   What information is stored on the device?  For how long?  What
   security protects it?


6.2. Scenario 2

   Target Seeks Own Location with GPS Device with No Computing Power

   In this example (an instance of B-8 or B-9), usable Location
   Information is computed by an outside entity based on GPS data.  In
   this example, the outside entity is NOT the wireless carrier
   providing network access, but is instead a third party.  The location
   is derived as follows: the Device receives GPS transmissions, and
   sends (using the wireless carriers network, which acts as a simple
   Data Transporter) the raw data to a third party Location Server.
   That server processes the data and sends it back to the Device.  The
   third party Location Server may or may not store the Location
   Information for later use in accordance with the Privacy Policies set
   by the Rule Maker.



Cuellar, Morris, Kanai         Geopriv Scenarios                     22

Expires in six months                                           Nov 2002

     One Way GPS Satellites
               |
               V
     +--------------------------+                        +-----------+
     | GPS Device:              |  1. Raw GPS Data       | Wireless  |
     |                          | ---------------------> | Carrier:  |
     |  Rule Maker = Target =   |                        |           |
     |  Location Seeker =       |                        |  Data     |
     |  Ultimate Loc. Recipient | <--------------------- |  Trans-   |
     |                          | 4. Location Inform.    |  porter   |
     +--------------------------+                        +-----------+
                                                     2. Raw |    ^ 3.
                                                       Data |    | Loc.
                                                            |    | Inf.
                                                            V    |
                                     +-------------------------------+
                                     | Third Party Service Provider: |
                                     |                               |
                                     |   Location Server             |
                                     |                               |
                                     +-------------------------------+

   The same concerns raised in Scenario 6.1 (about the security of
   information contained in the Device) remain.  A host of additional
   concerns are raised, including about the security of information as
   it passes through the Data Transporter.  The most significant
   additional concerns are about the third party Location Server,
   including the length of data retention, the ability to reuse and
   disclose, and the security of any data storage.


6.3. Scenario 3

   Fleet Owner Seeks Location of Rental Cars with GPS Device

   In this example (an instance of classification B-9), a rental car
   company wants to track its vehicles using GPS, solely for purposes of
   fleet management (and not as a service to the rental customer).  The
   Target is the rental car and the Unintended Target is the driver.
   The location of the Target (and the Unintended Target as well) is
   derived as follows: the rental car receives GPS transmissions, and on
   a regular basis transmits the raw GPS data via a wireless network to
   a third party Location Server, which in turn determines the Location
   Information in a useful format and forwards that LI to the car rental
   company.









Cuellar, Morris, Kanai         Geopriv Scenarios                     23

Expires in six months                                           Nov 2002

     One Way GPS Satellites
               |
               V
     +--------------------------+                        +-----------+
     | GPS Device:              |   1. Raw GPS Data      | Wireless  |
     |                          | ---------------------> | Carrier:  |
     |  Rental Car = Target     |                        |           |
     |                          |                        |  Data     |
     |  Driver = Unintended     |                        |  Trans-   |
     |           Target         |                        |  porter   |
     +--------------------------+                        +-----------+
                                                     2. Raw |
                                                       Data |
                                                            |
                                                            V
     +-----------------------+               +-----------------------+
     | Rental Car Company    |  3. Location  | Third Party           |
     |                       |  Information  |  Service Provider:    |
     | Rule Maker = Ultimate |<--------------|                       |
     |   Location Recipient  |               | Location Server       |
     +-----------------------+               +-----------------------+

   All of the same concerns raised in Scenario 6.2 are raised here, plus
   additional concerns (in particular concerning the threat to the
   privacy of the Unintended Target, the car rental customer driving the
   rental car).  That threat is reduced (but far from eliminated) if the
   information transmitted to the third party Location Server does not
   carry any identifier related to the customer/driver.  In general, the
   threats to the Unintended Target are outside the scope of Geopriv,
   but the risk to the Unintended Target nevertheless warrants note.


6.4. Scenario 4

   Target in Fixed Location Purchases Regionally Restricted Content

   In this example (an instance of classification B-5), the Target has
   in his or her home a desktop computer continuously connected to the
   Internet over a wire-line DSL connection. The Target seeks to
   purchase certain audio or video content from a World Wide Web based
   content provider.  For contractual or legal reasons, the content
   provider will only sell the content to users located in a particular
   country or region.  The content provider (as the Location Seeker)
   requests that the Target's Initial Access Provider (the Target's DSL
   ISP) provide the Target's Location to the content provider.









Cuellar, Morris, Kanai         Geopriv Scenarios                     24

Expires in six months                                           Nov 2002

     +------------------------+                    +-----------+
     | Home Computer:         | 1. Content Request | DSL       |
     |                        | ------------------>| Provider  |
     |  Rule Maker = Target   |                    |           |
     |                        |                    | Location  |
     |                        | <----------------- | Server    |
     |                        | 6. Content         |           |
     +------------------------+                    +-----------+
                                                     |  ^  |  ^
                                                     |  |  |  |
                                                     |  |  |  |
     +---------------------+   2. Content Request    |  |  |  |
     | Content Provider:   | <-----------------------/  |  |  |
     |                     |   3. Location Request      |  |  |
     |   Location Seeker = | ---------------------------/  |  |
     |   Ultimate Location |   4. Location Information     |  |
     |     Recipient       | <-----------------------------/  |
     |                     |   5. Content                     |
     |                     | ---------------------------------/
     +---------------------+


6.5. Scenario 5

   Third Party Seeks Location of Target with Device with Computing Power
   and Location Awareness

   In this case, a mobile node (laptop or handheld) is at the same time
   is the Target, Rule Maker, Location Server, and Location Sighter.
   The mobile node knows or discovers its own position using a GPS
   mechanism, a manual input from the user, or a co-located sensor that
   recognizes the relative position of some active badges or other
   reference points.  An application running in the mobile node delivers
   its location to some Ultimate Location Recipients.

   An Ultimate Location Recipient that wants to know the position of the
   mobile node sends a Location Requests to the application running on
   the mobile node. After authenticating the Location Recipient, the
   application checks which policy rule matches, translates the location
   information to the appropriate form and sends back this Filtered
   Location Information to the Ultimate Location Recipient.













Cuellar, Morris, Kanai         Geopriv Scenarios                     25

Expires in six months                                           Nov 2002

     +--------------------------+                        +-----------+
     | Smart Mobile Device:     | 2. Location Request    | Wireless  |
     |                          | <--------------------- | Carrier:  |
     |  Rule Maker = Target =   |                        |           |
     |  Location Sighter =      |                        |  Data     |
     |  Location Server         | ---------------------> |  Trans-   |
     |                          | 3. Location Inform.    |  porter   |
     +--------------------------+                        +-----------+
                                                    4. Loc. |    ^ 1.
                                                       Inf. |    | Loc.
                                                            |    | Req.
                                                            V    |
                                     +-------------------------------+
                                     | Requesting entity:            |
                                     |                               |
                                     |  Location Seeker =            |
                                     |  Ultimate Location Recipient  |
                                     |                               |
                                     +-------------------------------+


   Notice that in this case the policies are only for internal use of
   the mobile node and as such do not have to be standardized. Only the
   interface to the Ultimate Location Recipients has to be standardized.
   The Location Recipient, however, must obey the Rule Maker's Privacy
   Policies, which are either conveyed or referenced in the Location
   Object


6.6. Scenario 6

   Third Party Seeks Location of Target with Device with Computing Power
   But No Location Awareness

   This scenario is very similar to the prior one, but instead of the
   mobile node discovering his position by himself, it requests its
   wireless carrier (its Initial Access Provider) to determine the
   location of the mobile note (the Device), and send it back to the
   mobile node for service to the Ultimate Location Recipient.















Cuellar, Morris, Kanai         Geopriv Scenarios                     26

Expires in six months                                           Nov 2002

     +------------------+                        +---------------------+
     | Mobile Device:   |  2. Location Request   | Wireless Carrier    |
     |                  | <--------------------- |                     |
     |                  |  3. Location Request   |  Data Transporter   |
     |  Rule Maker =    | ---------------------> |   for 1-2, 5-6      |
     |  Target =        |  4. Location Inform.   |                     |
     |  Location        | <--------------------- |  Location Sighter&  |
     |  Server          |  5. Location Inform.   |   Server for 3-4    |
     |                  | ---------------------> |                     |
     +------------------+                        +---------------------+
                                                    6. Loc. |    ^ 1.
                                                       Inf. |    | Loc.
                                                            |    | Req.
                                                            V    |
                                     +-------------------------------+
                                     | Requesting entity:            |
                                     |                               |
                                     |  Location Seeker =            |
                                     |  Ultimate Location Recipient  |
                                     |                               |
                                     +-------------------------------+

   Notice that in this scenario no Location Recipient exists, besides
   the Rule Maker and the Ultimate Location Recipients served by the
   Rule Maker. Thus, the Rule Maker is in full control of its private
   information.

   There is a significant privacy concern raised by the uncertainty of
   how the Rule Maker makes sure that the Location Sighter (here, the
   Initial Access Provider) does not provide location information to
   other location recipients.  Either the IAP is aware of the full
   policies of the owner, or a default (set by law, contract, or
   protocol design) prohibits disclosure.  A precise requirement should
   be formulated to guarantee this privacy protection.

   Another concern is that, depending on the sensing infrastructure and
   its trusts relationships to the user, authenticating the supplied
   location information is difficult for the following reasons:

        o some sensor systems only detect active badges that can be
           removed from the mobile object they represent.

        o sensor systems are not equipped with proper keys or key
           distribution software.


6.7. Scenario 7

   Target with Location Aware Device Using Third Party Location Server
   to Obtain Location Based Service From a Fourth Party Service Provider




Cuellar, Morris, Kanai         Geopriv Scenarios                     27

Expires in six months                                           Nov 2002

   In this case, a mobile node (laptop or handheld) is at the same time
   is the Target, Rule Maker, Location Server, and Location Sighter.
   The mobile node knows or discovers its own position using a GPS
   mechanism, a manual input from the user, etc., and periodically sends
   that location to a third party Location Server with which the Rule
   Maker has a prior contractual arrangement.  The Target sends the
   Location Server its Privacy Policies in advance.  When the Target
   then seeks a location service, it requests the service from the
   service provider.  The service provider requests the Target's
   location from the Location Server, and then fills the Target's
   request for a service.


     +----------------------+    Periodically Sent   +-----------------+
     | Mobile Device:       | b. Location Inform.    | Wireless        |
     |                      | ---------------------> | Carrier:        |
     |  Rule Maker = Target |                        |                 |
     |                      | 1. Service Request     |  Data           |
     |                      | ---------------------> |  Transporter    |
     |                      | 6. Location Service    |                 |
     |                      | <--------------------- |                 |
     +----------------------+                        +-----------------+
             |                                         |  |  |
             | a. Privacy Policies                     |  |  |
             |    (sent external to                    |  |  |
             |     and in advance of                   |  |  |
             |     location service                    |  |  |
             |     transaction)           Periodically |  |  |
             V                            Sent Location|  |  |
          +--------------------------+ c. Information  |  |  |
          | Third Party Location     | <---------------/  |  |
          |    Server:               |                    |  |
          |                          |                    |  |
          |  Location Server         |                    |  |
          |                          |                    |  |
          +--------------------------+                    |  |
                   ^    |                                 |  |
       3. Location |    | 4. Location                     |  |
          Request  |    |    Information                  |  |
                   |    V                                 |  |
          +---------------------+                         |  |
          | Location Service    |  2. Service Request     |  |
          |   Provider          | <-----------------------/  |
          |                     |                            |
          |  Location Seeker =  |  5. Location Service       |
          |  Ultimate Location  | ---------------------------/
          |  Recipient          |
          +---------------------+


6.8. Scenario 8



Cuellar, Morris, Kanai         Geopriv Scenarios                     28

Expires in six months                                           Nov 2002

   Target with Non-Aware Device Using Third Party Location Server to
   Obtain Location Based Service From a Fourth Party Service Provider

   This final scenario is the same as the prior scenario except that the
   Target's Device does NOT know its location and must instead have its
   Location Server ask for its location from the Target's Initial Access
   Provider:

     +----------------------+                        +-----------------+
     | Mobile Device:       |                        | Wireless        |
     |                      |                        | Carrier:        |
     |  Rule Maker = Target |                        |  Data Transport |
     |                      | 1. Service Request     |   for 1-2,7-8   |
     |                      | ---------------------> |  Location Sight&|
     |                      | 8. Location Service    |  Server for 4-5 |
     |                      | <--------------------- |                 |
     +----------------------+                        +-----------------+
             |                                         ^  |  |  ^
             | a. Privacy Policies                     |  |  |  |
             |    (sent external to                    |  |  |  |
             |     and in advance of                   |  |  |  |
             |     location service                    |  |  |  |
             |     transaction)                        |  |  |  |
             V                                         |  |  |  |
          +--------------------------+ 4. Loc. Request |  |  |  |
          | Third Party Location     | ----------------/  |  |  |
          |    Server:               |                    |  |  |
          |                          | 5. Location        |  |  |
          |  Location Server         |    Information     |  |  |
          |                          | <------------------/  |  |
          +--------------------------+                       |  |
                   ^    |                                    |  |
       3. Location |    | 6. Location                        |  |
          Request  |    |    Information                     |  |
                   |    V                                    |  |
          +---------------------+                            |  |
          | Location Service    |  2. Service Request        |  |
          |   Provider          | <--------------------------/  |
          |                     |                               |
          |  Location Seeker =  |  7. Location Service          |
          |  Ultimate Location  | ------------------------------/
          |  Recipient          |
          +---------------------+

   Note that the Initial Access Provider also acts as a Location Server
   to provide the initial Location Sighting to the third party Location
   Server, which then in turn fills the request for location.


7. Implications and Conclusions




Cuellar, Morris, Kanai         Geopriv Scenarios                     29

Expires in six months                                           Nov 2002

   Critical privacy issues illustrated by the location computation
   scenarios are who controls the data and how, who computes or derives
   the location information, and who stores uses and discloses the data.

   All examples apart from the closed system represented by example A
   present many privacy issues.  The more entities involved, the more
   difficult it is to make sure the privacy rules of the rule maker are
   implemented. In cases where there is a pre-existing relationship,
   technology may not be necessary to transmit privacy rules.  Instead,
   the rule-maker and IAP might reach a contractual agreement about
   privacy. But, the rule-maker will not always have a contractual
   relationship with the IAP or all involved entities.  In some
   instances the target will have no choice but to use a single IAP.
   Sometimes "a chain" from the IAP to other entities to enforce the
   privacy rules may work. Therefore, technologies that address these
   issues must be developed.

   It is not the purpose of this document to identify the specific
   technologies necessary to protect privacy of location information.
   But, in considering the framework set out above, the scenarios
   suggest a number of possible technological needs to protect a
   target's privacy and transmit a rule-maker's privacy rules. Possible
   technological needs include methods to transmit to any entity the
   rule makers privacy rules. A possible solution could be the direct
   transfer of the privacy rules with the data itself. Another solution
   could be the use of a rule repository.  It should be noted that
   privacy rules which may contain sensitive data warrant privacy
   protection.

   Entities may be constrained by national or local laws regarding how
   they handle information.  For example, in some relevant situations
   within some countries, "Customer Proprietary Network Information"
   (CPNI) rules require that telecommunications carriers obtain customer
   approval before using, disclosing, or permitting access to
   individually identifiable CPNI.

8. Security Considerations

   The purpose of the geopriv Location Object is to allow a policy-
   controlled disclosure of location information for location services.
   The information carried within the Location Object is secured in a
   way compliant with the privacy and security policies of the Rule
   Maker, but other information, carried in other objects or headers are
   in general not secured in the same way.  The scenarios included in
   this draft can serve to illustrate security concerns that must be
   addressed by geopriv.

9. Acknowledgements

   Important elements of this draft were inspired by a prior scenarios
   draft by Kenji Takahashi and his colleagues.



Cuellar, Morris, Kanai         Geopriv Scenarios                     30

Expires in six months                                           Nov 2002


10. References


   [ISO99] ISO99: ISO IS 15408, 1999, http://www.commoncriteria.org/.

   [OECD] OECD Guidelines on the Protection of Privacy and Transborder
      Flows of Personal Data, http://www.oecd.org.

   [Pfi01] Pfitzmann, Andreas; K÷hntopp, Marit: Anonymity,
      Unobservability, and Pseudonymity - A Proposal for Terminology;
      in: H Federrath (Ed.): Designing Privacy Enhancing Technologies;
      Proc. Workshop on Design Issues in Anonymity and Unobservability;
      LNCS 2009; 2001; 1-9. Newer versions available at
      http://www.koehntopp.de/marit/pub/anon

   [RFC2119] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
      Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997

11. Author's Addresses

   Jorge R. Cuellar
   Siemens AG
   Otto-Hahn Ring 6
   81730 Munich                   Email:  jorge.cuellar@mchp.siemens.de
   Germany

   John B. Morris, Jr.
   Director, Internet Standards, Technology & Policy Project
   Center for Democracy and Technology
   1634 I Street NW, Suite 1100
   Washington, DC 20006                         Email:  jmorris@cdt.org
   USA

   Tsuyoshi Go Kanai
   Fujitsu Laboratories, Ltd.
   64 Nishiwaki, Okubo-cho,
   Akashi 674-8555                      Email:  kanai.go@jp.fujitsu.com
   Japan



12. Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (date). All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this


Cuellar, Morris, Kanai         Geopriv Scenarios                     31

Expires in six months                                           Nov 2002

   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.





































Cuellar, Morris, Kanai         Geopriv Scenarios                     32