 
 
   NSIS                                                                 
   Internet Draft                                         H. Tschofenig 
                                                          D. Kroeselberg 
                                                                 Siemens 
   Document:                                                            
   draft-ietf-nsis-threats-04.txt 
   Expires: August 2004                                   February 2004 
    
    
                         Security Threats for NSIS 
                     <draft-ietf-nsis-threats-04.txt> 
    
    
Status of this Memo 
 
    
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is subject to all provisions 
   of Section 10 of RFC2026.  
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.  
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
   at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."  
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at  
   http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html  
    
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at  
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html  
    
Abstract 
    
   This threats document provides a detailed analysis of the security 
   threats relevant for the NSIS protocol. It calls attention to and 
   helps with understanding of various security considerations in the 
   NSIS Requirements, Framework, and Protocol proposals. This document 
   does not describe vulnerabilities of specific NSIS protocols. 
    







 
 
Tschofenig, Kroeselberg    Expires - August 2004              [Page 1] 
                      Security Threats for NSIS         February 2004 
 
 
Table of Contents 
    
   1. Introduction..................................................2 
   2. Relevant Communications Models................................3 
      2.1 First-Peer Communications.................................5 
      2.2 End-to-Middle Communications..............................6 
      2.3 Intra-Domain Communications...............................6 
      2.4 Inter-Domain Communications...............................6 
      2.5 End-to-End Communications.................................7 
      2.6 Middle-to-Middle Communications...........................8 
   3. Generic Threats...............................................8 
      3.1 Man-in-the-Middle Attacks.................................8 
      3.2 Replay of Signaling Messages.............................10 
      3.3 Injecting or Modifying Messages..........................11 
      3.4 Insecure Parameter Exchange and Negotiation..............11 
   4. NSIS-Specific Threat Scenarios...............................11 
      4.1 NSIS SA Usage............................................12 
      4.2 Combining Signaling and SA Establishment.................12 
      4.3 Eavesdropping and Traffic Analysis.......................13 
      4.4 Identity Spoofing........................................13 
      4.5 Unprotected Authorization Information....................15 
      4.6 Missing Non-Repudiation..................................16 
      4.7 Malicious NSIS Entity....................................17 
      4.8 Denial of Service Attacks................................17 
      4.9 Disclosing the Network Topology..........................18 
      4.10 Unprotected Session or Reservation Ownership............19 
      4.11 Attacks against the Transport Mechanism.................20 
   5. Security Considerations......................................21 
   6. Normative References.........................................21 
   7. Informative References.......................................22 
   Author's Addresses..............................................23 
   Full Copyright Statement........................................23 
    
 
1. Introduction 
    
   Whenever a new protocol has to be developed or existing protocols 
   have to be modified, threats to their security should be evaluated. 
   The process of securing protocols is broken down into discrete 
   steps. To address security in the NSIS working group, a number of 
   steps have been taken: 
 
   - NSIS Analysis Activities (e.g., RSVP Security Properties)   
   - Security Threats for NSIS          
   - NSIS Requirements               
   - NSIS Framework                  
   - NSIS Protocol Proposals 
    

 
 
Tschofenig, Kroeselberg    Expires - August 2004              [Page 2] 
                      Security Threats for NSIS         February 2004 
 
 
   This document identifies the basic security threats that need to be 
   addressed during the NSIS signaling protocol design. This document 
   cannot provide detailed threats for all possible NSIS NSLPs. QoS,  
   NAT/Firewall and other NSLPs documents need to provide a description 
   of their trust models and a threat description for their specific 
   application domain. In addition, although the base protocol might be 
   secure, certain extensions may cause problems when used in a 
   particular environment. Furthermore, it is necessary to investigate 
   the context in which a signaling protocol is used and the 
   architecture into which it is integrated. As an example of such 
   interaction, accounting and charging are taken into account in this 
   document, because without an appropriate integration of the two, it 
   is difficult to deploy any NSIS solution. This interaction is also a 
   subject of discussion within the NSIS Framework. 
    
   We use the NSIS terms defined in [Brun03]. 
    
    
2. Relevant Communications Models 
    
   Signaling messages traverse different parts of a network, demand 
   different security protection, and raise different security 
   problems. The different needs for security protection are mainly due 
   to the fact that NSIS signaling messages cross trust boundaries into 
   domains where different trust relationships exist. Often, one may 
   describe this by categorizing communications as first-peer, last-
   peer, intra-domain, or inter-domain (see Figure 1).  
    
   The main properties of the parts of a network listed here are 
   briefly described in this section, and the threats against them in 
   Sections 3 and 4 are classified as generic and NSIS specific. Figure 
   1 depicts a typical end-to-end communication scenario including 
   access parts between the NSIS end-entities and their nearest NSIS 
   hops. This "first-peer communications" commonly comes with specific 
   security requirements (as described below) that are especially 
   important for properly addressing security in mobile scenarios. 
   Differences in the trust relationship and the required security for 
   first-peer communication, compared with other parts of the signaling 
   path, might exist. 
    
   To refine the above differentiation based on the network parts that 
   NSIS signaling may traverse, we consider trust relationships between 
   different network parts. 
    
   Additional threats may apply to NSIS communications in which one 
   entity involved is an end-entity (Initiator or Responder) and the 
   other entity is any intermediate hop except the immediately adjacent 
   peer. This is typically called the end-to-middle scenario (see 
   Figure 2 for a description of relevant trust relations).  
 
 
Tschofenig, Kroeselberg    Expires - August 2004              [Page 3] 
                      Security Threats for NSIS         February 2004 
 
 
    
     +------------------+   +---------------+   +------------------+ 
     |                  |   |               |   |                  | 
     |  Administrative  |   | Intermediate  |   |  Administrative  | 
     |     Domain A     |   |   Domains     |   |     Domain B     | 
     |                  |   |               |   |                  | 
     |                 (Inter-domain Communication)                | 
     |        +---------+---+---------------+---+---------+        | 
     |  (Intra-domain   |   |               |   | (Intra-domain    | 
     |   Communication) |   |               |   |  Communication)  | 
     |        |         |   |               |   |         |        | 
     |        |         |   |               |   |         |        | 
     +--------+---------+   +---------------+   +---------+--------+ 
              ^                                           v 
              |                                           | 
     First Peer Communication               Last Peer Communication 
              |                                           | 
        +-----+-----+                               +-----+-----+ 
        |   NSIS    |                               |   NSIS    | 
        | Initiator |                               | Responder | 
        +-----------+                               +-----------+ 
    
                       Figure 1: NSIS Network Parts 
    
   The motivation for including this scenario stems, for example, from 
   the SIP [RFC3261] protocol. To counter a number of specific security 
   threats, any intermediate SIP hop may request a SIP end-entity (UA) 
   to authenticate. Such functionality seems generally useful for 
   intermediaries at the borders of trust domains that signaling 
   messages need to traverse.  
    
   Intermediate NSIS hops may have to deal as well with specific 
   security threats not (directly) involving any end-entities. This 
   scenario is called middle-to-middle. A typical example of middle-to-
   middle communication is between two NSIS hops at the borders of 
   their respective trust domains (i.e., inter-domain communications). 
   NSIS messages may have to traverse one or more untrusted hops 
   between these NSIS entities.   
    
   Figure 2 illustrates these additional scenarios. The first-peer and 
   last-peer cases discussed above are covered by the peer-to-peer 
   trust relationships between end-entity and closest hop. 
    






 
 
Tschofenig, Kroeselberg    Expires - August 2004              [Page 4] 
                      Security Threats for NSIS         February 2004 
 
 
    
                 **************************************** 
                 *                                      * 
            +----+-----+       +----------+        +----+-----+ 
      +-----+  NSIS    +-------+  NSIS    +--------+  NSIS    +-----+ 
      |     |  Node 1  |       |  Node 2  |        |  Node 3  |     | 
      |     +----------+       +----+-----+        +----------+     | 
      |                             ~                               | 
      |  ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~                               | 
      |  ~                                                          | 
   +--+--+-----+                                          +---------+-+ 
   |   NSIS    +//////////////////////////////////////////+   NSIS    | 
   | Initiator |                                          | Responder | 
   +-----------+                                          +-----------+ 
    
    Legend: 
     -----: Peer-to-Peer Trust Relationship 
     /////: End-to-End Trust Relationship 
     *****: Middle-to-Middle Trust Relationship 
     ~~~~~: End-to-Middle Trust Relationship 
    
                    Figure 2: NSIS Trust Relationships 
    
2.1 First-Peer Communications 
    
   First-peer communications refers to the peer-to-peer interaction 
   between a signaling message originator, the NSIS Initiator (NI), and 
   the first NSIS-aware entity along the path. Making assumptions about 
   the threats, security requirements, and available trust 
   relationships may be difficult here.  
    
   To illustrate this, in public mobile environments it is difficult to 
   assume the existence of a pre-established security association 
   directly available for NSIS peers involved in first-peer 
   communications, because these peers cannot be assumed to have any 
   pre-existing relationship between each other. For enterprise 
   networks, in contrast, the situation is different. Usually there is 
   a fairly strong (pre-established) trust relationship between the 
   peers. Enterprise network administrators usually have some degree of 
   freedom to select the appropriate security protection and to enforce 
   it. The choice of selecting a security mechanism is therefore often 
   influenced by the already available infrastructure, and per-session 
   negotiation of security mechanisms is often not required (which, in 
   contrast, is required for the public mobile case).  
    
   For first-peer communications, especially, threats related to 
   initial security association setup, or threats due to replay 
   attacks, lack of confidentiality, denial of service, integrity 

 
 
Tschofenig, Kroeselberg    Expires - August 2004              [Page 5] 
                      Security Threats for NSIS         February 2004 
 
 
   violation, or identity spoofing are relevant, and potentially lead 
   to theft of service,  fraud, or violations of privacy.  
    
2.2 End-to-Middle Communications 
    
   End-to-middle interaction in signaling may be required, e.g., to 
   grant end-entities access to specific services in trust domains 
   different from the one to which the first peer belongs. Threats 
   specific to this scenario may be introduced by untrusted 
   intermediate NSIS hops that maliciously alter NSIS signaling. These 
   threats are still relevant if security mechanisms are in place 
   between the NSIS hops, but terminate at each hop (e.g., IPsec hop-
   by-hop protection).   
    
2.3 Intra-Domain Communications 
    
   After having been verified at the first peer, an NSIS signaling 
   message traverses the network within the same administrative domain 
   to which the first peer belongs. Because the request has already 
   been authenticated and authorized, the threats are different from 
   those described in the previous sections. To differentiate first-
   peer communications from intra-domain communications (i.e., 
   communications internally within one administrative domain) we 
   assume that no external end hosts have direct access to the internal 
   network nodes, except to the first peer. We furthermore assume that 
   NSIS peers within the same administrative domain have at least some 
   sort of trust relationship. 
    
2.4 Inter-Domain Communications 
    
   The threat assumptions between the borders of different 
   administrative domains largely depend on the authorization 
   procedures. If one domain forges QoS reservations, then this domain 
   may also have to pay for the reservation. Hence, in this case, there 
   is no real benefit for this domain to forge a QoS reservation. If an 
   end host is directly charged by intermediate domains (i.e., by a 
   domain different from the malicious domain), such an attack may be a 
   quite realistic threat.  
    
   Security protection of messages transmitted between different 
   administrative domains is necessary to tackle attacks like spoofing, 
   integrity violation, or denial of service between these domains, 
   e.g., to allow proper accounting. The number of neighboring domains 
   is usually rather limited (compared with first-peer communications), 
   which substantially reduces the key management considerations for 
   securing inter-domain NSIS signaling. 
    
   Signaling information other than QoS service parameters, such as 
   policy rules in the case of middlebox communications, places 
 
 
Tschofenig, Kroeselberg    Expires - August 2004              [Page 6] 
                      Security Threats for NSIS         February 2004 
 
 
   different assumptions on inter-domain communications. Business 
   relationships and trust assumptions are of particular importance as 
   a basis for securing these communications. 
    
   If signaling messages are conveyed transparently in the core network 
   (i.e., they are neither intercepted nor processed in the core 
   network), then the signaling message communications effectively 
   takes place between potentially distant access networks. This might 
   place a burden on the key management infrastructure required between 
   these access networks, which might not know of each other in 
   advance. This might lead to an inability to secure signaling 
   messages for direct communications between the access networks. 
   Hence, this can be seen as a serious deployment problem, because it 
   might be unacceptable for an access network service provider to 
   perform processing (e.g., QoS reservations or policy rule 
   installation at firewalls) triggered by unprotected, 
   unauthenticated, and possibly unauthorized incoming signaling 
   messages. 
    
2.5 End-to-End Communications 
    
   NSIS aims to signal information between the Initiator and the 
   Responder. This section refers to the trust relationships required 
   between the end points in cases where security protection is 
   required. Note that this security protection is likely to be 
   required only for certain objects such as those related to pricing 
   and charging. Protecting the entire signaling message end to end is 
   not normally regarded as feasible, because intermediate NSIS nodes 
   need (a) to inspect various objects and (b) to add, modify, or 
   delete objects from the signaling message.  
    
   The following example illustrates a possible application of end-to-
   end protection for objects carried within the NSIS signaling 
   protocol. Alice, the data sender, wants Bob, the data receiver, to 
   pay for a QoS reservation (reverse charging). Bob wants to be 
   assured that the QoS signaling message he receives was indeed 
   transmitted by Alice, because he is only willing to pay for 
   particular users and not for everyone. Hence, Bob wants to verify 
   that the request came from Alice (authentication) and that the 
   included parameters are unmodified (integrity). Additionally it 
   might be necessary to secure a negotiation step and to deliver 
   authorization information securely to the parties involved. 
   Information required to render an authorization decision (such as 
   prices or QoS objects) also needs proper security protection.  
    
   Typical threats in such a scenario range from modification of QoS 
   objects or price information (i.e., making Bob pay too much), to 
   fraud (i.e., forcing Bob always to pay for the reservations), to 
   identity spoofing (i.e., an impostor claiming to be Alice). 
 
 
Tschofenig, Kroeselberg    Expires - August 2004              [Page 7] 
                      Security Threats for NSIS         February 2004 
 
 
    
   Regarding end-to-end security, one additional issue needs to be 
   addressed: delegation. Whenever signaling is addressed end to end 
   and an arbitrary node along the path acts as a proxy on behalf of 
   the other endpoint, a delegation mechanism is required to provide 
   secure interaction. This might lead to additional complexity.  
    
2.6 Middle-to-Middle Communications 
    
   The middle-to-middle case is not explicitly considered here, 
   although it is important, because it is already covered by either 
   intra- or inter-domain communications depending on the locations of 
   the entities involved. 
    
    
3. Generic Threats 
    
   This section provides scenarios of threats that are applicable to 
   signaling protocols in general. Note that some of these scenarios 
   use the term user instead of NSIS Initiator. This is mainly because 
   security protocols allow differentiation between entities as hosts 
   and as users (based on the identifiers used).  
    
   For the following subsections, we use the general distinction into 
   two cases in which attacks may occur. These are according to the 
   separate steps, or phases, normally encountered when applying 
   protocol security (with, e.g., IPsec, TLS, Kerberos, or SSH). 
   Therefore, this section starts with a brief motivation for this 
   separation.  
    
   Security protection of protocols is often separated into two steps. 
   The first step provides primarily entity authentication and key 
   establishment (which result in a persistent state often called a 
   security association), whereas the second step provides message 
   protection (some combination of data origin authentication, data 
   integrity, confidentiality, and replay protection) using the 
   previously established security association. The first step tends to 
   be more expensive than the second, which is the main reason for the 
   separation. If messages are transmitted infrequently, then these two 
   steps may be collapsed into a single and usually rather costly one. 
   One such example is e-mail protection via S/MIME. The two steps may 
   be tightly bound into a single protocol, as in TLS, or defined in 
   separate protocols, as with IKE and IPsec. We use this separation to 
   cover the different threats in more detail.  
    
3.1 Man-in-the-Middle Attacks 
    
   This section describes both (1) security threats that exist if two 
   peers do not already share a security association or do not use 
 
 
Tschofenig, Kroeselberg    Expires - August 2004              [Page 8] 
                      Security Threats for NSIS         February 2004 
 
 
   security mechanisms at all, and (2) threats that are applicable when 
   a security association is already established. Note also that a 
   denial of service attack on a signaling protocol exists when no 
   separation between SA establishment and signaling protection takes 
   place. The discovery procedure, in particular, is vulnerable to a 
   number of such attacks. 
    
   - Attacks during NSIS SA Establishment 
    
   While establishing a security association, an adversary fools the 
   signaling message Initiator with respect to the entity to which it 
   has to authenticate. The Initiator authenticates to the man-in-the-
   middle adversary, who is then able to modify signaling messages to 
   mount DoS attacks or steal services that get billed to the 
   Initiator. In addition, it may be able to terminate the Initiator's 
   NSIS messages of and inject messages to a peer itself, therefore 
   acting as the peer to the Initiator and as the Initiator to the 
   peer. This results in the Initiator wrongly believing that it is 
   talking to the "real" network, whereas it is actually attached to an 
   adversary.  
   For this attack to be successful, pre-conditions have to hold which 
   are described in the following two cases:  
    
   - Missing Authentication 
    
   In the first case, this threat can be carried out because of missing 
   authentication between neighboring peers: without authentication a 
   NI, NR, or NF is unable to detect an adversary. However, in some 
   practical cases authentication might be difficult to accomplish, 
   either because the next peer is unknown, because of misbelieved 
   trust relationships in parts of the network, or because of the 
   inability to establish proper security protection (inter-domain 
   signaling messages, dynamic establishment of a security association, 
   etc.). If one of the communicating endpoints is unknown, then for 
   some security mechanisms it is either impossible or impractical to 
   apply appropriate security protection. Sometimes network 
   administrators use intra-domain signaling messages without proper 
   security. Such a configuration would then allow an adversary on a 
   compromised non-NSIS-aware node to interfere with nodes running an 
   NSIS signaling protocol. Note that this type of threat goes beyond 
   those caused by malicious NSIS nodes (described in Section 4.7).  
    
   - Unilateral Authentication 
    
   In the case of unilateral authentication, the NSIS entity that does 
   not authenticate its peer is unable to discover a man-in-the-middle 
   adversary. Although mutual authentication of signaling messages 
   should take place between each peer participating in the protocol 
   operation, special attention is given here to first-peer 
 
 
Tschofenig, Kroeselberg    Expires - August 2004              [Page 9] 
                      Security Threats for NSIS         February 2004 
 
 
   communications. Unilateral authentication between an end host and 
   the first peer (just authenticating the end host) is still common 
   today, but it certainly opens up many possibilities for man-in-the-
   middle attackers impersonating either the end host or the 
   (administrative domain represented by the) first peer. 
    
   Missing or unilateral authentication, as described above, is part of 
   a general problem of network access with inadequate authentication, 
   and it should not be considered something unique to the NSIS 
   signaling protocol. Obviously, there is a strong need to correctly 
   address this in a future NSIS protocol. The signaling protocols 
   addressed by NSIS are different from other protocols, in which only 
   two entities are involved. Note that first-peer authentication is 
   especially important, because a security breach here could impact 
   nodes beyond the entities directly involved (or even beyond a local 
   network).  
    
   Finally it should be noted that the signaling protocol should be 
   considered as a peer-to-peer protocol, whereby the roles of 
   Initiator and Responder can be reversed at any time. Hence, 
   unilateral authentication is not particularly useful for such a 
   protocol. However, there might be a need to have some form of 
   asymmetry in the authentication process, whereby one entity uses a 
   different authentication mechanism than the other one. As an 
   example, the combination of symmetric and asymmetric cryptography 
   should be mentioned. 
    
   - Weak Authentication 
    
   In this case, the threat can be carried out because of weak 
   authentication mechanisms whereby information transmitted during the 
   NSIS SA establishment process may leak passwords or allow offline 
   dictionary attacks. This threat is applicable to NSIS for the 
   process of selecting certain security mechanisms.  
    
3.2 Replay of Signaling Messages 
    
   This threat scenario covers the case in which an adversary 
   eavesdrops and collects signaling messages and replays them at a 
   later time (or at a different place, or uses parts of them at a 
   different place or in a different way, e.g., cut-and-paste attacks). 
   Without proper replay protection, an adversary might mount man-in-
   the-middle, denial of service, and theft of service attacks.  
    
   A more difficult attack that may cause problems even in case of 
   replay protection requires the adversary to crash an NSIS-aware 
   node, cause it to lose state information (sequence numbers, security 
   associations, etc.), and then be able to replay old signaling 

 
 
Tschofenig, Kroeselberg    Expires - August 2004             [Page 10] 
                      Security Threats for NSIS         February 2004 
 
 
   messages. This attack takes advantage of re-synchronization 
   deficiencies. 
    
3.3 Injecting or Modifying Messages 
    
   This type of threat involves integrity violations, whereby an 
   adversary modifies signaling messages (e.g., by acting as a man-in-
   the-middle) to cause unexpected network behavior. Possible actions 
   an adversary might consider for its attack are reordering, delaying, 
   dropping, injecting, truncating, and otherwise modifying messages.  
    
   An adversary may inject a signaling message requesting a large 
   amount of resources (possibly using a different user's identity). 
   Other resource requests may then be rejected. In combination with 
   identity spoofing, it is also possible to carry out fraud. This 
   attack is only feasible in the absence of authentication and 
   signaling message protection.  
    
   Some threats directly related to these are described in Sections 
   4.4, 4.7, and 4.8. 
    
3.4 Insecure Parameter Exchange and Negotiation 
    
   First, protocols may be useful in a variety of scenarios with 
   different security requirements. Second, different users (e.g., a 
   university, a hospital, a commercial enterprise, or a government 
   ministry) have inherently different security requirements. Third, 
   different parts of a network (e.g., within a building, across a 
   public carrier's network, or over a private microwave link) may need 
   different levels of protection. It is often difficult to meet these 
   (sometimes conflicting) requirements with a single security 
   mechanism or fixed set of security parameters, so often a selection 
   of mechanisms and parameters is offered. Therefore, a protocol is 
   required to agree on certain security mechanisms and parameters. An 
   insecure parameter exchange or security negotiation protocol can 
   help an adversary mount a downgrading attack to force selection of 
   weaker mechanisms than mutually desired. Hence, without binding the 
   negotiation process to the legitimate parties and protecting it, an 
   NSIS protocol might be only as secure as the weakest mechanism 
   provided (e.g., weak authentication), and the benefits of defining 
   configuration parameters and a negotiation protocol are lost. 
    
    
4. NSIS-Specific Threat Scenarios 
    
   This section describes 11 threat scenarios in terms of attacks on 
   and security deficiencies in the NSIS signaling protocol. A number 
   of security deficiencies might enable an attack. Fraud is an example 
   of an attack that might be enabled by missing replay protection, 
 
 
Tschofenig, Kroeselberg    Expires - August 2004             [Page 11] 
                      Security Threats for NSIS         February 2004 
 
 
   missing protection of authorization tokens, identity spoofing, 
   missing authentication, and other deficiencies that help an 
   adversary steal resources. Different threat scenarios based on 
   deficiencies that could enable an attack are addressed in this 
   section. 
    
   The threat scenarios are not independent. Some of them, e.g., denial 
   of service, are well-established security terms and, as such, need 
   to be addressed, but are often enabled by one or more deficiencies 
   described under other scenarios. 
    
4.1 NSIS SA Usage 
    
   Once a security association is established (and used) to protect 
   signaling messages, many basic attacks are prevented. However, a 
   malicious NSIS node is still able to perform various attacks as 
   described in Section 4.7. Replay attacks may be possible when an 
   NSIS node crashes, restarts, and performs state re-establishment. 
   Proper re-synchronization of the security mechanism must therefore 
   be provided to address this problem.  
    
4.2 Combining Signaling and SA Establishment 
    
   This scenario describes attacks that allow an adversary to flood an 
   NSIS node with bogus signaling messages to cause a denial of service 
   attack.  
    
   When a signaling message arrives at an NSIS-aware network element, 
   certain processing is required. If this message contains security 
   objects such as digital signatures, and no security association is 
   already available, then some additional processing is required for 
   the cryptographic verification. Because NSIS signaling should not 
   require extra roundtrips between two NSIS peers, it is difficult to 
   provide the DoS protection mechanisms commonly found in 
   authentication and key agreement protocols. Signaling messages can 
   be idempotent, which means that they contain the same amount of 
   information as the original message. An example would be a refresh 
   message that is equivalent to a create message. This property allows 
   a refresh message to create new state along a new path, although no 
   previous state is available. For this to work, specific classes of 
   cryptographic mechanisms supporting this behavior are needed. An 
   example is a scheme based on digital signatures, which, however, 
   should be used with care due to possible denial of service attacks. 
   Problems with using these types of exchanges with public key based 
   protection are described in [AN97] and in [ALN00]. 
    
   In addition to the threat scenario described above, an incoming 
   signaling message might require time consuming processing 
   (computations, state maintenance, timer setting, etc.) and 
 
 
Tschofenig, Kroeselberg    Expires - August 2004             [Page 12] 
                      Security Threats for NSIS         February 2004 
 
 
   communication with third-party nodes such as policy servers, LDAP 
   servers, etc. If an adversary is able to transmit a large number of 
   signaling messages (for example, with QoS reservation requests) with 
   invalid credentials, then the verifying node may not be able to 
   process other reservation messages from legitimate users.  
    
   Further attacks may be enabled by injecting error messages or 
   forcing the creation of error messages to extract additional 
   information.  
    
4.3 Eavesdropping and Traffic Analysis 
    
   This section covers threats whereby an adversary is able to 
   eavesdrop on signaling messages. The signaling packets collected may 
   allow traffic analysis or be used later to mount replay attacks, as 
   described in Section 3.2. The eavesdropper might learn QoS 
   parameters, communication patterns, policy rules for firewall 
   traversal, policy information, application identifiers, user 
   identities, NAT bindings, authorization objects, network 
   configuration and performance information, and more.  
    
   An adversary's capability to eavesdrop on signaling messages might 
   violate a user's preference for privacy, particularly if unprotected 
   authentication or authorization information (including policies and 
   profile information) is exchanged.  
    
   Note that this threat scenario is not mitigated by applying 
   integrity protection to the messages, which is often considered 
   sufficient for signaling protocols. 
    
   Because the NSIS protocol signals messages through a number of 
   nodes, it is possible to differentiate between nodes actively 
   participating in the NSIS protocol and others that do not actively 
   participate in the NSIS protocol. For certain objects or messages it 
   might be desirable to permit actively participating intermediate 
   NSIS nodes to eavesdrop. On the other hand, it might be desirable 
   that only the intended end points (NSIS Initiator and NSIS 
   Responder) are able to read certain other objects.  
    
4.4 Identity Spoofing 
    
   Identity spoofing relevant for NSIS occurs in two forms: first, 
   identity spoofing can happen during the establishment of a security 
   association based on a weak authentication mechanismn and, second, 
   it can consist of spoofing data traffic.   
     
   In the first case, Eve, acting as an adversary, may claim to be the 
   registered user Alice by spoofing Alice's identity. Eve thereby 
   causes the network to charge Alice for the network resources 
 
 
Tschofenig, Kroeselberg    Expires - August 2004             [Page 13] 
                      Security Threats for NSIS         February 2004 
 
 
   consumed. This type of attack is possible if authentication is based 
   on a simple username identifier (i.e., in absence of cryptographic 
   authentication), or if authentication is provided for hosts, and 
   multiple users have access to a single host. This attack could also 
   be classified as theft of service.  
    
   In the second case, an adversary may be able to exploit the 
   established flow identifiers (required for QoS and middlebox 
   communication [Midcom] specific signaling protocols). Some 
   identifiers, among others, IP addresses, transport protocol 
   identifiers, port numbers, and flow labels (see [RFC1809] and 
   [RC+03]), are transported in these protocols. Modification of these 
   flow identifiers allows adversaries to exploit or to render 
   ineffective quality of service reservations or policy rules at 
   middleboxes. An adversary could mount an attack by modifying the 
   flow identifier of a signaling message. 
    
   NSIS signaling messages contain some sort of flow identifier, which 
   is associated with a specified behavior (e.g., a particular flow 
   experiences QoS treatment or allows packets to traverse a firewall). 
   An adversary might, therefore, use IP spoofing and inject data 
   packets to benefit from previously installed flow identifiers.  
    
   The following threat is carried out by spoofing the identity of 
   transmitted data traffic. The spoofed identity is the IP source 
   address. For this attack to be successful, accounting records are 
   collected based on the IP source address and not on a SPI due to 
   IPsec protection. After the network receives a properly protected 
   reservation request, transmitted by the legitimate user Alice, 
   Traffic Selectors are installed at the corresponding devices (for 
   example, the edge router). These Traffic Selectors are used for flow 
   identification and allow data traffic originated from a given source 
   address to be matched and assigned to a particular QoS reservation. 
   The adversary Eve now spoofs the IP address of the Alice. In 
   addition, Alice's host may be crashed by the adversary with a denial 
   of service attack or may lose connectivity, for example, because of 
   mobility considerations. If both nodes are located at the same link 
   and use the same IP address, then obviously a duplicate IP address 
   will be detected. Assuming that only Eve is now present at the link, 
   she is able to receive and transmit data (for example RTP data 
   traffic) that receives preferential QoS treatment based on the 
   previous reservation. Depending on the installed Traffic Selector 
   granularity, Eve might have more possibilities to exploit the QoS 
   reservation or a pin-holed firewall. Assuming the soft state 
   paradigm, whereby periodic refresh messages are required, the 
   absence of Alice will not be detected until the next signaling 
   message appears and forces Eve to respond with a protected signaling 
   message. Again, this attack is applicable not just to QoS traffic, 
   but the existence of a QoS reservation increases its impact, because 
 
 
Tschofenig, Kroeselberg    Expires - August 2004             [Page 14] 
                      Security Threats for NSIS         February 2004 
 
 
   this type of traffic is more expensive. The same attack is also 
   applicable to a Middlebox protocol.  
    
   The ability for an adversary to inject data traffic that matches a 
   certain flow identifier established by a legitimate user often 
   requires the ability also to receive the data traffic. This is, 
   however, true only if the flow identifier consists of values that 
   contain addresses used for routing. If we imagine using attributes 
   of a flow identifier that do not require such a property, then 
   identity spoofing and injecting traffic are much easier. An 
   adversary can use a nearly arbitrary endpoint identifier to achieve 
   the desired result. Obviously, though, the endpoint identifiers are 
   not irrelevant, because the messages have to travel the same path 
   through the network.  
    
   Data traffic marking based on DiffServ is such an example. Whenever 
   an ingress router uses only marked incoming data traffic for 
   admission control procedures, then various attacks are possible. 
   These problems have been known in the DiffServ community for a long 
   time and have been documented in various DiffServ-related documents. 
   The IPsec protection of DiffServ Code Points is described in Section 
   6.2 of [RFC2745]. Related security issues (for example denial of 
   service attacks) are described in Section 6.1 of the same document. 
    
4.5 Unprotected Authorization Information 
    
   Authorization is an important criterion for providing resources such 
   as QoS reservations, NAT bindings, and pin-holes through firewalls. 
   Authorization information might be delivered to the NSIS 
   participating entities in a number of ways.   
    
   Typically the authenticated identifier is used to assist during the 
   authorization procedure as, e.g., described in [RFC3812]. Depending 
   on the chosen authentication protocol, certain threats may exist. 
   Section 3 discusses a number of issues related to this approach when 
   the authentication and key exchange protocol is used to establish 
   session keys for signaling message protection.  
    
   Another approach is to use some sort of authorization token. The 
   functionality and structure of such an authorization token for RSVP 
   is described in [RFC3520] and [RFC3521].  
      
   Achieving secure interaction between different protocols based on 
   authorization tokens, however, requires some care. By using such an 
   authorization token it is possible to link state information between 
   different protocols. Returning an unprotected authorization token to 
   the end host might allow an adversary (for example an eavesdropper) 
   to steal resources. An adversary might also use the token to monitor 

 
 
Tschofenig, Kroeselberg    Expires - August 2004             [Page 15] 
                      Security Threats for NSIS         February 2004 
 
 
   communication patterns. Finally, an untrustworthy end host might 
   also modify the token content.  
    
   The Session/Reservation Ownership problem can also be regarded as an 
   authorization problem. Details are described in Section 4.10. In 
   enterprise networks, authorization is often coupled with membership 
   in a particular class of users or groups. This type of information 
   either can be delivered as part of the authentication and key 
   agreement procedure or has to be retrieved via separate protocols 
   from other entities. If an adversary manages to modify information 
   relevant for determining authorization or the outcome of the 
   authorization process itself, then theft of service might be 
   possible. 
    
4.6 Missing Non-Repudiation 
    
   Repudiation in this context refers to a problem where one party 
   later denies having taken a certain action (such as requesting a QoS 
   reservation). Problems stemming from a lack of non-repudiation 
   appear in two forms:  
    
   On the one hand, from a service provider's point-of-view, the 
   following threat may be worth investigation. A user may deny having 
   issued a reservation request for which it was charged. The service 
   provider may then want to be able to prove that a particular user 
   issued the reservation request in question.  
    
   On the other hand, the same threat can be interpreted from a user's 
   point-of-view. A service provider may claim to have received a 
   number of reservation requests. The user in question thinks that it 
   never issued those requests and wants to see a proof of correct 
   service usage for a given set of QoS parameters. 
    
   In today's telecommunication networks, non-repudiation is not 
   provided. The user has to trust the network operator to meter the 
   traffic correctly, collect and merge accounting data, and ensure 
   that no unforeseen problems occur. If a signaling protocol with the 
   non-repudiation property is desired for establishing QoS 
   reservations for authorized resources, this impacts the protocol 
   design.  
    
   Non-repudiation poses additional requirements on the security 
   mechanisms, because it public-key cryptography is needed to provide 
   it. Because this would normally increase the overall cost for 
   security, threats related to missing non-repudiation are only 
   considered relevant in certain specific cases (e.g., specific 
   authorization mechanisms) and not for general NSIS signaling. 
    

 
 
Tschofenig, Kroeselberg    Expires - August 2004             [Page 16] 
                      Security Threats for NSIS         February 2004 
 
 
4.7 Malicious NSIS Entity 
    
   Network elements within a domain (intra-domain) experience a 
   different trust relationship with regard to the security protection 
   of signaling messages compared with edge NSIS entities. It is 
   assumed that edge NSIS entities are responsible for performing 
   cryptographic processing (authentication, integrity and replay 
   protection, authorization, and accounting) for signaling messages 
   arriving from the outside. This prevents unprotected signaling 
   messages from appearing within the internal network. If, however, an 
   adversary manages to take over an edge router, then the security of 
   the entire network is compromised. An adversary is then able to 
   launch a number of attacks including denial of service; integrity 
   violations; replay, reordering, and deletion of data packets; and 
   various others. A rogue firewall can harm other firewalls by 
   modifying policy rules. The chain-of-trust principle applied in 
   peer-to-peer security protection cannot protect against a malicious 
   NSIS node. An adversary with access to a NSIS router is also able to 
   get access to security associations and transmit secured signaling 
   messages. Note that even non-peer-to-peer security protection might 
   not be able to prevent this problem fully. Because an NSIS node 
   might issue signaling messages on behalf of someone else (by acting 
   as a proxy), additional problems need to be considered.  
    
   An NSIS-aware edge router is a critical component that requires 
   strong security protection. A strong security policy applied at the 
   edge does not imply that other routers within an intra-domain 
   network do not need to verify signaling messages cryptographically. 
   If the chain-of-trust principle is deployed, then the security 
   protection of the entire path (in this case within the network of a 
   single administrative domain) is as strong as the weakest link. In 
   the case under consideration, the edge router is the most critical 
   component of this network, and it may also act as a security gateway 
   or firewall for incoming and outgoing traffic. For outgoing traffic 
   this device has to implement the security policy of the local domain 
   and apply the appropriate security protection. 
    
   For an adversary to mount this attack, either an existing NSIS-aware 
   node along the path has to be attacked successfully, or an adversary 
   must succeed in convincing another NSIS node to be the next NSIS 
   peer (man-in-the-middle attack). 
    
4.8 Denial of Service Attacks 
    
   A number of denial of service (DoS) attacks can cause NSIS nodes to 
   malfunction. Other attacks that could lead to DoS, such as man-in-
   the-middle attacks, replay attacks, injection or modification of 
   signaling messages, etc., are mentioned throughout this document.  
    
 
 
Tschofenig, Kroeselberg    Expires - August 2004             [Page 17] 
                      Security Threats for NSIS         February 2004 
 
 
   - Path Finding 
    
   This threat scenario includes potential DoS attacks that exist when 
   the reservation setup is split into two phases, i.e., path and 
   reservation (as used, for example, in receiver-based reservation 
   setup). In this case, assuming that the node transmitting the path 
   message is not charged for the path message itself, it may be able 
   to generate a large number of reservation requests (possibly in a 
   distributed fashion). Charging is activated only after successful 
   verification of the reservation request. The reservations are, 
   however, never intended to be successful for various reasons: the 
   destination node cannot be reached; it is not responding; or it 
   simply rejects the reservation. An adversary can succeed because 
   state has already been allocated along the path for various 
   processing tasks including path pinning.  
    
   - Discovery Phase 
    
   Conveying signaling information to a large number of entities along 
   a data path requires some sort of discovery. This discovery process 
   is vulnerable to a number of attacks, because it is difficult to 
   secure. An adversary can use the discovery mechanisms to convince 
   one entity to signal information to another entity not along the 
   data path or to cause the discovery process to fail. In the first 
   case, the signaling protocol could appear to continue correctly, 
   except that policy rules are installed at the incorrect firewalls or 
   QoS resource reservations take place at the wrong entities. For an 
   end host, this means that the protocol failed for unknown reasons.  
    
   - Faked Error or Response Messages 
    
   An adversary may be able to inject false error or response messages 
      as part of a DoS attack. This could be either at the signaling 
      message protocol layer (NTLP), at the layer of each client layer 
      protocol (NSLP: QoS, Midcom, etc.), or at the transport protocol 
      layer. An adversary might cause unexpected protocol behavior or 
      might succeed with a DoS attack. The discovery protocol, 
      especially, exhibits vulnerabilities with regard to this threat 
      scenario (see the above discussion on discovery). In the case in 
      which no separate discovery protocol is used and signaling 
      messages are addressed to end hosts only (with a Router Alert 
      Option to intercept message as NSIS aware nodes), an error 
      message might be used to indicate a path change. Such a design 
      combines a discovery protocol together with a signaling message 
      exchange protocol.  
    
4.9 Disclosing the Network Topology 
    

 
 
Tschofenig, Kroeselberg    Expires - August 2004             [Page 18] 
                      Security Threats for NSIS         February 2004 
 
 
   In some organizations or enterprises there is a desire not to reveal 
   internal network structure (or other related information) outside of 
   a closed community. An adversary might be able to use NSIS messages 
   for network mapping (e.g., discovering which nodes exist, which use 
   NSIS, what version, what resources are allocated, what capabilities 
   nodes along a path have, etc.). Discovery messages, traceroute, 
   diagnostic messages (see [RFC2745] for a description of diagnostic 
   message functionality for RSVP), and query messages, in addition to 
   record route and route objects, provide potential assistance to an 
   adversary. Hence, the requirement of not disclosing a network 
   topology might conflict with other requirements to provide means for 
   automatically discovering NSIS-aware nodes or to provide diagnostic 
   facilities (used for network monitoring and administration). 
 
4.10 Unprotected Session or Reservation Ownership 
    
   Figure 3 shows an NSIS Initiator that has established state 
   information at NSIS nodes along a path as part of the signaling 
   procedure. As a result, Access Router 1, Router 3, and Router 4 (and 
   other nodes) have stored session state information including the 
   Session Identifier SID-x. 
     
                                            Session ID(SID-x) 
                                       +--------+ 
                     +-----------------+ Router +------------> 
    Session ID(SID-x)|                 |   4    | 
                 +---+----+            +--------+ 
                 | Router | 
          +------+   3    +******* 
          |      +---+----+      * 
          |                      * 
          | Session ID(SID-x)    * Session ID(SID-x) 
      +---+----+             +---+----+ 
      | Access |             | Access | 
      | Router |             | Router | 
      |   1    |             |   2    | 
      +---+----+             +---+----+ 
          |                      * 
          | Session ID(SID-x)    * Session ID(SID-x) 
     +----+------+          +----+------+ 
     |  NSIS     |          | Adversary | 
     | Initiator |          |           | 
     +-----------+          +-----------+ 
    
                Figure 3: Session or Reservation Ownership 
    
   The Session Identifier is included in signaling messages to 
   reference to the established state.  
    
 
 
Tschofenig, Kroeselberg    Expires - August 2004             [Page 19] 
                      Security Threats for NSIS         February 2004 
 
 
   If an adversary were able to obtain the Session Identifier, for 
   example by eavesdropping on signaling messages, it would be able to 
   add the same Session Identifier SID-x to a new signaling message. 
   When the new signaling message hits Router 3 (as shown in Figure 3), 
   existing state information can be modified. The adversary can then 
   modify or delete the established reservation and cause unexpected 
   behavior for the legitimate user.  
    
   The source of the problem is that Router 3 (a cross-over router) is 
   unable to decide whether the new signaling message was initiated 
   from the owner of the session or reservation.  
    
   In addition, nodes other than the initial signaling message 
   originator are allowed to signal information during the lifetime of 
   an established session. As part of the protocol, any NSIS-aware node 
   along the path (and the path might change over time) could initiate 
   a signaling message exchange. It might, for example, be necessary to 
   provide mobility support or to trigger a local repair procedure. If 
   only the initial signaling message originator were allowed to 
   trigger signaling message exchanges, some protocol behavior would 
   not be possible.  
    
   If this threat scenario is not addressed, an adversary can launch 
   DoS, theft of service, and various other attacks. 
    
4.11 Attacks against the Transport Mechanism 
    
   In [BL01] a two-level architecture is proposed, which suggests 
   splitting an NSIS protocol into layers: a signaling message 
   transport-specific layer and an application-specific layer. This 
   architectural assumption is also considered within the NSIS 
   framework [HF+03]. Most of the threats described in this document 
   are applicable to the application-specific part (i.e., signaling QoS 
   or middlebox-specific information). There are, however, some threats 
   that are applicable to the transport of signaling messages.  
    
   Network or transport layer protocols lacking protection mechanisms 
   are vulnerable to certain attacks such as header manipulation, DoS, 
   spoofing of identities, session hijacking, unexpected aborts, etc.  
    
   Malicious nodes can attack the congestion control mechanism to force 
   NSIS nodes into a congestion avoidance state. 
    
   In the case in which existing protocols are used for exchanging NSIS 
   signaling messages, known threats scenarios applicable to these 
   protocols are relevant. 
    
    

 
 
Tschofenig, Kroeselberg    Expires - August 2004             [Page 20] 
                      Security Threats for NSIS         February 2004 
 
 
5. Security Considerations 
          
   This entire memo discusses security issues relevant for NSIS 
   protocol design. It begins by identifying the components of a 
   network running NSIS (Initiator, Responder, and different 
   Administrative Domains between them). It then considers five cases 
   in which communications take place between these components, and it 
   examines the trust relationships presumed to exist in each case: 
   First-Peer Communications, End-to-Middle Communications, Intra-
   Domain Communications, Inter-Domain Communications, and End-to-End 
   Communications. This analysis helps determine the security needs and 
   the relative seriousness of different threats in the different 
   cases.  
    
   The document points out the need for different protocol security 
   measures: authentication, key exchange, message integrity, replay 
   protection, confidentiality, authorization, and some precautions 
   against denial of service. The threats are subdivided into generic 
   ones (e.g., man-in-the-middle attacks, replay attacks, tampering and 
   forgery, and attacks on security negotiation protocols) and 11 
   threat scenarios particularly applicable to the NSIS protocol. 
   Denial of service, for example, is covered in the NSIS-specific 
   section, not because it cannot be carried out against other 
   protocols, but because the methods used to carry out denial of 
   service attacks tend to be protocol specific. Numerous illustrative 
   examples provide insight into what can happen if these threats are 
   not mitigated.  
    
   This document points out repeatedly that not all of the threats are 
   equally serious in every context. It does attempt to identify the 
   scenarios in which security failures may have the highest impact. 
   However, it is difficult for the protocol designer to foresee all 
   the ways in which NSIS protocols will be used or to anticipate the 
   security concerns of a wide variety of likely users. Therefore, the 
   protocol designer needs to offer a full range of security 
   capabilities and ways for users to negotiate and select what they 
   need, case by case. To counter these threats, security requirements 
   have been listed in [Brun03]. Topics relevant to the NSIS Framework 
   have been incorporated into [HF+03]. 
    
    
6. Normative References  
    
   [Brun03] M. Brunner, "Requirements for QoS signaling protocols," 
   Internet Draft, Internet Engineering Task Force, August 2003.  Work 
   in progress. 
    
    

 
 
Tschofenig, Kroeselberg    Expires - August 2004             [Page 21] 
                      Security Threats for NSIS         February 2004 
 
 
7. Informative References 
    
   [HF+03] R. Hancock, I. Freytsis, G. Karagiannis, J. Loughney, and S. 
   V. den Bosch, "Next steps in signaling: Framework," Internet Draft, 
   Internet Engineering Task Force, September 2003.  Work in progress. 
    
   [RFC1809] C. Partridge, "Using the flow label field in IPv6," RFC 
   1809, Internet Engineering Task Force, June 1995. 
    
   [RFC2745] A. Terzis, B. Braden, S. Vincent, and L. Zhang, "RSVP 
   Diagnostic Messages," RFC 2745, Internet Engineering Task Force, 
   Jan. 2000. 
    
   [RFC3182]   Yadav, S., Yavatkar, R., Pabbati, R., Ford, P., Moore, 
   T., Herzog, S., Hess, R.: "Identity Representation for RSVP", RFC 
   3182, October, 2001. 
    
   [RFC3261] J. Rosenberg, H. Schulzrinne, G. Camarillo, A. Johnston, 
   J. Peterson, R. Sparks, M. Handley, and E. Schooler, "SIP: session 
   initiation protocol," RFC 3261, Internet Engineering Task Force, 
   June 2002. 
    
   [RFC3521]   L. Hamer, B. Gage, and H. Shieh, "Framework for session 
   set-up with media authorization," RFC 3521, Internet Engineering 
   Task Force, April 2003.   
        
   [RFC3520] L. Hamer, B. Gage, B. Kosinski, and H. Shieh, "Session 
   Authorization Policy Element", RFC 3520, Internet Engineering Task 
   Force, April 2003.  
    
   [RC+03] J. Rajahalme, A. Conta, B. Carpenter, and S. Deering, "IPv6 
   Flow Label Specification," Internet Draft, Internet Engineering Task 
   Force, April 2003.  Work in progress. 
    
   [BL01] B. Braden and B. Lindell, "A two-level architecture for 
   internet signaling," Internet Draft, Internet Engineering Task 
   Force, Nov. 2001. (Expired). 
    
   [AN97] T. Aura and P. Nikander: "Stateless Connections", In 
   Proceedings of the International Conference on Information and 
   Communications Security (ICICS'97), Lecture Notes in Computer 
   Science 1334, Springer, 1997. 
    
   [ALN00] T. Aura, J. Leiwo and P. Nikander: "Towards Network Denial 
   of Service Resistant Protocols", In Proceedings of the 15th 
   International Information Security Conference (IFIP/SEC 2000), 
   Beijing, China, August 2000. 
 

 
 
Tschofenig, Kroeselberg    Expires - August 2004             [Page 22] 
                      Security Threats for NSIS         February 2004 
 
 
Author's Addresses 
    
   Hannes Tschofenig 
   Siemens AG 
   Corporate Technology  
   CT IC 3  
   Otto-Hahn-Ring 6 
   81739 Munich 
   Germany 
   EMail: Hannes.Tschofenig@siemens.com 
    
   Dirk Kroeselberg 
   Siemens AG 
   Otto-Hahn-Ring 6 
   81739 Munich 
   Germany 
   EMail: Dirk.Kroeselberg@siemens.com 
     
    
Appendix A. Contributors 
 
We especially thank Richard Graveman, who provided text for the 
security considerations section, besides a detailed review of the 
document. 
 
Appendix B. Acknowledgments 
    
   We would like to thank (in alphabetical order) Marcus Brunner, Jorge 
   Cuellar, Mehmet Ersue, Xiaoming Fu, and Robert Hancock for their 
   comments on an initial version of this draft. Jorge and Robert gave 
   us an extensive list of comments and provided information on 
   additional threats.  
    
   Jukka Manner, Martin Buechli, Roland Bless, Marcus Brunner, Michael 
   Thomas, Cedric Aoun, John Loughney, Rene Soltwisch, Cornelia 
   Kappler, and Mohan Parthasarathy provided comments on a recent 
   version of this draft. Their input helped improve the content of 
   this document. Roland Bless, Michael Thomas, and Cornelia Kappler, 
   in particular, provided good proposals for regrouping and 
   restructuring the material.  
    
   A final review was given by Michael Richardson. We thank him for the 
   detailed comments.  
    
    
Full Copyright Statement 
 
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved. 
    
 
 
Tschofenig, Kroeselberg    Expires - August 2004             [Page 23] 
                      Security Threats for NSIS         February 2004 
 
 
   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published 
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any 
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph 
   are included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this 
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for 
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be 
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than 
   English. 
    
   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be 
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assignees. 
    
   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an 
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING 
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING 
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION 
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF 
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
 
 
Acknowledgement 
    
   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the 
   Internet Society. 
 
 


















 
 
Tschofenig, Kroeselberg    Expires - August 2004             [Page 24] 
