

   CCAMP Working Group                         Eric Mannie (KPNQwest)
   Internet Draft                           D.Papadimitriou (Alcatel)
   Expiration Date: November 2002                       L.Ong (Ciena)

                                                             May 2002


          GMPLS LSP Bandwidth Modification (LBM) for SONET/SDH

                draft-mannie-ccamp-gmpls-lbm-tdm-03.txt


Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026. Internet-Drafts are
   working documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF),
   its areas, and its working groups. Note that other groups may also
   distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
   documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts
   as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in
   progress."


     The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
     http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html

     The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
     http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html



Abstract


   This document defines how GMPLS can be used to dynamically modify
   the bandwidth of a TDM LSP. It focuses first on SONET/SDH and
   intends to cover other switching technologies in a further release.

   This document also defines how to use multiple differently routed
   LSPs to build a single SONET/SDH virtually concatenated circuit.
   Each LSP can be recovered (i.e. protected or restored) individually.

1. Introduction


   Extensions to GMPLS are defined to control SONET/SDH networks in
   [GMPLS-SONET-SDH]. They specify the SONET/SDH traffic parameters
   used to describe in details the type of SONET/SDH LSP (i.e.
   connection) being requested. Such a connection can be requested as
   unidirectional or bi-directional.

   Dynamically changing the bandwidth allocated for a SONET/SDH
   connection is very useful for instance, when Ethernet traffic is
   transported over SONET/SDH connections. According to the demand, the
   size of a concatenated SONET/SDH connection can be modified
   dynamically without having to reestablish a new connection, and
   potentially to interrupt the service.

   SONET/SDH, bandwidth modification can be indeed achieved in very
   different ways. From one end, it can be realized by establishing


E. Mannie et. al.   Internet-Draft - November 2002                   1

draft-mannie-ccamp-gmpls-tdm-lbm-03.txt                         May 02

   another connection between the same source and destination with
   different characteristics (e.g. signal type) and then by switching
   the traffic to the newly established connection by performing a
   switchover. At the other end of the spectrum, bandwidth modification
   can be done by dynamically adding or removing SPEs/VCs to a
   connection using the concept of virtual concatenation (or
   potentially contiguous concatenation). This would ideally be
   achieved in a non-disruptive way while avoiding double counting
   (i.e. double reservation) the resources while modifying the
   bandwidth by using for instance the concept of make-before-break.
   The current proposal focuses among other on this last case where
   only differential capacity is added (or removed) to the connection.

   In practice, bandwidth modification is mainly achievable when
   virtual concatenation is used since SPEs/VCs donÆt need to be
   contiguous: they are transported individually and can even be routed
   independently. This could also be achieved when using contiguous
   concatenation but in practice this approach is much less likely to
   happen since a bandwidth increase requires additional free SPEs/VCs
   physically contiguous at each interface traversed by the connection.

   Moreover, as currently defined, GMPLS only allows the SPEs/VCs
   components belonging to a virtually concatenated circuit to be co-
   routed through the same Line/Multiplex Section. This contribution
   removes this current GMPLS limitation by allowing a SONET/SDH
   circuit to be made of several independent connections (i.e. LSPs).

   GMPLS signalling currently supports simultaneous setup of multiple
   SPEs/VCs in a single setup request. This requires the SPEs/VCs to be
   routed through the same Line/Multiplex section. This document
   extends the GMPLS procedures to allow separate setup of multiple
   LSPs, possibly with disjoint routing, to be coordinated at the
   endpoints. In that case, LSPs can be set-up, maintained and deleted
   independently, while being part of the same SONET/SDH circuit. LSPs
   can be co-routed through the same component TE link, through
   different components of the same TE link or even routed completely
   diversely, as far as T1X1/ITU-T requirements for differential delays
   are respected (out of the scope of this document).


   T1X1 and ITU-T Related Efforts:

   Both have defined a protocol called Link Capacity Adjustment Scheme
   (LCAS) for virtual concatenated (group) signals for SONET/SDH and
   G.709 OTN (Optical Transport Networks), independently of any
   distributed control plane. This signalling protocol transported in-
   band in the Path Overhead (POH), for instance in SONET/SDH.

   LCAS (see [ITU-T G.7042]) allows increasing or decreasing the
   capacity of a virtual container that is transported using Virtual
   Concatenation. In addition, LCAS will automatically decrease the
   capacity if a member experience a failure in the network, and
   increase the capacity when the network fault is repaired.



E. Mannie et. al.   Internet-Draft - November 2002                   2

draft-mannie-ccamp-gmpls-tdm-lbm-03.txt                         May 02

   For SDH, LCAS is defined for all VC types for which virtual
   concatenation is defined, i.e. VC-4, VC-3, VC-2, VC-12 and VC-11.
   Using LCAS, a VC can only be added at the end of a virtually
   concatenated signal, but can be removed from any place. The same
   applies in SONET, where LCAS is defined for high order STS-1-Xv/STS-
   3c-Xv and low-order VTn-Xv SPE (n = 1.5, 2, 3, 6).


   Scope and coverage:

   This document defines LSP Bandwidth Modification (LBM) procedures
   and extensions for GMPLS using either virtual concatenation or
   contiguous concatenation. It defines among other a combination of
   the signalling provided by GMPLS and LCAS at the control and
   transport plane, respectively. Note the current version focuses on
   SONET/SDH and will in a future release cover G.709 Optical Transport
   Networks (OTN).

   Similarly to GMPLS, this document covers bandwidth modification of
   unidirectional LSPs and bi-directional symmetric LSPs. Bi-
   directional asymmetric LSPs setup is not supported by the current
   GMPLS Signalling specification. In this context, the current
   proposal allows for SONET/SDH bandwidth modification being requested
   only by the initiator (source) of a circuit. A future version might
   cover destination initiated bandwidth modification. It could also be
   extended to cover modification of other connection attributes than
   the bandwidth, like link protection/restoration characteristics.

   This document also covers bandwidth modification when using multiple
   LSPs to support a single circuit. This approach has the drawback of
   requiring more signalling but seems to be more appropriated when
   operating within the context of a global control plane. It provides
   the advantage that each LSP can be routed independently AND
   protected/restored independently. Note that GMPLS LBM can be first
   used to modify the bandwidth of a single unique LSP (circuit),
   without any LSP combination.     

   In brief, this document provides the required GMPLS signalling
   extensions to cover the following bandwidth modification (i.e.
   increase/decrease) scenarios:

   - GMPLS LBM without Virtual Concatenation referred to as LBM using
     a parallel LSP

   - GMPLS LBM with Virtual Concatenation only
      . with Single LSP Bandwidth Modification
      . with Multiple LSP Combination (within a Circuit)

   - GMPLS LBM with LCAS running in sequence using GMPLS for LSP
     provisioning and LCAS for end-to-end in-band signalling

   Note: an additional scenario (GMPLS LBM with Contiguous
   Concatenation) is proposed in Appendix 1.



E. Mannie et. al.   Internet-Draft - November 2002                   3

draft-mannie-ccamp-gmpls-tdm-lbm-03.txt                         May 02

2. SONET/SDH Concatenation

2.1 SDH Virtual and Contiguous Concatenation

   Section 11 of G.707 (April 2000) recommendation defines VC
   contiguous and virtual concatenation. Contiguous concatenation
   maintains the bandwidth contiguous through the whole network, while
   virtual concatenation breaks the bandwidth into individuals VCs,
   transports and routes these VCs individually from the source and
   then recombines them at the path termination. Virtual concatenation
   requires concatenation functionality only at the path termination
   equipment, while contiguous concatenation requires concatenation
   functionality at each network element:

   - Contiguous concatenation is defined for VC-4s to provide a VC-4-Xc
     (X=4, 16, 64, 256) and for VC-2s in a higher order VC-3 to provide
     a VC-2-Xc (X=1,...,7).

   - Virtual concatenation is defined for VC-4s, VC-3s, VC-2s, VC-12s
     and VC-11s but all the VCs belonging to a virtually concatenated
     circuit must be of the same type. The virtual concatenation of X
     VC-4/3 (X=1,...,256) provides a VC-4/3-Xv. The number of low order
     VCs that can be virtually concatenated together depends on the
     higher order VC in which they are transported and is defined
     according to table 11-9 in G.707.

   Each VC has its own Path Overhead (POH):

   - For low order VC: the VC-2/1 K4 POH byte in bit 2 is multi-framed
     in 32 frames to form a 32 bits string and is used to indicate a
     frame count and a sequence indicator. The frame count provides a
     measure of the differential delay (see ITU-T G.707). Each VC-2/1
     of a VC-2/1-Xv has a fixed unique sequence number in the range of
     0 to X-1.

   - For high order VC: the VC-4/3 H4 POH byte is used for the virtual
     concatenation specific sequence and multi-frame indication. What
     is important in the context of GMPLS LBM is that each VC-4/3 has a
     fixed sequence number in the range of 0 to X-1.

   These VC sequence numbers will be used by the GMPLS LBM procedures
   to identify each frame unambiguously in the same virtually
   concatenated circuit.

   VCs can be routed and transported individually, even over different
   multiplex sections, i.e. over different TE link components or over
   different TE links. There are limitations due to the differential
   delay between different routes (outside of the scope of this
   document). GMPLS LBM provides the same level of flexibility, using
   and combining multiple LSPs.

2.2 SONET Virtual and Contiguous Concatenation



E. Mannie et. al.   Internet-Draft - November 2002                   4

draft-mannie-ccamp-gmpls-tdm-lbm-03.txt                         May 02

   ANSI T1.105 recommendation defines VC contiguous and virtual
   concatenation. Contiguous concatenation maintains the bandwidth
   contiguous through the whole network, while virtual concatenation
   breaks the bandwidth into individuals STS SPEs, transports and
   routes these STS SPEs individually from the source and then
   recombines them at the path termination. Virtual concatenation
   requires concatenation functionality only at the path termination
   equipment, while contiguous concatenation requires concatenation
   functionality at each network element:

   - Contiguous concatenation is defined for STS-1/STS-3c SPEs to
     provide a STS-(3*X)c SPE (X=1, 4, 16, 64, 256)
   - Virtual concatenation is defined for STS-1s, STS-3cs and VTn SPEs
     (n = 1.5, 2, 3, 6) but all the STS/VT SPEs belonging to a
     virtually concatenated circuit must be of the same type. The
     virtual concatenation of X STS-1/STS-3c (X=1,...,256) provides
     a STS-1-Xv/STS-3c-Xv SPE. The number of low order VTn SPEs (n =
     1.5, 2, 3, 6) that can be virtually concatenated together depends
     on the higher order STS-1/STS-3c SPE in which they are transported
     as defined according to Table 8 of ANSI T1.105.

   Each VT/STS SPE has its own Path Overhead (POH):
   - For low order VT SPEs: the VTn Z7 POH byte in bit 2 is multi-
     framed in 32 frames to form a 32 bits string and is used to
     indicate a frame count and a sequence indicator. The frame count
     provides a measure of the differential delay (see ANSI T1.105).
     Each VTn SPE of a VTn-Xv SPE has a fixed unique sequence number in
     the range of 0 to X-1.
   - For high order STS SPEs: the STS-1/STS-3c H4 POH byte is used for
     the virtual concatenation specific sequence and multi-frame
     indication. It uses a two-stage multi-framing. As for SDH, the
     important point in the context of GMPLS LBM is that each STS-
     1/STS-3c SPE has a fixed sequence number in the range of 0 to X-1.

   These sequence numbers will be used by the GMPLS LBM procedures to
   identify each frame unambiguously in the same virtually concatenated
   circuit. As for SDH, VTs/STS SPEs can be routed and transported
   individually, even over different line sections, i.e. over different
   TE link components or over different TE links.

3. Link Capacity Adjustment Scheme (LCAS)   

   Link Capacity Adjustment Scheme (LCAS) recommendation [LCAS] details
   the procedure to add (or remove) the payload carried by a VC-4/VC-3
   within a VC-n-Xv group (n = 3, 4) and to add (or remove) the payload
   carried by a VC-11/VC-12/VC-2 within a VC-m-Xv group (m = 11, 12,
   2). Relying on virtual concatenation support, LCAS is defined as an
   extended end-to-end signalling protocol transported over the H4
   overhead (for HOVC) and K4 overhead (for LOVC). The same applies in
   SONET for high order STS-1-Xv/STS-3c-Xv and low-order VTn-Xv SPE (n
   = 1.5, 2, 3, 6) signalling being transported over H4 and Z7 POH,
   respectively.



E. Mannie et. al.   Internet-Draft - November 2002                   5

draft-mannie-ccamp-gmpls-tdm-lbm-03.txt                         May 02

   Running GMPLS at the control plane level and LCAS at the transport
   plane level implies to clearly determine the interactions between
   these protocols. LCAS is an end-to-end (i.e. PTE-to-PTE) signalling
   protocol enabling bandwidth modification at end systems relying on
   group of virtually concatenated HOVC/STS SPE (or LOVC/VT SPE)
   belonging to the same circuit and provisioned through
   Element/Network Management Systems (EMS/NMS) or any distributed
   control plane. However, LCAS doesnÆt provide setting up and
   releasing connections between intermediate nodes. This means that
   LCAS must be combined with an EMS/NMS system or any distributed
   control plane in order for the global system to offer dynamic
   connection(s) setup throughout the network. The proposed GMPLS
   signalling extensions aim to deliver this capability including when
   one of the two end systems supports only virtual concatenation.

4. GMPLS LBM with a Parallel Connection

   This section describes how to modify the bandwidth of a connection
   by establishing a new completely bandwidth disjoint connection and
   moving the traffic to the newly established connection by doing a
   switchover at the end-points. This procedure can be performed
   manually or automatically. It also uses a simplified version of the
   make-before-break concept.

   A new disjoint connection is first established. It can be routed
   differently from the original connection and may have completely
   different traffic parameters. This new connection reserves its own
   resources and before performing the switchover, some bandwidth may
   be double reserved.

   This is for instance the only way to change the bandwidth of an
   SDH LSP from a non-concatenated VC type to a different non-
   concatenated VC type. An example is when going from a VC-3 to a VC-4
   for an IP/MPLS bandwidth upgrade. This situation is depicted in the
   following figure:

   Step 1: Make

     -----------      Working      -----------
    |     |VC-3 |-----------------| VC-3|     | Working active
    | PTE |-----     Make (GMPLS)  -----| PTE |
    |     |VC-4 |<--------------->| VC-4|     |
     -----------                   -----------

   Step 2: Share

     -----------      Working      -----------
    |     |VC-3 |<--------------->| VC-3|     | Working active
    | PTE |-----      Working      -----| PTE |
    |     |VC-4 |<--------------->| VC-4|     | Working standby
     -----------                   -----------

   Step 3: Break


E. Mannie et. al.   Internet-Draft - November 2002                   6

draft-mannie-ccamp-gmpls-tdm-lbm-03.txt                         May 02

     -----------    Break (GMPLS)  -----------
    |     |VC-3 |<--------------->| VC-3|     |
    | PTE |-----      Working      -----| PTE |
    |     |VC-4 |-----------------| VC-4|     | Working active
     -----------                   -----------

   With RSVP-TE, the procedures described in [RSVP-TE] (Section 4.6.4)
   can be used but with a FF (Fixed Filter) reservation style instead
   of a SE (Share Explicit) style.

   With CR-LDP, the procedures described in [CRLDP-MODIFY] MUST be
   used. A new Action Indicator Flag [CRLDP] value is defined for this
   purposes. A disjoint source route can also be used.

   The major point is that the LSP destination must be able to
   understand that 1) a new LSP is intended to replace an existing LSP
   and 2) this newly setup LSP is not independent of the existing one.
   This is achieved using the mechanism explained here above.

   Moreover, the switchover from the working connection to the new
   active one is strictly an end-point operation only. Also, one
   expects that this operation can be performed within an upper bounded
   period of time constraint whose definition is out of the scope of
   this document. When this period of time satisfies the requestor
   constraints, this mechanism can be considered as a non-disruptive
   bandwidth service modification.

5. GMPLS LBM with Virtual Concatenation

   This section defines the procedures for SONET/SDH bandwidth
   modification when virtual concatenation is used. It first defines
   the procedures to add or remove VCs in a single LSP (Section 5.1),
   and then the one enabling to combine several LSPs together (Section
   5.2).

5.1 Single LSP Bandwidth Modification

   This section is only applicable to the standard virtual
   concatenation as defined by T1X1/ITU-T (see [T1.105] and [G.707],
   respectively).

   SONET/SDH LSP bandwidth modification can only be allowed when the
   LSP is already set up and active, i.e. modification is not defined
   or allowed during the LSP(s) establishment or release. Only
   bandwidth modification requested by the ingress LSR of the LSP is
   considered here. The Ingress LSR shall not modify an LSP before a
   previous modification procedure is completed.

   When a bandwidth modification is requested, an updated SONET/SDH
   traffic parameter is sent downstream within a Path/Label
   Request message. This request is explicitly identified as a
   bandwidth modification request using a specific indication
   mechanism.


E. Mannie et. al.   Internet-Draft - November 2002                   7

draft-mannie-ccamp-gmpls-tdm-lbm-03.txt                         May 02

   With RSVP-TE, the procedures for bandwidth modification defined in
   Section 4.6.4 of [RSVP-TE] are used. The SENDER_TEMPLATE and
   SENDER_TSPEC objects carry respectively a modified LSP ID and a
   modified SONET/SDH traffic parameter within the Path message sent
   from the source LSR (i.e. head-end PTE) to the destination LSR (i.e.
   tail-end PTE). This allows recognizing that a bandwidth modification
   is requested.

   With CR-LDP, the procedures described in [CRLDP-MODIFY] MUST be
   used. The Action Indicator Flag [CRLDP] of the LSPID TLV indicates
   an LSP modification. This allows recognizing that a bandwidth
   modification is requested.

   Subsequently, the following alternative can be considered:
   - If accepted, the same new traffic parameter is sent back to the
     source indicating a bandwidth modification of a unidirectional or
     a bi-directional LSP. This traffic parameter is transported in the
     FLOWSPEC of the Resv message with RSVP-TE or in the Label Mapping
     message with CR-LDP.
   - If refused, the previously used SONET/SDH traffic parameter is
     sent back to the source. It allows ensuring that the request for
     bandwidth modification was well received and treated by the
     destination without commitment of the requested modification.

   Note that the actual bandwidth allocation is committed when the
   Resv/Label Mapping message flows in the upstream direction.

   A modified SONET/SDH traffic parameter SHOULD have a different NVC
   field and MAY have a different MT field. The Multiplier field (MT)
   SHOULD not be used since this field has a different semantic. All
   other fields MUST be identical.

   SPEs/VCs can only be added at the end of an LSP. For instance, when
   adding Y VC-4s to a VC-4-Xv (where each of the VC-4 is numbered from
   0 to X-1), one obtains a VC-4-(X+Y)v with the sequence numbered from
   0 to X+Y-1.

   The number Y of SPEs/VCs to add is given by the following equation:
   ABS[(new NVC * new MT) - (old NVC * old MT)]. The first new SPE/VC
   will have a sequence number equals to the sequence number of the
   previously last VC + 1 (i.e. X).

   Example:

   Old Traffic Parameters: ST = VC-4 - NVC = 2 - MT = 1 (VC-4-2v)
     Sequence: VC-4[0] = 0 and VC-4[1] = 1

   New Traffic Parameters: ST = VC-4 - NVC = 4 - MT = 1 (ADD 2 VC-4)
     Sequence: VC-4[2] = 2 and VC-4[3] = 3

   GMPLS LBM explicitly allows the value of the traffic parameters to
   change over time. Modified SONET/SDH traffic parameter indicates the
   complete traffic parameters of the updated circuit and not a delta.
   The delta computation is simply done by comparing the fields.

E. Mannie et. al.   Internet-Draft - November 2002                   8

draft-mannie-ccamp-gmpls-tdm-lbm-03.txt                         May 02


   SPEs/VCs can be removed from an LSP but only at the end of that LSP
   (i.e. starting at SPE/VC sequence number X-1). When a new traffic
   parameter is sent requesting less SPEs/VCs, the difference is
   removed from the end of the sequence. This is a limitation in
   comparison with LCAS that allows removing any SPEs/VCs component
   (independently of its positions within the sequence).

   Note: The sequence number of each SPE/VC is transported in the
   corresponding POH according to the SONET/SDH specifications. So, it
   is not needed to transport these sequence numbers in GMPLS signaling
   since they are implicitly deduced at each end according to the order
   of operations. When adding or removing SPEs/VCs, the sequence
   numbers of the other (i.e. previous) SPEs/VCs of the same LSP are
   not modified and stay identical.

5.2 Multiple LSPs Combination

   The reasons to combine multiple LSPs to provide one larger SONET/SDH
   circuit were already explained before. Such a combination requires
   that all LSPs belonging to the same circuit be clearly identified as
   belonging to the same group and as being in a given order. Defining
   an additional Circuit ID and an LSP Sequence Number in GMPLS
   signalling [GMPLS-SIG] enables to achieve this. Obviously, each LSP
   of the combination may have a different number of SPEs/VCs.

   The following rules are defined together with the introduction of
   the Circuit ID and the LSP Sequence Number:
   - All LSPs belonging to the same circuit MUST have the same Circuit
     ID
   - All LSPs MUST have a unique LSP sequence number in that Circuit ID

   The LSP sequence number MUST be the sequence number of the first
   SPE/VC of the overall virtually concatenated circuit. This sequence
   number is a redundant information with respect to the SONET/SDH
   SPE/VC sequence number transported in the POH. This allows a level
   of consistency checking between the control plane and the transport
   plane.

   From the GMPLS control plane point of view, these LSPs are seen as
   totally independent and being uniquely identified in RSVP-TE by the
   SESSION object together with the SENDER_TEMPLATE or FILTER_SPEC
   object. They can be co-routed or not. They can be routed explicitly
   diversely or not. They can fail separately and be individually
   protected/restored or not.

   Therefore, in this context, the GMPLS LBM "application" can be
   considered as a straightforward application at the top of the
   control plane, managing individual LSPs made of virtually
   concatenated VCs to build a larger SONET/SDH virtually concatenated
   circuit. This "application" is only supported at each end of an
   SONET/SDH circuit without impacting intermediate nodes.



E. Mannie et. al.   Internet-Draft - November 2002                   9

draft-mannie-ccamp-gmpls-tdm-lbm-03.txt                         May 02

   All SPEs/VCs corresponding to a new LSP can only be added at the end
   of the virtually concatenated signal sequence. In that case, the
   SPE/VC sequence number of the first SPE/VC is the sequence number of
   the last SPE/VC of the last LSP + 1.

   When an LSP is removed, for whatever reason, all its SPEs/VCs are
   removed. This implies that sequence numbers of other SPEs/VCs
   belonging to the LSPs logically following the removed LSP MUST be
   renumbered. The same is done for the LSP sequence numbers. However,
   this is not an issue since all the LSPs are initiated by the same
   entity.

   Note that when combined to the single LSP control-driven (meaning
   initiated by the source node and not an external event) bandwidth
   modification procedure defined here before, SPEs/VCs of an LSP can
   be removed starting from its last members (stack method). It results
   in a multi-LSP configuration that SPEs/VCs can also be removed
   independently of a complete LSP removal but with the given
   restriction.

   All LSPs belonging to the same virtually concatenated signal MUST
   have the same SONET/SDH traffic parameter, except for the NVC and MT
   fields. Note however that the use of the multiplier (MT) in that
   context is not at all recommended.

5.3 SPE/VC recognition and significance

   When a modification occurs in a virtually concatenated signal, the
   receiving end needs to know which SPE/VC is part of the circuit and
   when the content of each SPE/VC is valid.

   A SPE/VC is considered as being part of circuit when it is signaled,
   i.e. when the corresponding Resv/Label Mapping message is sent back
   to the source. The SPE/VC content is considered as significant when
   it is received with a specific indication in the POH (it can also be
   located for HOVC/STS SPE in the H4 POH byte as defined by LCAS) and
   a valid sequence number according to the receiving end status.

   The sequence number transported in the POH has a global significance
   per circuit not per LSP. Since multi-frames are used, the sequence
   number is considered usable only when the last bit of the multi-
   framed field has been received. Even if comparable to LCAS, this
   message oriented signalling mechanism does not target to compete
   with its hitless functionality.

   Note: to ensure that in the upstream direction the destination end
   doesnÆt send traffic before the source completed the bandwidth
   modification; the destination end MAY simply wait for a ResvConf to
   be received.

5.4 GMPLS Signalling Extensions

   This memo requires the encoding and transport of a Circuit ID and an
   LSP Sequence Number for all LSPs being established according to the

E. Mannie et. al.   Internet-Draft - November 2002                  10

draft-mannie-ccamp-gmpls-tdm-lbm-03.txt                         May 02

   procedures of Section 5.2. Having a Circuit ID even for a single LSP
   circuit further allows adding LSPs to this circuit.

   A new Circuit ID object/TLV is defined to identify all LSPs
   belonging to the same SONET/SDH circuit inside of which the Sequence
   Number identifies each (component) LSP.

   For RSVP-TE, one new SENDER_TEMPLATE class object is defined and
   uses a new C-Type (TBA), and one new FILTER_SPEC class object is
   defined and uses a new C-Type (TBA).

   For CR-LDP, a new Circuit ID TLV is defined and the use of LSPID TLV
   is mandatory.

   In both cases this Object/TLV includes the following fields:

   -  Circuit ID field (32 bits)

      This is a unique Circuit ID number, generated by the source. It
      is unique in the context of the source and does not change during
      the lifetime of the circuit.

      In the current version, when used this field MUST be non-zero.

   -  LSP Sequence Number field (16 bits)

      This is a unique sequence number in the context of the Circuit
      ID. It allows ordering the LSP in the SONET/SDH virtually
      concatenated signal. Numbering starts at 0.

   -  LSP Sequence Number status (8 bits)

      This field is coded in one octet and defined as a bit vector of
      flag. For a given status, a flag set to one indicates that the
      status MUST be processed for the corresponding message. The
      currently defined flags are:

      - Flag 1 (bit 1): ignore
      - Flag 2 (bit 2): reset
      - Flag 3 (bit 3) to 8 (bit 8): reserved.

      Flag 1, when set simply ignores the LSP Sequence Number value
      (the LSP Sequence Number is non-significant). Flag 2 applies only
      for an existing LSP Sequence Number whose value is reset to the
      one indicated by the new LSP Sequence Number. Other flags are
      reserved for further extensions, if not used they must be set to
      zero when sent, and should be ignored when received.

6. GMPLS LBM with LCAS

   This section describes a sequential combination of GMPLS and LCAS.

   In brief, the proposed mechanism runs GMPLS between end-points for a
   given HOVC/STS (LOVC/VT) Group capacity provisioning (also referred

E. Mannie et. al.   Internet-Draft - November 2002                  11

draft-mannie-ccamp-gmpls-tdm-lbm-03.txt                         May 02

   to as capacity initiation, increase or decrease in [LCAS]) and
   discovery of LCAS destination support. Then, the addition or removal
   of the payload carried in the HOVC/STS SPE (or LOVC/VT SPE) Group
   member(s) belonging to the provisioned HOVC/STS (LOVC/VT) Group is
   performed using LCAS end-to-end signalling.

   Note: that in the present application, GMPLS LBM does not replace or
   overlap with the end-to-end LCAS signalling AND does not preclude
   the usage of other methods (see for instance [GMPLS-SONET-SDH-CCV])
   for capacity initiation, increase or decrease.

   The detailed mechanism can be described as follows:

   1. Bandwidth initiation, increase or decrease:

      1a. Path/Label Request message initiated from the Source to the
          Destination indicating the (new, in case of increase or
          decrease) Traffic Parameter values i.e. NVC and MT together
          with the capability of the Source to support of LCAS; this
          operation is performed by using a dedicated Modifiable flag
          (M flag) in the ADMIN_STATUS object/TLV (see [GMPLS-RSVP] and
          [GMPLS-LDP]).

      2a. Resv/Label Mapping Message sent back as described in Section
          5.1 in addition to the LCAS support by the receiver using the
          M flag. Notice that this flag follows exactly the same rules
          as the ones defined for any other ADMIN STATUS flag (see
          [GMPLS-RSVP] and [GMPLS-LDP]).

      When LCAS is supported at both ends (2) applies, on the contrary,
      when LCAS is not supported by at least one end, (3) applies.

   2. LCAS End-to-end signalling (add/remove group member)

      - If LCAS is supported by both ends and a bandwidth increase/
        decrease is triggered at the source for a unidirectional LSP:
        3a. LCAS end-to-end signalling protocol used to exchange the H4
            CTRL messages
        4a. Trigger the H4 NORM value and use the allocated bandwidth

      - If LCAS is supported by both ends and a bandwidth increase/
        decrease is triggered at the source for a bi-directional LSP:
        3b. LCAS end-to-end signalling protocol used to exchange the H4
            CTRL messages
        4b. Trigger the H4 NORM value and use the allocated bandwidth

   3. GMPLS LBM Signalling

      - If LCAS is NOT supported by at least one end, then LCAS
        messages are ignored by the non-supporting end which therefore
        only provides virtual concatenation capability. In this case
        the addition or removal of the HOVC/SPE (or LOVC/VT SPE)
        components belonging to the virtually concatenated circuit is
        driven by GMPLS LBM signalling as described in Section 5.1.

E. Mannie et. al.   Internet-Draft - November 2002                  12

draft-mannie-ccamp-gmpls-tdm-lbm-03.txt                         May 02

        This implies that when LCAS is not supported at the source
        (independently of the destination support), the LBM method can
        be directly applied.

   There are no additional GMPLS signalling extensions (compared to the
   one proposed for virtual concatenation û see Section 5.4) required
   when LBM is used in combination with LCAS, except the additional M
   flag in the ADMIN STATUS object/TLV.

7. Acknowledgments

   The authors would like to thank J. Jones (Alcatel), G. Grammel
   (Alcatel), A. Bellato (Alcatel), S. Ansorge (Alcatel) and H. van
   Helvoort (Lucent) for their useful feedback.

   Valuable comments and input were also received from A. Geyssens
   (KPNQwest), M. Moelants (KPNQwest), X. Neerdaels (KPNQwest) and P.
   Noel (KPNQwest) and F. Yin (KPNQwest).

8. Security Considerations

   This draft introduces no new security considerations to [GMPLS-
   SONET-SDH].

9. References

   [CRLDP]    Jamoussi, B. et al., "Constraint-Based LSP Setup using
              LDP", Internet Draft, Work in Progress, draft-ietf-mpls-
              cr-ldp-06.txt, November 2001.

   [CRLDP-MODIFY]  Ash, J. et al., "LSP Modification Using CR-LDP",
                   Internet Draft, Work in Progress, draft-ietf-mpls-
                   crlsp-modify-03.txt, March 2001.

   [GMPLS-ARCH] Mannie, E. (Editor), "GMPLS Architecture", Internet
                Draft, draft-ccamp-ietf-gmpls-architecture-02.txt,
                February 2002.

   [GMPLS-LDP]  Berger, L. (Editor), "Generalized MPLS Signaling
                - CR-LDP Extensions", Internet Draft, draft-ietf-
                mpls-generalized-cr-ldp-05.txt, November, 2001.

   [GMPLS-RSVP] Berger, L. (Editor), "Generalized MPLS Signaling
                - RSVP-TE Extensions", Internet Draft, draft-ietf-
                mpls-generalized-rsvp-te-06.txt, November 2001.

   [GMPLS-SIG]  Berger, L. (Editor), "Generalized MPLS û Signaling
                Functional Description", Internet Draft, draft-ietf-
                mpls-generalized-signaling-07.txt, November 2001.

   [GMPLS-SONET-SDH] Mannie, E. (Editor), "GMPLS Extensions for SONET
                and SDH Control", Internet Draft, draft-ietf-ccamp-
                gmpls-sonet-sdh-03.txt, February 2002.


E. Mannie et. al.   Internet-Draft - November 2002                  13

draft-mannie-ccamp-gmpls-tdm-lbm-03.txt                         May 02

   [GMPLS-SONET-SDH-EXT] Mannie, E. (Editor), "GMPLS Extensions to
                Control Non-Standard SONET and SDH Features",
                Internet Draft, draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-sonet-sdh-
                extensions-01.txt, February 2002.

   [RFC2119]   Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
               Requirement Levels," RFC 2119.

   [RFC2210]   Wroclawski, J., "The Use of RSVP with IETF Integrated
               Services," RFC 2210, September 1997.

   [RSVP-TE]  Awduche D., et. al., "RSVP-TE: Extensions to RSVP for LSP
              Tunnels,"  Internet Draft, Work in Progress, draft-ietf-
              mpls-rsvp-lsp-tunnel-09.txt, July 2001.

10. Authors' Addresses

      Eric Mannie (KPNQwest)
      Terhulpsesteenweg 6A
      1560 Hoeilaart, Belgium
      Phone: +32 2 658-5652
      Email: eric.mannie@kpnqwest.com

      Dimitri Papadimitriou (Alcatel)
      Francis Wellesplein 1,
      B-2018 Antwerpen, Belgium
      Phone: +32 3 240-8491
      Email: dimitri.papadimitriou@alcatel.be

11. Appendix 1 - GMPLS LBM with Contiguous Concatenation

   A non-concatenated circuit could be modified to a contiguously
   concatenated circuit (with any number of SPEs/VCs), and vice-versa.
   However the corresponding behavior in the transport plane is not
   standardized today. This kind of LSP bandwidth modification would be
   useful to consider as further investigation. This approach would
   imply some issues briefly introduced hereafter.

   When increasing the bandwidth of a circuit, it could work only if
   the right number of free SPEs/VCs can be found directly before the
   beginning of the circuit, or after the end of the circuit. This is
   unlikely to happen in most of the cases. When decreasing the
   bandwidth of a circuit, it could work in all cases.

   As opposed to virtual concatenation, there is one single POH and
   there is of no SPE/VC sequence number. Therefore, the new number of
   concatenated SPEs/VCs MUST match the one advertised in the traffic
   parameters as indicated in the NCC field (see [GMPLS-SONET-SDH]).

   The concept of make/share-before-break defined in MPLS could also be
   used to support bandwidth modification of continuously concatenated
   signals in the same way as with the single LSP bandwidth
   modification with virtual concatenation. However, in that case
   multiple LSPs can not be combined.

E. Mannie et. al.   Internet-Draft - November 2002                  14

draft-mannie-ccamp-gmpls-tdm-lbm-03.txt                         May 02
























































E. Mannie et. al.   Internet-Draft - November 2002                  15

