



INTERNET-DRAFT                                       Donald Eastlake 3rd
                                                                Motorola
                                                        Declan McCullagh
                                                              Wired News
Expires: March 2002                                       September 2001



                       .xxx Considered Dangerous
                       ---- ---------- ---------
                      <draft-eastlake-xxx-01.txt>



Status of This Document

   Distribution of this draft is unlimited. Comments should be sent to
   the authors.

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC 2026.  Internet-Drafts are
   working documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its
   areas, and its working groups.  Note that other groups may also
   distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.



Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2001).  All Rights Reserved.



Abstract

   Periodically there are proposals to mandate the use of a special top
   level name or an IP address bit to flag "adult" or "safe" material or
   the like.  This document explains why this is an ill considered idea.






D. Eastlake 3rd, D. McCullagh                                   [Page 1]


INTERNET-DRAFT         .xxx Considered Dangerous          September 2001


Table of Contents

      Status of This Document....................................1
      Copyright Notice...........................................1
      Abstract...................................................1

      Table of Contents..........................................2

      1. Background..............................................3
      2. Legal and Philisophical Problems........................4
      4. Technical Difficulties..................................6
      4.1 Domain Name System (DNS) and Other Names...............7
      4.1.1 Linguistic Problems..................................8
      4.1.2 The DNS Hierarchy and Use of TLDs....................8
      4.1.2 You Can't Control What Names Point At You!...........9
      4.1.3 Particular Protocol Considerations...................9
      4.1.3.1 Electronic Mail (SMTP)............................10
      4.1.3.2 Web Access (HTTP).................................11
      4.1.3.3 News (NNTP).......................................11
      4.1.3.4 Internet Relay Chat...............................12
      4.2 IP Addressing.........................................12
      4.2.1 Hierarchical Routing................................13
      4.2.2 IP Version 4 Addresses..............................14
      4.2.3 IP Version 6 Addresses..............................14
      4.3 PICS Labels...........................................15
      5. Conclusions............................................15

      References................................................16

      Authors Addresses.........................................18

      Full Copyright Statement..................................19
      Expiration and File Name..................................19



















D. Eastlake 3rd, D. McCullagh                                   [Page 2]


INTERNET-DRAFT         .xxx Considered Dangerous          September 2001


1. Background

   The concept of a .xxx, .sex, or similar top-level domain in which it
   would be mandatory to locate salacious or similar material is
   periodically suggested by some politicians and commentators. Other
   proposals have included a domain reserved exclusively for material
   viewed as appropriate for minors, or using IP address bits or ranges
   to segregate content.

   In an October 1998 report accompanying the Child Online Protection
   Act, the House Commerce committee said "there are no technical
   barriers to creating an adult domain, and it would be very easy to
   block all websites within an adult domain." The report also said that
   the committee was wary of regulating the computer industry and that
   any decision by the U.S. government "will have international
   consequences." [HOUSEREPORT]

   British Telecom has backed adult top-level domains, saying in a 1998
   letter to the U .S. Department of Commerce that it "strongly
   supported" that plan. The reason: "Sexually explicit services could
   then be legally required to operate with domain names in this gTLD
   [that] would make it much simpler and easier to control access to
   such sites..." [BT] One of ICANN's progenitors, the GTLD-MOU
   committee, suggested a "red-light-zone" top-level domain in a
   September 1997 request for comment. [GTLD-MOU]

   Some adult industry executives have endorsed the concept. In 1998,
   Seth Warshavsky, president of the Internet Entertainment Group, told
   the U.S. Senate Commerce committee that he would like to see a .adult
   domain. "We're suggesting the creation of a new top-level domain
   called '.adult' where all sexually explicit material on the Net would
   reside," Warshavsky said in an interview at the time. [WARSHAVSKY]
   More recently, other entrepreneurs in the industry have said that
   they do not necessarily object to the creation of an adult domain as
   long as they may continue to use .com.

   Conservative groups in the U.S. say they are not eager for such a
   domain, and prefer criminal laws directed at publishers and
   distributors of sexually-explicit material.  The National Law Center
   for Children and Families in Fairfax, Virginia, said in February 2001
   that it did not favor any such proposal. For different reasons, the
   American Civil Liberties Union and civil liberties groups also oppose
   it.

   Sen. Joseph Lieberman, the U.S. Democratic Party's vice presidential
   nominee, endorsed the idea at a June 2000 meeting of the federal
   Commission on Child Online Protection. Lieberman said in a prepared
   statement that "we would ask the arbiters of the Internet to simply
   abide by the same standard as the proprietor of an X-rated movie
   theater or the owner of a convenience store who sells sexually-


D. Eastlake 3rd, D. McCullagh                                   [Page 3]


INTERNET-DRAFT         .xxx Considered Dangerous          September 2001


   explicit magazines." [LIEBERMAN]

   In the 1998 law creating this commission, the U.S. Congress required
   the members to investigate "the establishment of a domain name for
   posting of any material that is harmful to minors." The commission
   devoted a section of its October 2000 report to that topic. It
   concluded that both a .xxx and a .kids domain are technically
   possible, but would require action by ICANN. The report said that an
   adult domain might be only "moderately effective" and raises privacy
   and free speech concerns. [COPAREPORT]

   The commission also explored the creation of a so-called red zone or
   green zone for content by means of allocation of a new set of IP
   addresses under IPv6. Any material not in one of those two zones
   would be viewed as in a grey zone and not necessarily appropriate or
   inappropriate for minors. Comments from commissioners were largely
   negative: "Effectiveness would require substantial effort to attach
   content to specific IP numbers. This approach could potentially
   reduce flexibility and impede optimal network performance. It would
   not be effective at blocking access to chat, newsgroups, or instant
   messaging."

   In October 2000, ICANN rejected a .xxx domain during its initial
   round of approving additional top-level domains. The reasons are not
   entirely clear, but former ICANN Chairwoman Esther Dyson said that
   the adult industry did not entirely agree that such a domain would be
   appropriate. One .xxx hopeful, ICM Registry of Ontario, Canada, in
   December 2000 asked ICANN to reconsider its decision. [ICM-REGISTRY]



2. Legal and Philisophical Problems

   When it comes to sexually-explicit material, every person, court, and
   government has a different view of what's acceptable and what is not.
   Attitudes change over time, and what is viewed as appropriate in one
   town or year may spark protests in the next. When faced with the
   slippery nature of what depictions of sexual activity should be
   illegal or not, one U.S. Supreme Court justice blithely defined
   obscenity as: "I know it when I see it."

   In the U.S.A., obscenity is defined as explicit sexual material that,
   among other things, violates "contemporary community standards" -- in
   other words, even at the national level, there is no agreed-upon rule
   governing what is illegal and what is not. Making matters more knotty
   is that there are over 200 United Nations country codes, and in most
   of them political subdivisions can impose their own restrictions.
   Even for legal nude modeling, age restrictions differ. They're
   commonly 18 years of age, but only 17 years of age in one
   scandinavian country. A photographer there conducting what's viewed


D. Eastlake 3rd, D. McCullagh                                   [Page 4]


INTERNET-DRAFT         .xxx Considered Dangerous          September 2001


   as a legal and proper photo shoot likely would be branded a felon and
   child pornographer in the U.S. In yet other countries and groups, the
   entire concept of nude photography or even photography of graphic a
   person in any form may, as the creation of a "graven image", be
   unacceptable.

   Saudi Arabia, Iran, Afghanistan, and China are not likely to have the
   same liberal views as, say, the Netherlands or Denmark. Saudi Arabia
   and China, like some other nations, filters their Internet connection
   and have created a government committee to protect their society from
   web sites that officials view as immoral. Their views on what should
   be included in a .xxx domain would hardly be identical to those in
   liberal western nations.

   Those wildly different opinions on sexual material make it
   inconceivable that a global consensus can ever be reached on what is
   appropriate or inappropriate for a .xxx or .adult top-level domain.
   Moreover, the existence of such a domain would create an irresistible
   temptation on the part of conservative legislators to require
   controversial publishers to move to that domain and punish those who
   do not.

   Some conservative politicians already have complained that ICANN did
   not approve .xxx in its October 2000 meeting. During a February 2001
   hearing in the U.S. House of Representatives, legislators warned that
   they "want to explore ICANN's rationale for not approving two
   particular top level domain names -- .kids and .xxx -- as a means to
   protect kids from the awful smut which is so widespread on the
   Internet."

   It seems plausible that only a few adult publishers, and not those
   who have invested resources in building a brand around a .com site,
   would voluntarily abandon their current domain name. Instead, they'd
   likely add a &.xxx variant and keep their original address. The
   existence of .xxx could propel legislators in the U.S. and other
   countries to require them to publish exclusively from an adult
   domain, a move that would invite ongoing political interference with
   Internet governance and raise concerns about forced speech and self-
   labeling.

   In fact, the ultimate arbiter of generic top-level domain names -- at
   least currently -- is not ICANN, but the U.S. government. The U.S.
   Congress' General Accounting Office in July 2000 reported that the
   Commerce Department continues to be responsible for domain names
   allowed by the authoritative root. [GAO] The GAO's auditors concluded
   it was unclear whether the Commerce Department has the "requisite
   authority" under current law to transfer that responsibility to
   ICANN.

   The American Civil Liberties Union -- and other members of the


D. Eastlake 3rd, D. McCullagh                                   [Page 5]


INTERNET-DRAFT         .xxx Considered Dangerous          September 2001


   international Global Internet Liberty Campaign -- caution that
   publishers speaking frankly about birth control, AIDS prevention, gay
   and lesbian sex, the social problem of prison rape, etc., could be
   coerced into moving to an adult domain. Once there, they would be
   stigmatized and easily blocked by schools, libraries, companies, and
   other groups using filtering software. Publishers of such information
   who do not view themselves as pornographers and retain their existing
   addresses could be targeted for prosecution.

   The existence of an adult top-level domain would likely open the door
   for related efforts, either policy or legislative. There are many
   different axes through which offensive material can be defined: Sex,
   violence, hate, heresy, subversion, blasphemy, illegal drugs,
   profanity, political correctness, glorification of crime, incitement
   to break the law, and so on. Such suggestions invite the ongoing
   lobbying of ICANN, the U.S. government, or other policy-making bodies
   by special-interest groups that are not concerned with the technical
   feasibility or practicality of their advice.

   An adult top-level domain could have negative legal repercussions by
   endangering free expression. U.S. Supreme Court Justice Sandra Day
   O'Connor has suggested that the presence of "adult zones" on the
   Internet would make a future Communications Decency Act (CDA) more
   likely to be viewed as constitutional. In her partial dissent to the
   Supreme Court's rejection of the CDA in 1997 [CDA], O'Connor said
   that "the prospects for the eventual zoning of the Internet appear
   promising." (The Supreme Court ruled the CDA violated free speech
   rights by making it a crime to distribute "indecent" or "patently
   offensive" material online.)

   Privacy could be harmed by such a proposal. It would become easier
   for repressive governments and other institutions to track visits to
   sites in a domain labeled as adult and record personally-identifiable
   information about the visitor. Repressive governments would instantly
   have more power to monitor naive users and prosecute them for their
   activities. It's also implausible that a top-level domain would be be
   effective in controlling access to chat, email, newsgroups, instant
   messaging, and new services as yet to be invented.



4. Technical Difficulties

   Even ignoring the philosophical and legal difficulties outlined
   above, there are substantial technical difficulties in attempting to
   impose content classification by domain names or IP addresses.
   Mandatory content labeling is usually advanced with the idea of using
   a top level domain name, discussed in section 4.1 below, but we also
   discuss the possibility of using IP address bits or ranges in section
   4.2 below.


D. Eastlake 3rd, D. McCullagh                                   [Page 6]


INTERNET-DRAFT         .xxx Considered Dangerous          September 2001


   In section 4.3 difficulties with a few particular higher level
   protocols are discussed.  In some cases, these protocols use
   different name spaces. It should be kept in mind that additional
   future protocols may be devised with as yet undreamed of naming
   characteristics.

   We also discuss PICS labels [PICS] as an alternative technology in
   section 4.4.

   Only a limited technical background is assumed so some basic
   information is included below. In some cases descriptions are
   simplified and some details omitted.

   This technical disucssion minimizes the definitional problems.
   However, it is still necessary for evaluating some technical
   considerations to have some estimate of the amount of categorization
   that would be necessary for a realistic global censorship system.
   There is no hope of agreement on this point. For our purposes, we
   will, quite arbitrarily, assume that the world's population consists
   of approximately 90,000 overlapping communities, each of which would
   have a different categorization of interest. Further, we arbitrarily
   assume that some unspecified but clever encoding scheme enables a
   proper global categorization of all information by a 300 bit label.
   Some would say a 300 bit label is too large, others that it is too
   small. Regardless, we will use it for some technical evaluations.



4.1 Domain Name System (DNS) and Other Names

   The most prominent user visible part of Internet naming and
   addressing is the domain name system [RFC 1034, 1035].  Domain Names
   are dotted sequences of labels such as aol.com, world.std.com,
   www.rosslynchapel.org.uk, or ftp.gnu.lcs.mit.edu [RFC 1035, 1591,
   2606].  They form an important part of most World Wide Web addresses
   or URLs [RFC 2396], commonly appearing right after "//".

   Domain names simply name nodes in a global distributed hierarchically
   delegated database.  A wide variety of information can be stored at
   these nodes including IP addresses of machines on the network (see
   section 4.2 below), mail delivery information, and many other types
   of information.  Thus, the data stored at foo.example.com could be
   the numeric information for sending data to a particular machine,
   which would be used if you tried to browse <http://foo.example.com>,
   the name of a computer (say mailhost.example.com) to handle mail
   addressed to anyone "@foo.example.com", and/or other information.

   There are also other naming systems in use, such as news group names
   and Internet Relay Chat (IRC) channel names.



D. Eastlake 3rd, D. McCullagh                                   [Page 7]


INTERNET-DRAFT         .xxx Considered Dangerous          September 2001


   The usual labeling idea presented is to reserve a top level name,
   such as .xxx for "adult" material and/or .kids for "safe" material or
   the like.  This has technical and linguistic problems with this are
   described in the subsections below.



4.1.1 Linguistic Problems

   When using name labeling, the first problem is from whose language do
   you take the names to impose?  Words and acronyms can have very
   different meanings in different languages and the probability of
   confusion is multiplied when phonetic collisions are considered.

   As an example of possible problems, note that for a few years, the
   government of Turkmenistan has suspended new registrations in ".tm",
   which had previously been a source of revenue, because some of the
   registered second level domain names may have been problematic. In
   particular, their web home page at <http://www.nic.tm> has said:

       Statement from the .TM NIC

       The response to the .TM registry has been overwhelming. Thousands
       of names have been registered from all over the world. Some of
       the names registered, however, may be legally obscene in
       Turkmenistan, and as a result the .TMNIC registry is reviewing
       its naming policy for future registrations. The .TMNIC has
       suspended registrations until a new policy can be implemented. We
       hope to be live again shortly.



4.1.2 The DNS Hierarchy and Use of TLDs

   An important aspect of the design of the Domain Name System (DNS) is
   the hierarchical delegation of data maintenance.  The DNS really only
   works, and has been able to scale the over five orders of magnitude
   it has grown since its initial deployment, only due to this
   delegation.

   The first problem is that one would expect most computers or web
   sites to have a mix of material only some of which should be
   specially classified. Using special TLDs multiples the number of DNS
   zones the site has to worry about. For example, assume the site has
   somehow already sorted its material into "kids", "normal, and "adult"
   piles.  Without special TLD labels, it can store them under
   kids.example.net, adult.example.net, and other.example.net, for
   instance, which requires only the maintenance of the single
   example.net zone of database entries. With special TLD labeling, at
   least example.net (for normal stuff), example.net.xxx, and


D. Eastlake 3rd, D. McCullagh                                   [Page 8]


INTERNET-DRAFT         .xxx Considered Dangerous          September 2001


   example.net.kids would need to be maintained which are three separate
   zones in different parts of the DNS tree under three separate
   delegations.  As the number of categories expands and the number of
   category combinations explodes, this quickly becomes completely
   unmanageable. If 300 bits worth of labeling is required, the system
   could, in theory, need 2**300 name categories, an impossibiity.  No
   individual site would need to use all categories and the category
   domain names would not all have to be all top level names.  But it
   would still be an unmanageable nightmare.



4.1.2 You Can't Control What Names Point At You!

   The DNS system works as a database and associates certain data,
   called resource records, or RRs, with domain names.  In particular,
   it can associate IP address resource records with domain names.  For
   example, when you browse a URL, most commonly the domain name within
   that URL is looked up in the DNS and the resulting address is used to
   address the packets sent from your web browser or other software to
   the server or peer.

   Remember what we said in Section 4.1.1 about hierarchical delegation?
   Anyone controlling a DNS zone of data, say example.com, can insert
   data at that name or any deeper name (except to the extent they
   maintain delegations of some of the deeper namespace to yet others).
   So the controller of example.com can insert data so that
   purity.example.com has stored at it the same computer address which
   is at www.obscene.example.xxx.  This directs any reference to
   purity.example.com to use the associated IP address which is the same
   as the www.obscene.example.xxx web site.  The manager of that
   hypothetical web site, who controls the obscene.example.xxx zone, has
   no control over the example.com DNS zone and so is technically
   incapable of causing it to conform to any "xxx" labeling law.  Or, in
   the alternative, someone could create a name conforming to an adult
   labeling requirement that actually pointed to someone else's entirely
   unobjectionable site, perhaps for the purpose of polluting the
   labeling.

   Thus, providers of data on the Internet cannot stop anyone from
   creating names pointing to their computer's IP address with
   misleading domain names.



4.1.3 Particular Protocol Considerations

   There are additional considerations related to particular protocols.
   We consider only a few here.  The first two, electronic mail and the
   World Wide Web, use domain name addressing.  The second two, net news


D. Eastlake 3rd, D. McCullagh                                   [Page 9]


INTERNET-DRAFT         .xxx Considered Dangerous          September 2001


   and IRC, actually use different name spaces and illustrate further
   technical problems with name based labeling.



4.1.3.1 Electronic Mail (SMTP)

   The standard Internet electronic mail protocol separates "envelope"
   information from content [RFC 2821, 2822].  The envelope information
   indicates where a message claims to have originated and to whom it
   should be delivered.  The content has fields starting with labels
   like "From:" and "To:" but these actually have no effect and can be
   arbitrarily forged using simple. normally available software, such a
   telnetting to the SMTP port on a mail server.  Content fields are not
   compared with envelope fields.

   While different mail clients display envelope information and headers
   from the content of email differently, generally the common content
   fields are given prominence.  Thus, while not exactly the same as
   content labeling, it should be noted that it is trivial to send mail
   to anyone with arbitrary domain names in the email addresses
   appearing in the From and To headers, etc.

   It is also easy set up a host to forward mail to an email address or
   mailing list.  Mail sent with normal mail tools to this forwarder
   will automatically have content headers reflecting the forwarder's
   name but the forwarder will change the envelope information and cause
   the mail to be actually sent to the original list.  For example,
   (with names disguised) there is a social mailing list
   innocuous@foo.example.org and someone set up a forwarder at cat-
   torturers@other.example.  Mail sent to the forwarder is forwarded and
   appears on the innocuous mailing list but with a "To: cat-
   torturers@other.example" header in its body and this is the header
   that is displayed by mail readers.  In some cases, similar things can
   be done using the "bcc" or blind courtesy copy feature of Internet
   mail.

   Thus, standard Internet tools provide no way to control domain names
   appearing inside email headers.

   There is work proceeding on securing email; however, such efforts at
   present only allow you to verify whether or not a particular entity
   was the actual author of the mail.  They do not generally relate to
   controlling or authenticating domain names in the content of the
   mail.







D. Eastlake 3rd, D. McCullagh                                  [Page 10]


INTERNET-DRAFT         .xxx Considered Dangerous          September 2001


4.1.3.2 Web Access (HTTP)

   At least with modern web servers and browsers supporting HTTP 1.1
   [RFC 2616], the domain name used to access the site is available to
   access different web sites even though they are on the same machine
   at the same IP address. This is a small plus for name based labeling
   since different categories of information on the same computer could
   be set up to be accessed via different domain names. But for a
   computer with any reasonable variety of data, the explosion of trying
   to differently name

   On the other hand, the web has automatic forwarding. Thus, when one
   tries to access data at a particular domain name, the server there
   can re-direct your browser, temporarily or permanently, to a
   different name. Or it can re-direct you to a numeric IP address so as
   to by-pass name filtering.



4.1.3.3 News (NNTP)

   Net news uses hierarchical structured newsgroup names that are
   similar in appearance to domain names except that the most
   significant label is on the left and the least on the right, the
   opposite of domain names.  However, while the names are structured
   hierarchically, there is no central control.  Instead, news servers
   periodically connect to other news servers that have agreed to
   exchange messages with them and then they update each other on
   messages only in those newsgroups in which they wish to exchange
   messages.

   Although hierarchical zones in the domain name system are locally
   managed, they need to be reachable starting at the top level root
   servers which are in turn more or less controlled by ICANN and the US
   Deparment of Commerce. With no such central point or points in the
   net news world, any pair or larger set of news servers anywhere in
   the world can agree to exhance news messages under any news group
   names they like, making central control or even influence virtually
   impossible. In fact, within some parts of the news group namespace on
   some servers, anyone can create new newsgroups with arbitrary names.

   Even if news group names could be controlled, the contents of the
   messages are determined by posters. While some groups are moderated,
   most are not. "Cancel" messages can be sent out for news messages,
   but that mechanism is subject to abuse so many servers are configured
   to ignore cancels. In any case, the message may have been distributed
   to a huge number of computers world wide before any cancel is sent
   out.

   And of course, the fitting 300 bits worth of labeling into news group


D. Eastlake 3rd, D. McCullagh                                  [Page 11]


INTERNET-DRAFT         .xxx Considered Dangerous          September 2001


   names is just as impossible as it is to fit into domain names.



4.1.3.4 Internet Relay Chat

   Internet Relay Chat is another example of a service which uses a
   different name space.  It uses a single level space of "channel
   names" which are meaningful within a particular network of IRC
   servers. Because it is not hierarchical, each server must know about
   all names, which limits the size of a network of servers.

   As with newsgroup names, the fact that IRC channel names are local
   decision not subject to or reachable from any global "root" makes
   centralized political control virtually impossible.



4.2 IP Addressing

   A key characteristic of the Internet Protocol (IP) on which the
   Internet is based is that it breaks data up into "packets".  These
   packets are individually handled and routed from source to
   destination.  Each packet has in it a numeric address for the
   destination point to which the Internet will try to deliver the
   packet.

   (End users do not normally see these numeric addresses but instead
   deal with "domain names" as described in section 4.1 above.)

   The predominant numeric address system now in use is called IPv4, or
   Internet Protocol Version 4, which provides for 32 bit addresses [RFC
   791].  There is increasing migrattion to the newer IPv6, which
   provides for 128 bit addresses [RFC 1752].

   One problem in using addressing for content filtering is that this is
   a very coarse technique.  IP addresses address network interfaces
   which usually correspond to entire computer systems which could house
   multiple web pages, sets of files, etc., only a small part of which
   it was desired to block or enable.  Increasingly, a single IP address
   may correspond to a NAT (Network Address Translation) box [NAT] which
   hides multiple computers behind it, although in that case these
   computers are usually not servers.

   However, even beyond this problem of coarse granularity, the
   practical constraints of hierarchical routing make the allocation of
   even a single IPv4 address bit or a significant number of IPv6
   address bits impossible.




D. Eastlake 3rd, D. McCullagh                                  [Page 12]


INTERNET-DRAFT         .xxx Considered Dangerous          September 2001


4.2.1 Hierarchical Routing

   As packets of data flow through the Internet, decisions must be made
   as to how to forward them "towards" their destination.  This is
   normally done by comparing the initial bits of the packet destination
   address to entries in a "routing table" and forwarding the packets as
   indicated by the table entry with the longest prefix match.

   While the Internet is actually a general mesh, if, for simplicity, we
   consider it to have a central backbone at the "top", a packet is
   typically routed as follows:

   The local networking code looks at its routing table to determine if
   the packet should be sent directly to another computer on the "local"
   network, to a router to specially forward it to another nearby
   network, or routed "up" to a "default" router to forward it to a
   higher level service provider's network.  If the packet's destination
   is "far enough away" it will eventually get forwarded up to a router
   on the backbone.  Such a router can not sent the packet "up" since it
   is at the top or "default free" zone and must have a complete table
   of what other top level router to send the packet to.  Currently,
   such top level routers are very large and expensive devices. They
   must be able to maintain tables of tens of thousands of routes.  When
   the packet gets to the top level router of the part of the network
   within which its destination lies, it get forwarded "down" to
   successive routers which are more and more specific and local until
   eventually its gets to a router on the local network where its
   destination address lies.  This local router sends the packet
   directly to the destination computer.

   Because all of these routing decisions are made on a longest prefix
   match basis, it can be seen that IP addresses are not general names
   or labels but are intimately associated with the actual topology and
   routing structure of the network.  If there were assigned at random,
   routers would be required to remember so many specific routes for
   specific addresses that it would exceed the current technical
   capabilities for router design and the Internet would not work.

   It should also be noted that there is some inefficiency in allocation
   at each level of hierarchy [RFC 1715].  Generally allocations are of
   a power of two addresses and as requirements grow and/or shrink, it
   is not practical to use every address for a computer.

   (The above simplified description ignores multi-homing and many other
   details.)







D. Eastlake 3rd, D. McCullagh                                  [Page 13]


INTERNET-DRAFT         .xxx Considered Dangerous          September 2001


4.2.2 IP Version 4 Addresses

   There just isn't any practical way to reallocate even one bit of IPv4
   global Internet Addresses for content filtering use.  Such addresses
   are in short supply and such an allocation would, in effect, cut the
   number of available addresses in half.  There just aren't enough
   addresses, given the efficiency of hierarchical allocation and
   routing, to do this.  Even if there were, current numbers have not
   been allocated with this in mind so that a renumbering within every
   organization with hosts on the Internet would be required, a
   nightmarish and Herculean task costing in the billions of dollars.
   Even if these problems were overcome, the allocation of even a single
   bit near the top of the address bits would likely double the number
   of routes in the default free zone, exceeding the capacity of current
   routers and requiring the upgrade of thousands of them to new routers
   that do not exist yet. The allocation of a bit near the bottom of the
   address bits would require world wide local action which would be
   impossible to require or enforce, even if the bit were available.

   And all this is for only a single bit, let alone more than one, is
   allocated to content labeling. And we are assuming you would actually
   need 300 bits, more than there are!

   Basically, the idea is a non-starter.



4.2.3 IP Version 6 Addresses

   IPv6 provides 128 bit address fields.  Furthermore, allocation of
   IPv6 addresses is in its infancy. Thus the allocation of, say, one
   bit of IPv6 address for labeling is conceivable.

   However, as discussed above (section 4.2.1), every high bit allocated
   for labeling doubles the cost imposed on the routing system.
   Allocating one bit would generally double the size of routing tables.
   Allocating two bits would mulitply them by four. Allocating the 300
   bits we assume necessary for realistic world wide labeling is
   logically impossible for IPv6, 300 being a lot larger than 128, and
   if it were, would result in techically unachievable routing table
   sizes.  Even allocating 30 bits, if that were possible, could
   multiply table sizes by a billion.

   Allocating low bits also has problems. There are technical proposals
   that use the bottom 64 bits in a manner incompatible with their use
   for labels [RFC 2374]. So it would probably have to be "middle bits"
   (actually low bits of the upper half). As with IPv4, it would be
   impossible to enforce this world wide. If it were, it might be
   conceivable that one or two bits could be allocated there, which
   would be completely inadequate.


D. Eastlake 3rd, D. McCullagh                                  [Page 14]


INTERNET-DRAFT         .xxx Considered Dangerous          September 2001


4.3 PICS Labels

   PICS Labels [PICS] have several modes.  If content is required to
   have labels in it, which is one mode, it raises all the problems of
   categorization granularity and forced speech.  But if used in a mode
   whereby a third party determines and provides labels for content and
   users are free to select whatever such third party or parties they
   wish to consult, it is a way to permit a myriad of categories,
   editors, and evaluators to exist in parallel.

   It would be quite reasonable to have multiple PICS services that, in
   the aggregate, provided 300 bits of label information or more. There
   could be a PICS service for every community of interest.  This sort
   of technology is really the only reasonable way to make
   categorizations or labelings of material available in a diverse and
   dynamic world.

   While such PICS label services could be used to distirubte government
   promulgatged censorship categories, for example, it is not clear how
   this is any worse than government censorship via national firewalls.



5. Conclusions

   The concept that a single top level domain name, such as .xxx, or a
   single IP address bit, could be allocated and become the madatory
   home of "adult" or "offensive" material world wide is hopeless
   nonsense.

   Global agreement on what sort of material should be in such a ghetto
   is impossible. In the world wide context, the use of a single
   category or small number of categories is absurd. The implementation
   of a reasonable size label that could encompass the criterion of the
   many communities of the world, such as 300 bits, is impossible at the
   domain name or IP address level and will remain so for the foreeable
   future. Besides technical impossibility, such a mandate would be an
   illegal forcing of speech in some jurisdictions and for domain names
   faces severe linguistic problems.

   Nevertheless, the concept of a plethora of independent reviewers,
   some of which might be governmental agencies, and the ability of
   those accessing information to select and utilize ratings assigned by
   such reviewers, is possible.








D. Eastlake 3rd, D. McCullagh                                  [Page 15]


INTERNET-DRAFT         .xxx Considered Dangerous          September 2001


References

   [BT] - British Telecom comments to U.S. Commerce Department, February
   20, 1998,
   <http://www.ntia.doc.gov/ntiahome/domainname/130dftmail/BT.htm>

   [CDA] - Reno v. American Civil Liberties Union, 117 S.Ct. 2329, June
   26, 1997, <http://supct.law.cornell.edu/supct/html/96-
   511.cpanel.html>

   [COPAREPORT] - Final Report of the COPA Commission to the U.S.
   Congress, October 20, 2000,
   <http://www.copacommission.org/report/newtopleveldomain.shtml>

   [GAO] - GAO Report OGC-00-33R, July 7, 2000,
   <http://www.gao.gov/new.items/og00033r.pdf>

   [GTLD-MOU] - GTLD-MOU Policy Oversight committee RFC 97-02, September
   13, 1997, <http://www.gtld-mou.org/docs/notice-97-02.html>

   [HOUSEREPORT] - U.S. House Commerce Committee report, 105th Congress,
   October 5, 1998.
   <http://www.epic.org/free_speech/censorship/hr3783-report.html>

   [ICM-REGISTRY] - Request for reconsideration from ICM Registry to
   ICANN, December 15, 2000,
   <http://www.icann.org/committees/reconsideration/icm-request-
   16dec00.htm>

   [LIEBERMAN] - Testimony of Senator Joe Lieberman before Children's
   Online Protection Act Commission, June 8, 2000,
   <http://www.senate.gov/~lieberman/press/00/06/2000608958 .html>

   [NAT] - ...

   [PICS] -  Platform for Internet Content Selection
      Service Descriptions <http://www.w3.org/TR/REC-PICS-services>
      Label Format and Distribution <http://www.w3.org/TR/REC-PICS-
         labels>
      PICS Rules <http://www.w3.org/TR/REC-PICSRules>
      PICS Signed Labels (DSIG) 1.0 Specification
         <http://www.w3.org/TR/REC-DSig-label/>

   [RFC 791] - "Internet Protocol", J. Postel, September 1981.

   [RFC 1034] - P. Mockapetris, "Domain Names - Concepts and
   Facilities", STD 13, November 1987.

   [RFC 1035] - P. Mockapetris, "Domain Names - Implementation and
   Specifications", STD 13, November 1987.


D. Eastlake 3rd, D. McCullagh                                  [Page 16]


INTERNET-DRAFT         .xxx Considered Dangerous          September 2001


   [RFC 1591] - J. Postel, "Domain Name System Structure and
   Delegation", March 1994.

   [RFC 1715] - C. Huitema, "The H Ratio for Address Assignment
   Efficiency", November 1994.

   [RFC 1752] - S. Bradner, A. Mankin, "The Recommendation for the IP
   Next Generation Protocol", January 1995.

   [RFC 2374] - R. Hinden, M. O'Dell, S. Deering, "An IPv6 Aggregatable
   Global Unicast Address Format", July 1998.

   [RFC 2396] - T.  Berners-Lee, R. Fielding, L. Masinter, "Uniform
   Resource Identifiers (URI): Generic Syntax", August 1998.

   [RFC 2460] - "Internet Protocol, Version 6 (IPv6) Specification",
   Deering, S. and R. Hinden, December 1998.

   [RFC 2606] - D. Eastlake, A. Panitz, "Reserved Top Level DNS Names",
   June 1999.

   [RFC 2616] - "Hypertext Transfer Protocol -- HTTP/1.1", R. Fielding,
   J. Gettys, J. Mogul, H. Frystyk, L. Masinter, P. Leach, T. Berners-
   Lee, June 1999.

   [RFC 2821] - "Simple Mail Transfer Protocol", J. Klensin, Editor,
   April 2001.

   [RFC 2822] - "Internet Message Format", P. Resnick, Editor, April
   2001.

   [WARSHAVSKY] - "Congress weighs Net porn bills," CNET article,
   February 10, 1998, <http://news.cnet.com/news/0-1005-200-326435.html>



















D. Eastlake 3rd, D. McCullagh                                  [Page 17]


INTERNET-DRAFT         .xxx Considered Dangerous          September 2001


Authors Addresses

   Donald E. Eastlake 3rd
   Motorola
   155 Beaver Street
   Milford, MA 01757 USA

   Telephone:   +1-508-634-2066 (h)
                +1-508-261-5434 (w)
   FAX:         +1-508-261-4447 (w)
   EMail:       Donald.Eastlake@motorola.com


   Declan McCullagh
   Wired News
   1935 Calvert Street, NW #1
   Washington, DC 20009

   Telephone:   +1-202-986-3455
   FAX:         +1-202-986-3472
   EMail:       declan@wired.com































D. Eastlake 3rd, D. McCullagh                                  [Page 18]


INTERNET-DRAFT         .xxx Considered Dangerous          September 2001


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2001).  All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.




Expiration and File Name

   This draft expires March 2002.

   Its file name is draft-eastlake-xxx-01.txt.
















D. Eastlake 3rd, D. McCullagh                                  [Page 19]

