Service Location Working Group                              Erik Guttman
INTERNET DRAFT                                     Sun Microsystems, Inc
                                                         11 October 1999

                    The Directory Agent Service Type
                  draft-guttman-svrloc-da-scheme-00.txt


Status of This Memo

   This document is a submission by the Service Location Working Group
   of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF).  Comments should be
   submitted to the srvloc@srvloc.org mailing list.

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC 2026 [1].

   This document is an Internet-Draft.  Internet-Drafts are working
   documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas,
   and its working groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at
   any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as ``work in progress.''

     The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
     http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

     The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
     http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   To view the entire list of current Internet-Drafts, please check
   the ``1id-abstracts.txt'' listing contained in the Internet-Drafts
   Shadow Directories on ftp.is.co.za (Africa), ftp.nordu.net (Northern
   Europe), ftp.nis.garr.it (Southern Europe), munnari.oz.au (Pacific
   Rim), ftp.ietf.org (US East Coast), or ftp.isi.edu (US West Coast).

   Distribution of this memo is unlimited.


Abstract

   This document describes the Directory Agent service type.  Directory
   Agents are one of three types of agents used in the Service Location
   Protocol, Version 2 [1].  The Directory Agent caches services for a
   set of Service Agents which have been enabled to use SLPv2.  User
   Agents issue requests of Directory Agents to discover services.

1. Introduction

   This document provides a Service Template for SLPv2 Directory Agents.
   Service templates are defined in [2].  

   SLPv2 may be used to discover Directory Agents.  Directory Agents 
   respond with DAAdvert messages which include attributes.  This 
   document describes the standard attributes which Directory Agents
   MAY include in their DAAdverts.


Guttman                   Expires 11 April 2000                [Page  1]

Internet Draft      The Directory Agent Service Type     11 October 1999

2. The Directory-Agent Service Type

  -------------------------template begins here-----------------------
  template-type=directory-agent

  template-version=0.1

  template-lang=en

  template-description=
    This defines the directory-agent service type.  This service is
    used by SLPv2 User Agents, who issue service discovery requests
    and by SLPv2 Service Agents, who register their services with
    the Directory Agent.  The SLPv2 Directory Agent caches the service
    information and provides scalability to the SLPv2 protocol.  The
    Directory Agent MAY include attribute information in its DAAdvert
    messages.  User Agents and Service Agents MAY also use attributes
    to select Directory Agents, by issuing SLPv2 Directory Agent
    discovery Service Requests messages which include a search filter.

  template-url-syntax=
    url-path= ; The URL of the service agent.  Defined in [1].

  min-refresh-interval=string L O
  ; The minimum lifetime the Directory Agent will accept in service
  ; registrations.

  --------------------------template ends here------------------------


3. Security Considerations

  Authentication of Directory Agent URLs is possible within the context
  of SLPv2 [1].  Directory Agent URLs may be used by SLPv2 UAs and SAs.  
  If SLPv2 security mechanisms are not used, UAs and SAs will have no 
  guarantee these services actually conform to the selected subset.


References:

  [1] E. Guttman, C. Perkins, J. Veizades, M. Day.  Service Location
      Protocol.  RFC 2608, June 1999.

  [2] E. Guttman, C. Perkins, J. Kempf, Service Templates and service:
      Schemes.  RFC 2609, June 1999.









Guttman                   Expires 11 April 2000                [Page  2]

Internet Draft     The Directory Agent Service Type      11 October 1999


Author Contact Information:

     Erik Guttman
     Sun Microsystems
     Bahnstr. 2
     74915 Waibstadt Germany

     Erik.Guttman@sun.com
     +49 7263 911 701


Full Copyright Statement

      Copyright (C) The Internet Society (1999).  All Rights Reserved.

      This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
      others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
      or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
      and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
      kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
      included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
      document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
      the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
      Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
      developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
      copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
      followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
      English.

      The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
      revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

      This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
      "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
      TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
      BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
      HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
      MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE."















Guttman                 Expires 11 April 2000                [Page  3]

