   INTERNET-DRAFT                                              SIPPING WG 
   November 2004                                             Rajnish Jain 
   Expires: May 2005                          Excel Switching Corporation 
                                                         Vijay K. Gurbani 
                                   Lucent Technologies/Bell Laboratories 
    
    
    
       Requirements for Persistent Connection Management in the Session 
                          Initiation Protocol (SIP) 
              draft-jain-sipping-persistent-conn-reqs-03.txt 
       
       
   Status of this Memo  
       
         By submitting this Internet-Draft, I certify that any 
      applicable patent or other IPR claims of which I am aware have 
      been disclosed,and any of which I become aware will be disclosed, 
      in accordance with RFC 3668. 
       
         Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet 
      Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. 
      Note that other groups may also distribute working documents as 
      Internet-Drafts. 
       
         Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
      months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
      documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts 
      as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in 
      progress." 
       
      The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
      http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt. 
       
      The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
      http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
       
      This Internet-Draft will expire on May, 2005. 
    
    
   Copyright Notice 
    
      Copyright ¨ The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved. 
     








    
    
   Jain                      Expires - May 2005                  [Page 1] 

   Internet-Draft     Persistent Connection Reqs         November 2004 
    
    
    
   Abstract  
       
      SIP over connection-oriented transport protocol based systems are 
      likely to face certain distinct performance and behavioral issues 
      that are not manifest when SIP is transported over connectionless 
      protocols. Allowing SIP entities to mutually conserve connections 
      over a predictable, extended period of time is one of the leading 
      requirements to help SIP entities deliver their optimal 
      performance in the network. Overall, this document contemplates 
      transport layer connection management issues relating to SIP. 
      Requirements and potential solutions for introducing a backward 
      compatible notion of persistent connections in SIP are presented.  
    
    
   Applicability Statement 
    
      The means and procedures described in the Internet-Draft are most 
      applicable in scenarios where there is a high volume of signaling 
      traffic between two SIP entities, or the need to maintain a long-
      term trusted, peering relationship between them.  Examples of 
      such scenarios are much-used signaling paths between two proxies 
      belonging to different service providers, or the signaling path 
      between a SIP User Agent Client (UAC) and its default outbound 
      proxy. 
    
    
   Table of Contents 
       
      1. Conventions used in this document.............................3 
      2. Introduction..................................................3 
      3. Transport Layer Connection Management.........................6 
      4. Advantages of Persistent Connections..........................9 
         4.1 Performance Efficiency....................................9 
         4.2 Resources Efficiency......................................9 
      5. Requirements.................................................10 
      6. Proposed Solutions...........................................10 
         6.1 New Via header field parameter...........................10 
         6.2 New SIP header...........................................11 
      7. Security Considerations......................................12 
      8. IANA Considerations..........................................12 
      9. Acknowledgements.............................................12 
         
    
    
    
    
    

    
    
   Jain                      Expires - May 2005                  [Page 2] 

   Internet-Draft     Persistent Connection Reqs         November 2004 
    
    
    
   1. Conventions used in this document  
           
      In this document, the key words "MUST", "MUST NOT","REQUIRED", 
      "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", 
      "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" are to be interpreted as described in 
      RFC2119[2] and indicate requirement levels for compliant SIP 
      implementations. 
    
    
   2. Introduction 
       
      SIP [1] being an application layer protocol is stacked above the 
      transport layer in the Internet Protocol model. Although SIP 
      tends to be loosely coupled with transport layer, certain aspects 
      of SIP entities are somewhat influenced by (or can benefit from) 
      the workings of vastly diverse transport layer protocols. For 
      instance, connection-oriented transport protocols (such as TCP, 
      SCTP, and TLS over TCP) demand more systemic resources and 
      introduce latencies to provide their salient features in contrast 
      with their connectionless counterparts (such as UDP). As a 
      result, the dynamics of a connection oriented transport protocol 
      are likely to produce somewhat of a ripple effect on the entire 
      SIP entity. Evidently, in order to minimize the negative 
      performance impact caused by excessive connections, SIP 
      implementers desire standardized mechanisms to expend connections 
      cautiously.    
         
      In general, SIP is currently quite liberal in setting up and 
      tearing down transport layer connections. Per [1], transport 
      layer connections should be opened, closed, and recycled at the 
      discretion of individual implementations. To prevent lingering of 
      low traffic connections, section 18 of [1] guides implementers to 
      close connections after an implementation-defined amount of idle 
      time. Depending on the interpretation of [1] by the implementer, 
      the idle time can range from 32s (T1*64) to infinity (thereby 
      keeping the connection open forever; however, there are problems 
      with this interpretation of "infinity", as will be discussed 
      later). In a multi-vendor SIP network, diverse SIP entities will 
      thus vastly differ in their discretion of connection idle timeout 
      periods and connection reuse policies. Such discrepancies will 
      manifest themselves into inter-operability chaos and inefficient 
      network performance. The connect-reuse Internet-Draft[2] presents 
      a few scenarios where performance degradation is evident. 
     
      Typically, connections between SIP entities frequently age out 
      due to sporadic traffic patterns, if they are maintained at all 
      beyond a transactionÆs lifetime. Connections are always deemed 
      ephemeral in nature and are shut down without any consensus 
    
    
   Jain                      Expires - May 2005                  [Page 3] 

   Internet-Draft     Persistent Connection Reqs         November 2004 
    
    
      between interacting SIP entities. To that end, several 
      opportunities are missed where SIP entities would best serve the 
      network if they communicate over persistent connections that are 
      setup and torn down predictably. Unfortunately, connections are 
      currently torn down by either side due to lack of communication 
      of such intent from one entity to another using a SIP construct. 
    
      Exceptions include a few scenarios supported by SIP currently 
      that facilitate connection conservation. Figure 1. below shows a 
      typical SIP trapezoid arrangement with end-points Ea and Eb and 
      their default out-bound proxy servers Pa and Pb, respectively. 
    
    
         
                                   --Ca2b--> 
                               Pa . . . . . .Pb 
                               .             . 
                             .                  . 
                           Ea  . . . . . . . . . Eb 
                                        
                       Figure 1: Typical SIP trapezoid. 
       
       
      For illustration purpose it is assumed that Pa and Pb are in a 
      peering relationship and communicate over a connection-oriented 
      transport protocol. The call flow begins with Pa receiving an 
      INVITE from Ea (for Eb). As a result, Pa originates a transport 
      layer connection to Pb called Ca2b and puts call request to Pb 
      over that connection. Per SIP, the following message exchanges 
      will likely recycle connections further down the call flow: 
       
      1. Responses from Pb to Pa 
      2. New requests from Pa to Pb 
       
      It is worth noting that new requests from Pa to Pb have the 
      opportunity to recycle connection Ca2b, if the connection is 
      indeed active at the time new requests arrive. If there is 
      significant (implementation-defined) time gap between two 
      requests from Pa to Pb, it is likely that connection Ca2b would 
      age out and be closed before the later request arrives. In this 
      case, a new request from Pa to Pb will have to trigger a new 
      connection. This problem can be alleviated by making PaÆs 
      implementation-defined timer substantially large. However, that 
      approach manifests a bigger scaling issue, as Pa would then tend 
      to exhibit that behavior universally with every SIP entity 
      (including end-points) it initiates a connection to. Furthermore, 
      Pa and Pb may vastly differ in their discretion of transport 
      layer idle timeouts. Assuming that Pa tends to be ôliberalö 
      (smaller timeout) and Pb ôconservativeö (larger timeout), when it 
      comes to cycling through transport connections, Pa can swamp Pb 
    
    
   Jain                      Expires - May 2005                  [Page 4] 

   Internet-Draft     Persistent Connection Reqs         November 2004 
    
    
      with transport layer connection setup and tear down requests. 
      This may negatively influence overall functioning of Pb.  
      Likewise, numerous under utilized lingering connections may lend 
      themselves to scaling and performance issues. Therefore, some 
      technique is required for selectively making the implementation-
      defined timer large on a per entity pair relationship basis. 
       
      Apart from transactions from Pa to Pb, new transactions initiated 
      from Pb to Pa are most unlikely to recycle connection Ca2b 
      despite of it being active. The reason is that normally SIP 
      treats connections as ephemeral, as indicated in the following 
      text from section 18 of [1]: 
       
      ôNote that, because the source port is often ephemeral, but it 
      cannot be known whether it is ephemeral or selected through 
      procedures in [4], connections accepted by the transport layer 
      will frequently not be reused. The result is that two proxies in 
      a "peering" relationship using a connection-oriented transport 
      frequently will have two connections in use, one for transactions 
      initiated in each direction.ö 
       
      Given the method described in [1], proxy server Pb is faced with 
      two subtly distinct dilemmas in recycling connection Ca2b. 
      Firstly, Pb cannot rely on the availability of the Ca2b 
      connection for a required time period as the connection was 
      originally created by Pa, and therefore can be preempted (torn 
      down) by Pa at PaÆs own discretion. Pb has no idea, whatsoever, 
      whether PaÆs Ca2b connection is meant to be persistent or 
      ephemeral. Giving the benefit of doubt to the ephemeral case, Pb 
      will be unable to recycle connection Ca2b for transporting its 
      transactions to Pa (unless the implementer is willing to take the 
      risk of mid-transaction connection closure and handle 
      consequences thereafter). 
    
      Secondly, Pb has no way to know from Pa if it is welcome to (or 
      forced to) use the Ca2b connection for requests from Pb to Pa. It 
      is quite likely that an implementation of Pa may not be set up to 
      accept new requests within an existing dialog on any other port 
      than the standard SIP port numbers (5060 for UDP, TCP and SCTP, 
      5061 for TLS over TCP, or TLS over SCTP). If Pb were to use the 
      Ca2b connection for requests to Pa, the requests will arrive at 
      PaÆs source port for Ca2b connection, which may not necessarily 
      be a standard SIP port number.  
       
      Given that [1] does not provide a way for Pa and Pb to 
      communicate their connection usage methods, Pb will most likely 
      originate a new transport layer connection to Pa called Cb2a for 
      transport of Pb to Pa transactions. Figure 2 below shows 
      simultaneous existence of Ca2b and Cb2a connections. 
       
    
    
   Jain                      Expires - May 2005                  [Page 5] 

   Internet-Draft     Persistent Connection Reqs         November 2004 
    
    
       
                                  --Ca2b--> 
                               Pa . . . . . .Pb 
                               .  <--Cb2a--   . 
                             .                  . 
                           Ea  . . . . . . . . . Eb 
                                        
                  Figure 2 Two connections for SIP messages. 
       
      Quite likely, the Cb2a connection is unnecessary when Ca2b 
      connection is active.  Reference [2] acknowledges this issue. It 
      presents requirements and proposes a mechanism for Ca2b 
      connection reuse for transactions initiated from Pb to Pa. It 
      recommends that a new Via header field parameter (called ôaliasö) 
      be added in a request from Pa to Pb, to imply that Pb is allowed 
      to (and should) reuse the Ca2b connection.  
       
      The technique presented in [2] is quite efficient and flexible in 
      eliminating the need for a Cb2a connection when Ca2b connection 
      is active. However, the technique tends to solve only the second 
      dilemma mentioned above. While it enables Pa to tell Pb that Pb 
      is welcome to (and perhaps should) use the Ca2b connection for Pb 
      to Pa requests, it leaves out the connection longevity aspect. Pb 
      still cannot rely on the availability of Ca2b connection for a 
      required time period.   
       
      Furthermore, the technique presented in [2] ignores a potential 
      insistence aspect for connection reuse request. That is, how 
      insistent (or needy) Pa is when it puts out the ôaliasö field in 
      the Via header. On one extreme, Pa may want to softly request Pb 
      to reuse Ca2b connection (for performance optimization e.g.), in 
      which case Pb can somewhat leverage itsÆ own judgment to honor or 
      deny the request. On another extreme, Pa may want to hard press 
      Pb to reuse Ca2b connection (when Pa is behind a NAT e.g.), in 
      which case Pb can be made to somewhat unconditionally honor the 
      connection.  
    
      Evidently, a scheme that allows SIP entities to communicate their 
      transport layer connection reuse policy (including longevity and 
      insistence aspects) with each other is necessary. Such a scheme 
      would not only allow SIP implementations to cautiously expend 
      transport layer connections to provide optimal performance, but 
      also accomplish certain application layer requirements. 
      Accordingly, this draft goes beyond [2] and presents requirements 
      and proposals for introducing needful vocabulary in SIP the 
      management of persistent transport layer connections. 
       
    
   3. Transport Layer Connection Management     
       
    
    
   Jain                      Expires - May 2005                  [Page 6] 

   Internet-Draft     Persistent Connection Reqs         November 2004 
    
    
      Management of transport layer connections can be premised on 
      diverse stimuli and policies. Typically such discretions arise 
      from SIP traffic profiles, SIP entity relationships, application 
      behaviors, underlying platform support, etc. For instance, two 
      high throughput proxy servers in a peering relationship will 
      greatly benefit if they are conservative at connection management 
      (i.e. have a larger timeout). Whereas, a SIP phone that 
      occasionally places or receives call is perhaps best suited to be 
      liberal at connection management.  
       
      In connection-oriented transport layer protocols, a connection 
      instance is somewhat mutually owned by both client and server 
      sides. Both sides commit their resources and maintain per 
      connection finite state machines. Therefore, broadly speaking, 
      connection management should be considered and allowed to be a 
      cooperative onus of the connected entities. Application entities 
      on the two sides of a connection should be allowed to communicate 
      their connection management information of mutual interest over 
      an application layer protocol. In SIP based networks, where SIP 
      entities range from edge to the core of the network, the 
      connection management behaviors cannot be base-lined; however, 
      given that the roles of SIP entities are well defined, a few 
      broad classes of connection management can be defined that 
      represent every SIP entity in the network.  
       
      Based on SIP traffic profiles and application behaviors, diverse 
      requirements for connection management are expected to fall into 
      the following three classes: 
                  
                 1. Uni-directional ephemeral connections 
                 2. Bi-directional ephemeral connections 
                 3. Persistent connections  
     
      Uni-directional ephemeral connections carry transactions 
      initiated by one side only (the side that actively sought out the 
      connection). They age out at the isolated discretion of 
      individual implementations. Typically, connections that become 
      idle for an implementation-defined period of time are closed. 
      Either party is allowed to close such type of connections. 
      Choosing a large connection idle time period on the originator 
      side alone does not guarantee that these connections will be 
      long-lived. Accordingly, SIP entities should inherently assume 
      these connections to be ephemeral in nature. These are 
      essentially the type of connections described in section 18 of 
      [1]. Connections Ca2b and Cb2a in figure 2 of this draft are 
      unidirectional ephemeral connections. 
       
      Bi-directional ephemeral connections carry transactions initiated 
      by both sides. They (also) age out at the isolated discretion of 
      individual implementations. Typically, connections that become 
    
    
   Jain                      Expires - May 2005                  [Page 7] 

   Internet-Draft     Persistent Connection Reqs         November 2004 
    
    
      idle for an implementation-defined period of time are closed. 
      Either party is allowed to close such type of connections. 
      Choosing a large connection idle time period on one side alone 
      does not guarantee that these connections will be long-lived. 
      Since SIP does not allow peering entities to communicate their 
      connection idle time periods, each SIP entity should, therefore, 
      inherently assume these connections to be ephemeral in nature. 
      These are essentially the ôaliasö type of connections described 
      in [2].  
       
      Bi-directional ephemeral connections essentially start out as 
      uni-directional connections, but on solicitation from the 
      original uni-directional side to another they become bi-
      directional. Bi-directional connections do not occur 
      automatically. They are solicited and succeed upon acceptance 
      from the other side. For instance, in the Pa/Pb example, Pb 
      shouldnÆt make Ca2b connection bi-directional unless Pa requests 
      it. Pb is allowed to accept or deny the request to reuse the 
      connection. Figure 3 below shows a bi-directional ephemeral 
      connection between Pa and Pb called Ca+b. 
         
       
                                   <-Ca+b-> 
                               Pa . . . . . .Pb 
                               .             . 
                             .                  . 
                           Ea  . . . . . . . . . Eb 
       
               Figure 3. Bi-directional ephemeral connections. 
    
      Persistent connections, in contrast with ephemeral connections, 
      do not age out due to connection idle timeouts typically caused 
      by sporadic SIP traffic patterns. Persistent connections are 
      driven by the application logic above SIP and therefore are most 
      predictable. Once established between two SIP entities as a 
      result of a dialog-initiating transaction, these connections 
      persists beyond the transaction's lifetime, and in fact, even 
      beyond the dialog's lifetime.  Their closure may be expected 
      (scheduled downtime) or unexpected (system crash), however, the 
      remaining peer should construe any such closure as an indication 
      to release resources on its side of the connection.  Neither side 
      explicitly closes these connections under normal circumstances. 
      These connections are expected to endure regardless of SIP 
      message traffic patterns. Their typical usage would be between 
      two SIP entities that are kind of ôhard wiredö together based on 
      the network architecture. Figure 4 below shows a persistent 
      connection between Pa and Pb called Ca&b.  
    
    
       
    
    
   Jain                      Expires - May 2005                  [Page 8] 

   Internet-Draft     Persistent Connection Reqs         November 2004 
    
    
                                   <-Ca&b-> 
                               Pa . . . . . .Pb 
                               .             . 
                             .                  . 
                           Ea  . . . . . . . . . Eb 
       
                      Figure 4. Persistent Connections. 
       
       
      Note: Is there any need to further sub-divide persistent 
      connections into 2: uni-directional persistent connections and 
      bi-directional persistent connections?  As a prelude to a 
      discussion, consider that a TCP socket, once opened, is bi-
      directional.  Thus, it would seem appropriate to carry over the 
      same semantics to a persistent connection.  On the other hand, 
      certain SIP clients may want to ensure the downstream server that 
      they will keep the connection persistent and not close it down 
      after the transaction is over (uni-directional persistent), but 
      if the downstream entity wants to send a new request, it can open 
      up a new uni-directional persistent connection on its own, which 
      will be honored. 
    
   4. Advantages of Persistent Connections 
    
      Persistent connections can potentially be advantageous in many 
      ways. This section presents some of their evident advantages. 
       
   4.1 Performance Efficiency   
       
      TCP itself requires a 3-way handshake to agree on window sizes 
      and sequence numbers before the first byte of payload data is 
      exchanged between peers.  TLS over TCP endures an even longer 
      delay as both parties are authenticated.  Such delays can vary 
      from being mildly irritable to causing signaling and media to 
      become out of lockstep (for example, subjecting a re-INVITE 
      putting media on hold to re-establish credentials between two or 
      more intervening proxies can add several round-trip times between 
      the time a user presses the "Hold" button to when the media is 
      actually put on hold). A persistent connection between signaling 
      entities along the path would alleviate the need to establish a 
      new ephemeral connection for such services. 
       
       
   4.2 Resources Efficiency 
    
      Every connection entails precious resources. Each time a socket 
      is opened between peers, the hosts allocate buffers, descriptors 
      and other resources in the kernel for the subsequent exchange of 
      data. Simultaneously, implementation of TCP and SCTP layers 
      instantiate and maintain per connection finite state machines. 
    
    
   Jain                      Expires - May 2005                  [Page 9] 

   Internet-Draft     Persistent Connection Reqs         November 2004 
    
    
      Typically, every connection entails timer support. As the number 
      of simultaneously active connections rise, so does the burden on 
      the transport layer and therefore the entire entity. It would 
      appear that in peering arrangements (or in cases of a UAC and its 
      default outbound proxy), these machinations could be avoided 
      since the intent is to reuse the connection between the peers. 
         
    
   5. Requirements 
       
      The following items present requirements on the SIP protocol for   
      connection management between two interacting SIP entities: 
       
      1. The mechanism provided for persistent connection management 
         should accommodate needs for diverse kinds of SIP entities. 
       
      2. The mechanism provided should allow SIP entities to utilize 
         persistent connections at their own discretion, as well as in 
         consultation with their peers. 
    
      3. The mechanism provided should allow SIP entities to request 
         unidirectional/bi-directional ephemeral or persistent 
         connections from the transport layer. 
    
      4. The mechanism provided should prevent a SIP entity that 
         liberally expends connections from swamping another peer 
         entity. 
    
      5. The mechanism provided should be such that a SIP entity that 
         supports this Internet-Draft automatically honors requests 
         from entities supporting [2] and [1]. 
       
    
   6. Proposed Solutions 
    
      This section presents two potential solutions to connection 
      management information exchange between two SIP entities. The 
      intent is to have one solution; however, such a solution would 
      benefit from a discussion involving a larger audience as 
      represented by the IETF SIPPING WG. 
       
   6.1 New Via header field parameter  
       
      The first solution is to extend the via-params parameter of the 
      Via header as follows: 
       
      via-params = via-ttl / via-maddr / via-received / via-branch / 
                   via-connection 
      via-connection = "persistent" 
    
    
    
   Jain                      Expires - May 2005                 [Page 10] 

   Internet-Draft     Persistent Connection Reqs         November 2004 
    
    
      The advantage of this solution is that the presence of the 
      "persistent" Via parameter serves as a hint to the server on the 
      intention of the originator of the connection. The originator 
      guarantees to leave the connection up beyond the transaction's 
      lifetime. It is now up to the server to either honor the 
      persistency and send subsequent requests (in the same dialog or 
      on separate dialogs) on the same socket, or to close the socket 
      after the transaction is over. In the event that the server 
      closes the socket after the transaction, the client reverts to 
      existing behavior by freeing up any resources and attempting a 
      new connection to the same downstream server on subsequent 
      requests. 
       
      The disadvantage of this solution is that it does not provide for 
      a negotiation on the time frame that the socket remains open.  
      The next solution addresses this very disadvantage.  
       
       
   6.2 New SIP header 
       
      The second solution is to implement an extension that allows for 
      negotiation for the acquiescence and longevity of a persistent 
      connection. Under this solution, a client that seeks a persistent 
      connection will: 
       
         (1) Insert a "Supported" header with the option tag 
             "persistence", indicating support for this extension. 
       
         (2) Insert a "persistent" Via parameter as described in the 
             previous section.  The client MAY also include a header 
             called "Persistent-Timeout" to indicate an upper bound on 
             the time it will allow for the socket to remain open. If 
             this header is not present, a value of infinity is assumed 
             (i.e. the client will not, under normal operations, close 
             the socket). 
       
      A receiving server, if it supports the extension in this 
      Internet-Draft, can honor the request depending on its policies 
      with respect to persistent connections and the presence (or 
      absence) of the "Persistent-Timeout" header.  If a server wants 
      to decrease (or increase) the timeout value, it will send a 4xx 
      response (exact number to be determined) along with a "Min-
      Persistence" header that indicates its desire on the longevity of 
      the persistent connection.  The client is expected to retry the 
      request again with the "Persistent-Timeout" parameter containing 
      a value of MIN("Persistence-Timeout", "Min-Persistence"). 
       
      The advantage of this solution is that a server can explicitly 
      reject a request from a client that wants to establish a 

    
    
   Jain                      Expires - May 2005                 [Page 11] 

   Internet-Draft     Persistent Connection Reqs         November 2004 
    
    
      persistent connection.  It can also pare down (or force up) the 
      longevity timer of the persistent connection. 
       
      The disadvantage of this solution is that it goes beyond the 
      "hint" nature of a transparent solution.  At this point, some 
      more discussion would be helpful to understand if such a 
      offer/counter-offer mechanism is desired. 
       
      <BNF for "Supported", "Persistent-Timeout" and "Min-Persistence" 
      to be added later>. 
       
    
   7. Security Considerations 
       
      <To be provided> 
    
   8. IANA Considerations 
    
      <To be provided> 
    
   9. Acknowledgements 
       
      Thanks to Eric Colasanto, Victor Saverino, James Ford, Sarit 
      Galanos Mekler, Cullen Jennings, and Aby Kuriakose for providing 
      valuable input on the issues addressed in this draft.   
    
    
   Normative References 
       
      [1]  Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston, A., 
           Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley, M. and E. Schooler, "SIP:     
           Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261, June 2002. 
       
      [2]  Mahy, R., "Requirements for Connection Reuse in the Session   
           Initiation Protocol (SIP)",  
           draft-ietf-sipping-connect-reuse-reqs00 (work in progress),            
           October 2002. 
       
      [3]  Dierks, T., Allen, C., Treese, W., Karlton, P., Freier, A.    
           and P. Kocher, "The TLS Protocol Version 1.0", RFC 2246,  
           January 1999. 
    
    
   Informational References 
      
       
      [4]  Stewart, R., Xie, Q., Morneault, K., Sharp, C.,  \ 
           Schwarzbauer, H., Taylor, T., Rytina, I., Kalla, M., Zhang,  
           L. and V. Paxson, "Stream Control Transmission Protocol",  
           RFC 2960, October 2000. 
    
    
   Jain                      Expires - May 2005                 [Page 12] 

   Internet-Draft     Persistent Connection Reqs         November 2004 
    
    
        
        
    
   Author's Addresses 
     
      Rajnish Jain 
      Excel Switching Corporation, 
      75 Perseverance Way, 
      Hyannis, Massachusetts 02601 
       
      Email: rjain@excelswitching.com 
       
       
      Vijay K. Gurbani 
      Lucent Technologies, Inc.  
      2000 Lucent Lane 
      Rm 6G-440 
      Naperville, IL 60566, US 
        
      Email: vkg@lucent.com 
       
    
   Full Copyright Statement  
           
      Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).  All Rights Reserved. 
      This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions 
      contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors 
      retain all their rights. 
            
      This document and the information contained herein are provided 
      on an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE 
      REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND 
      THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, 
      EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY 
      THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY 
      RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS 
      FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
       
    











    
    
   Jain                      Expires - May 2005                 [Page 13] 