



IETF                                                           B. Jordan
Internet-Draft                                      Symantec Corporation
Intended status: Informational                                A. Thomson
Expires: July 6, 2019                                 LookingGlass Cyber
                                                        January 02, 2019


 Collaborative Automated Course of Action Operations (CACAO) for Cyber
                                Security
                     draft-jordan-cacao-charter-00

Abstract

   This is the charter for the Working Group: Collaborative Automated
   Course of Action Operations (CACAO) for Cyber Security

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on July 6, 2019.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2019 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.




Jordan & Thomson          Expires July 6, 2019                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                    CACAO                     January 2019


Table of Contents

   1.  Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Working Group . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   3.  Goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   4.  Deliverables  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3

1.  Problem

   Threat Actors and Intrusion Sets are advancing at an increasing rate
   relative to cyber defense.  Further, cyber defenders typically have
   to manually identify and process prevention, mitigation, and
   remediation steps in order to protect their systems, networks, data,
   and users.

   Due to this increase and sophistication of cyber attacks the need for
   a secure mechanism that would enable system and network operators to
   respond to threats in machine relevant time has raised significantly.
   While some attacks may be well known to certain security experts and
   cyber researchers they are often not documented in a way that would
   enable automated mitigation or remediation.  A documented language
   for describing prevention, mitigation, and remediation actions is
   critical for cyber defenders to respond more quickly and reduce the
   exposure from an attack.

2.  Working Group

   To enable and assist cyber defense, the Collaborative Automated
   Course of Action Operations (CACAO) for Cyber Security working group
   will focus on creating a solution to securely document and share the
   actions needed to prevent, mitigate, and remediate threats.  This
   effort will focus on providing an information model, data
   serialization, and transport for defining, sharing, and processing
   Collaborative Automated Course of Action Operations (CACAO).

   Each collaborative course of action will consist of a sequence of
   cyber defense actions that can be coordinated and deployed across a
   set of heterogeneous cyber security systems such that both the
   actions requested and the resultant outcomes may be monitored and
   verified.

   The primary focus of this proposed working group will be the
   definition and the distribution of the sequence of actions (perhaps
   in a tree or graph).  Where possible we will leverage existing
   efforts that _may_ define the atomic actions to be included in a
   process or sequence.




Jordan & Thomson          Expires July 6, 2019                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                    CACAO                     January 2019


3.  Goals

   This working group has the following major goals: * Identify and
   document the use cases and requirements * Create an information and
   data model that can capture and enable collaborative courses of
   action (sometimes called playbooks) that can be used to automate some
   parts of cyber defense * Identify and document the system functions
   and roles that must exist with associated protocols to exchange
   information between those system functions * Identify and document
   the configuration for a series of protocols that can be used to
   distribute courses of action in both direct delivery and publish-
   subscribe methods * Define and create a series of tests and documents
   to assist with interoperability

4.  Deliverables

   The working group plans to create informational and standards track
   draft documents some of which may be published through the IETF RFC
   stream.

   Within the first year, the working group aims to: * Identify a
   solution for capturing and distributing multiple sequenced atomic
   actions, whether they be manual or automated.  * Publish a standards
   track draft solution that can be used by organizations and vendors to
   create and distribute Courses of Action / Playbooks.

Authors' Addresses

   Bret Jordan
   Symantec Corporation
   350 Ellis Street
   Mountain View  CA 94043
   USA

   Email: bret_jordan@symantec.com


   Allan Thomson
   LookingGlass Cyber
   10740 Parkridge Blvd, Suite 200
   Reston  VA 20191
   USA

   Email: athomson@lookingglasscyber.com







Jordan & Thomson          Expires July 6, 2019                  [Page 3]
