Internet-Draft                                           J. Jeong (ed.)
                                           ETRI/University of Minnesota
                                                                       
Expires: April 2005                                     23 October 2004
    
    
           Requirements for Ad Hoc IP Address Autoconfiguration
               draft-jeong-manet-addr-autoconf-reqts-03.txt
                                      
    
    
Status of this Memo 
    
   By submitting this Internet-Draft, I certify that any applicable 
   patent or other IPR claims of which I am aware have been disclosed, 
   and any of which we become aware will be disclosed, in accordance 
   with RFC3668. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
   documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts 
   as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in 
   progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt. 
    
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 22, 2005. 
    
Copyright Notice 
    
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).  All Rights Reserved. 
    
Abstract 
    
   Ad hoc network has no built-in infra-structure for communication 
   among mobile nodes and operates in a stand-alone fashion, or may be 
   connected to the public Internet.  All the nodes in ad hoc network 
   have the capability to maintain all the resources of the network in a
   distributed fashion.  One of the most important resources is the set


 
 
Jeong, et al.            Expires - April 2005                 [Page 1] 
Internet-Draft    MANET Address Autoconf Requirements     October 2004 
 
 
   of IP addresses configured with an addressing scheme.  When a new 
   node joins a network, it has to be assigned a unique IP address as 
   part of its initialization.  Since ad hoc network's topology may 
   change unpredictably, it is important to provide a resilient method 
   for providing IP address autoconfiguration.  This document specifies
   the requirements for IP address autoconfiguration in ad hoc networks
   which have dynamic network topology. 
    
Conventions used in this document 
    
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [3]. 
    
Table of Contents 
    
   1. Introduction...................................................2 
   2. Terminology....................................................3 
   3. Scenarios......................................................3 
      3.1. Join and Departure of Mobile Nodes........................3 
      3.2. Network Partitioning and Merging..........................4 
      3.3. Internet Connectivity.....................................4 
   4. Requirements for Ad Hoc IP Address Autoconfiguration...........5 
   5. IPv6 Considerations............................................6 
   6. Security Considerations........................................7 
   7. Open Issues....................................................7 
   8. Acknowledgements...............................................8 
   9. Normative References...........................................8 
   10. Informative References........................................8 
   11. Authors' Addresses............................................9 
   12. Intellectual Property Statement..............................10 
   Full Copyright Statement.........................................11 
   Acknowledgement..................................................11 
    
1.  Introduction 
    
   IP address configuration is a prerequisite for all the IP networking.
   In ad hoc networks, such configuration should be performed in every 
   mobile node, either manually or automatically.  For convenience sake,
   automatic configuration is needed in mobile ad hoc network [4]. 
    
   In ad hoc networks, having dynamic network topology and being multi-
   hop, the current automatic address configuration schemes used in the
   Internet are difficult to adopt, such as DHCP and IPv6 stateless 
   address autoconfiguration.  Also, mobile ad hoc network is an 
   unadministered network where there exists no network administrator 
   who provides network configuration information to users.  In this 


 
 
Jeong, et al.            Expires - April 2005                 [Page 2] 
Internet-Draft    MANET Address Autoconf Requirements     October 2004 
 
 
   environment, mobile node should be able to self-configure its IP 
   address. 
    
   This document specifies the requirements for IP address 
   autoconfiguration, considering mobile ad hoc network where there 
   happen the network partitioning and merging very often.  Also, it 
   considers the global connectivity between the mobile ad hoc network
   and Internet. 
    
2.  Terminology 
    
   Two new terms are defined below: 
    
   Mobile Ad Hoc Network (MANET)    A network where mobile nodes can 
                                    communicate with one another without
                                    preexisting communication 
                                    infrastructure such as base station
                                    or access point. 
    
   Autoconfiguration (Autoconf)     Automatic configuration or 
                                    self-configuration. 
    
3.  Scenarios 
    
   There are the scenarios that should be considered in ad hoc IP 
   address autoconfiguration.  Address autoconf protocol needs to deal
   with the following aspects of the ad hoc environment. 
    
3.1.  Join and Departure of Mobile Nodes
    
   When a mobile node joins a new MANET, an unused IP address is 
   allocated to or configured in the mobile node.  When the mobile node
   leaves the MANET, its address may become free for another. 
    
   Requirements: 
    
   o  Address autoconf protocol MUST support timely autoconfiguration of
      IP address for a mobile node. 
    
   o  Address autoconf protocol MAY support mechanisms to probe 
      whether a mobile node moves into another MANET. 
    
   o  Mobile nodes using address autoconf protocol MUST validate 
      allocated IP addresses when powering up or rebooting. 
    
   o  Mobile nodes using address autoconf protocol MAY validate 
      allocated IP addresses when moving into a new network. 
    
 
 
Jeong, et al.            Expires - April 2005                 [Page 3] 
Internet-Draft    MANET Address Autoconf Requirements     October 2004 
 
 
   Implication: 
    
   o  The information needed to autoconfigure IP address must be 
      collected or predefined in the MANET. 
    
3.2.  Network Partitioning and Merging 
    
   Inevitably, a single MANET will be divided into two or more MANET 
   partitions.  Also, these two or more MANET partitions, using the same
   address autoconf protocol, will be connected together, creating a 
   single merged MANET.  Prior to the merging, each partition has 
   independently allocated or configured addresses.  After merging, two
   nodes in the merged network may end up using the same address, thus 
   potentially creating address conflict. 
    
   Therefore, this network merging must be perceived by mobile node.  If
   address conflicts exist, they should be resolved. 
    
   Implication: 
    
   o  The detection and resolution of address conflicts are the 
      indispensable part of address autoconf protocol operation. 
    
   Requirements: 
    
   o  Ad hoc address autoconf protocol MUST detect and resolve address 
      conflicts in a timely manner and on an ongoing basis. 
    
   o  Ad hoc address autoconf protocol MUST allow conflicted address 
      replaced with another. 
    
   o  Ad hoc address autoconf protocol SHOULD minimize the damage, such
      as loss of delivered packets, due to address replacement. 
    
   o  Addresses SHOULD be allocated or autoconfigured in a way that 
      minimizes the probability that two or more nodes will have the 
      same address. 
    
   o  In order to detect duplicate addresses, ad hoc address autoconf 
      protocol MAY get the aid of ad hoc routing protocol. 
    
   Through address autoconf protocol that detects and resolves the 
   conflicts on an ongoing basis, mobile nodes will benefit from 
   preventing misrouting due to duplicate addresses, and can be provided
   consistent routing. 
    
3.3.  Internet Connectivity 
    
 
 
Jeong, et al.            Expires - April 2005                 [Page 4] 
Internet-Draft    MANET Address Autoconf Requirements     October 2004 
 
 
   A mobile node can want to communicate with a node placed in the 
   Internet.  In such a case, an Internet gateway providing the Internet
   connectivity can exist in the MANET [5]. 
    
   Requirements: 
    
   o  MANET SHOULD allow configuration of zero or more gateways for the
      global connectivity to the Internet. 
    
   o  Mobile node that desires Internet connectivity MAY have a globally
      routable IP address. 
    
   Implication: 
    
   o  For host DNS name resolution, DNS information, such as the address
      of recursive DNS server, should be delivered together with gateway
      information. 
    
4.  Requirements for Ad Hoc IP Address Autoconfiguration 
    
   Ad hoc IP address autoconfiguration always includes the configuration
   of an IP address and netmask (or prefix information in IPv6); it may 
   include some routing information (such as default route or Internet 
   gateway), considering the global connectivity to the Internet.  IP 
   address autoconfiguration must take place before an IP packet can be
   sent from one node to another.  This section requires that sufficient
   information be provided by an ad hoc address autoconf protocol to 
   allow IP packets to be sent to a unicast destination IP address 
   within a connected MANET partition, consisting of multi hops. 
    
   Requirements: An ad hoc address autoconf protocol 
    
   o  MUST configure an appropriate netmask or prefix information. 
    
   o  MUST allocate or autoconfigure unique IP addresses within a 
      connected MANET partition. 
    
   o  MAY allow configuration of zero or more gateways for the global 
      connectivity to the Internet. 
    
   The following requirements are derived from applying Section 3.1 and
   Section 3.2 to IP interface configuration. 
    
   Requirements: An ad hoc address autoconf protocol 
    
   o  MUST be capable of providing IP address in a reasonable delay. 
    
   o  MUST be capable of discovering whether an IP address is currently
 
 
Jeong, et al.            Expires - April 2005                 [Page 5] 
Internet-Draft    MANET Address Autoconf Requirements     October 2004 
 
 
      in use. 
    
   o  MUST detect and resolve IP address conflicts in a timely manner 
      and on an ongoing basis. 
    
   o  MUST timely validate autoconfigured IP addresses when powering up
      or rebooting. 
    
   o  MAY timely validate autoconfigured IP addresses when moving into a
      new network. 
    
   o  SHOULD be able to process the address conflict due to manual 
      address configuration. 
    
   o  SHOULD minimize the influence of autoconf traffic on the ongoing
      MANET communication performance. 
       
   o  MAY get the aid of ad hoc routing protocol so as to detect 
      duplicate addresses. 
    
   o  SHOULD minimize the modification of existing MANET routing 
      protocol. 
    
   o  MAY get the aid of ad hoc routing protocol so as to minimize 
      the probability that two or more nodes will have the same address.
    
   o  When MANET partitions merge, ad hoc address autoconf protocol 
      SHOULD be performed in the way it avoids congestion caused by 
      messages sent for the purpose of duplicate address detection. 
    
   o  SHOULD minimize the damage, such as loss of delivered packets, 
      due to address replacement for supporting the survivability 
      of upper-layer sessions, such as TCP. 
    
   o  SHOULD allocate IP addresses to mobile nodes in a way that 
      minimizes the probability that two or more nodes will have the 
      same address. 
    
   o  The reclamation of addresses unused any more MAY be considered. 
      An IP address is assigned only for the duration the node stays in
      the network.  When the node departs the network, its IP address 
      MAY become available for assignment to other nodes.  In this case,
      address autoconf protocol SHOULD NOT immediately reuse the 
      released IP addresses as soon as they become available, in order 
      to reduce address conflicts. 
    
5.  IPv6 Considerations 
    
 
 
Jeong, et al.            Expires - April 2005                 [Page 6] 
Internet-Draft    MANET Address Autoconf Requirements     October 2004 
 
 
   IPv6 provides a mechanism that allows a host to generate a link-local
   IP address Autoconfiguration [6][7].  Thus, this mechanism can be 
   extended to be suitable for MANET [8] or another can be redesigned 
   separately [9][10].  Also, it is necessary to discuss how to use IPv6
   link-local address in a MANET which is logically one subnet. 
    
6.  Security Considerations
    
   Ad hoc IP address autoconf protocol MUST NOT be any less secure than
   current IETF-Standard protocols related to IP address 
   autoconfiguration. 
    
   Because of their lack of infrastructure and their strong mobility, 
   mobile ad hoc networks are vulnerable to lots of security attacks. 
   Especially, address autoconf protocol is likely to be a good target 
   for attackers.  For example, it can be the victim of Denial of 
   Service attacks in which a malicious node monopolizes all the 
   addresses or sends the response messages to create address conflicts
   in the network.  Consequently, an ad hoc IP address autoconf protocol
   SHOULD, as much as possible, prevent such attacks. 
    
   Requirements: An ad hoc address autoconf protocol 
    
   o  SHOULD prevent malicious nodes from monopolizing all addresses of
      a network. 
    
   o  SHOULD prevent malicious nodes from voluntarily creating IP 
      conflicts. 
    
   o  SHOULD be able to identify nodes which belong to the network. 
    
   o  SHOULD make sure that only authorized nodes are configured and 
      granted access to network resources. 
    
   Implication: 
    
   o  A node SHOULD be able to prove at every moment, its membership of
      the network. 
    
7.  Open Issues 
    
   There are some open issues about ad hoc address autoconfiguration as
   follows: 
    
   o  Is there any need to categorize requirements into some classes? 
      Most of the ad hoc address autoconf protocols proposed until now 
      can be categorized into two classes: a) Stateless address 
      autoconf protocol and b) Stateful address autoconf protocol. 
 
 
Jeong, et al.            Expires - April 2005                 [Page 7] 
Internet-Draft    MANET Address Autoconf Requirements     October 2004 
 
 
      We need to discuss if we should specify the respective 
      requirements according to each class. 
       
   o  Should we make ad hoc address autoconf protocol completely 
      independent of ad hoc routing protocol or able to get the aid of 
      ad hoc routing protocol?  We can use ad hoc routing protocol to 
      detect address conflict. 
    
   o  Should we consider address conflict in the overlapped MANETs with
      two or more ad hoc routing protocols? 
       
   o  How can we design address autoconfiguration mechanism efficiently
      when ad hoc networks are connected to the infrastructured 
      networks, such as the Internet? 
       
   o  Should we consider the coexistence of the address autoconf 
      protocol using authentication mechanism and that not using 
      authentication mechanism? 
    
    
8.  Acknowledgements 
    
   This draft has greatly benefited from inputs by Charles E. Perkins
   and Kilian Weniger.  The authors appreciate their contribution. 
    
9.  Normative References 
    
   [1]  S. Bradner, "Intellectual Property Rights in IETF Technology", 
        RFC 3668, February 2004.  
    
   [2]  S. Bradner, "IETF Rights in Contributions", RFC 3667, 
        February 2004. 
    
   [3]  S. Bradner, "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement 
        Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997. 
    
10.  Informative References 
    
   [4]  A. Williams, "Requirements for Automatic Configuration of IP 
        Hosts", draft-ietf-zeroconf-reqts-12.txt, September 2002, Work 
        in Progress. 
    
   [5]  R. Wakikawa et al., "Global connectivity for IPv6 Mobile Ad 
        Hoc Networks", draft-wakikawa-manet-globalv6-03.txt, November 
        2002, Work in Progress. 
    
   [6]  T. Narten, E. Nordmark and W. Simpson, "Neighbour Discovery for
        IP version 6", RFC 2461, December 1998. 
 
 
Jeong, et al.            Expires - April 2005                 [Page 8] 
Internet-Draft    MANET Address Autoconf Requirements     October 2004 
 
 
    
   [7]  S. Thomson and T. Narten, "IPv6 Stateless Address 
        Autoconfiguration", RFC 2462, December 1998. 
    
   [8]  C. Perkins et al., "IP Address Autoconfiguration for Ad Hoc 
        Networks", draft-ietf-manet-autoconf-01.txt, November 2001, Work
        in Progress. 
    
   [9]  J. Jeong et al., "Ad Hoc IP Address Autoconfiguration", 
        draft-jeong-adhoc-ip-addr-autoconf-03.txt, July 2004, Work in
        Progress. 
    
   [10] J. Jeong et al., "Ad Hoc IP Address Autoconfiguration for AODV",
        draft-jeong-manet-aodv-addr-autoconf-01.txt, July 2004, Work in
        Progress. 
    
11.  Authors' Addresses 
    
   Jaehoon Paul Jeong, Editor 
   ETRI/University of Minnesota at Twin Cities 
   117 Pleasant Street SE 
   Minneapolis, MN 55455 
   USA 
    
   Phone: +1 651 587 7774 
   EMail: jjeong@cs.umn.edu 
    
   Jung-Soo Park 
   ETRI / PEC 
   161 Gajeong-dong, Yuseong-gu 
   Daejeon 305-350 
   Korea 
    
   Phone: +82 42 860 6514 
   EMail: pjs@etri.re.kr 
    
   Kenichi Mase 
   Niigata University 
   2-8050 Ikarashi, 
   Niigata-shi, 950-2181 
   Japan 
    
   Phone: +81 25 262 7446 
   EMail: mase@ie.niigata-u.ac.jp 
    
   Youn-Hee Han 
   Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology 
   111, Suwon 440-600 
 
 
Jeong, et al.            Expires - April 2005                 [Page 9] 
Internet-Draft    MANET Address Autoconf Requirements     October 2004 
 
 
   Korea 
    
   Phone: +82 31 280 9577 
   EMail: yhhan@sait.samsung.co.kr 
    
   Badis Hakim 
   LRI Laboratory 
   University of Paris-XI 
   91405 Orsay cedex 
   France 
    
   Phone: 01 69 15 65 91 
   EMail: Hakim.Badis@lri.fr 
    
   Jean-Marie Orset 
   Institut National des Telecommunications 
   9, rue Charles Fourier  
   91 011 Evry 
   France 
    
   Phone: 01 60 76 44 75 
   EMail: jean-marie.orset@int-evry.fr 
    
12.  Intellectual Property Statement 
    
   The following intellectual property notice is copied from RFC3668, 
   Section 5. 
    
   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed 
   to pertain to the implementation or use of the technology 
   described in this document or the extent to which any license 
   under such rights might or might not be available; nor does it 
   represent that it has made any independent effort to identify any 
   such rights.  Information on the procedures with respect to rights 
   in RFC documents can be found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 
    
   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use 
   of such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository 
   at http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 
    
   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention 
   any copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other 
   proprietary rights that may cover technology that may be required 


 
 
Jeong, et al.            Expires - April 2005                [Page 10] 
Internet-Draft    MANET Address Autoconf Requirements     October 2004 
 
 
   to implement this standard.  Please address the information to the 
   IETF at ietf-ipr@ietf.org. 
    
Full Copyright Statement 
    
   The following copyright notice is copied from RFC3667, Section 5.4.
   It describes the applicable copyright for this document. 
    
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).  This document is 
   subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 
   78, and except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their 
   rights. 
    
   This document and the information contained herein are provided on 
   an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE 
   REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND 
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, 
   EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT 
   THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR 
   ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A 
   PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
    
Acknowledgement 
    
   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the 
   Internet Society. 























 
 
Jeong, et al.            Expires - April 2005                [Page 11] 