Internet-Draft                                       Alexander Bogdanov
draft-bogdanov-cage-00.txt                                    June 2002
Expires: December 2002

                                  CAGE
Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 [1].

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

Abstract

   This document focuses attention on some aspects of network
   technologies development. It does not contain any technical
   decisions. Nevertheless, it brings up questions, immediately
   connected with IETF activity.

Introduction

   In this document the following new technologies are viewed:

      o  Unification of the distributed computer resources on a standard
         basis.
      o  Interaction of various devices through Internet , from simple
         sensing elements up to robotized compound complexes.
      o  Creation of an infrastructure for self-organizing systems.

   Undoubtedly, that the majority of people developing these
   technologies, purposes the good aims. The list of using may be very
   long and interesting. Many of them are necessary, and will be really
   used. Positive aspects of it are obvious. Therefore, the backside is
   viewed only in this document.

   The given technologies in aggregate will change Internet face.
   Probably, it is not necessary to give examples from Isaac Asimov's
   books. It is obvious, that computers and a plenty of devices, which
   do not associates now with computers, will have some intellect and a
   possibility of the remote control in the near future. These devices
   will surround us everywhere - at home, in the street, at the work, in
   pockets and details of clothes. It might seem, that it is the right

Bogdanov                                                       [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                    CAGE                        June 2002

   time to fulfill the main task - changing an infrastructure, which
   would correspond to new requirements of safety and allowed to keep
   inviolability of individual life.

   It is possible to specify here two directions. The first provides
   creation of the private protected network infrastructure with rigid
   standards of the equipment, the software and mechanisms of keys
   distribution. Such structure has the good protection against
   malefactors and the controllable limited access for law-enforcement
   bodies. The second direction provides a transparent infrastructure,
   with the full and uncontrollable access for law-enforcement bodies
   and the limited access for malefactors. At that, law-enforcement
   bodies have advantage before attacking and may carry out preventive
   measures or operative actions immediately. From the safety point of
   view, the advantage of one method over another is not obvious. The
   specified directions are mutually exclusive and have no the balanced
   intermediate decisions. The biometric identification, which does not
   change the essence of a problem, may be applied in a combination with
   both of them.

   The second direction is chosen today. It is specified by the similar
   tendencies, which are traced during the last some years in the
   different countries with different political and economic systems,
   different traditions, living standards and levels of Internet
   development. Probably on a question - whether we may afford a private
   global network - the negative response is given. Probably, there is
   no other way to provide safety today, except shadowing.

   Certainly, the technical decisions, which allow bypassing these
   tendencies, exist. However, they will not define the basic network
   infrastructure. The business of the Internet providers completely
   depends on the state, and they will not introduce the popular
   protected decisions. The means of information gathering and storage
   will be improved. A quantity of video cameras will be established,
   the network traffic, the mobile phones, the computerized automobiles,
   the various devices of personal identification will be supervised.
   The intellectual distributed systems for the analysis of the
   collected information will be developed.

   Today, the internal shadowing is considered an obligatory condition
   of a corporations survival, and it is the justified measure
   frequently. Tomorrow we'll hear that the total shadowing is a
   necessary condition of surviving of the state and its citizens. And
   there are no attributes that it will be otherwise.

   Maybe the new generation, which is accustomed to video cameras in a
   children's room from the cradle, will not pay attention to shadowing.
   It simply will become the norm of life. Maybe will be less people
   through some tens of years, which concern to intervention in their
   private life and to restriction of their freedom with indignation and
   hostility. Or there will be no such people wholly :-((. May be, it is 
   all insignificantly in comparison with the advantages, that the 
   technical progress promises to us. However, the gold cage remains a 
   cage in any case. Therefore, the time has come to change the NET name.

Bogdanov                                                       [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                    CAGE                        June 2002

References

   [1]  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3", BCP
        9, RFC 2026, October 1996.

Author's Address

   Alexander Bogdanov

   Email: a_bogdanov@iname.ru
          www.umsp.net

Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2001). All Rights Reserved.
   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.
   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.




















Bogdanov                                                       [Page 3]

