


Network Working Group                                        S. Krishnan
Internet-Draft                                                  Ericsson
Intended status: Standards Track                                A. Kukec
Expires: January 3, 2010                            University of Zagreb
                                                             R. Gagliano
                                                                  LACNIC
                                                            July 2, 2009


        Certificate profile and certificate management for SEND
                      draft-ietf-csi-send-cert-00

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 3, 2010.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents in effect on the date of
   publication of this document (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info).
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.






Krishnan, et al.         Expires January 3, 2010                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft   SEND certificate profile and management       July 2009


Abstract

   Secure Neighbor Discovery (SEND) Utilizes X.509v3 certificates for
   performing router authorization.  This document specifies a
   certificate profile for SEND based on Resource Certificates along
   with extended key usage values required for SEND.


Table of Contents

   1.  Requirements notation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   4.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   5.  Certificate Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     5.1.  Per-ISP SEND model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
       5.1.1.  Support for OCSP in SEND . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     5.2.  RPKI SEND model  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   6.  Certificate profile  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     6.1.  Extended Key Usage Values  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   7.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   8.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15




























Krishnan, et al.         Expires January 3, 2010                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft   SEND certificate profile and management       July 2009


1.  Requirements notation

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].














































Krishnan, et al.         Expires January 3, 2010                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft   SEND certificate profile and management       July 2009


2.  Introduction

   Secure Neighbor Discovery [RFC3971] Utilizes X.509v3 certificates for
   performing router authorization.  It uses the X.509 extension for IP
   addresses to verify whether the router is authorized to advertise the
   mentioned IP addresses.

   Since the IP addresses extension does not mention what functions the
   node can perform for the IP addresses it becomes impossible to know
   the reason for which the certificate was issued.  In order to
   facilitate issuance of certificates for specific functions, it is
   necessary to utilize the ExtKeyUsageSyntax field of the X.509
   certificate to mention the purpose for which the certificate was
   issued.  This document specifies three extended key usage values, one
   for routers, one for proxies, and one for address owners, for use
   with SEND.

   The SEND specification also does not describe a revocation mechanism
   for SEND certificates.  This document describes different possible
   solutions for the certificate management, as well as certificate
   profile for certificates that a SEND capable node needs to support in
   addition to what has been defined in [RFC5280].





























Krishnan, et al.         Expires January 3, 2010                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft   SEND certificate profile and management       July 2009


3.  Terminology

   End entity certificates issued in support of SeND MUST comply with
   the RPKI resource profile [res-certificate-profile].  CA certificates
   used to verify these router (EE) certificates also MUST comply with
   this profile.  This implies that these CA certificates MUST contain
   at an RFC 3779 address extension representing the address space
   allocations held by the service provider represented by the CA.

   Relying parties (e.g., user devices that implement SeND and process
   these router certificates) MUST be configured with one or more trust
   anchors, to enable validation of the router certificates.  These
   trust anchors MAY be the default trust anchors defined for the RPKI,
   or they MAY be self-signed (CA) certificates associated with the
   service providers operating the routers in question.  In either case,
   it is RECOMMENDED that the RPKI trust anchor representation defined
   in [res-certificate-profile] be employed.

   Because of the flexibility afforded service through (local) trust
   anchor configuration, certificates used for SeND support can be
   issued prior to issuance of RPKI certificates under the global
   address allocation hierarchy.  Note, however, that a CA certificate
   issued independently of the global RPKI will have to be reissued in
   order to integrate a local PKI with the global RPKI.



























Krishnan, et al.         Expires January 3, 2010                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft   SEND certificate profile and management       July 2009


4.  Terminology

   SEND certificates         Certificates described in [RFC3971] and
                             extended in this document.  They belong
                             either to SEND routers or Secure Proxy ND
                             nodes:

                             *  Router Authorization Certificate and
                                parent certificates in the Authorization
                                Delegation chain.  There is no
                                difference in the profile of the Router
                                Authorization Certificate and other
                                (parent) certificates in the
                                Authorization Delegation process.

                             *  Secure Proxy ND certificates for ND
                                Proxy, Mobile IPv6 Home Agent or Proxy
                                Mobile Access Gateway
                                [draft-ietf-csi-proxy-send-00].

   SIDR RPKI certificates    Certificates defined in
                             [draft-ietf-sidr-res-certs-16].

   RPKI                      SIDR PKI hierarchy established in
                             accordance with [draft-ietf-sidr-arch-00]
                             whose Trust Anchors are entities which
                             provide administrative control of the IP
                             address space (IANA, RIRs).

   SEND PKI                  PKI hierarchy used by SEND.

   SEND RPKI                 SEND PKI established as part of the bigger
                             SIDR RPKI.


















Krishnan, et al.         Expires January 3, 2010                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft   SEND certificate profile and management       July 2009


5.  Certificate Management

   A certification path in SEND is transported in Certification Path
   Advertisement (CPA) message sent from a router to SEND host.  CPA
   message is sent in reply to the Certification Path Solicitation
   message (CPS) message.  The certification path sent in CPA message is
   a path between a router and SEND host's trust anchor and it might be
   potentially voluminous.  Thus, CPA and CPS messages are kept separate
   from the rest of SEND messages.

   SEND specification does not define any certificate management
   routines (certific ate issuance and revocation).  The only two
   routines described in SEND specification are the Certificate path
   validation and IP address extension verification.

   This document explains two possible solutions for the SEND Public Key
   Infrastructure (SEND PKI).  The certificate management and
   certificate profile will depend on the type of SEND PKI:

   o  Per-ISP (ISP-centric) PKI model (with CRL based revocation),

   o  SEND PKI being a part of the bigger RPKI (with OCSP based
      revocation).

5.1.  Per-ISP SEND model

   The Per-ISP PKI model is a model with isolated ISP-centric PKI
   islands.  It does not have any prerequisites on certificate
   revocation or certificate profile, contrary to RPKI model which uses
   only CRLs (not even delta CRLs) and has defined certificate profile
   [draft-ietf-sidr-res-certs-11].  Per-ISP PKI model could use in-band
   revocation and OCSP.  Two main advantages of OCSP over CRL in the
   SEND context are:

   o  The size of the CRL is potentially large and unbounded, and would
      be too big to carry in a CPA message.

   o  The relying party (SEND host) at the instant of receiving of CPA
      message does not have an access to Internet.  The SEND router
      receives an OCSP response from OCSP responder and forwards it to
      the SEND non-router node.  With CRLs, the relying part would have
      to accept certificates from the CPA message, consider them as
      provisional and perform revocation out-of-band later when it gains
      the Internet access.

   The disadvantage of this model is that it represents a local PKI
   where the mobile users would be ill-served, not knowing the the Trust
   Anchors in the visited local PKI.



Krishnan, et al.         Expires January 3, 2010                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft   SEND certificate profile and management       July 2009


5.1.1.  Support for OCSP in SEND

   This section suggests the solution for the support of OCSP in SEND.
   It defines new options in the Certification Path Solicitation
   message, as well as in the Certification Path Advertisement message.

   The Certification Path Solicitation message would then have the
   following options.

   o  Trust Anchor: Trust Anchors, as defined in Section 6.4.3 of
      [RFC3971], which the client is willing to accept

   o  OCSP Responder: The hash of a trusted OCSP responder's public key
      or a concatenated list of hashes of more OCSP Responders' public
      keys.

   The client (non-router SEND node) sends multiple OCSP responder
   hashes in one CPS message, rather than one OCSP Responder per CPS
   message.  Matching of certificate waiting for validation with the
   corresponding OCSP response can be achieved by matching the target
   certificate identifier from the OCSP response to the corresponding
   certificate.

   The modified Certification Path Advertisement message contains the
   following new, optional fields:

   o  Certificate

   o  Trust Anchor: to help the client to find out which advertisement
      is useful

   o  OCSP response: One or more OCSP response messages, each containing
      the response for a certificate from the request, as specified in
      Section 2.2 of [RFC2560].

   o  OCSP responder: the hash of the trusted OCSP responder's public
      key that is used to help the client to find the advertisement
      which corresponds to the defined OCSP responder's public key.

   The problem for the client is that when it is in the process of
   forming a CPS message, it does not have certificates for which it is
   sending the OCSP request.  Thus, it can not form the OCSP request as
   described in [RFC2560].  However, the client can work around this
   problem using the hashes of OCSP responders.  This problem is also
   described in Section 5.1 of [RFC4806].






Krishnan, et al.         Expires January 3, 2010                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft   SEND certificate profile and management       July 2009


5.2.  RPKI SEND model

   This solution suggests for the SEND PKI to be the part of the bigger
   RPKI [draft-ietf-sidr-arch-03].  The main advantages of this model
   are:

   o  It is a global model suitable for mobile users.  The RPKI has a
      default trust anchors that are widely used and available for
      mobile users.

   o  The RPKI project (certificate management and certificate profile)
      has been adopted by all 5 RIRs and IANA.  SEND could simply adopt
      well-known and already accepted RPKI mechanisms.

   The disadvantages of this model are related to the fact that the SEND
   specification was developed before the standardization of the RPKI.
   Hence, SEND is not completely compliant with the RPKI specifications:

   o  It defines its own IP prefix validation routine and it is not
      suitable for the use with CRLs, while the RPKI suports only CRLs.

   o  It requires different certificate profile, with the certificate
      extensions described in the Section 6.

   The solution would be to amend RPKI certificate profile to develop a
   separate profile for SEND RPKI certificates, support for OCSP and
   inclusion of SEND specific extensions (e.g.  EKU extension) on the
   lower (local) tiers of the RPKI.  On the RIR and NIR tier of the
   RPKI, CRL is not expected to grow to large sizes, but on the lower
   tiers (SEND level), the link topology is expected to be more dynamic
   and the CRL might grow to larger sizes.  Thus, the use of OCSP is
   more suitable than the use of the CRLs.



















Krishnan, et al.         Expires January 3, 2010                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft   SEND certificate profile and management       July 2009


6.  Certificate profile

   The SEND certificate profile is similar to the RPKI certificate
   profile, but differs in the certificate extensions.  In case of the
   per-ISP SEND PKI model, the certificate profile described in this
   section could be fully adopted.  In case of the SEND RPKI model, the
   described certificate extensions are not compliant with the current
   SIDR documents [draft-ietf-sidr-res-certs-11].  In case of the SEND
   RPKI model, such certificate profile requires the RPKI certificate
   profile to be amended, to support OCSP and SEND RPKI certificates on
   the lower tiers of the RPKI hierarchy.

   The subjectAltName extension MAY appear in the SEND RPKI
   certificates, and the Extended Key Usage MUST appear in the SEND RPKI
   certificates, while they do not appear in the SIDR RPKI certificates.
   CRL Distribution Points, Subject Information Access, Subject Key
   Identifier and Authority Key Identifier, and the extension for AS
   Resources which appear in SIDR RPKI certificates, MUST NOT appear in
   SEND RPKI certificates.

   The Trust Anchor option in CPS and CPA messages can be specified as
   DER encoded X.501 Name or FQDN.  The values of the Trust Anchor
   option field is tied to the values of certificate fields.  In the
   first case (X.501 Name), the Trust Anchor option MUST be equal to the
   Subject field from the certificate.  The Subject field MUST be used
   in accordance with both Resource Certificate Profile
   [draft-ietf-sidr-res-certs-11] and SEND specification [RFC3971].  In
   the case of FQDN, Trust Anchor option MUST be equal to the
   subjectAltName of type FQDN in the certificate.  If Subject Name is
   empty, subjectAltName extension MUST be marked as critical [RFC5280].

   The Key Usage extension defines the basic purposes for which the key
   pair may be used.  The Router Authorization Certificate MUST have the
   digitalSignature bit set, since its key pair is used for the CGA
   generation and Router Advertisement signing.  Other certificates in
   the Authorization Delegation chain MUST have the keyCertSign bit set.
   Certificates MUST NOT have a CRLSign bit set.  This extension MUST be
   marked as critical and MUST be processed independently of the
   Extended Key Usage extension.  The certificate purpose must be
   consistent with both the Extended Key Usage extension and the Key
   Usage extension.

   The Extended Key Usage extension is described in the section 5.1.  It
   MUST be marked as critical.

   Certificate policy extension MAY be used in the SEND RPKI
   certificates, as well as the Name Constraints and Policy Constraints,
   in order to provide possibility for the future TA management



Krishnan, et al.         Expires January 3, 2010               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft   SEND certificate profile and management       July 2009


   [draft-ietf-pkix-ta-mgmt-reqs-00], but they MUST NOT be marked as
   critical.

   The Authority Information Access extension specifies how to retrieve
   additional CA information, e.g. the information about the OCSP
   responder.  It MUST be marked as non-critical, since the host can
   learn the OCSP responder from its configuration file.

   The extension for IP addresses MUST be used as described in
   [[draft-ietf-sidr-res-certs-11]], but applications have to take into
   account that IP addresses in the IP address extension might have a
   larger scope than the IP addresses in SIDR-defined RPKI certificates
   (e.g. null prefix).

   All other extensions MUST be used in accordance with Resource
   Certificate Profile [draft-ietf-sidr-res-certs-11].

6.1.  Extended Key Usage Values

   The Internet PKI document [RFC5280] specifies the extended key usage
   X.509 certificate extension.  The extension indicates one or more
   purposes for which the certified public key may be used.  The
   extended key usage extension can be used in conjunction with key
   usage extension, which indicates the intended purpose of the
   certified public key.

   The extended key usage extension syntax is repeated here for
   convenience:

     ExtKeyUsageSyntax ::= SEQUENCE SIZE (1..MAX) OF KeyPurposeId

     KeyPurposeId ::= OBJECT IDENTIFIER

   This specification defines three KeyPurposeId values: one for
   authorizing routers, one for authorizing proxies, and one for address
   owners.

   The inclusion of the router authorization value indicates that the
   certificate has been issued for allowing the router to advertise
   prefix(es) that are mentioned using the X.509 extensions for IP
   addresses and AS identifiers [RFC3779]

   The inclusion of the proxy authorization value indicates that the
   certificate has been issued for allowing the proxy to perform
   proxying of neighbor discovery messages for the prefix(es) that are
   mentioned using the X.509 extensions for IP addresses and AS
   identifiers [RFC3779]




Krishnan, et al.         Expires January 3, 2010               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft   SEND certificate profile and management       July 2009


   The inclusion of the owner authorization value indicates that the
   certificate has been issued for allowing the node to use the
   address(es) or prefix(es) that are mentioned using the X.509
   extensions for IP addresses and AS identifiers [RFC3779]

   Inclusion of multiple values indicates that the certified public key
   is appropriate for use by a node performing more than one of these
   functions.

     send-kp OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::=
       { iso(1) identified-organization(3) dod(6) internet(1)
         security(5) mechanisms(5) TBA1 }

     id-kp-sendRouter OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::= { send-kp 1 }

     id-kp-sendProxy OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::= { send-kp 2 }

     id-kp-sendOwner OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::= { send-kp 3 }

   The extended key usage extension MAY, at the option of the
   certificate issuer, be either critical or non-critical.

   Certificate-using applications MAY require the extended key usage
   extension to be present in a certificate, and they MAY require a
   particular KeyPurposeId value to be present (such as id-kp-sendRouter
   or id-kp-sendProxy) within the extended key usage extension.  If
   multiple KeyPurposeId values are included, the certificate-using
   application need not recognize all of them, as long as the required
   KeyPurposeId value is present.






















Krishnan, et al.         Expires January 3, 2010               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft   SEND certificate profile and management       July 2009


7.  Security Considerations

   The certification authority needs to ensure that the correct values
   for the extended key usage are inserted in each certificate that is
   issued.  Relying parties may accept or reject a particular
   certificate for an intended use based on the information provided in
   these extensions.  Incorrect representation of the information in the
   extended key usage field can cause the relying party to reject an
   otherwise appropriate certificate or accept a certificate that ought
   to be rejected.









































Krishnan, et al.         Expires January 3, 2010               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft   SEND certificate profile and management       July 2009


8.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC2560]  Myers, M., Ankney, R., Malpani, A., Galperin, S., and C.
              Adams, "X.509 Internet Public Key Infrastructure Online
              Certificate Status Protocol - OCSP", RFC 2560, June 1999.

   [RFC3779]  Lynn, C., Kent, S., and K. Seo, "X.509 Extensions for IP
              Addresses and AS Identifiers", RFC 3779, June 2004.

   [RFC3971]  Arkko, J., Kempf, J., Zill, B., and P. Nikander, "SEcure
              Neighbor Discovery (SEND)", RFC 3971, March 2005.

   [RFC4806]  Myers, M. and H. Tschofenig, "Online Certificate Status
              Protocol (OCSP) Extensions to IKEv2", RFC 4806,
              February 2007.

   [RFC5280]  Cooper, D., Santesson, S., Farrell, S., Boeyen, S.,
              Housley, R., and W. Polk, "Internet X.509 Public Key
              Infrastructure Certificate and Certificate Revocation List
              (CRL) Profile", RFC 5280, May 2008.




























Krishnan, et al.         Expires January 3, 2010               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft   SEND certificate profile and management       July 2009


Authors' Addresses

   Suresh Krishnan
   Ericsson
   8400 Decarie Blvd.
   Town of Mount Royal, QC
   Canada

   Phone: +1 514 345 7900 x42871
   Email: suresh.krishnan@ericsson.com


   Ana Kukec
   University of Zagreb
   Unska 3
   Zagreb
   Croatia

   Email: ana.kukec@fer.hr


   Roque Gagliano
   LACNIC

   Email: roque@lacnic.net


























Krishnan, et al.         Expires January 3, 2010               [Page 15]


