INTERNET-DRAFT                                           Manjunath Iyer
Expires: December 18, 2006                      Celstream
                                                          June 18, 2006

 

 
      Shifted feedback technique for congestion notification
               draft-manjunath-ipfix-shifted-feedback-00.txt
                                        

Status of this Memo 

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents 
   that any applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or 
   she is aware have been or will be disclosed, and any of which 
   he or she becomes aware will be disclosed, in accordance with 
   Section 6 of BCP 79. 

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet 
   Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working  
   groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute working 
   documents as Internet-Drafts. 

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of 
   six months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by 
   other documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use 
   Internet-Drafts as reference material or to cite them other 
   than as "work in progress." 

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html 

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed 
   at http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.  

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 18, 2006.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

Abstract

   The [RFC2581] provides a mechanism to indicate the congestion
   information of the network to the source.  In this draft, time 
   shifting of the signal before usage is suggested. The time 
   shifting operation effectively counters the impact of the self 
   similarity of the traffic that originates in a DiffServe network 
   model as a result of the aggregation. 
   
   
   
Manjunath              Expires December18, 2006          [Page  1] 

 
Internet-Draft        Shifted feedback  Architecture     June 2006

1.  Introduction

1.1  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in
   this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].

1.2  Overview

    
In a TCP network, a feedback signal indicating the network status 
is provided from the end user of the information to the source 
as given in [RFC2581]. Although the signal can be effectively 
utilized for adjusting the TCP window size and control the traffic 
effectively, by the time the signal reaches the source, the network 
characteristics would change [RFC2488]. The draft uses a predicted 
feedback signal.The formula for computing the TCP window width is 
given in[WYX01]


Logically, it would be correct to synchronize the loss probability 
and the packet size that exist at any instance of time t. Prediction 
of the loss rate would be required to be used in the formula.

1.3  Signal processing with the feedback signal

The network traffic makes use of DiffServ defined in [RFC2474] for 
meeting the service quality requirements. The DiffServ involves 
aggregation of the traffic resulting in self similarity and long 
range dependency in the traffic. The self similar traffic is found 
to have adverse effect on the network resources making it tougher 
to meet the quality of service (QoS). Shaping the feedback 
signal provides an opportunity to counter the impact of the 
aggregation and self similarity in the traffic. 

1.4.  Impact on the resources

The shifted feedback signal can foresee the evolving network and 
control the data transfer rates in such a way that the network 
does nor get congested and at the same time the resources are 
used efficiently. Pumping in packets to a choked network results 
in further delays and retransmissions. The signal processing 
SHOULD consider both these factors.

One of the simplest processing over the feedback signal is to 
control the shifts. When the prediction is done with a time 
shift equal to the round trip time (RTT), the value going in 
to the formula matches and the resource utilization would be 
maximum. It results in reduced packet loss,reduced delay and 
jitter that is extremely useful for real time audio or video 
traffic. For a time shift less thane RTT the advantage would 
be reduced proportionally. 







Manjunath              Expires December18, 2006          [Page  2] 

Internet-Draft        Shifted feedback  Architecture         June 2006


The RTT value may be deduced from the feedback signal with 
the usage of time stamps. The usage of time stamps is given 
in [RFC3161]. The predicted value of RTT may be used to compute 
the predicted value of the signal over that time duration. 



One advantage of the self similarity in the traffic is that 
the traffic shaper introduced in such a loop would be self similar. 
All the parameters such as RTT would start becoming self similar 
and easily predictable. In case where RTT can not be computed, or 
computationally expensive, a constant value may be assumed.

2. Implementation

Various implementation models are possible depending up on the 
accuracy of the required feedback suitable for the context. 
In a client server model the predictions may be done at the client 
end and then embedded in the feedback signal.It would reduce the 
burden on the server that has to handle multiple streams. 
In a duplex peer to per model, still the originator of the feedback 
MAY take the responsibility and compute the feedback signal. For 
further accuracy, the data source can use the time stamps and check 
it against the RTT or the time and apply corrections.
Some processing over-head is involved if the data source has 
to get in to the computation and prediction of the loss probability.  
To reduce the time, shifted predicted signals may be used.
The data source receives the feedback signal and easily 
shift it depending up on the delay with respect to the anticipated 
time. It reduces the computation time.






Manjunath              Expires December18, 2006          [Page  3] 

Internet-Draft        Shifted feedback  Architecture           June 2006


3.  Security Considerations 


  The document concerns security of forward as well as feedback path 
signals
  
  1 The feedback signal MUST reach the source in time. Its absence could
 be an indication of attack on the network.
  
  2 An abnormal variations in the resource requirement indicated by the 
   feedback signal MAY be interpreted as spam or intrusion on the 
   network

 
 



4.  IANA Considerations 

This document has no actions for IANA.

 
 
Manjunath              Expires December18, 2006          [Page  4] 
 


Internet-Draft        Shifted feedback  Architecture       June 2006
 


5.  References

5.1 Normative References 


     [RFC2119] Bradner, S. "Key Words for use in RFCs to Indicate 
             Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.  

  

5.2 Informative References 


  [RFC2581] M.Allman, V. Paxson and W. Stevens, "TCP Congestion 
Control", RFC 2581, April 1999.  

   [RFC2488] M. Allman., D. Glover, and L. Sanchez, "Enhancing 
TCP over Satellite Channels using Standard Mechanisms", RFC 2488, 
January 1999.

   [RFC2474] K. Nichols, R., S. Blake., F. Baker and  D. Black, 
   "Definition of the Differentiated Services Field  (DS Field)  
 in the IPv4 and IPv6 Headers ", RFC 2474,  December 1998.

   [RFC3161] C. Adams, P. Cain., D. Pinkas and R. Zuccherato, 
   "Internet X.509 Public Key Infrastructure   Time-Stamp 
  Protocol (TSP)",   
RFC 3161, August 2001.
   [WYX01] Wei Wu, Yong Ren and Xiuming Shan, "Analysis on 
  adjustment-based TCP-friendly congestion control:fairness and 
  stability",Dept. of Electron. Eng., Tsinghua Univ., Beijing ; 
  In  LCN 2001


 
Manjunath              Expires December18, 2006          [Page  5] 
 


Internet-Draft        Shifted feedback  Architecture          June 2006
 
6.  Author's Address 

   Manjunath.R
   Celstream.
   9,Prestige bluechip
   Opp.Christ college
   Bangalore-560029
   INDIA
   Phone: 80-41191919
   E-mail: manju_r_99@yahoo.com
           
      





 
 
Manjunath              Expires December18, 2006          [Page  6] 


Internet-Draft        Shifted feedback  Architecture          June 2006

7.  Acknowledgements 

   The author acknowledges the creators of the RFCs referred in this
 draft for the valuable information and the extensions based on 
 which this draft has been created   

   The following individuals directly contributed for encouragement,
   identifying   Issues,  suggesting resolutions to the issues found in 
   this document: Srinivas Rao, Rangaraj. This document benefited
   from all these contributions. 

   The author acknowledges the encouragement and services rendered
   by his family members and friends during the preparation of the 
   document.   





 
 
Manjunath              Expires December18, 2006          [Page  7] 


Internet-Draft        Shifted feedback  Architecture         June 2006
 
8.  Full Copyright Statement 

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).  This document is 
   subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in 
   BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors retain 
   all their rights.  

   This document and the information contained herein are 
   provided on an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE 
   ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), 
   THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE 
   DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT 
   NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION 
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES 
   OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 





 
 
Manjunath              Expires December18, 2006          [Page  8] 
 

Internet-Draft        Shifted feedback  Architecture          June 2006
 
9.  Intellectual Property Statement  

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of    
   any Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might 
   be claimed to pertain to the implementation or use of the 
   technology described in this document or the extent to which 
   any license under such rights might or might not be 
   available; nor does it represent that it has made any 
   independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information 
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can 
   be found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.  

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and 
   any assurances of licenses to be made available, or the 
   result of an attempt made to obtain a general license or 
   permission for the use of such proprietary rights by 
   implementers or users of this specification can be obtained 
   from the IETF on-line IPR repository at http://www.ietf.org/ipr.  

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its 
   attention any copyrights, patents or patent applications, 
   or other proprietary rights that may cover technology that 
   may be required to implement this standard.  Please address 
   the information to the IETF at ietf-ipr@ietf.org.
 
Manjunath              Expires December 18, 2006          [Page 9] 












