
 
INTERNET DRAFT    Simplified Extension of LSP Space          Jun 2006 
 
 
 
Network Working Group                                       L. Ginsberg 
Internet Draft                                               S. Previdi 
Expiration Date: Dec 2006                                      M. Shand 
                                                          Cisco Systems 
                                                              June 2006 
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
 
              Simplified Extension of LSP Space for IS-IS 
                    draft-ietf-isis-wg-extlsp-00.txt 
 
 
Status of this Memo 
    

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any 
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware 
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes 
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79. 

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-   
   Drafts. 

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
   at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html 

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html 

     

Abstract 
    

   This draft describes a simplified method for extending the LSP space 
   beyond the 256 Link State PDU (LSP) limit defined in ISO 10589. This 
   method is intended as a preferred replacement for the method defined 
   in RFC 3786. 

Table of Contents 
 
  
Ginsberg                   Expires Dec 2006                   [Page 1] 
 
 
INTERNET DRAFT    Simplified Extension of LSP Space          Jun 2006 
 
 
    

   1. Conventions used in this document..............................2 
   2. Overview.......................................................2 
   3. Definitions of Commonly Used Terms.............................3 
   4. Utilizing Additional System IDs................................4 
    4.1 Additional Information in Extended LSPs......................4 
    4.2 Extended LSP Restrictions....................................4 
     4.2.1 TLVs Which MUST NOT Appear................................4 
     4.2.2 Leaf Advertisements in Extended LSPs......................5 
     4.2.3 IS Neighbor Advertisement Restrictions....................5 
     4.2.4 Area Addresses............................................6 
     4.2.5 Overload, Attached, and Partition Repair Bits.............6 
    4.3 Originating LSP Requirements.................................6 
    4.4 IS Alias ID TLV (IS-Alias)...................................6 
    4.5 New TLVs in support of IS Neighbor Attributes................7 
   5. Comparison with the RFC 3786 Solution..........................8 
   6. Deployment Considerations......................................8 
    6.1 Advertising New TLVs in Extended LSPs........................8 
    6.2 Reachability and non-SPF TLV Staleness.......................9 
    6.3 Normal LSP OL State and the Use of Extended LSPs.............9 
    6.4 Moving Neighbor Attribute Information to Extended LSPs.......9 
    6.5 Advertising Leaf Information in Extended LSPs...............10 
   7. Security Considerations.......................................10 
   8. IANA Considerations...........................................10 
   9. Normative References..........................................10 
   10. Acknowledgments..............................................11 
   11. Authors' Addresses...........................................11 
   12. Full Copyright Statement.....................................12 
    
1.    Conventions used in this document 

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [BCP14]. 

2.    Overview 

   [IS-IS] defines the set of LSP fragments which may be originated by 
   a system at each level. This set is limited to 256 fragments. [IS-
   IS] also defines a maximum value for an LSP fragment 
   (originatingLxLSPBufferSize) as 1492 bytes. The carrying capacity of 
   an LSP set, while bounded, has thus far been sufficient for 
   advertisements associated with an area/domain in existing deployment 
   scenarios. However, the definition of additional information to be 
   included in LSPs (e.g. multitopology support, traffic engineering 
 
 
Ginsberg                   Expires Dec 2006                   [Page 2] 
 
 
INTERNET DRAFT    Simplified Extension of LSP Space          Jun 2006 
 
 
   information, router capabilities, etc.) has the potential to exceed 
   the carrying capacity of an LSP set. 

   This issue first drew interest when traffic engineering extensions 
   were introduced. This interest resulted in the solution defined in 
   RFC 3786. However, that solution suffers from restrictions required 
   to maintain interoperability with systems which do not support the 
   extensions.  

   This document defines extensions which allow a system to exceed the 
   256 fragment limit and do so in a way which has no interoperability 
   issues with systems which do not support the extension. It is seen 
   as a simpler and therefore preferred solution to the problem. 

3.    Definitions of Commonly Used Terms 

   This section provides definitions for terms that are used throughout 
   the text. The terminology is consistent with that used in RFC 3786. 

   Originating System: A physical IS running the IS-IS protocol.  As 
     this document describes a method which allows a single physical IS 
     to originate LSPs on behalf of multiple virtual ISs, the 
     Originating System represents the single physical IS. 

   Normal system-id: The system-id of an Originating System as defined 
     by [IS-IS]. 

   Additional system-id: A system-id other than the "Normal system-id" 
     that is assigned by the network administrator to an Originating 
     System in order to allow the generation of extended LSP fragments. 
     The Additional system-id, like the Normal system-id, must be 
     unique throughout the routing area (Level-1) or domain (Level-2). 

   Original LSP: An LSP using the Normal system-id in its LSP ID. 

   Extended LSP: An LSP using an Additional system-id in its LSP ID. 

   LSP set: Logical LSP. A group of LSP fragments (for a given level) 
     which have the same LSPID. This term is used to resolve the 
     ambiguity between a logical LSP and an LSP fragment, both of which 
     are sometimes termed "LSP". 

   Extended LSP set: An LSP set consisting of LSP fragments using an 
     Additional system-id. 

   Extension-capable IS: An IS implementing the mechanisms described in 
     this document. 



 
 
Ginsberg                   Expires Dec 2006                   [Page 3] 
 
 
INTERNET DRAFT    Simplified Extension of LSP Space          Jun 2006 
 
 
4.    Utilizing Additional System IDs 

   This extension allows an Originating System to be assigned 
   additional system-ids which may be used to generate additional LSP 
   sets. The additional system-ids are subject to the same restrictions 
   as normal system-ids i.e. when used at Level-1 the additional 
   system-id MUST be unique within the Level-1 area. When used at 
   Level-2 the additional system-id MUST be unique within the domain. 

   Extended LSPs are treated by the IS-IS Update Process in the same 
   manner as normal LSPs i.e. the same rules as to generation, 
   flooding, purging, etc. apply. In particular, if the Extended LSP 
   with LSP Number zero and remaining lifetime > 0 is not present for a 
   particular additional system-id then none of the extended LSPs in 
   that Extended LSP set shall be processed. 

4.1     Additional Information in Extended LSPs  

   Fragment 0 of an Extended LSP Set MUST include the new IS alias ID 
   TLV defined in Section 4.4. This allows the Extended LSP set to be 
   associated with the Originating System which generated the LSP(s). 

4.2     Extended LSP Restrictions 

   The following restrictions on the information which may appear in an 
   Extended LSP are defined in order to avoid interoperability issues 
   with systems which do not support the extensions defined in this 
   document. All TLV references are based on the current definitions in 
   the IANA IS-IS TLV Codepoints Registry. 

4.2.1       TLVs Which MUST NOT Appear 

   The following TLVs MUST NOT appear in an Extended LSP: 

             TLV Name (#) 
             ----------- 
             ES Neighbors (3) 
             Part. DIS (4) 
             Prefix Neighbors (5) 
    

   If any of the TLVs listed above appear in an Extended LSP, an 
   Extension Capable IS MUST ignore those TLVs on receipt and SHOULD 
   report an error. Other TLVs in that extended LSP set MUST be 
   processed normally. 




 
 
Ginsberg                   Expires Dec 2006                   [Page 4] 
 
 
INTERNET DRAFT    Simplified Extension of LSP Space          Jun 2006 
 
 
4.2.2       Leaf Advertisements in Extended LSPs 

   Advertisement of leaf information in Extended LSPs is allowed. 
   Inclusion of such information requires the advertisement of a 
   neighbor between the Originating System and the Virtual IS 
   associated with the extended LSP set in which the leaf 
   advertisements appear. See section 4.2.3. 

   When leaf advertisements for multiple topologies (see [M-IS-IS]) are 
   included in an Extended LSP set, the multi-topology TLV (229) MUST 
   include all topologies for which a leaf advertisement is included. 

   The following TLVs fall into this category: 

             TLV Name (#) 
             ----------- 
             IP Int. Reach (128) 
             IP Ext. Address (130) 
             The extended IP reachability TLV (135) 
             MT IP Reach (235) 
             IPv6 IP Reach (236) 
             MT IPv6 IP Reach (237) 
    

4.2.3       IS Neighbor Advertisement Restrictions 

   Advertisement of IS Neighbor Reachability in an Extended LSP is 
   restricted to advertisement of neighbor reachability to the 
   Originating System. A neighbor to the Originating System MUST be 
   advertised in Extended LSPs. If multi-topology capability [M-IS-IS] 
   is supported, an MT IS Neighbor advertisement to the Originating 
   System IS MUST be included for every topology advertised in the 
   Extended LSP set. Neighbor advertisement(s) to the Originating 
   System in an Extended LSP MUST use a non-zero metric and SHOULD use 
   a metric of MaxLinkMetric-1. 

   The restrictions defined here apply to all TLVs used to advertise 
   neighbor reachability. These include the following TLVs: 

             TLV Name (#) 
             ----------- 
             IS Neighbors (2) 
             The extended IS reachability TLV (22) 
             MT-ISN (222) 
 



 
 
Ginsberg                   Expires Dec 2006                   [Page 5] 
 
 
INTERNET DRAFT    Simplified Extension of LSP Space          Jun 2006 
 
 
4.2.4       Area Addresses 

   Fragment #0 of an Extended LSP set MUST include an Area Address TLV. 
   The set of area addresses advertised MUST be a subset of the set of 
   Area Addresses advertised in the normal LSP fragment #0 at the 
   corresponding level. Preferably the advertisement SHOULD be 
   syntactically identical to that included in the normal LSP fragment 
   #0 at the corresponding level. 

4.2.5       Overload, Attached, and Partition Repair Bits 

   The Overload (OL), Attached (ATT), and Partition Repair (P) bits 
   MUST be set to 0 in all Extended LSP fragments. 

   Note that ISs NOT supporting these extensions will interpret these 
   bits normally in Extended LSPs they receive. If the ATT bit were set 
   in an Extended LSP this could indicate that the Virtual IS is 
   attached to other areas when the Originating System is not. This 
   might cause legacy systems to use the Virtual IS as a default exit 
   point from the area. 

4.3     Originating LSP Requirements 

   The Original LSP set MUST include a neighbor to the Virtual IS 
   associated with each Extended LSP set generated. If multi-topology 
   capability [M-IS-IS] is supported, an MT IS Neighbor advertisement 
   to the Virtual IS MUST be included for every topology advertised in 
   the Extended LSP set. The neighbor advertisement(s) in the Original 
   LSP MUST specify a metric of zero. This guarantees that the two way 
   connectivity check between Originating System and Virtual IS will 
   succeed and that the cost of reaching the Virtual IS is the same as 
   the cost to reach the Originating System. 

4.4     IS Alias ID TLV (IS-Alias) 

   The IS-Alias TLV allows extension-capable ISs to recognize the 
   Originating System of an Extended LSP set. It identifies the Normal 
   system-id of the Originating System. 












 
 
Ginsberg                   Expires Dec 2006                   [Page 6] 
 
 
INTERNET DRAFT    Simplified Extension of LSP Space          Jun 2006 
 
 
         Type   24 
         Length # of octets in the value field (7 to 255) 
         Value 

                                            No. of octets 
             +-----------------------+ 
             | Normal System-id      |     6 
             +-----------------------+ 
             | Sub-TLV length        |     1 
             +-----------------------+ 
             | Sub-TLVs (optional)   |     0 to 248 
             +-----------------------+ 
              
            
           Normal system-id 

                 The Normal system-id of the Originating System 

           Sub-TLVs length 

                 Total length of all sub-TLVs. 

           Sub-TLVs 

   No subTLVs are defined in this document. Should future extensions 
   define subTLVs, the subTLVs MUST be formatted as described in RFC 
   3784. 

4.5     New TLVs in support of IS Neighbor Attributes 

   One of the major sources of additional information in LSPs is the 
   subTLV information associated with the extended IS reachability TLV 
   (22) and MT IS Neighbor TLV (222). This includes (but is not limited 
   to) information required in support of Traffic Engineering (TE) as 
   defined in RFC 3784 and RFC 4205. The restrictions defined in this 
   document prohibit the presence of TLV 22 and/or TLV 222 in Extended 
   LSPs except to advertise the neighbor relationship to the 
   Originating System. In the event that there is a need to advertise 
   in Extended LSPs such information associated with neighbors of the 
   Originating System, it is necessary to define new TLVs to carry the 
   subTLV information.  

   Two new TLVs are therefore defined. 

   1)IS Neighbor Attribute TLV (23). It is identical in format to the 
   Extended IS Reachability TLV (22). 



 
 
Ginsberg                   Expires Dec 2006                   [Page 7] 
 
 
INTERNET DRAFT    Simplified Extension of LSP Space          Jun 2006 
 
 
   2)MT IS Neighbor Attribute TLV (223). It is identical in format to 
   the MT IS Neighbor TLV (222). 

   These new TLVs MAY be included in Original LSPs or Extended LSPs. 
   Regardless of the type of LSP in which the TLVs appear, the 
   information pertains to the neighbor relationship between the 
   Originating System and the IS identified in the TLV. 

   These TLVs MUST NOT be used to infer that a neighbor relationship 
   exists in the absence of TLV 22 or TLV 222 (whichever applies) in 
   the Originating LSP set for the specified neighbor. This restriction 
   is necessary in order to maintain compatibility with systems which 
   do not support these extensions. 

 
5.    Comparison with the RFC 3786 Solution 

   This document utilizes the same basic mechanism (additional system-
   ids) as RFC 3786 to allow an originating system to generate more 
   than 256 LSP fragments. It differs from RFC 3786 in that it 
   restricts the content of Extended LSPs to information which does  
   NOT impact the building of a Shortest Path Tree (SPT). 

   Legacy IS-IS implementations which do not support the extensions 
   defined in this document see the extended LSPs as information 
   associated with a system which is reachable only via the Originating 
   System. As no other systems are reachable via the Virtual ISs, the 
   SPF calculation in legacy ISs is therefore consistent with that 
   performed by extension capable ISs. There is therefore no need for 
   the two different operating modes defined in RFC 3786. 

   There is also no need for the special handling of the original LSP 
   set and the extended LSP set(s) as a single Logical LSP during the 
   SPF as specified in Section 5 of RFC 3786. 

6.    Deployment Considerations 

   There are a number of deployment considerations which limit the 
   usefulness of extended LSPs unless all systems are extension-capable 
   ISs. 

6.1     Advertising New TLVs in Extended LSPs 

   As extended LSPs MAY be utilized to advertise TLVs associated with 
   other protocol extensions (definition of which is outside the scope 
   of this document) and/or the extensions defined in Section 4.5 of 
   this document, it is obvious that the utilization of the information 
   in extended LSPs by legacy IS-IS implementations will be limited. 
   The implication of this is that as implementations are revised to 
   support the protocol extensions which define new TLVs/subTLVs that 
 
 
Ginsberg                   Expires Dec 2006                   [Page 8] 
 
 
INTERNET DRAFT    Simplified Extension of LSP Space          Jun 2006 
 
 
   MAY be advertised in extended LSPs, the implementation SHOULD also 
   be revised to support the extensions defined in this document so 
   that it is capable of processing the new information whether it 
   appears in normal or extended LSPs. 

6.2     Reachability and non-SPF TLV Staleness 

   In cases where non-SPF information is advertised in LSPs, it is 
   necessary to determine whether the system which originated the 
   advertisement is reachable in order to guarantee that a receiving IS 
   does not use or leak stale information. So long as the OL bit is NOT 
   set by the Originating System in normal LSPs, reachability to the 
   Virtual IS will be consistent with reachability to the Originating 
   System. Therefore, no special rules are required in this case. 

6.3     Normal LSP OL State and the Use of Extended LSPs 

   If the Originating System sets the OL bit in a normal LSP, legacy 
   systems will see the Virtual ISs associated with that Originating 
   System as unreachable and therefore will not use the information in 
   the corresponding Extended LSPs. Under these circumstances, 
   Extension capable ISs MUST also see the Virtual ISs as unreachable. 
   This avoids potential routing loops in cases where leaf information 
   is advertised in Extended LSPs.  

6.4     Moving Neighbor Attribute Information to Extended LSPs 

   Section 4.5 defines new TLVs which MAY be used to advertise neighbor 
   attribute information in extended LSPs. In cases where neighbor 
   attribute information associated with the same context (e.g. the 
   same link) appears in both an Original LSP and in one or more 
   Extended LSP Sets, the following rules apply for each attribute: 

   o If the attribute information does not conflict, it MUST be 
     considered additive 

   o If the attribute information conflicts, then the information in 
     the Original LSP, if present, MUST be used. If no information is 
     in the Original LSP, then the information from the Extended LSP 
     with the lowest system-id SHALL be preferred. 

   Utilization of the new TLVs for neighbor attribute information would 
   provide additional benefits which include: 

   o Elimination of the need for redundant IS neighbor TLVs to be 
     processed as part of the SPF. 

   o Easier support for a set of TE information associated with a 
     single link which exceeds the 255 byte TLV limit by allowing the 

 
 
Ginsberg                   Expires Dec 2006                   [Page 9] 
 
 
INTERNET DRAFT    Simplified Extension of LSP Space          Jun 2006 
 
 
     interpretation of multiple TLVs to be considered additive rather 
     than mutually exclusive. 

6.5     Advertising Leaf Information in Extended LSPs 

   The need to advertise leaf information in Extended LSPs may arise 
   because of extensive leaking of inter-level information or because 
   of the support of multiple topologies as described in [M-IS-IS]. 
   When leaf information is advertised in Extended LSPs, these LSPs now 
   contain information which MUST be processed in order to correctly 
   update the forwarding plane of an IS. This may increase the 
   frequency of SPF calculations by ISs in the network. It is therefore 
   recommended that, when possible, leaf information be restricted to 
   the normal LSP set. 

7.    Security Considerations 

   This document raises no new security issues for IS-IS. 

8.    IANA Considerations 

   This document defines the following new ISIS TLVs that need to be 
   reflected in the ISIS TLV code-point registry: 

    Type        Description                            IIH   LSP   SNP 
    ----        -----------------------------------    ---   ---   --- 
    23          IS Neighbor Attribute                   n     y     n 
    24          IS Alias ID                             n     y     n 
    223         MT IS Neighbor Attribute                n     y     n 
    

9.    Normative References 

   [IS-IS] ISO, "Intermediate system to Intermediate system routeing 
     information exchange protocol for use in conjunction with the 
     Protocol for providing the Connectionless-mode Network Service 
     (ISO 8473)," ISO/IEC 10589:2002, Second Edition.  

   [RFC 3784] Smit, H. and T. Li, "Intermediate System to 
     Intermediate System (IS-IS) Extensions for Traffic Engineering 
     (TE)", RFC 3784, June 2004.  

   [RFC 3786] Hermelin, A., Previdi, S. and Shand, M., "Extending the 
     Number of Intermediate to Intermediate (IS-IS) Link State PDU 
     (LSP) Fragments Beyond the 256 Limit," RFC 3786, May 2004.  

   [RFC 4205] Kompella, K. and Rehkter, Y., "Intermediate System to 
     Intermediate System (IS-IS) Extensions in Support of Generalized 
     Multi-Protocol Label Switching (GMPLS)", RFC 4205, October 2005.  
 
 
Ginsberg                   Expires Dec 2006                  [Page 10] 
 
 
INTERNET DRAFT    Simplified Extension of LSP Space          Jun 2006 
 
 
   [M-IS-IS] Pryzgienda, T., Shen, N., and Sheth, N., "Multi Topology 
     (MT) Routing in IS-IS", draft-ietf-isis-wg-multi-topology-11.txt 
     (work in progress), October 2005.  

    [BCP9] Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 
     3", BCP 9, RFC 2026, October 1996.  

   [BCP14] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate 
     Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997  

   [BCP26] Narten, T. and Alvestrand, H., "Guidelines for Writing an 
     IANA Considerations Section in RFCs", BCP 26 , RFC 2434, October 
     1998 

    

   [BCP79] Bradner, S. Ed., "Intellectual Property Rights in IETF 
     Technology ", BCP 79 , RFC 3979, March 2005 

10.     Acknowledgments 

11.     Authors' Addresses 

    
   Les Ginsberg 
   Cisco Systems 
   510 McCarthy Blvd. 
   Milpitas, Ca. 95035 USA 
   Email: ginsberg@cisco.com 
    

   Stefano Previdi 
   CISCO Systems, Inc.  
   Via Del Serafico 200  
   00142 - Roma  
   ITALY  
   Email: sprevidi@cisco.com   
        
   Mike Shand   
   Cisco Systems   
   250 Longwater Avenue,   
   Reading,   
   Berkshire,   
   RG2 6GB   
   UK  
   Email: mshand@cisco.com    
        



 
 
Ginsberg                   Expires Dec 2006                  [Page 11] 
 
 
INTERNET DRAFT    Simplified Extension of LSP Space          Jun 2006 
 
 
12.     Full Copyright Statement 

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006). 

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions 
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors 
   retain all their rights. 
    
   This document and the information contained herein are provided on 
   an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE 
   REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE 
   INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR 
   IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF 
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED 
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published 
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any 
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph 
   are included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this 
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for 
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be 
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than 
   English. 

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be 
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns. 

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed 
   to pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described 
   in this document or the extent to which any license under such 
   rights might or might not be available; nor does it represent that 
   it has made any independent effort to identify any such rights. 
   Information on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC 
   documents can be found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 

    

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use 
   of such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository 
   at http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 
 
 
Ginsberg                   Expires Dec 2006                  [Page 12] 
 
 
INTERNET DRAFT    Simplified Extension of LSP Space          Jun 2006 
 
 
   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at ietf-
   ipr@ietf.org. 

    











































 
 
Ginsberg                   Expires Dec 2006                  [Page 13] 
 