



IRTF                                                             D. King
Internet-Draft                                      Lancaster University
Intended status: Informational                                   J. Dang
Expires: August 26, 2021                             Huawei Technologies
                                                               A. Farrel
                                                      Old Dog Consulting
                                                       February 22, 2021


Challenges for the Internet Routing Infrastructure Introduced by Changes
                          in Address Semantics
                draft-king-irtf-challenges-in-routing-01

Abstract

   Historically, the meaning of an IP address has been to identify an
   interface on a network device.  Routing protocols have been developed
   based on the assumption that a destination address has this semantic.

   Many proposals have been made to add semantics to IP addresses.
   These proposals may set the meaning of an address within the scope of
   a limited domain, or suggest an address semantic that is meaningful
   at specific points in the network (such as the source and
   destination), and ideally can continue to be used without special
   interpretation at transit points.

   This document presents a brief survey of technologies related to IP
   address semantic proposals and describes the challenges to the
   existing routing system that they present.  It then summarizes the
   opportunities for research into new or modified routing protocols to
   make use of new address semantics.  It does not pass comment on the
   advisability or practicality of any of the solutions.

   This document is presented as study to support further research into
   clarifying and understanding the issues without directly proposing
   technical solutions that are ready for productization, deployment, or
   standardization.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.




King, et al.             Expires August 26, 2021                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft             Routing Challenges              February 2021


   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 26, 2021.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2021 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   2.  Current Challenges to Internet Routing  . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   3.  Network Path Selection  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     3.1.  Path Aware Routing  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   4.  What is Semantic Routing? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     4.1.  Architectural Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
       4.1.1.  Semantic Prefix Domains . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   5.  Existing Approaches for Routing Based on Additional Semantics  12
     5.1.  Non-Address-Based Routing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
       5.1.1.  Deep Packet Inspection  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
       5.1.2.  Differentiated Services . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
       5.1.3.  IPv6 Extension Headers  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
     5.2.  Semantic Overlays . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
       5.2.1.  Application-Layer Traffic Optimization  . . . . . . .  14
       5.2.2.  Multipath TCP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
       5.2.3.  Service Function Chaining . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
       5.2.4.  Path Computation Element  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
     5.3.  Semantic Addressing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
       5.3.1.  Locator/ID Separation Protocol (LISP) . . . . . . . .  15
       5.3.2.  Identifier-Locator Network Protocol . . . . . . . . .  16
       5.3.3.  Segment Routing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
       5.3.4.  Preferred Path Routing  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17
       5.3.5.  Information-Centric Networking  . . . . . . . . . . .  17
       5.3.6.  Connectionless Network Protocol . . . . . . . . . . .  18



King, et al.             Expires August 26, 2021                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft             Routing Challenges              February 2021


     5.4.  Group Semantics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
       5.4.1.  Anycast . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
       5.4.2.  Prioritycast  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
       5.4.3.  Multicast . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  20
       5.4.4.  Automatic Multicast Tunneling . . . . . . . . . . . .  21
       5.4.5.  Bit Index Explicit Replication  . . . . . . . . . . .  21
   6.  Overview of Current Routing Research Work . . . . . . . . . .  22
     6.1.  Path Aware Networking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  22
     6.2.  Clean Slate Approaches  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  22
       6.2.1.  Scalability, Control, and Isolation on Next-
               Generation Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  22
       6.2.2.  Non IP Approaches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  23
     6.3.  Hybrid Approaches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  24
     6.4.  Approaches that Modify Existing Routing Protocols . . . .  24
       6.4.1.  Dynamic Anycast . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  24
     6.5.  No Changes Needed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  25
   7.  Challenges for Internet Routing Research  . . . . . . . . . .  25
     7.1.  Routing Research Questions to be Addressed  . . . . . . .  26
   8.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  29
   9.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  29
   10. Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  29
   11. Contributors  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  30
   12. Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  30
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  38

1.  Introduction

   The Internet continues to expand rapidly, and beyond the Internet, IP
   has become the global standard in any type of computer network
   independent of whether or what connectivity to the Internet it has.
   At the same time, there are increasingly varied expectations against
   the services and service level objectives required from networks.
   Packet delivery expectations beyond best effort is one big area:
   throughput, latency, error recovery, and (absence of) packet or
   connectivity loss, reordering or jitter.  Requirements include
   relative or absolute guarantees or predictable elastic changes under
   contention on these performance factors.  This places significant
   pressure on Service Providers to be aware of the type of services
   being delivered, and to have access to sufficient information about
   how individual packets should be treated to meet the user,
   application and application instance requirements.

   Internet Protocol (IP) identifies facilitates how a device is
   attached to the Internet and is distinguished from every other
   device.  Addresses are used to direct packets to a destination
   (destination address) and indicate to where receiver and network
   (error) replies should be sent (source address).  An IP address may
   be assigned to each network interface of a device connected to a



King, et al.             Expires August 26, 2021                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft             Routing Challenges              February 2021


   network that uses IP.  Applications use IP addresses to both identify
   a host and to indicate the physical or virtual location of the host.

   The meaning of a unicast IPv6 address is defined as "An identifier
   for a single interface."  [RFC4291].  That document goes on to say,
   "A packet sent to a unicast address is delivered to the interface
   identified by that address.".  The unqualified use of the term IP
   address (IPv4/IPv6) always assumes unicast semantic as it is the
   original and predominant semantic of IP addresses.

   Network routing protocols were developed based on the assumption that
   a destination address has this unicast meaning.  The protocols are
   designed to determine paths through the network toward destination
   addresses so that IP packets with a common destination address
   converge on that destination.  Anycast and multicast addresses were
   also defined and these new address semantics necessitated variations
   to the routing protocols and the development of new protocols.

   This document presents a brief survey of proposals to extend the
   semantics of IP addresses by assigning additional meanings to some
   parts of the address, or by partitioning the address into a set of
   subfields that give scoped addressing instructions.  Some of these
   proposals are intended to be deployed in limited domains [RFC8799]
   (networks) that are IP-based, while other proposals are intended for
   use across the Internet.  The impact the proposals have on routing
   systems may require clean-slate solutions, hybrid solutions,
   extensions to existing routing protocols, or potentially no changes
   at all.

   This document also presents some of the challenges to the existing
   routing system that these changes in semantics may present.  It then
   summarizes the existing research and opportunities for future
   research into new or modified routing protocols to make use of new
   address semantics.

   In this document, the focus is on routing and forwarding at the IP
   layer.  It is possible that a variety of overlay mechanisms exist to
   perform service or path routing at higher layers, and that those
   approaches may be based on "semantic addresses", but that is out of
   scope for this document.

   This document draws on surveys and analysis already performed in "A
   Survey of the Research on Future Internet Architectures"
   [RESEARCHFIAref], and "ITU-T FG-NET2030 Architecture Framework"
   [ITUNET2030ref], and work related to specific Internet technologies,
   such as the Internet of Things (IOT) "Overview of Existing Routing
   Protocols for Low Power and Lossy Networks" [IOTSURVEYref].




King, et al.             Expires August 26, 2021                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft             Routing Challenges              February 2021


2.  Current Challenges to Internet Routing

   Today's Internet faces several significant challenges which are a
   consequence of the architectural design decisions and exponential
   growth.  These challenges include mobility, multihoming, programmable
   paths, scalability and security, and were not the focus of the
   original design of the Internet.  Nevertheless, IP-based networks
   have, in general, coped well in an incremental manner as each new
   challenge has evolved.  This list is presented to give context to the
   continuing requirements that routing protocols must meet as new
   semantics are applied to IP addresses.

      Mobility - Mobility introduces several challenges, including
      maintaining a relation between a sender and a receiver in cases
      where sender and/or receiver changes their point of network
      attachment.  The original network must always be informed about
      the mobile nodes current location, to allow continuity of
      services.  Mobility users may also consume resources, while
      physical moving.  The mobile user service instances and
      attachments will also change due to varying load or latency, e.g.,
      in Multi-access Edge Computing (MEC) scenarios.

      Multihoming - Multihomed stations or multihomed networks are
      connected to the Internet via more than one access network and
      therefore, may be assigned multiple IP addresses from different
      pools of addresses.  There are challenges concerning how traffic
      is routed back to the source if the source has originated its
      traffic using the wrong address for a particular connection, or if
      one of the connections to the Internet is degraded.

      Multi-path - The Internet was initially designed to find the
      single, "best" path to a destination using a distributed routing
      algorithm.  Current, IP-based networks topologies facilitate
      multiple paths each with different characteristics and with
      different failure likelihoods.  It may be beneficial to send
      traffic over multiple paths to achieve reliability and enhance
      throughput, and it may be desirable to select one path or another
      in order to provide delivery qualities or to avoid transiting
      specific areas of an IP-based network.  However, the way in which
      packets are routed using the best or shortest path means that
      distinguishing these alternate paths and directing traffic to them
      can be hard.  Further, problems concerning scalability, commercial
      agreements among Service Providers, and the design of BGP make the
      utilization of multi-path techniques difficult for inter-domain
      routing.  (Note that this discussion is distinct from Equal Cost
      Multi-path (ECMP) where packets are directed onto two "parallel"
      paths of identical least cost using a hash algorithm operated on
      some of the packets' header fields.)



King, et al.             Expires August 26, 2021                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft             Routing Challenges              February 2021


      Multicast - [TBD]

      Programmable Paths - The ability to decouple IP-based network
      paths from routing protocols and agreements between Service
      Providers, would allow users and applications to configure and
      select network paths themselves, based on required path (that is,
      traffic-delivery) characteristics.  Currently, user and
      application packets follow the path selected by routing protocols
      and the way traffic is routed through a network is under the
      exclusive control of the Service Provider that owns the network.

      End-Point Selection - [TBD]

      Scalability - There are many scaling concerns that pose critical
      challenges to the Internet.  Not least among these challenges is
      the size of the routing tables that routers in an IP-based network
      must maintain and exchange with their peers.  As the number of
      devices attached to the network grows, so the number of addresses
      in use also grows, and because of the address allocation schemes,
      the mobility of devices, and the various connectivity options
      between networks, the routing table sizes also grow and are not
      amenable to aggregation.  This problem exists even in limited
      domains (such as IoT), where the size of the routing table - as
      more devices are added to the network - may be a gating factor in
      there applicability of certain routing protocols.  It may be noted
      that scaling issues are exacerbated by multihoming practices if a
      host that is multihomed is allocated a different address for each
      point of attachment.

      Security - [TBD]

   Some of the challenges outlined here were previously considered
   within the IETF by the IABs "Routing and Addressing Workshop" held in
   Amsterdam, The Netherlands on October 18-19, 2006 [RFC4984].  Several
   architectures and protocols have since been developed and worked on
   within and outside the IETF, and these are briefly examined in
   Section 5.

3.  Network Path Selection

   Two approaches are typically used for network path selection.
   Firstly, a priori assessment by having the feasible paths and
   constraints computed in advance.  Secondly, real-time computation in
   response to changing network conditions.

   The first scenario may be conducted offline and allows for concurrent
   or global optimization based on constraints and policy.  As network




King, et al.             Expires August 26, 2021                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft             Routing Challenges              February 2021


   size and complexity increases, the required computing power may
   increase exponentially for this type of computation.

   The second approach must consider the speed of calculation where
   complex constraints are applied to the path selection.  The response
   processing may delay the service setup or the responsiveness to
   changes (such as failures) in the network.  Path selection filters
   may be applied to reduce the complexity of the network data and the
   computation algorithm, however, the path computation accuracy and
   optimality may be negatively affected.

   In both scenarios, the amount of information that needs to be
   imported and processed can become very large (e.g., in large
   networks, with many possible paths and route metrics), which might
   impede the scalability of either method both in terms of the storage
   and the distribution of the information.

   In the last decade, significant research has been conducted into the
   architecture of the future Internet.  During this research, several
   techniques emerged, highlighting the benefits of path awareness and
   path selection for end-hosts during this research, and multiple path-
   aware network architectures have been proposed, including SCION
   [SCIONref] and RINA [RINAref], and the work of the Path Aware
   Networking Research Group as discussed later in this document.

   When choosing the best paths or topology structures, the following
   criteria may need to be considered:

   o  Method by which a path, or set of paths, is to be calculated.  For
      example, a path may be selected automatically by the routing
      protocol or may imposed (perhaps for traffic engineering reasons)
      by a central controller or management entity.

   o  Criteria used for selecting the best path.  For example, classic
      route preference, or administrative policies such as economic
      costs, resilience, security, and if requested, applying
      geopolitical considerations.

3.1.  Path Aware Routing

   The current Internet architecture is built using a best-effort
   philosophy.  There are techniques discussed in this document that
   attempt better-than-best-effort delivery.  The start-point and end-
   point of a path are identified using IP addresses, but the path might
   not run all the way from a packet's source to its destination.  The
   assumption is that a packet reaching the end of a path is forwarded
   to its destination using best-effort techniques.




King, et al.             Expires August 26, 2021                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft             Routing Challenges              February 2021


   Evaluating and building paths that respect requirements that go
   beyond the simple best effort model is particularly challenging and
   computationally heavy since numerous quality-related parameters need
   to be considered.

4.  What is Semantic Routing?

   Networks are often divided into addressing regions for various
   administrative or technological reasons.  Different routing paradigms
   may be applied in each region, and within a single region specific
   "private" semantics may be applied to the IP addresses.  This concept
   is not new one, a pragmatic solution for achieving network function
   in a limited domain is found in (see Section 4.1.1).

   These address semantics are established using customer types,
   customer connections, topological constraints, performance groups,
   and security, etc.  Service Provides or network operators will apply
   local policies to user and application packets as they enter the
   network possibly mapping addresses or possibly encapsulating them
   with an additional IP header.  In some case, the packet has its
   source and destination within a single network and the network
   operator can apply address semantics policies across the whole
   network.  In other cases (such as general IP-based traffic), a packet
   will require a path across multiple networks, and each may apply its
   own set of traffic forwarding policies.  In these cases, there is
   often no consistency or guaranteed performance unless a Service Level
   Agreement (SLA) is applied to traffic traversing multiple networks.

   Many proposals have been made to add semantics to IPv6 addresses
   beyond the simple identification of the source and destination
   [I-D.jia-scenarios-flexible-address-structure].  These proposals may
   set the meaning of an address within the scope of a limited domain,
   or suggest an address semantic that is meaningful at specific points
   in the network.  In this context, a "limited domain" means that the
   interpretation of the address is only applicable to a well-defined
   set of network nodes, and if a packet bearing an address with a
   modified semantic were to escape from the domain, the special meaning
   of the address would be lost.  Additionally, the meaning of "specific
   points in the network" is generally applied to the source and
   destination nodes of a packet, while all transit nodes are unaware of
   the special semantic, however it could be the case that some key
   transit nodes are able to access the meaning of the address and so
   apply special routing or other functions to the packet.

   Other proposals include providing semantics specific to mobile
   networks, multicast traffic, different device types, different
   underlying connectivity, hierarchical connectivity, geographic




King, et al.             Expires August 26, 2021                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft             Routing Challenges              February 2021


   location, application or network function usage, or connectivity
   requirements.

   Some new IP address semantics may have implications for how network
   routing is performed.  Some proposals might not be supported by
   existing routing protocols and so would require changes.  Other
   proposals might enable advanced routing features or offer benefits in
   scaling and management of routing systems.  Semantic Routing is the
   process of routing packets that contain semantics in their IP
   addresses, possibly using that information to perform policy-based
   routing or other enhanced routing functions.

   Such proposals include the following:

   o  Providing semantics specific to mobile networks so that a user or
      device may move through the network without disruption to their
      service [CONTENT-RTG-MOBILEref].

   o  Enabling optimized multicast traffic distribution by encoding
      multicast tree and replication instructions within addresses
      [MULTICAST-SRref].

   o  Using addresses to identify different device types so that their
      traffic may be handled differently [SEMANTICRTG].

   o  Content-based routing (CBR), forwarding of the packet based on
      message content rather than the destination addresses
      [OPENSRNref].

   o  Deriving IP addresses from the physical layer identifiers and
      using addresses depending on the underlying connectivity.

   o  Identifying hierarchical connectivity so that routing can be
      simplified [EIBPref].

   o  Providing geographic location information within addresses
      [GEO-IPref].

   o  Indicating the application or network function on a destination
      device or at a specific location; or enable Service Function
      Chaining (SFC).

   o  Expressing how a packet should be handled, prioritized, or
      allocated network resources as it is forwarded through the network
      [TERASTREAMref].

   o  Using cryptographic algorithms to mask the identity of the source
      or destination, masking routing tables within the domain, while



King, et al.             Expires August 26, 2021                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft             Routing Challenges              February 2021


      still enabling packet forwarding across the network
      [BLIND-FORWARDINGref].

   In many cases, it may be argued that existing mechanisms applied on
   top of the common address semantic defined in RFC 4291 can deliver
   the correct functionality for these scenarios.  That is, packets may
   be tunneled over IP using a number of existing encapsulation
   techniques.  Nevertheless, there is pressure to reduce the amount of
   encapsulation (partly to resist reduction in the maximum transmission
   unit (MTU) over the network, and partly to achieve a flatter and more
   transparent network architecture).  This leads to investigations into
   whether the current IP addresses can be "overloaded" (without any
   negative connotations being attached to that word) by adding
   semantics to the addresses.

   Bringing new semantics to IP addresses may have implications for how
   network routing is performed.  Some proposals might not be supported
   by existing routing protocols and so would require changes.  Other
   proposals might enable advanced routing features or offer benefits in
   scaling and management of routing systems.  The purpose of this
   document is to collate and coordinate research into the consequences
   for routing of the various semantic addressing proposals, and to
   collect references to research work on routing solutions.

   The IPv4 protocol suit is widely deployed in the Internet.  However,
   with the rapid development and expansion of IP-based networking,
   weaknesses appeared with IPv4 protocol extensibility.  The IPv4
   header's restrictions cannot accommodate additional parameters;
   address space is also a limiting factor as the number of IP-connected
   devices grows exponentially.  Therefore, research and development of
   IPv4 are comparatively low compared to IPv6 research and clean slate
   proposals.

   Several technical challenges exist for semantic routing, these
   include:

   o  Address consumption caused by lower address utility rate.  The
      wastage is mainly comes from aligning.

   o  Finite allocation for semantic address blocks.

   o  Encoding too many semantics into prefixes will require evaluation
      of which to prioritize.

   o  Risk of privacy/information leakage.

   o  Burdening the user, application or prefix assignment node.




King, et al.             Expires August 26, 2021               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft             Routing Challenges              February 2021


   o  Source address spoofing preventing mechanism may be required.

   o  Backwards compatibility with the existing IP-based networking.

4.1.  Architectural Considerations

   Semantics may be applied in a number of ways to integrate with
   existing routing architectures.  The most obvious is to build an
   overlay such that IP is used only to route packets between network
   nodes that utilize the semantics at a higher layer.  There are a
   number of uses of this approach including Service Function Chaining
   (SFC) (see Section 5.2.3) and Information Centric Networking (ICN)
   (see Section 5.3.5).  An overlay may be achieved in a higher layer,
   or may be performed using tunneling techniques (such as IP-in-IP) to
   traverse the areas of the IP network that cannot parse additional
   semantics and so join together those nodes that use the semantics.

   The application of semantics may also be constrained to within a
   limited domain (see Section 4.1.1).  In some cases, such a domain
   will use IP, but be disconnected from Internet.  In those cases, the
   challenges are limited to enabling the desired function within the
   domain.  In other cases, traffic from within the domain is exchanged
   with other domains that are connected together across an IP-based
   network using tunnels or via application gateways.  And in another
   case traffic from the domain is routed across the Internet to other
   nodes and this requires backward-compatible routing approaches,
   tunnels, or gateway functions.

4.1.1.  Semantic Prefix Domains

   A semantic prefix domain [I-D.jiang-semantic-prefix] is a portion of
   the Internet over which a consistent set of semantic-based policies
   are administered in a coordinated fashion.  Examples of semantic
   prefix domains include:

   o  Administrative domains

   o  Applications

   o  Autonomous systems

   o  Hosts

   o  Network types

   o  Routers

   o  Trust regions



King, et al.             Expires August 26, 2021               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft             Routing Challenges              February 2021


   o  User groups

   A semantic prefix domain has a set of pre-established semantic
   definitions which are only meaningful locally.  Without an efficient
   mechanism for notification, exchange, or configuration of semantics,
   the definitions of semantics are only meaningful within the local
   semantic prefix domain, and the addresses on a packet from within a
   domain risk being misinterpreted by hosts and routers outside the
   domain.  While, sharing semantic definitions among semantic prefix
   domains would enable wider semantic-based network function, such
   approaches run the risk of complexity caused by overlapping
   semantics, and require a significant trust model between network
   operators.  More successful approaches to multi-domain semantics
   might be to rely either on backwards-compatible techniques or on
   standardised semantics.

   A semantic prefix domain may also span several physical networks and
   traverse multiple service provider networks.  However, when an
   interim network is traversed (such as when an intermediary network is
   used for interconnectivity) the relevance of the semantics is limited
   to network domains that share a common semantic policy, and tunneling
   may be needed to traverse transit domains.

5.  Existing Approaches for Routing Based on Additional Semantics

   Several IETF-based approaches are available to allow service
   providers to perform policy-based routing, including identifying and
   marking IP traffic either by changing the semantic of IP addresses or
   by adding such a semantic in other fields/namespaces, enabling
   differentiated handling by transit routers (queuing, dropping,
   forwarding, etc.).  The sections below distinguish between those
   schemes that perform routing based on information other than IP
   addresses, those that establish an overlay network in which to apply
   semantics, and those that add semantics to the addresses.  A further
   separate group of approaches is presented here to cover the concept
   of group semantics where a single address identifies more than one
   end point.

5.1.  Non-Address-Based Routing

   Many routing schemes examine not just the destination address field,
   but other field in the packet header to make routing decisions.
   These approaches (sometimes referred to as "policy-based routing")
   allow packets to follow different paths through the network depending
   on semantics assigned to these other fields or simply based on
   hashing algorithms operating on the values of those fields.





King, et al.             Expires August 26, 2021               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft             Routing Challenges              February 2021


5.1.1.  Deep Packet Inspection

   Deep Packet Inspection (DPI) may be used by a router to learn the
   characteristics of packets in order to forward them differently.
   This involves looking into the packet beyond the top-level network-
   layer header to identify the payload.  Once identified, the traffic
   type can be used as an input for marking the packets for network
   handling, or for performing specific policies on the packets.

   However, DPI may be expensive both in processing costs and latency.
   The processing costs means that dedicated infrastructure is necessary
   to carry out the function and this may have an associated financial
   cost.  The latency incurred may be too much for use with any delay/
   jitter sensitive applications.  As a result, DPI is difficult for
   large-scale deployment and its usage is often limited to specific
   functions at the edge of the network.

   Despite this, "shallow DPI" is commonplace in routers today as they
   examine the five-tuple of source address, destination address,
   payload protocol, source port, and destination port to perform a hash
   function for ECMP purposes (a form of policy-based routing).

5.1.2.  Differentiated Services

   Quality of Service (QoS) based on and Differentiated Services
   [RFC2474] is a widely deployed framework specifying a simple and
   scalable coarse-grained mechanism for classifying and managing
   network traffic.  However, in a service providers network, DiffServ
   codepoint (DSCP) values cannot be trusted when they are set by the
   customer, and may have different meanings as packets are passed
   between networks.

   In real-world scenarios, Service Providers deploy "remarking" points
   at the edges of their network, re-classifying received packets by
   rewriting the DSCP field according to local policy using information
   such as the source/destination address, IP protocol number, transport
   layer source/destination ports, and possibly applying DPI as
   described in Section 5.1.1.

   The traffic classification process and node-by-node processing leads
   to increased packet processing overhead and complexity at the edge of
   the Service Providers network.

5.1.3.  IPv6 Extension Headers

   [RFC8200] defines the IPv6 header and also a number of extension
   headers.  These extension headers can be used to carry additional
   information that may be used by transit routers (the hop-by-hop



King, et al.             Expires August 26, 2021               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft             Routing Challenges              February 2021


   options header) or by the destination identified by the destination
   address field (the destination options header).  These extension
   headers could be used to encode additional semantics that could be
   used to perform routing and to determine what functions and
   operations should be performed on a packet.

   [RFC7872] and [I-D.ietf-v6ops-ipv6-ehs-packet-drops] provide some
   discussions about the operational problems of using IPv6 extension
   headers especially in multi-domain environments, while
   [I-D.bonica-6man-ext-hdr-update] proposes to update RFC 8200 with
   guidance regarding the processing, insertion and deletion of IPv6
   extension headers.

5.2.  Semantic Overlays

   An overlay network is built on top of an underlay or transport
   network.  Packets are encapsulated with the header for the overlay
   network to carry the additional information needed to provide the
   desired function, and then the packets are encapsulated for transport
   through the underlay network.  In this case, no changes are made to
   the meaning of the IP addresses in the underlay, but the destination
   address identifies the next hop in the overlay network rather than
   the ultimate destination of the packet.  In this way, packets can be
   steered through different overlay nodes where routing decisions can
   be made.

5.2.1.  Application-Layer Traffic Optimization

   Application-Layer Traffic Optimization (ALTO) [RFC7285] is an
   architecture and protocol.  ALTO defines abstractions and services to
   provide simplified network views and network services to guide the
   application usage of network resources, including cost.

   An ALTO server gathers information about the network and answers
   queries from an ALTO client that wants to find a suitable path for
   traffic.  ALTO responses are typically used to route whole flows (not
   individual packets) either to suitable destinations (such as network
   functions) or onto paths that have specific qualities.

5.2.2.  Multipath TCP

   Multipath TCP (MPTCP) [RFC8684] enables the use of TCP in a multipath
   network using multiple host addresses.  A Multipath TCP connection
   provides a bidirectional bytestream between two hosts communicating
   like normal TCP and thus does not require any change to the
   applications.  However, Multipath TCP enables the hosts to use
   different paths with different IP addresses to exchange packets
   belonging to the MPTCP connection.



King, et al.             Expires August 26, 2021               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft             Routing Challenges              February 2021


   MPTCP it increases the available bandwidth, and so provides shorter
   delays; it increases fault tolerance, by allowing the use of other
   routes when one or more routes become unavailable; and it enables
   traffic engineering and load balancing.

5.2.3.  Service Function Chaining

   Service Function Chaining (SFC) [RFC7665] is the process of sending
   traffic through an ordered set of abstract service functions.  This
   may be achieved using an overlay encapsulation such as the Network
   Service Header (NSH) [RFC8300] or MPLS [RFC8596] that rely on
   tunneling through an underlay without any additional semantics
   applied to the IP addresses.

   Alternatively, SFC can be performed by adding semantics to the
   addresses, for example, as in Section 5.3.3.

5.2.4.  Path Computation Element

   The Path Computation Element (PCE) [RFC4655] is an architecture and
   protocol [RFC5440] that can be used to assist with network path
   selection.  A PCE is an entity capable of computing paths for a
   single or set of services.  A PCE might be a network node, network
   management station, or dedicated computational platform that is
   resource-aware and has the ability to consider multiple constraints
   for sophisticated path computation.  PCE applications compute label
   switched paths for MPLS and GMPLS traffic engineering, but the PCE
   has been extended for a variety of additional traffic engineering
   problems.

5.3.  Semantic Addressing

   In semantic addressing, additional information or meaning is placed
   into the IP address, and this is used to route packets within the
   network.

5.3.1.  Locator/ID Separation Protocol (LISP)

   The Locator/ID Separation Protocol (LISP) [RFC6830] was published by
   the IETF as an Experimental RFC in 2013 and is now being moved to the
   Standards Track [I-D.ietf-lisp-rfc6830bis] and
   [I-D.ietf-lisp-rfc6833bis].  LISP separates IP addresses into two
   numbering spaces: Endpoint Identifiers (EIDs) and Routing Locators
   (RLOCs).  The former, the EIDs, are used to identify communication
   end-points (as the name states) as well as local routing and
   forwarding in the edge network.  The latter, RLOCs, are used to
   locate the EIDs in the Internet topology end are usually the address
   of ASBRs (Autonomous System Border Routers).  IP packets addressed



King, et al.             Expires August 26, 2021               [Page 15]

Internet-Draft             Routing Challenges              February 2021


   with EIDs are encapsulated with RLOCs for routing and forwarding over
   the Internet.

   As end-to-end packet forwarding includes both EIDs and RLOCs an
   additional control-plane is needed.  This control plane provides a
   mapping system and basic traffic engineering capabilities.
   Multihoming becomes easier because one EID can be associated to more
   than one RLOC or even to a local network address prefix.

5.3.2.  Identifier-Locator Network Protocol

   The Identifier-Locator Network Protocol (ILNP) [RFC6740] is an
   experimental network protocol designed to separate the two functions
   of network addresses: identification of network endpoints, topology
   or location information.  Differently from LISP, ILNP encodes both
   locator and identifier in the IPv6 address format (128 bits).  More
   specifically, the most significant 64 bits of the 128 bits IPv6
   address is the locator, while the less significant 64 bits form the
   identifier.  Upon reaching the destination network, a cache is used
   to find the corresponding node.  Furthermore, DNS can be dynamically
   updated, which is essential for mobility and also for provider-
   independent addresses.  Similar to LISP, multihoming can be set by
   assigning multiple locators to the same identifier.  In addition,
   identifiers can also be encrypted for privacy reasons.  It was
   intended that ILNP should be backwards-compatible with existing IP,
   and is incrementally-deployable.

5.3.3.  Segment Routing

   Segment Routing (SR) [RFC8402] leverages the source routing paradigm.
   A node steers a packet through an ordered list of instructions,
   called "segments".  A segment can represent any instruction,
   topological or service based.  A segment can have a semantic local to
   an SR node or global within an SR domain.  SR provides a mechanism
   that allows a flow to be restricted to a specific topological path,
   while maintaining per-flow state only at the ingress node(s) to the
   SR domain.

   In SR for IPv6 networks (SRv6) segment routing functions are used to
   achieve a networking objective that goes beyond packet routing, in
   order to provide "network programming"
   [I-D.ietf-spring-srv6-network-programming].  The network program is
   expressed as a list of instructions, which are represented as 128-bit
   segments, called Segment Identifiers (SID) - encoded and presented in
   the form of an IPv6 address.  The first instruction of the network
   program is placed in the Destination Address field of the packet.  If
   the network program requires more than one instruction, the remaining




King, et al.             Expires August 26, 2021               [Page 16]

Internet-Draft             Routing Challenges              February 2021


   list of instructions is placed in the Segment Routing Extension
   Header (SRH)[RFC8754].

   An SRv6 instruction can represent any topological or service-based
   instruction.  The SRv6 domain is the service provider domain where
   SRv6 services are built to transport any kind of customer traffic
   including IPv4, IPv6, or frames.  SRv6 is the instantiation of
   Segment Routing deployed on the IPv6 data plane.  Therefore, in order
   to support SRv6, the network must first be enabled for IPv6.

   For nodes forwarding traffic, the SRH in the IPv6 header is only
   processed if the destination address identifies the local node.  In
   this case, the node must take several actions, including reading the
   SRH, performing any node-specific actions identified by the
   destination address or the next SIDs in the SRH, and re-writing the
   IPv6 destination address field using information from the SRH before
   forwarding the packet.

5.3.4.  Preferred Path Routing

   Preferred Path Routing (PPR)
   [I-D.chunduri-lsr-isis-preferred-path-routing] is a proposed routing
   protocol mechanism where alternate forwarding state is installed for
   a set of different preferred paths.  Each preferred path is described
   as an ordered linear list of nodes, links, and network functions, and
   the path is identified by a network-global preferred path identifier.
   If a packet is marked with preferred path identifier, it is forwarded
   according to the preferred path that has been installed on the
   router.  If a packet is not marked or if the preferred path is not
   installed on the router, the packet is forwarded using the normal
   shortest path first algorithm.

   In PPR, the preferred path identifier is encoded in an IP address,
   but the address is only used in an encapsulation of the end-to-end
   packet.  This approach is a hybrid in that it is applying a different
   meaning to the IP addresses, using that meaning in an encapsulation,
   but routing the packets through an existing IP network.

5.3.5.  Information-Centric Networking

   Information-Centric Networking (ICN) [ICNref] is an approach to
   evolve the Internet infrastructure away from a host-centric paradigm,
   based on perpetual connectivity and the end-to-end principle, to a
   network architecture in which the focal point is information (or
   content or data) that is assigned specific identifiers.

   Several scenarios exist for semantic-based networking, providing
   reachability based on Content Routing [CONTENTref] and Name Data



King, et al.             Expires August 26, 2021               [Page 17]

Internet-Draft             Routing Challenges              February 2021


   Networking [NDNref].  The technology area of ICN is now reaching
   maturity, after many years of research and commercial investigation.
   A technical discussion into the deployment and operation of ICNs
   continues in the IETF: [RFC8763] provides several important
   deployment considerations for facilitating ICN and practical
   deployments.

   Although ICN is primarily an overlay technology, a more recently
   concept, Hybrid-Information-Centric Networking (hICN), has been
   introduced [HICNref].  In an hICN environment the ICN aspect is
   integrated into the IPv6 architecture, reusing existing IPv6 packet
   formats with the intention of maintaining compatibility with existing
   and deployed IP network technology without creating overlays that
   might require a new packet format or additional encapsulations.  The
   work is described in [I-D.muscariello-intarea-hicn].

   This document does not promote or endorse specific ICN solutions: we
   focus on the potential routing challenges faced by these types of new
   networks, and highlight key areas of research interest.

5.3.6.  Connectionless Network Protocol

   The Connectionless Network Service (CLNP) [CLNPref] is a network
   layer encoding that supports variable length, hierarchical
   addressing.  It is widely deployed in many communications networks
   and is the ITU-T's standardised encoding for packets in the
   management plane for Synchronous Digital Hierarchy (SDH) networks.
   For a while, CLNP was considered in competition with IP as the
   network layer encoding for the Internet, but IP (in conjunction with
   TCP) won out.

   Many of the considerations for semantic addressing can be handled
   using CLNP, and it is particularly well suited to applications that
   demand variable length addresses or that structure addresses
   hierarchically for routing or geo-political reasons.

   Routing for CLNP can be achieved using the IS-IS routing protocol in
   its full form as documented in [ISISref] rather than its IP-only form
   [RFC1195].  While this may make it possible to use CLNP alongside IP
   in some routed networks, it does not integrate the use of IP
   addresses with additional semantics with the historic use of IP
   addresses except in "ships that pass in the night" fashion.
   Alternatively, [RFC1069] explains how to carry regular IP addresses
   in CLNP.







King, et al.             Expires August 26, 2021               [Page 18]

Internet-Draft             Routing Challenges              February 2021


5.4.  Group Semantics

   A mayor enhanced addressing semantic in IP is called "group
   semantics".  Here, an IP address identifies more than one individual
   interface or node.  This facilitates the delivery of a packet to any
   one of a group of destinations, or to all members of a group.

5.4.1.  Anycast

   The first instance of group semantics to see deployment was what is
   now called "anycast".  This approach comes for "free" as part of
   normal IP routing for unicast addresses.  An anycast address can be
   assigned to multiple interfaces on different nodes, and packets
   carrying such a destination address are routed toward the instance
   closest to the sender of the packet.

   While duplicate identical addresses might have been considered a
   configuration error, it now forms the basis of service redundancy in
   IP networks.  Multiple instances of services acting as responders use
   the same IP address so that a consumer has a high chance of finding
   the service even after network failures.  IPv6 [RFC4291] formalizes
   this semantic, following practices already used in before in IPv4 for
   anycast.  [RFC7094] discusses the architecture.

   Anycast presents a problem because not all the packets in a sequence
   sent to the same anycast address will necessarily arrive at the same
   destination.  This situation can arise even in stable routing
   systems.  Solutions to this are not standardised as generic
   mechanisms, and depend on a higher layer protocol performing an
   initial discovery phase and then directing all subsequent packets
   using unique unicast addresses.

   There are also additional complexities for security when anycast is
   used because security associations are best formed as one-to-one
   relationships.

5.4.2.  Prioritycast

   A modifications to anycast that can be instantiated by additional
   engineering in the routing system is has been called "prioritycast".
   Instead of relying on the shortest path forwarding semantic,
   prioritycast directs all traffic to the anycast address instance that
   is reachable and has the highest priority.  This approach only
   requires small modifications to routing protocols so that priorities
   are advertized along side the addresses.

   Prioritycast was originally introduced as a recommended operational
   practice for deployments of Bidirectional PIM (Bidir-PIM) [RFC8736]



King, et al.             Expires August 26, 2021               [Page 19]

Internet-Draft             Routing Challenges              February 2021


   which requires a single active instance of its Rendezvous Point (RP)
   service.  The RP is the root of a bidirectional tree and prioritycast
   addresses for RP allow fast failover without additional redundancy
   protocols beside the routing protocol, which would otherwise be
   necessary for such a redundancy service.

5.4.3.  Multicast

   Multicast address semantics support delivery to all members of a
   group of destinations.  This is a controlled variant of broadcasting
   where packets are delivered to all possible receivers in a particular
   (static) scope such as a multi-access link.  Membership of a
   multicast link is dynamically signalled by the group members, and a
   group is identified by a specific address.

   IP multicast [RFC1112], based on the protocol and service definition
   aspects of Steve Deering's PhD, is widely deployed for IPv4.  It is
   equally adopted and used in IPv6 using the addressing architecture
   specified in [RFC4291].  In IP multicast (any Source Multicast - ASM)
   any node can send to the multicast group and have its packets
   delivered to all members of the group.

   Research deployments in the 1990s (the so called 'MBone' [MBONEref])
   indicated that IP multicast gave rise to a number of issues related
   to address assignment, implementation, scale, and security.  The
   problem of allocation and management of IP multicast (group)
   addresses led to several proposals including Multicast Address
   Dynamic Client Allocation Protocol (MADCAP) [RFC2730], the Multicast
   Address Allocation Architecture (MALLOC) [RFC6308], the Multicast
   Address-Set Claim Protocol (MASC) [RFC2909], and the Multicast-Scope
   Zone Announcement Protocol (MZAP) [RFC2776], but none was widely
   adopted.  Attempts to create a complete routing protocol suite for IP
   multicast service model within the IETF resulted in the Multicast
   Source Discovery Protocol (MSDP) being published as an experimental
   RFC [RFC3618].

   The popularity of multicast as a concept and the widespread
   deployment of commercial IPv4 multicast led to the development of
   "Source Specific Multicast" service (SSM) [RFC4607].  In SSM, the
   combination of the Source and Group addresses (S,G) of an IP
   multicast packet form a so-called SSM channel address, which
   identifies group of receivers and implies a single permitted sender.
   Receivers subscribe to every SSM channel.

   From the perspective of a service user, SSM solves the security issue
   (only valid sources can send traffic) and the address assignment
   issue (all group addresses are relative to the source address).  For




King, et al.             Expires August 26, 2021               [Page 20]

Internet-Draft             Routing Challenges              February 2021


   the operator, SSM also eliminates the complex operational
   requirements of ASM.

5.4.4.  Automatic Multicast Tunneling

   Automatic Multicast Tunneling (AMT) [RFC7450] is a protocol for
   delivering multicast traffic from sources in a multicast-enabled
   network to receivers that lack multicast connectivity to the source
   network.  The protocol uses UDP encapsulation and unicast replication
   to provide this functionality as a hybrid solution using both
   multicast routing and an overlay approach.

5.4.5.  Bit Index Explicit Replication

   The IETF standardized or otherwise deployed protocol solutions in
   support of ASM and SSM in about 2015 relied all on per-hop, per ASM-
   group/per-SSM-channel stateful hop-by-hop forwarding/replication.
   Service Provider at that time were starting to removing or reduce
   heavy-weight control and per-hop forwarding processing in unicast
   caused by MPLS LDP/RSVP-TE driven designs, replacing it with more
   lightweight MPLS-SR and later SRv6 forwarding and associated control
   planes.  But to reduce the cost for multicast service, the only
   transit-hop stateless solution available was ingres-replication,
   tunnel multicast across unicast, hence trading hop-by-hop state (and
   its control and management plane cost) in the network against traffic
   overhead and (under congestion) higher latency.

   SSM and MPLS multicast solutions require relatively complex protocols
   and state management in routers in the network.  The only alternative
   to this was "ingress replication" which placed large amounts of
   traffic into the network.

   Bit Index Explicit Replication (BIER) [RFC8279] addresses these
   problems.  BIER does not contain the notion of ASM or SSM groups.
   Instead, a sender enumerates the set of receivers to which the packet
   is to be delivered.  The network routers forward packets and
   replicate them onto the shortest paths to the destinations.  As the
   packets are replicated, so the enumeration of the receivers is pruned
   on each copy of the packet.

   BIER is able to use existing routing protocols without modification,
   but requires enhancements in the forwarding plane to encode, parse,
   and act on the set of receivers.  The BIER information is carried in
   new encapsulations [RFC8296] that is carried hop-by-hop in IP.  Thus,
   the additional semantic is in an overlay.






King, et al.             Expires August 26, 2021               [Page 21]

Internet-Draft             Routing Challenges              February 2021


6.  Overview of Current Routing Research Work

   Several recent techniques for improving IP-based routing have been
   proposed, some of these are highlighted below.

6.1.  Path Aware Networking

   The IRTF's Path Aware Networking Research Group [PANRGref] aims to
   support research in bringing path aware techniques into use in the
   Internet.  This research overlaps with many past and existing IETF
   and IRTF efforts including multipath transport protocols, congestion
   control in multiply-connected environments, traffic engineering, and
   alternate routing architectures.

   [I-D.irtf-panrg-path-properties] offers a vocabulary of path
   properties.  By doing so it gives some clarity of the distinction
   between path aware routing and semantic routing as considered in this
   document.

   [I-D.irtf-panrg-what-not-to-do] provides a catalog and analysis of
   past efforts to develop and deploy Path Aware techniques.  Most, but
   not all, of these mechanisms were considered at higher levels,
   although some apply at the IP routing and forwarding layer.

6.2.  Clean Slate Approaches

   Incremental updates to the current Internet is seen as suboptimal and
   an undesirable long-term solution [CLEANSLATEref].

   A clean slate redesign of inter-domain routing would provide many
   benefits and could reuse existing legacy routing protocols for intra-
   domain communication.  The following subsections outline current
   proposals for clean slate inter-domain Internet routing.

6.2.1.  Scalability, Control, and Isolation on Next-Generation Networks

   The SCION (Scalability, Control, and Isolation on Next-Generation
   Networks) [SCIONref] inter-domain network architecture has been
   designed to address security and scalability issues and provides an
   alternative current Border Gateway Protocol (BGP) solutions.  The
   SCION proposal combines a globally distributed public key
   infrastructure, a way to efficiently derive symmetric keys between
   any network entities, and the forwarding approach of packet-carried
   forwarding state.

   SCION End-hosts fetch viable path segments from the path server
   infrastructure, and construct the exact forwarding route themselves
   by combining those path segments.  The architecture ensures that a



King, et al.             Expires August 26, 2021               [Page 22]

Internet-Draft             Routing Challenges              February 2021


   variety of combinations among the path segments are feasible, while
   cryptographic protections prevent unauthorized combinations or path-
   segment alteration.  The architecture further enables path
   validation, providing per-packet verifiable guarantees on the path
   traversed.

6.2.2.  Non IP Approaches

6.2.2.1.  Recursive InterNetwork Architecture

   Recursive Inter Network Architecture (RINA) [RINAref] builds upon the
   principle that applications communicate through Inter-process
   Communication (IPC) facilities.  For an application to communicate
   through the distributed IPC facility, it only needs to know the name
   of the destination application and to use the IPC interface to
   request communication.

   By leveraging IPC concepts RINA allows two processes to communicate,
   IPC requires certain functions such as locating processes,
   determining permission, passing information, scheduling, and managing
   memory.  Similarly, two applications on different end-hosts should
   communicate by utilizing the services of a distributed IPC facility
   (DIF).  A DIF is an organizing structure, generally referred to as a
   "layer".

   The scope and functions provided by the different IPC facilities may
   vary given the different type of network and performance goals.
   Moreover, an IPC layer may recursively request services from other
   IPC layers.  The idea of recursively using multiple inter-process
   communication services creates a multilayer structure repeated until
   an IPC facility can fit well for physical technologies, e.g., wired
   or wireless networks.

6.2.2.2.  Expedited Internet Bypass Protocol

   The Expedited Internet Bypass Protocol (EIBP) [EIBPref] is a clean
   slate approach to routing and forwarding in the Internet using the
   Internet infrastructure, but bypassing the Internet Protocol (IP).
   The EIBP method may be deployed in current routers and when invoked
   for a specific end to end IP hosts or networks, EIBP bypasses the
   heavy traffic and security challenges faced at Layer-3.  EIBP does
   not require routing protocols, instead it abstracts network
   structural (physical or logical) information into intelligent
   forwarding addresses that are acquired by EIBP routers automatically.

   The Forwarding tables used by EIBP are proportional to the
   connectivity (degree) at a routing device making the protocol
   scalable.  The EIBP routing system does not require network-wide



King, et al.             Expires August 26, 2021               [Page 23]

Internet-Draft             Routing Challenges              February 2021


   dissemination.  Topology change impacts are local and thus
   instabilities on topology changes are minimal.  EIBP is a low
   configuration protocol, which can be deployed in an AS and extended
   to multiple ASes independently.  EIBP evaluations were conducted
   using GENI testbeds and compared to IP using Open Shortest Path First
   and Border Gateway Protocol.  Significant performance improvements in
   terms of convergence and churn rates highlight the capabilities of
   EIBP.

6.3.  Hybrid Approaches

   Some research work is engaged in examining the emerging set of new
   requirements that exceed the network and transport services of the
   current Internet, which only delivers "best effort" service.  This
   work aims to determine what features can be built on top of existing
   solutions by adding additional new components or features.  A
   starting point for this discussion can be found in
   [I-D.bryant-arch-fwd-layer-ps].

6.4.  Approaches that Modify Existing Routing Protocols

   Some routing solutions to support semantic addressing may be possible
   by applying small changes to existing routing protocols.  These
   modifications may be:

   o  Backward compatible with the pre-existing protocol enabling
      insertion into existing networks.

   o  Compatible with forwarding existing IP packets enabling support of
      legacy traffic.

   o  Applicable only to deployment within a limited domain
      (Section 4.1.1).

6.4.1.  Dynamic Anycast

   Dyncast (Dynamic anycast) addresses the problem of directing traffic
   from a client to one service instance among several available, while
   considering decision metrics beyond shortest path when doing so.
   Those service instances are therefore possible destinations for a
   specific service demand.  [I-D.liu-dyncast-ps-usecases] outlines
   several use cases where such traffic steering requirement is
   desirable and may occur, such as in edge computing scenarios but also
   in distribution of video content in scenarios like autonomous
   driving.  The draft also outlines problems with existing solutions,
   most notably latency in changing relations from one service instance
   to another due to a change in metric, which defines that decision




King, et al.             Expires August 26, 2021               [Page 24]

Internet-Draft             Routing Challenges              February 2021


   (e.g., load in servers, latency, or a combination of several such
   metrics).

   Key to the proposed dyncast [I-D.li-dyncast-architecture]
   architecture is to build on the notion of (IP) anycast, while
   changing the addressing semantic from a locator-based addressing to a
   service-oriented one.  Here, the initial "service demand" packet is
   being identified through a service identifier as destination address.
   This identifier is then mapped onto a binding IP (locator-based)
   address at the ingress of the network, allowing for locator-based
   routing to be used throughout the network.  The ingress-based
   architecture is designed in such a way that ingress nodes upon
   arrival of a new service demand can determine which instance (i.e.,
   which binding IP to use) considering both network- and service-
   related metrics.  These metrics can be distributed among ingress
   nodes in various ways, including over a routing protocol solution.

   The overall forwarding decision is the adherence with what terms
   "instance affinity", i.e., the need to adhere to a previous routing
   decision for more than one packet, unlike IP forwarding on locator
   addresses.  This affinity is created, by means of a binding table on
   the ingress nodes, since often more than one packet is needed for the
   overall service-level transaction with a specific service instance.
   For instance, HTTP requests may span more than one routed packet.
   Also, a service instance may also create ephemeral state, which
   requires the client to continue communicating with this instance for
   the duration of this state.  While the affinity is entirely defined
   by the application layer protocol, the network layer takes the
   affinity marking as input into the decision to renew its routing
   decision.

6.5.  No Changes Needed

   It is entirely possible that some forms of modified address semantic
   will work perfectly well with existing routing protocols and
   mechanisms either across the whole Internet or within limited and
   carefully controlled domains.  Claims for this sort of functionality
   need to be the subject of careful research and analysis as the
   existing protocols were developed with a different view of the
   meaning of IP addresses, and because routing systems are notoriously
   fragile.

7.  Challenges for Internet Routing Research

   The techniques and architectures discussed in this document have
   established very different strategies for semantic routing, and the
   evolution of the Internet.  The first being with incremental updates
   and deployment, the second is based on clean slate proposals.  If



King, et al.             Expires August 26, 2021               [Page 25]

Internet-Draft             Routing Challenges              February 2021


   applied to the Internet as a whole, the later strategy faces the
   considerable challenge of how to drastically change the Internet with
   minimal or no service disruption, while if applied to specific
   controlled domains it raises the question of how nodes in those
   domains can communicate across the Internet to nodes that are outside
   the domain.

   It may not be possible to embrace all emerging scenarios outlined in
   this document with a single approach or solution.  Requirements such
   as 5G mobility, near-space-networking, and networking for outer-
   space, may need to be handled using separate network technologies.
   Therefore, developing a new Internet architecture that is both
   economically feasible and which has the support of the networking
   equipment vendors, is a significant challenge in the immediate future
   of the Internet.

   Improving IP-based network capabilities and capacity to scale, and
   address a set of growing requirements presents significant research
   challenges, and will require contributions from the networking
   research community.

7.1.  Routing Research Questions to be Addressed

   As research into the scenarios and possible uses of semantic
   addressing progresses, a number of questions need to be addressed in
   the scope of routing.  These questions go beyond "Why do we need this
   function?" and "What could we achieve by carrying this additional
   semantic in an IP address?"  The questions are also distinct from
   issues of how the additional semantics can be encoded within an IP
   address.  All of those issues are, of course, important
   considerations in the debate about semantic addressing, but they form
   part of the essential groundwork of research into semantic addressing
   itself.

   This section sets out some of the concerns about how the routing
   system might be impacted by the use of semantic addressing.  These
   questions need to be addressed in separate research work or folded
   into the discussion of each semantic addressing proposal.

   1.  What is the scope of the semantic address proposal?  This
       question may be answered as:

       *  Global: It is intended to apply to all uses of IP addresses.

       *  Backbone: It is intended to apply to IP-based network
          connectivity.





King, et al.             Expires August 26, 2021               [Page 26]

Internet-Draft             Routing Challenges              February 2021


       *  Overlay: It is to be used as an overlay network over previous
          uses of IP or other underlay technologies using tunneling.

       *  Gateway: The semantic addressing will be used within a limited
          domain, and communications with the wider Internet will be
          handled by a protocol or application gateway.

       *  Domain: The use of the semantic addressing is entirely limited
          to within a domain or private network.

       Underlying this issue is a broader question about the boundaries
       of the use of IP, and the limit of "the Internet".  If a limited
       domain is used, is it a semantic prefix domain [RFC8799] where a
       part of the IP address space identifies the domain so that an
       address is routable to the domain but the additional semantics
       are used only within the domain, or is the address used
       exclusively within the domain so that the external impact of the
       routability of the address that carries additional semantics is
       not important?

   2.  What will be the impact on existing routing systems?  What would
       happen if an address with additional semantics was released
       according to normal operations, accidentally, or maliciously?
       How would the existing routing systems react?  For example: how
       are cryptographically generated addresses made routable; how are
       the semantic parts of an address distinguished from the routable
       parts; is there an impact on the size and maintenance of routing
       tables due to the addition of semantics to addresses?

   3.  What path characteristics are needed for the routed paths?  Since
       one of the purposes of adding semantics to IP addresses is to
       cause special processing by routers, it is important to
       understand what behaviors are wanted.  Such path characteristics
       include (but are not limited to):

       *  Quality: expressed in terms of throughput, latency, jitter,
          drop precedence, etc.

       *  Resilience: expressed in terms of survival of network failures
          and delivery guarantees;

       *  Destination: How is a destination address to be interpreted if
          it encodes a choice of actual destinations?

       In these cases, how do the routing protocols utilize the address
       semantics to determine the desired characteristics?  What
       additional information about the network does the protocol need




King, et al.             Expires August 26, 2021               [Page 27]

Internet-Draft             Routing Challenges              February 2021


       to gather?  What changes to the routing algorithm is needed to
       deliver packets according to the desired characteristics?

   4.  Can we solve these routing challenges with existing routing tools
       and methods?  We can break this question into more detailed
       questions.

       *  Is new hardware needed?  Existing deployed hardware has
          certain assumptions about how forwarding is carried out based
          on IP addresses and routing tables.

       *  Do we need new routing protocols?  We might ask some
          subsidiary questions:

          +  Can we make do with existing protocols, possibly by tuning
             configuration parameters or using them out of the box?

          +  Can we make simple backward-compatible modifications to
             existing protocols such that they work for today's IP
             addresses as well as enhanced-semantic addresses?

          +  Do we need entirely new protocols or radically evolutions
             of existing protocols in order to deliver the functions
             that we need?

          +  Should we focus on the benefits of optimized routing
             solutions, or should we attempt to generalize to enable
             wider applicability?

          Do we need new management tools and techniques?  Management of
          the routing system (especially diagnostic management) is a
          crucial and often neglected part of the problem space.

   5.  What is the scalability impact for routing systems?  Scalability
       can be measured as:

       *  Routing table size.  How many entries need to be maintained in
          the routing table?  Some approaches to semantic addressing may
          be explicitly intended to address this problem.

       *  Routing performance.  Routing performance may be considered in
          terms of the volume of data that has to be exchanged both to
          establish and to maintain the routing tables at the
          participating routers.  It may also be measured in terms of
          how much processing is required to derive new routes when
          there is a change in the network routing information.





King, et al.             Expires August 26, 2021               [Page 28]

Internet-Draft             Routing Challenges              February 2021


       *  Routing convergence is the time that it takes for a routing
          protocol to discover changes (especially faults) in the
          network, to distribute the information about any changes to
          the network, and to reach a stable state across the network
          such that packets are routed consistently.

       For all questions of routing scalability, research that presents
       real numbers based on credible example networks is highly
       desirable.

   6.  To what extent can multicast be developed:

       *  To support programmable SDN systems such as P4 [BIER-P4]?

       *  To satisfy end-to-end applications?

       *  To apply per-packet multicasting to develop new services?

       *  As a separate network layer distinct from IP or by encoding
          group destinations into IP addresses?

   7.  What aspects need to be standardised?  It is really important to
       understand the necessity of standardization within this research.
       What degree of interoperability is expected between devices and
       networks?  Is the limited domain so constrained (for example, to
       a single equipment vendor) that standardization would be
       meaningless?  Is the application so narrow (for example, in niche
       hardware environments) such that interoperability is best handled
       by agreements among small groups of vendors such as in industry
       consortia?

8.  Security Considerations

   TBD

   This section should summarize the novel security issues raised for
   routing by semantic routing.  It does not need to cover all other
   security considerations for semantic routing.

9.  IANA Considerations

   This document makes no requests for IANA action.

10.  Acknowledgements

   Thanks to Stewart Bryant for useful conversations.  Luigi Iannone,
   Robert Raszuk, Dirk Trossen, and Ron Bonica made helpful comments.
   The text on Dyncast is based on suggestions from Dirk Trossen, Luigi



King, et al.             Expires August 26, 2021               [Page 29]

Internet-Draft             Routing Challenges              February 2021


   Iannone, and Yizhou Li.  Toerless Eckert suggested text for the
   multicast sections.

   This work is partially supported by the European Commission under
   Horizon 2020 grant agreement number 101015857 Secured autonomic
   traffic management for a Tera of SDN flows (Teraflow).

11.  Contributors

   TBD

12.  Informative References

   [BIER-P4]  Merling, D., Lindner, S., and M. Menth, "Hardware Based
              Evaluation of Scalable and Resilient Multicast with BIER
              in P4", Presentation IETF-108 BIER Working Group Online
              Meeting, 2020,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/meeting/108/materials/
              slides-108-bier-05-bier-in-p4-00>.

   [BLIND-FORWARDINGref]
              Simsek, I., "On-Demand Blind Packet Forwarding",
              Paper 30th International Telecommunication Networks and
              Applications Conference (ITNAC), 2020, 2020,
              <https://www.computer.org/csdl/proceedings-article/
              itnac/2020/09315187/1qmfFPPggrC>.

   [CLEANSLATEref]
              Feldmann, A., "Internet Clean-Slate Design: What and
              Why?", Paper Annals of telecommunications-annales des
              telecommunications;64(5):271-6, 2009, 2009,
              <http://ccr.sigcomm.org/online/files/p59-feldmannA.pdf>.

   [CLNPref]  "Protocol for providing the connectionless-mode network
              service: Protocol specification - Part 1",
              standard ISO/IEC 8473-1:1998, 1998,
              <https://www.iso.org/standard/30931.html>.

   [CONTENT-RTG-MOBILEref]
              Liu, H. and W. He, "Rich Semantic Content-oriented Routing
              for mobile Ad Hoc Networks", Paper The International
              Conference on Information Networking (ICOIN2014), 2014,
              2014, <https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/6799682>.








King, et al.             Expires August 26, 2021               [Page 30]

Internet-Draft             Routing Challenges              February 2021


   [CONTENTref]
              Choi, J., Han, J., and E. Cho, "A survey on content-
              oriented networking for efficient content delivery",
              Paper IEEE Communications Magazine, 49(3): 121-127, May
              2011., 2011, <https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/
              iel5/35/5723785/05723809.pdf>.

   [EIBPref]  Shenoy, N., "Can We Improve Internet Performance? An
              Expedited Internet Bypass Protocol", Presentation 28th
              IEEE International Conference on Network Protocols, 2020,
              <https://icnp20.cs.ucr.edu/Slides/NIPAA/D-3_invited.pptx>.

   [GEO-IPref]
              Dasu, T., Kanza, Y., and D. Srivastava, "Geotagging IP
              Packets for Location-Aware Software-Defined Networking in
              the Presence of Virtual Network Functions", Paper 25th ACM
              SIGSPATIAL International Conference on Advances in
              Geographic Information Systems (ACM SIGSPATIAL 2017),
              2017, <https://about.att.com/ecms/dam/sites/labs_research/
              content/publications/
              AI_Geotagging_IP_Packets_for_Location.pdf>.

   [HICNref]  Carofiglio, G., Muscariello, L., Auge, J., Papalini, M.,
              Sardara, M., and A. Compagno, "Enabling ICN in the
              Internet Protocol: Analysis and Evaluation of the Hybrid-
              ICN Architecture", Paper Proceedings of the 6th ACM
              Conference on Information-Centric Networking, 2019., 2019,
              <https://www.researchgate.net/publication/336344520_Enabli
              ng_ICN_in_the_Internet_Protocol_Analysis_and_Evaluation_of
              _the_Hybrid-ICN_Architecture>.

   [I-D.bonica-6man-ext-hdr-update]
              Bonica, R. and T. Jinmei, "Inserting, Processing And
              Deleting IPv6 Extension Headers", draft-bonica-6man-ext-
              hdr-update-04 (work in progress), August 2020.

   [I-D.bryant-arch-fwd-layer-ps]
              Bryant, S., Chunduri, U., Eckert, T., and A. Clemm,
              "Forwarding Layer Problem Statement", draft-bryant-arch-
              fwd-layer-ps-02 (work in progress), January 2021.

   [I-D.chunduri-lsr-isis-preferred-path-routing]
              Chunduri, U., Li, R., White, R., Tantsura, J., Contreras,
              L., and Y. Qu, "Preferred Path Routing (PPR) in IS-IS",
              draft-chunduri-lsr-isis-preferred-path-routing-06 (work in
              progress), September 2020.





King, et al.             Expires August 26, 2021               [Page 31]

Internet-Draft             Routing Challenges              February 2021


   [I-D.ietf-lisp-rfc6830bis]
              Farinacci, D., Fuller, V., Meyer, D., Lewis, D., and A.
              Cabellos-Aparicio, "The Locator/ID Separation Protocol
              (LISP)", draft-ietf-lisp-rfc6830bis-36 (work in progress),
              November 2020.

   [I-D.ietf-lisp-rfc6833bis]
              Farinacci, D., Maino, F., Fuller, V., and A. Cabellos-
              Aparicio, "Locator/ID Separation Protocol (LISP) Control-
              Plane", draft-ietf-lisp-rfc6833bis-30 (work in progress),
              November 2020.

   [I-D.ietf-spring-srv6-network-programming]
              Filsfils, C., Camarillo, P., Leddy, J., Voyer, D.,
              Matsushima, S., and Z. Li, "SRv6 Network Programming",
              draft-ietf-spring-srv6-network-programming-28 (work in
              progress), December 2020.

   [I-D.ietf-v6ops-ipv6-ehs-packet-drops]
              Gont, F., Hilliard, N., Doering, G., Kumari, W., Huston,
              G., and W. LIU, "Operational Implications of IPv6 Packets
              with Extension Headers", draft-ietf-v6ops-ipv6-ehs-packet-
              drops-03 (work in progress), January 2021.

   [I-D.irtf-panrg-path-properties]
              Enghardt, T. and C. Krahenbuhl, "A Vocabulary of Path
              Properties", draft-irtf-panrg-path-properties-01 (work in
              progress), September 2020.

   [I-D.irtf-panrg-what-not-to-do]
              Dawkins, S., "Path Aware Networking: Obstacles to
              Deployment (A Bestiary of Roads Not Taken)", draft-irtf-
              panrg-what-not-to-do-16 (work in progress), December 2020.

   [I-D.jia-scenarios-flexible-address-structure]
              Jia, Y., Li, G., and S. Jiang, "Scenarios for Flexible
              Address Structure", draft-jia-scenarios-flexible-address-
              structure-00 (work in progress), October 2020.

   [I-D.jiang-semantic-prefix]
              Jiang, S., Qiong, Q., Farrer, I., Bo, Y., and T. Yang,
              "Analysis of Semantic Embedded IPv6 Address Schemas",
              draft-jiang-semantic-prefix-06 (work in progress), July
              2013.







King, et al.             Expires August 26, 2021               [Page 32]

Internet-Draft             Routing Challenges              February 2021


   [I-D.li-dyncast-architecture]
              Li, Y., Iannone, L., Trossen, D., and P. Liu, "Dynamic-
              Anycast Architecture", draft-li-dyncast-architecture-00
              (work in progress), February 2021.

   [I-D.liu-dyncast-ps-usecases]
              Liu, P., Willis, P., and D. Trossen, "Dynamic-Anycast
              (Dyncast) Use Cases and Problem Statement", draft-liu-
              dyncast-ps-usecases-01 (work in progress), February 2021.

   [I-D.muscariello-intarea-hicn]
              Muscariello, L., Carofiglio, G., Auge, J., Papalini, M.,
              and M. Sardara, "Hybrid Information-Centric Networking",
              draft-muscariello-intarea-hicn-04 (work in progress), May
              2020.

   [ICNref]   Barbera, D., Xylomenos, G., Ververidis, C., Siris, V., and
              N. Fotiou, "A Survey of information-centric networking
              research", Paper IEEE Communications Surveys and
              Tutorials, vol. 16, Iss. 2, Q2 2014, 2014,
              <https://www.scopus.com/record/
              display.uri?eid=2-s2.0-84901242669>.

   [IOTSURVEYref]
              Sheng, Z., Yang, S., Vasilakos, A., Mccann, J., and K.
              Leung, "A Survey on the IETF Protocol Suite for the
              Internet of Things: standards, challenges, and
              opportunities", Paper IEEE Wireless Communications, vol.
              20, no. 6, Dec 2013, 2014,
              <https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/6704479>.

   [ISISref]  "Intermediate System to Intermediate System intra-domain
              routeing information exchange protocol for use in
              conjunction with the protocol for providing the
              connectionless-mode network service", standard ISO/IEC
              10589, 2002, <https://standards.iso.org/ittf/
              PubliclyAvailableStandards/
              c030932_ISO_IEC_10589_2002(E).zip>.

   [ITUNET2030ref]
              "Network 2030 Architecture Framework", Technical
              Specification ITU-T Focus Group on Technologies for
              Network 2030, 2020, <https://www.itu.int/en/ITU-
              T/focusgroups/net2030/Documents/Network_2030_Architecture-
              framework.pdf>.






King, et al.             Expires August 26, 2021               [Page 33]

Internet-Draft             Routing Challenges              February 2021


   [MBONEref]
              Savetz, K., Randall, N., and Y. Lepage, "MBONE:
              Multicasting Tomorrow's Internet", Book IDG, 1996,
              <https://www.savetz.com/mbone/>.

   [MULTICAST-SRref]
              Jia, W. and W. He, "A Scalable Multicast Source Routing
              Architecture for Data Center Networks", Paper  IEEE
              Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 32, no.
              1, pp. 116-123, January 2014, 2014,
              <https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/6799682>.

   [NDNref]   Zhang, L., Afanasyev, A., and J. Burke, "Named Data
              Networking", Paper ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication,
              Review 44(3): 66-73, 2014, 2014.

   [OPENSRNref]
              Ren, P., Wang, X., Zhao, B., Wu, C., and H. Sun, "OpenSRN:
              A Software-defined Semantic Routing Network Architecture",
              Paper IEEE Conference on Computer Communications Workshops
              (INFOCOM WKSHPS), Hong Kong, 2015, 2015,
              <https://www.researchgate.net/
              publication/308827498_OpenSRN_A_software-
              defined_semantic_routing_network_architecture>.

   [PANRGref]
              "Path Aware Networking Research Group", RG Path Aware
              Networking Research Group,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/rg/panrg/about>.

   [RESEARCHFIAref]
              Pan, J., Paul, S., and R. Jain, "A Survey of the Research
              on Future Internet Architectures", Paper IEEE
              Communications Magazine, vol. 49, no. 7, July 2011, 2014,
              <https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/5936152>.

   [RFC1069]  Callon, R. and H. Braun, "Guidelines for the use of
              Internet-IP addresses in the ISO Connectionless-Mode
              Network Protocol", RFC 1069, DOI 10.17487/RFC1069,
              February 1989, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc1069>.

   [RFC1112]  Deering, S., "Host extensions for IP multicasting", STD 5,
              RFC 1112, DOI 10.17487/RFC1112, August 1989,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc1112>.

   [RFC1195]  Callon, R., "Use of OSI IS-IS for routing in TCP/IP and
              dual environments", RFC 1195, DOI 10.17487/RFC1195,
              December 1990, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc1195>.



King, et al.             Expires August 26, 2021               [Page 34]

Internet-Draft             Routing Challenges              February 2021


   [RFC2474]  Nichols, K., Blake, S., Baker, F., and D. Black,
              "Definition of the Differentiated Services Field (DS
              Field) in the IPv4 and IPv6 Headers", RFC 2474,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2474, December 1998,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2474>.

   [RFC2730]  Hanna, S., Patel, B., and M. Shah, "Multicast Address
              Dynamic Client Allocation Protocol (MADCAP)", RFC 2730,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2730, December 1999,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2730>.

   [RFC2776]  Handley, M., Thaler, D., and R. Kermode, "Multicast-Scope
              Zone Announcement Protocol (MZAP)", RFC 2776,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2776, February 2000,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2776>.

   [RFC2909]  Radoslavov, P., Estrin, D., Govindan, R., Handley, M.,
              Kumar, S., and D. Thaler, "The Multicast Address-Set Claim
              (MASC) Protocol", RFC 2909, DOI 10.17487/RFC2909,
              September 2000, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2909>.

   [RFC3618]  Fenner, B., Ed. and D. Meyer, Ed., "Multicast Source
              Discovery Protocol (MSDP)", RFC 3618,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC3618, October 2003,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3618>.

   [RFC4291]  Hinden, R. and S. Deering, "IP Version 6 Addressing
              Architecture", RFC 4291, DOI 10.17487/RFC4291, February
              2006, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4291>.

   [RFC4607]  Holbrook, H. and B. Cain, "Source-Specific Multicast for
              IP", RFC 4607, DOI 10.17487/RFC4607, August 2006,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4607>.

   [RFC4655]  Farrel, A., Vasseur, J., and J. Ash, "A Path Computation
              Element (PCE)-Based Architecture", RFC 4655,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC4655, August 2006,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4655>.

   [RFC4984]  Meyer, D., Ed., Zhang, L., Ed., and K. Fall, Ed., "Report
              from the IAB Workshop on Routing and Addressing",
              RFC 4984, DOI 10.17487/RFC4984, September 2007,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4984>.

   [RFC5440]  Vasseur, JP., Ed. and JL. Le Roux, Ed., "Path Computation
              Element (PCE) Communication Protocol (PCEP)", RFC 5440,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC5440, March 2009,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5440>.



King, et al.             Expires August 26, 2021               [Page 35]

Internet-Draft             Routing Challenges              February 2021


   [RFC6308]  Savola, P., "Overview of the Internet Multicast Addressing
              Architecture", RFC 6308, DOI 10.17487/RFC6308, June 2011,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6308>.

   [RFC6740]  Atkinson, RJ. and SN. Bhatti, "Identifier-Locator Network
              Protocol (ILNP) Architectural Description", RFC 6740,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC6740, November 2012,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6740>.

   [RFC6830]  Farinacci, D., Fuller, V., Meyer, D., and D. Lewis, "The
              Locator/ID Separation Protocol (LISP)", RFC 6830,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC6830, January 2013,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6830>.

   [RFC7094]  McPherson, D., Oran, D., Thaler, D., and E. Osterweil,
              "Architectural Considerations of IP Anycast", RFC 7094,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC7094, January 2014,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7094>.

   [RFC7285]  Alimi, R., Ed., Penno, R., Ed., Yang, Y., Ed., Kiesel, S.,
              Previdi, S., Roome, W., Shalunov, S., and R. Woundy,
              "Application-Layer Traffic Optimization (ALTO) Protocol",
              RFC 7285, DOI 10.17487/RFC7285, September 2014,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7285>.

   [RFC7450]  Bumgardner, G., "Automatic Multicast Tunneling", RFC 7450,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC7450, February 2015,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7450>.

   [RFC7665]  Halpern, J., Ed. and C. Pignataro, Ed., "Service Function
              Chaining (SFC) Architecture", RFC 7665,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC7665, October 2015,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7665>.

   [RFC7872]  Gont, F., Linkova, J., Chown, T., and W. Liu,
              "Observations on the Dropping of Packets with IPv6
              Extension Headers in the Real World", RFC 7872,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC7872, June 2016,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7872>.

   [RFC8200]  Deering, S. and R. Hinden, "Internet Protocol, Version 6
              (IPv6) Specification", STD 86, RFC 8200,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC8200, July 2017,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8200>.







King, et al.             Expires August 26, 2021               [Page 36]

Internet-Draft             Routing Challenges              February 2021


   [RFC8279]  Wijnands, IJ., Ed., Rosen, E., Ed., Dolganow, A.,
              Przygienda, T., and S. Aldrin, "Multicast Using Bit Index
              Explicit Replication (BIER)", RFC 8279,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC8279, November 2017,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8279>.

   [RFC8296]  Wijnands, IJ., Ed., Rosen, E., Ed., Dolganow, A.,
              Tantsura, J., Aldrin, S., and I. Meilik, "Encapsulation
              for Bit Index Explicit Replication (BIER) in MPLS and Non-
              MPLS Networks", RFC 8296, DOI 10.17487/RFC8296, January
              2018, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8296>.

   [RFC8300]  Quinn, P., Ed., Elzur, U., Ed., and C. Pignataro, Ed.,
              "Network Service Header (NSH)", RFC 8300,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC8300, January 2018,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8300>.

   [RFC8402]  Filsfils, C., Ed., Previdi, S., Ed., Ginsberg, L.,
              Decraene, B., Litkowski, S., and R. Shakir, "Segment
              Routing Architecture", RFC 8402, DOI 10.17487/RFC8402,
              July 2018, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8402>.

   [RFC8596]  Malis, A., Bryant, S., Halpern, J., and W. Henderickx,
              "MPLS Transport Encapsulation for the Service Function
              Chaining (SFC) Network Service Header (NSH)", RFC 8596,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC8596, June 2019,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8596>.

   [RFC8684]  Ford, A., Raiciu, C., Handley, M., Bonaventure, O., and C.
              Paasch, "TCP Extensions for Multipath Operation with
              Multiple Addresses", RFC 8684, DOI 10.17487/RFC8684, March
              2020, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8684>.

   [RFC8736]  Venaas, S. and A. Retana, "PIM Message Type Space
              Extension and Reserved Bits", RFC 8736,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC8736, February 2020,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8736>.

   [RFC8754]  Filsfils, C., Ed., Dukes, D., Ed., Previdi, S., Leddy, J.,
              Matsushima, S., and D. Voyer, "IPv6 Segment Routing Header
              (SRH)", RFC 8754, DOI 10.17487/RFC8754, March 2020,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8754>.

   [RFC8763]  Rahman, A., Trossen, D., Kutscher, D., and R. Ravindran,
              "Deployment Considerations for Information-Centric
              Networking (ICN)", RFC 8763, DOI 10.17487/RFC8763, April
              2020, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8763>.




King, et al.             Expires August 26, 2021               [Page 37]

Internet-Draft             Routing Challenges              February 2021


   [RFC8799]  Carpenter, B. and B. Liu, "Limited Domains and Internet
              Protocols", RFC 8799, DOI 10.17487/RFC8799, July 2020,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8799>.

   [RINAref]  Day, J., "Patterns in Network Architecture: A Return to
              Fundamentals", Book Prentice Hall, 2008.

   [SCIONref]
              Barbera, D., Chaut, L., Perrig, A., Reischuk, R., and P.
              Szalachowski, "Patterns in Network Architecture: A Return
              to Fundamentals", Paper The ACM, vol. 60, no. 6, June
              2017, 2017,
              <https://icnp20.cs.ucr.edu/Slides/NIPAA/D-3_invited.pptx>.

   [SEMANTICRTG]
              Strassner, J., Sung-Su, K., and J. Won-Ki, "Semantic
              Routing for Improved Network Management in the Future
              Internet", Book Chapter Springer, Recent Trends in
              Wireless and Mobile Networks, 2010, 2010,
              <https://link.springer.com/
              chapter/10.1007/978-3-642-14171-3_14>.

   [TERASTREAMref]
              Zaluski, B., Rajtar, B., Habjani, H., Baranek, M., Slibar,
              N., Petracic, R., and T. Sukser, "Terastream
              implementation of all IP new architecture", Paper 36th
              International Convention on Information and Communication
              Technology, Electronics and Microelectronics (MIPRO),
              2013, 2013,
              <https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/6596297>.

Authors' Addresses

   Daniel King
   Lancaster University

   Email: d.king@lancaster.ac.uk


   Joanna Dang
   Huawei Technologies

   Email: dangjuanna@huawei.com








King, et al.             Expires August 26, 2021               [Page 38]

Internet-Draft             Routing Challenges              February 2021


   Adrian Farrel
   Old Dog Consulting

   Email: adrian@olddog.co.uk















































King, et al.             Expires August 26, 2021               [Page 39]
