


SIPPING Working Group                                       G. Camarillo
Internet-Draft                                                  Ericsson
Expires: December 3, 2005                                   June 1, 2005


 Internet Assigned Number Authority (IANA) Registration of the Message
                           Media Feature Tag
               draft-camarillo-sipping-message-tag-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 3, 2005.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).

Abstract

   This document registers with the IANA a new media feature tag
   associated with the 'message' media type.  This media feature tag
   indicates that a particular device supports 'message' as a streaming
   media type.  Media feature tags can be used to route calls to devices
   that support certain features.






Camarillo               Expires December 3, 2005                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft             Message Feature Tag                 June 2005


Table of Contents

   1.   Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.   Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   3.   IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   4.   Acknowledges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   5.   Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
        Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
        Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . 5










































Camarillo               Expires December 3, 2005                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft             Message Feature Tag                 June 2005


1.  Introduction

   The SDP (Session Description Protocol) specification [5] defines a
   number of media types.  RFC 3840 [4] registers with the IANA media
   feature tags associated with all those media types except for the
   'message' media type.  This document registers a new media feature
   tag that is associated with the 'message' media type.

   The reason why the 'message' media feature tag was not registered by
   RFC 3840 was that when RFC 3840 was published, the SDP specification
   was RFC 2327 [1].  RFC 3840 defined media feature tags for all the
   media types defined by RFC 2327.  However, RFC 2327 did not define
   the 'message' media type.  This media type was defined by the revised
   SDP specification [5], which was published after RFC 3840.

2.  Security Considerations

   This specification does not affect the security of the Internet.  RFC
   3840 [4] discusses security considerations related to the use of
   media feature tags.

3.  IANA Considerations

   This specification registers a new media feature tag in the SIP [3]
   tree per the procedures defined in RFC 2506 [2] and RFC 3840 [4].

      Media feature tag name: sip.message

      ASN.1 Identifier: New assignment by IANA.

      Summary of the media feature indicated by this tag: This feature
      tag indicates that the device supports message as a streaming
      media type.

      Values appropriate for use with this feature tag: Boolean.

      The feature tag is intended primarily for use in the following
      applications, protocols, services, or negotiation mechanisms: This
      feature tag is most useful in a communications application for
      describing the capabilities of a device, such as a phone or PDA.

      Examples of typical use: Routing a call to a phone that can
      support session-based instant messaging.








Camarillo               Expires December 3, 2005                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft             Message Feature Tag                 June 2005


      Related standards or documents: RFC xxxx.  (Note for the RFC
      editor: substitute xxxx with the number of this RFC)

      Security Considerations: Security considerations for this media
      feature tag are discussed in Section 11.1 of RFC 3840.

4.  Acknowledges

   The need for this registration was discussed with Jonathan Rosenberg,
   Colin Perkins, and Jon Peterson.

5.  Normative References

   [1]  Handley, M. and V. Jacobson, "SDP: Session Description
        Protocol", RFC 2327, April 1998.

   [2]  Holtman, K., Mutz, A., and T. Hardie, "Media Feature Tag
        Registration Procedure", BCP 31, RFC 2506, March 1999.

   [3]  Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston, A.,
        Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley, M., and E. Schooler, "SIP:
        Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261, June 2002.

   [4]  Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., and P. Kyzivat, "Indicating User
        Agent Capabilities in the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)",
        RFC 3840, August 2004.

   [5]  Handley, M., "SDP: Session Description Protocol",
        draft-ietf-mmusic-sdp-new-24 (work in progress), February 2005.


Author's Address

   Gonzalo Camarillo
   Ericsson
   Hirsalantie 11
   Jorvas  02420
   Finland

   Email: Gonzalo.Camarillo@ericsson.com











Camarillo               Expires December 3, 2005                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft             Message Feature Tag                 June 2005


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Camarillo               Expires December 3, 2005                [Page 5]

