

Network Working Group                               M. Brunner (Editor) 
Internet Draft                                                      NEC 
Category: Informational                                       June 2003 
                                                                        
 
 
                   Requirements for Signaling Protocols 
                       <draft-ietf-nsis-req-08.txt> 
 
Status of this Memo 
 
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026. 
 
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that      
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
   at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as 
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
Copyright Notice 
    
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002). All Rights Reserved. 
    
Abstract 
    
   This document defines requirements for signaling across different 
   network environments, such as across administrative and/or 
   technology domains. Signaling is mainly considered for Quality of 
   Service such as The Resource Reservation Protocol, however in recent 
   years several other applications of signaling have been defined such 
   as signaling for label distribution in Multiprotocol Label Switching 
   or signaling to middleboxes. To achieve wide applicability of the 
   requirements, the starting point is a diverse set of scenarios/use 
   cases concerning various types of networks and application 
   interactions. This document presents the assumptions before listing 
   the requirements.  The requirements are grouped according to areas 
   such as architecture and design goals, signaling flows, layering, 
   performance, flexibility, security, and mobility.  
    
    
    
    
    
 

   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                    [Page 1] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols        June 2003 
    
Table of Contents 
    
   Status of this Memo................................................1 
   Abstract...........................................................1 
   Table of Contents..................................................2 
   1 Introduction.....................................................4 
   1.1.  Keywords....................................................4 
   2 Terminology......................................................4 
   3 Problem Statement and Scope......................................5 
   4 Assumptions and Exclusions.......................................6 
   4.1 Assumptions and Non-Assumptions................................6 
   4.2 Exclusions.....................................................7 
   5 Requirements.....................................................9 
   5.1 Architecture and Design Goals..................................9 
   5.1.1 NSIS SHOULD provide availability information on request......9 
   5.1.2 NSIS MUST be designed modularly..............................9 
   5.1.3 NSIS MUST decouple protocol and information.................10 
   5.1.4 NSIS MUST support independence of signaling and network 
   control paradigm..................................................10 
   5.1.5 NSIS SHOULD be able to carry opaque objects.................10 
   5.2 Signaling Flows...............................................10 
   5.2.1 The placement of NSIS Initiator, Forwarder, and Responder 
   anywhere in the network MUST be allowed...........................11 
   5.2.2 NSIS MUST support path-coupled and MAY support path-decoupled 
   signaling.........................................................11 
   5.2.3 Concealment of topology and technology information SHOULD be 
   possible..........................................................11 
   5.2.4 Transparent signaling through networks SHOULD be possible...11 
   5.3 Messaging.....................................................11 
   5.3.1 Explicit erasure of state MUST be possible..................12 
   5.3.2 Automatic release of state after failure MUST be possible...12 
   5.3.3 NSIS SHOULD allow for sending notifications upstream........12 
   5.3.4 Establishment and refusal to set up state MUST be notified..13 
   5.3.5 NSIS MUST allow for local information exchange..............13 
   5.4 Control Information...........................................13 
   5.4.1 Mutability information on parameters SHOULD be possible.....14 
   5.4.2 It SHOULD be possible to add and remove local domain 
   information.......................................................14 
   5.4.3 State MUST be addressed independent of flow identification..14 
   5.4.4 Modification of already established state SHOULD be seamless14 
   5.4.5 Grouping of signaling for several micro-flows MAY be provided
   ..................................................................14 
   5.5 Performance...................................................15 
   5.5.1 Scalability.................................................15 
   5.5.2 NSIS SHOULD allow for low latency in setup..................15 
   5.5.3 NSIS MUST allow for low bandwidth consumption for the 
   signaling protocol................................................15 
   5.5.4 NSIS SHOULD allow to constrain load on devices..............16 
   5.5.5 NSIS SHOULD target the highest possible network utilization.16 
   5.6 Flexibility...................................................16 
   5.6.1 Flow aggregation............................................16 
   5.6.2 Flexibility in the placement of the NSIS Initiator/Responder16 
   5.6.3 Flexibility in the initiation of state change...............16 
   5.6.4 SHOULD support network-initiated state change...............17 
     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                    [Page 2] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols        June 2003 
    
   5.6.5 Uni / bi-directional state setup............................17 
   5.7 Security......................................................17 
   5.7.1 Authentication of signaling requests........................17 
   5.7.2 Request Authorization.......................................17 
   5.7.3 Integrity protection........................................18 
   5.7.4 Replay protection...........................................18 
   5.7.5 Hop-by-hop security.........................................18 
   5.7.6 Identity confidentiality and network topology hiding........18 
   5.7.7 Denial-of-service attacks...................................18 
   5.7.8 Confidentiality of signaling messages.......................19 
   5.7.9 Ownership of state..........................................19 
   5.8 Mobility......................................................19 
   5.8.1 Allow efficient service re-establishment after handover.....19 
   5.9 Interworking with other protocols and techniques..............19 
   5.9.1 MUST interwork with IP tunneling............................19 
   5.9.2 MUST NOT constrain either to IPv4 or IPv6...................19 
   5.9.3 MUST be independent from charging model.....................20 
   5.9.4 SHOULD provide hooks for AAA protocols......................20 
   5.9.5 SHOULD work with seamless handoff protocols.................20 
   5.9.6 MUST work with traditional routing..........................20 
   5.10 Operational..................................................20 
   5.10.1 Ability to assign transport quality to signaling messages..20 
   5.10.2 Graceful fail over.........................................21 
   5.10.3 Graceful handling of NSIS entity problems..................21 
   6 Security Considerations.........................................21 
   7 References......................................................21 
   7.1 Normative References..........................................21 
   7.2 Non-Normative References......................................21 
   8 Acknowledgments.................................................21 
   9 Author's Addresses..............................................22 
   10 Appendix: Scenarios/Use cases..................................23 
   10.1 Terminal Mobility............................................23 
   10.2 Wireless Networks............................................25 
   10.3 An example scenario for 3G wireless networks.................26 
   10.4 Wired part of wireless network...............................27 
   10.5 Session Mobility.............................................29 
   10.6 QoS reservation/negotiation from access to core network......29 
   10.7 QoS reservation/negotiation over administrative boundaries...30 
   10.8 QoS signaling between PSTN gateways and backbone routers.....30 
   10.9 PSTN trunking gateway........................................32 
   10.10 An application requests end-to-end QoS path from the network34 
   10.11 QOS for Virtual Private Networks............................34 
   10.11.1 Tunnel end points at the Customer premises................34 
   10.11.2 Tunnel end points at the provider premises................35 
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                    [Page 3] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols        June 2003 
    
1 Introduction 
    
   This document defines requirements for signaling across different 
   network environments. It does not list any problems of existing 
   signaling protocols such as [RSVP].  
    
   In order to derive requirements for signaling it is necessary to 
   first have an idea of the scope within which they are applicable. 
   Therefore, we list use cases and scenarios where an NSIS protocol 
   could be applied. The scenarios are used to help derive requirements 
   and to test the requirements against use cases. 
    
   The requirements listed are independent of any application. However, 
   resource reservation and QoS related issues are used as example 
   within the text. However, QoS is not the only field where signaling 
   is used in the Internet. Signaling might also be used as a 
   communication protocol to setup and maintain the state in 
   middleboxes [RFC3234]. 
 
   This document does not cover requirements in relation to some 
   networking areas, in particular, interaction with host and site 
   multihoming. We leave these for future analysis. 
    
1.1. Keywords 
    
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in 
   this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 
   [KEYWORDS]. 
    
2 Terminology 
    
   We list the most often used terms in the document. However, they 
   cannot be made precise without a more complete architectural model, 
   and they are not meant to prescribe any solution in the document. 
   Where applicable, they will be defined in protocol documents. 
    
   NSIS Entity (NE): The function within a node, which implements an 
   NSIS protocol. In the case of path-coupled signaling, the NE will 
   always be on the data path.  
    
   NSIS Forwarder (NF): NSIS Entity between a NI and NR, which may 
   interact with local state management functions in the network. It 
   also propagates NSIS signaling further through the network.  
    
   NSIS Initiator (NI): NSIS Entity that starts NSIS signaling to set 
   up or manipulate network state.  
    
   NSIS Responder (NR): NSIS Entity that terminates NSIS signaling and 
   can optionally interact with applications as well.  
 
   Flow: A traffic stream (sequence of IP packets between two end 
   systems) for which a specific packet level treatment is provided. 
   The flow can be unicast (uni- or bi-directional) or multicast. For 
     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                    [Page 4] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols        June 2003 
    
   multicast, a flow can diverge into multiple flows as it propagates 
   toward the receiver.  For multi-sender multicast, a flow can also 
   diverge when viewed in the reverse direction (toward the senders). 
 
   Data Path: The route across the networks taken by a flow or 
   aggregate, i.e. which domains/subdomains it passes through and the 
   egress/ingress points for each. 
    
   Signaling Path: The route across the networks taken by a signaling 
   flow or aggregate, i.e. which domains/subdomains it passes through 
   and the egress/ingress points for each. 
    
   Path-coupled signaling: A mode of signaling where the signaling 
   messages follow a path that is tied to the data packets. Signaling 
   messages are routed only through nodes (NEs) that are in the data 
   path. 
 
   Path-decoupled signaling: Signaling with independent data and 
   signaling paths. Signaling messages are routed to nodes (NEs) which 
   are not assumed to be on the data path, but which are (presumably) 
   aware of it. Signaling messages will always be directly addressed to 
   the neighbor NE, and the NI/NR may have no relation at all with the 
   ultimate data sender or receiver. 
 
   Service: A generic something provided by one entity and consumed by 
   another.  It can be constructed by allocating resources. The network 
   can provide it to users or a network node can provide it to packets. 
 
3 Problem Statement and Scope 
    
   We provide in the following a preliminary architectural picture as a 
   basis for discussion. We will refer to it in the following 
   requirement sections. 
 
   Note that this model is intended not to constrain the technical 
   approach taken subsequently, simply to allow concrete phrasing of 
   requirements (e.g. requirements about placement of the NSIS 
   Initiator.) 
    
   Roughly, the scope of NSIS is assumed to be the interaction between 
   the NSIS Initiator and NSIS Forwarder(s), and NSIS Responder 
   including a protocol to carry the information, and the 
   syntax/semantics of the information that is exchanged. Further 
   statements on assumptions/exclusions are given in the next Section. 
    
   The main elements are: 
    
   1. Something that starts the request for state to be set up in the 
   network, the NSIS Initiator.  
    
   This might be in the end system or within some other part of the 
   network. The distinguishing feature of the NSIS Initiator is that it 
   acts on triggers coming (directly or indirectly) from the higher 
   layers in the end systems. It needs to map the services requested by 
     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                    [Page 5] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols        June 2003 
    
   them, and also provides feedback information to the higher layers, 
   which might be used by transport layer algorithms or adaptive 
   applications. 
    
   2. Something that assists in managing state further along the 
   signaling path, the NSIS Forwarder.  
    
   The NSIS Forwarder does not interact with higher layers, but 
   interacts with the NSIS Initiator, NSIS Responder, and possibly one 
   or more NSIS Forwarders on the signaling path, edge-to-edge or end-
   to-end. 
    
   3. Something that terminates the signaling path, the NSIS Responder. 
    
   The NSIS responder might be in an end-system or within other 
   equipment. The distinguishing feature of the NSIS Responder is that 
   it responds to requests at the end of a signaling path. 
    
   4. The signaling path traverses an underlying network covering one 
   or more IP hops. The underlying network might use locally different 
   technology. For instance, QoS technology has to be provisioned 
   appropriately for the service requested. In the QoS example, an NSIS 
   Forwarder maps service-specific information to technology-related 
   QoS parameters and receives indications about success or failure in 
   response. 
    
   5. We can see the network at the level of domains/subdomains rather 
   than individual routers (except in the special case that the domain 
   contains one link). Domains are assumed to be administrative 
   entities, so security requirements apply to the signaling between 
   them.  
 
4 Assumptions and Exclusions 
    
4.1 Assumptions and Non-Assumptions 
    
   1. The NSIS signaling could run end to end, end-to-edge, or edge-to-
   edge, or network-to-network ((between providers), depending on what 
   point in the network acts as NSIS initiator, and how far towards the 
   other end of the network the signaling propagates. In general, we 
   could expect NSIS Forwarders to become more 'dense' towards the 
   edges of the network, but this is not a requirement. For example, in 
   the case of QoS, an over-provisioned domain might contain no NSIS 
   Forwarders at all (and be NSIS transparent); at the other extreme, 
   NSIS Forwarders might be placed at every router. In the latter case, 
   QoS provisioning can be carried out in a local implementation-
   dependent way without further signaling, whereas in the case of 
   remote NSIS Forwarders, a protocol might be needed to control the 
   routers along the path. This protocol is then independent of the 
   end-to-end NSIS signaling.  
    
   2. We do not consider 'pure' end-to-end signaling that is not 
   interpreted anywhere within the network. Such signaling is a higher-
   layer issue and IETF protocols such as SIP etc. can be used. 
     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                    [Page 6] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols        June 2003 
    
    
   3. Where the signaling does cover several domains, we do not exclude 
   that different signaling protocols are used in each domain. We only 
   place requirements on the universality of the control information 
   that is being transported. (The goals here would be to allow the use 
   of signaling protocols, which are matched to the characteristics of 
   the portion of the network being traversed.) Note that the outcome 
   of NSIS work might result in various flavors of the same protocol. 
    
   4. We assume that the service definitions a NSIS Initiator can ask 
   for are known in advance of the signaling protocol running. For 
   instance in the QoS example, the service definition includes QoS 
   parameters, lifetime of QoS guarantee etc., or any other service-
   specific parameters. 
    
   There are many ways service requesters get to know about available 
   services. There might be standardized services, the definition can 
   be negotiated together with a contract, the service definition is 
   published in some on-line directory (e.g., at a Web page), and so 
   on. 
    
   5. We assume that there are means for the discovery of NSIS entities 
   in order to know the signaling peers (solutions include static 
   configuration, automatically discovered, or implicitly runs over the 
   right nodes along the data path, etc.) The discovery of the NSIS 
   entities has security implications that need to be addressed 
   properly. For some security mechanisms (i.e. Kerberos, pre-shared 
   secret) it is required to know the identity of the other entity. 
   Hence the discovery mechanism may provide means to learn this 
   identity, which is then later used to retrieve the required keys and 
   parameters.  
    
   6. NSIS assumes layer 3 routing and the determination of next data 
   node selection is not done by NSIS. 
    
4.2 Exclusions 
    
   1. Development of specific mechanisms and algorithms for application 
   and transport layer adaptation are not considered, nor are the 
   protocols that would support it. 
    
   2. Specific mechanisms (APIs and so on) for interaction between 
   transport/applications and the network layer are not considered, 
   except to clarify the requirements on the negotiation capabilities 
   and information semantics that would be needed of the signaling 
   protocol. 
    
   3. Specific mechanisms and protocols for provisioning or other 
   network control functions within a domain/subdomain are not 
   considered. The goal is to reuse existing functions and protocols 
   unchanged. However, NSIS itself can be used for signaling within a 
   domain/subdomain.  
    

     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                    [Page 7] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols        June 2003 
    
   For instance in the QoS example, it means that the setting of QoS 
   mechanisms in a domain is out of scope, but if we have a tunnel, 
   NSIS could also be used for tunnel setup with QoS guarantees. It 
   should be possible to exploit these mechanisms optimally within the 
   end-to-end context. Consideration of how to do this might generate 
   new requirements for NSIS however. For example, the information 
   needed by a NSIS Forwarder to manage a radio subnetwork needs to be 
   provided by the NSIS solution. 
    
   4. Specific mechanisms (APIs and so on) for interaction between the 
   network layer and underlying provisioning mechanisms are not 
   considered.  
    
   5. Interaction with resource management or other internal state 
   management capabilities is not considered. Standard protocols might 
   be used for this. This may imply requirements for the sort of 
   information that should be exchanged between the NSIS entities. 
 
   6. Security implications related to multicasting are outside the 
   scope of the signaling protocol.  
 
   7. Service definitions and in particular QoS services and classes 
   are out of scope. Together with the service definition any 
   definition of service specific parameters are not considered in this 
   document. Only the base NSIS signaling protocol for transporting the 
   service information are addressed. 
    
   8. Similarly, specific methods, protocols, and ways to express 
   service information in the Application/Session level are not 
   considered (e.g., SDP, SIP, RTSP, etc.).  
    
   9. The specification of any extensions needed to signal information 
   via application level protocols (e.g. SDP), and the mapping on NSIS 
   information are considered outside of the scope of NSIS working 
   group, as this work is in the direct scope of other IETF working 
   groups (e.g. MMUSIC). 
    
   10. Handoff decision and trigger sources: An NSIS protocol is not 
   used to trigger handoffs in mobile IP, nor is it used to decide 
   whether to handoff or not. As soon as or in some situation even 
   before a handoff happened, an NSIS protocol might be used for 
   signaling for the particular service again. The basic underlying 
   assumption is that the route comes first (defining the path) and the 
   signaling comes after it (following the path). This doesn't prevent 
   a signaling application at some node interacting with something that 
   modifies the path, but the requirement is then just for NSIS to live 
   with that possibility. However, NSIS must interwork with several 
   protocols for mobility management. 
    
   11. Service monitoring is out of scope. It is heavily dependent on 
   the type of the application and or transport service, and in what 
   scenario it is used. 
 

     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                    [Page 8] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols        June 2003 
    
5 Requirements 
    
   This section defines more detailed requirements for a signaling 
   solution, respecting the framework, scoping assumptions, and 
   terminology considered earlier. The requirements are in subsections, 
   grouped roughly according to general technical aspects: architecture 
   and design goals, topology issues, parameters, performance, 
   security, information, and flexibility. 
    
   Two general (and potentially contradictory) goals for the solution 
   are that it should be applicable in a very wide range of scenarios, 
   and at the same time lightweight in implementation complexity and 
   resource consumption requirements in NSIS Entities. One approach to 
   this is that the solution could deal with certain requirements via 
   modular components or capabilities, which are optional to implement 
   or use in individual nodes.  
    
   In order to prioritize the various requirements we informally define 
   different 'parts of the network'. In the different parts of the 
   network a particular requirement might have a different priority.  
    
   The parts of the networks we differentiate are the host-to-first 
   router, the access network, and the core network. The host to first 
   router part includes all the layer 2 technologies to access to the 
   Internet. This part of the division is especially informal and may 
   incorporate several access segments. In many cases, there is an 
   application and/or user running on the host initiating signaling. 
   The access network can be characterized by low capacity links, 
   medium speed IP processing capabilities, and it might consist of a 
   complete layer 2 network as well. The core network characteristics 
   include high-speed forwarding capacities and inter-domain issues. 
   These divisions between network types are not strict and do not 
   appear in all networks, but where they do exist they may influence 
   signaling requirements and will be highlighted as necessary. 
    
5.1 Architecture and Design Goals 
    
   This section contains requirements related to desirable overall 
   characteristics of a solution, e.g. enabling flexibility, or 
   independence of parts of the framework.  
    
5.1.1 NSIS SHOULD provide availability information on request  
    
   NSIS SHOULD provide a mechanism to check whether state to be setup 
   is available without setting it up. For the resource reservation 
   example this translates into checking resource availability without 
   performing resource reservation. In some scenarios, e.g., the mobile 
   terminal scenario, it is required to query, whether resources are 
   available, without performing a reservation on the resource.  
    
5.1.2 NSIS MUST be designed modularly  
    


     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                    [Page 9] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols        June 2003 
    
   A modular design allows for more lightweight implementations, if 
   fewer features are needed. Mutually exclusive solutions are 
   supported. Examples for modularity: 
    
   - Work over any kind of network (narrowband versus broadband, error-
   prone versus reliable, ...). This implies low bandwidth signaling, 
   and elimination of redundant information MUST be supported if 
   necessary.  
    
   - State setup for uni- and bi-directional flows is possible 
    
   - Extensible in the future with different add-ons for certain 
   environments or scenarios  
    
   - Protocol layering, where appropriate. This means NSIS MUST provide 
   a base protocol, which can be adapted to different environments. 
    
5.1.3 NSIS MUST decouple protocol and information 
    
   The signaling protocol MUST be clearly separated from the control 
   information being transported. This provides for the independent 
   development of these two aspects of the solution, and allows for 
   this control information to be carried within other protocols, 
   including application layer ones, existing ones or those being 
   developed in the future. The flexibility gained in the transport of 
   information allows for the applicability of the same protocol in 
   various scenarios.  
    
   However, note that the information carried needs to be standardized; 
   otherwise interoperability is difficult to achieve. 
    
5.1.4 NSIS MUST support independence of signaling and network control 
     paradigm 
    
   The signaling MUST be independent of the paradigm and mechanism of 
   network control. E.g., in the case of signaling for QoS, the 
   independence of the signaling protocol from the QoS provisioning 
   allows for using the NSIS protocol together with various QoS 
   technologies in various scenarios. 
 
5.1.5 NSIS SHOULD be able to carry opaque objects 
    
   NSIS SHOULD be able to pass around opaque objects, which are 
   interpreted only by some NSIS-capable nodes.  
    
5.2 Signaling Flows 
    
   This section contains requirements related to the possible signaling 
   flows that should be supported, e.g. over what parts of the flow 
   path, between what entities (end-systems, routers, middle boxes, 
   management systems), in which direction.  
 


     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                   [Page 10] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols        June 2003 
    
5.2.1 The placement of NSIS Initiator, Forwarder, and Responder 
     anywhere in the network MUST be allowed 
    
   The protocol MUST work in various scenarios such as host-to-network-
   to-host, edge-to-edge, (e.g., just within one provider's domain), 
   user-to-network (from end system into the network, ending, e.g., at 
   the entry to the network and vice versa), and network-to-network 
   (e.g., between providers).  
    
   Placing the NSIS Forwarder and NSIS Initiator functions at different 
   locations allows for various scenarios to work with the same 
   protocol. 
    
5.2.2 NSIS MUST support path-coupled and MAY support path-decoupled 
     signaling.  
    
   The path-coupled signaling mode MUST be supported. NSIS signaling 
   messages are routed only through nodes (NEs) that are in the data 
   path. 
    
   However, there is a set of scenarios, where signaling is not on the 
   data path. Therefore, NSIS MAY support the path-decoupled signaling 
   mode, where signaling messages are routed to nodes (NEs), which are 
   not assumed to be on the data path, but which are aware of it. 
 
5.2.3 Concealment of topology and technology information SHOULD be 
     possible 
    
   The NSIS protocol SHOULD allow for hiding the internal structure of 
   a NSIS domain from end-nodes and from other networks. Hence an 
   adversary should not be able to learn the internal structure of a 
   network with the help of the signaling protocol. 
    
   In various scenarios, topology information should be hidden for 
   various reasons. From a business point of view, some administrations 
   don't want to reveal the topology and technology used.  
    
5.2.4 Transparent signaling through networks SHOULD be possible 
    
   It SHOULD be possible that the signaling for some flows traverses 
   path segments transparently, i.e., without interpretation at NSIS 
   Forwarders within the network. An example would be a subdomain 
   within a core network, which only interpreted signaling for 
   aggregates established at the domain edge, with the signaling for 
   individual flows passing transparently through it. 
    
   In other words, NSIS SHOULD work in hierarchical scenarios, where 
   big pipes/trunks are setup using NSIS signaling, but also flows 
   which run within that big pipe/trunk are setup using NSIS. 
 
5.3 Messaging 
 


     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                   [Page 11] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols        June 2003 
    
5.3.1 Explicit erasure of state MUST be possible 
    
   When state along a path is no longer necessary, e.g., because the 
   application terminates, or because a mobile host experienced a hand-
   off, it MUST be possible to erase the state explicitly. 
    
5.3.2 Automatic release of state after failure MUST be possible 
    
   When the NSIS Initiator goes down, the state it requested in the 
   network SHOULD be released, since it will most likely no longer be 
   necessary.  
    
   After detection of a failure in the network, any NSIS 
   Forwarder/Initiator MUST be able to release state it is involved in. 
   For example, this may require signaling of the "Release after 
   Failure" message upstream as well as downstream, or soft state 
   timing out. 
    
   The goal is to prevent stale state within the network and adds 
   robustness to the operation of NSIS. So in other words, an NSIS 
   signaling protocol or mechanisms MUST provide means for an NSIS 
   entity to discover and remove local stale state.  
    
   Note that this might need to work together with a notification 
   mechanism. Note as well, that transient failures in NSIS processing 
   shouldn't necessarily have to cause all state to be released 
   immediately. 
    
5.3.3 NSIS SHOULD allow for sending notifications upstream 
    
   NSIS Forwarders SHOULD notify the NSIS Initiator or any other NSIS 
   Forwarder upstream, if there is a state change inside the network. 
   There are various types of network changes for instance among them: 
    
   Recoverable errors: the network nodes can locally repair this type 
   error. The network nodes do not have to notify the users of the 
   error immediately. This is a condition when the danger of 
   degradation (or actual short term degradation) of the provided 
   service was overcome by the network (NSIS Forwarder) itself. 
    
   Unrecoverable errors: the network nodes cannot handle this type of 
   error, and have to notify the users as soon as possible. 
    
   Service degradation: In case the service cannot be provided 
   completely but only partially. 
    
   Repair indication: If an error occurred and it has been fixed, this 
   triggers the sending of a notification. 
    
   Service upgrade available: If a previously requested better service 
   becomes available. 
 


     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                   [Page 12] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols        June 2003 
    
   The content of the notification is very service specific, but it is 
   must at least carry type information. Additionally, it may carry the 
   location of the state change. 
    
   The notifications may or may not be in response to a NSIS message. 
   This means an NSIS entity has to be able to handle notifications at 
   any time. 
    
   Note however, that there are a number of security consideration 
   needs to be solved with notification, even more important if the 
   notification is sent without prior request (asynchronously). The 
   problem basically is, that everybody could send notifications to any 
   NSIS entity and the NSIS entity most likely reacts on the 
   notification. For example, if it gets an error notification it might 
   erase state, even if everything is ok. So the notification might 
   depend on security associations between the sender of the 
   notification and its receiver. If a hop-by-hop security mechanism is 
   chosen, this implies also that notifications need to be sent on the 
   reverse path. 
 
 
.3.4 Establishment and refusal to set up state MUST be notified. 
   An NR MUST acknowledge establishment of state on behalf of the NI 
   requesting establishment of that state.  A refusal to set up state 
   MUST be replied with a negative acknowledgement by the NE refusing 
   to set up state. It MUST be sent to the NI. Depending on the 
   signaling application the (positive or negative) notifications may 
   have to pass through further NEs upstream. Information on the reason 
   of the refusal to set up state MAY be made available.  For example, 
   in the resource reservation example, together with a negative 
   answer, the amount of resources available might also be returned. 
 
5.3.5 NSIS MUST allow for local information exchange  
    
   The signaling protocol MUST be able to exchange local information 
   between NSIS Forwarders located within one single administrative 
   domain. The local information exchange is performed by a number of 
   separate messages not belonging to an end-to-end signaling process. 
   Local information might, for example, be IP addresses , notification 
   of successful or erroneous processing of signaling messages, or 
   other conditions. 
    
   In some cases, the NSIS signaling protocol MAY carry identification 
   of the NSIS Forwarders located at the boundaries of a domain. 
   However, the identification of edge should not be visible to the end 
   host (NSIS Initiator) and only applies within one administrative 
   domain. 
    
5.4 Control Information 
    
   This section contains requirements related to the control 
   information that needs to be exchanged. 
    


     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                   [Page 13] 
                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols        June 2003 
    
5.4.1 Mutability information on parameters SHOULD be possible 
    
   It is possible that nodes modify parameters of a signaling message. 
   However, it SHOULD be possible for the NSIS Initiator to control the 
   mutability of the signaled information. For example, the NSIS 
   Initiator should be able to control what is requested end to end, 
   without the request being gradually mutated as it passes through a 
   sequence of nodes.  
    
5.4.2 It SHOULD be possible to add and remove local domain information  
    
   It SHOULD be possible to add and remove local scope elements. 
   Compared to Requirement 5.3.5 this requirement does use the normal 
   signaling process and message exchange for transporting local 
   information. For example, at the entrance to a domain domain-
   specific information is added, which is used in this domain only, 
   and the information is removed again when a signaling message leaves 
   the domain. The motivation is in the economy of re-using the 
   protocol for domain internal signaling of various information 
   pieces. Where additional information is needed within a particular 
   domain, it should be possible to carry this at the same time as the 
   end-to-end information. 
    
5.4.3 State MUST be addressed independent of flow identification 
    
   Addressing or identifying state MUST be independent of the flow 
   identifier (flow end-points, topological addresses). Various 
   scenarios in the mobility area require this independence because 
   flows resulting from handoff might have changed end-points etc. but 
   still have the same service requirement. Also several proxy-based 
   signaling methods profit from such independence, though these are 
   not chartered work items for NSIS. 
    
5.4.4 Modification of already established state SHOULD be seamless 
    
   In many case, the established state needs to be updated (in QoS 
   example upgrade or downgrade of resource usage). This SHOULD happen 
   seamlessly without service interruption. At least the signaling 
   protocol should allow for it, even if some data path elements might 
   not be capable of doing so.  
    
5.4.5 Grouping of signaling for several micro-flows MAY be provided 
    
   NSIS MAY group signaling information for several micro-flow into one 
   signaling message. The goal of this is the optimization in terms of 
   setup delay, which can happen in parallel. This helps applications 
   requesting several flows at once. Also potential refreshes (in case 
   of a soft state solution) might profit from grouping.  
    
   However, the network needs not know that a relationship between the 
   grouped flows exists. There MUST NOT be any transactional semantic 
   associated with the grouping. It is only meant for optimization 
   purposes. 
    
     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                   [Page 14] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols        June 2003 
    
5.5 Performance 
    
   This section discusses performance requirements and evaluation 
   criteria and the way in which these could and should be traded off 
   against each other in various parts of the solution. 
    
   Scalability is always an important requirement for signaling 
   protocols. However, the type of scalability and its importance 
   varies from one scenario to another. 
    
   Note that many of the performance issues are heavily dependent on 
   the scenario assumed and are normally a trade-off between speed, 
   reliability, complexity, and scalability. The trade-off varies in 
   different parts of the network. For example, in radio access 
   networks low bandwidth consumption will outweigh the low latency 
   requirement, while in core networks it may be reverse. 
    
5.5.1 Scalability  
    
   NSIS MUST be scalable in the number of messages received by a 
   signaling communication partner (NSIS Initiator, NSIS Forwarder, and 
   NSIS Responder). The major concern lies in the core of the network, 
   where large numbers of messages arrive. 
    
   It MUST be scalable in number of hand-offs in mobile environments. 
   This mainly applies in access networks, because the core is 
   transparent to mobility in most cases. 
    
   It MUST be scalable in the number of interactions for setting up a 
   state. This applies for end-systems setting up several states. Some 
   servers might be expected to setup a large number of states. 
    
   Scalability in the amount of state per entity MUST be achieved for 
   NSIS Forwarders in the core of the network. 
    
   Scalability in CPU usage MUST be achieved on end terminals and 
   intermediate nodes in case of many state setup processes at the same 
   time. 
    
5.5.2 NSIS SHOULD allow for low latency in setup 
    
   NSIS SHOULD allow for low latency setup of states. This is only 
   needed in scenarios, where state setups are required on a short time 
   scale (e.g. handover in mobile environments), or where human 
   interaction is immediately concerned (e.g., voice communication 
   setup delay).  
    
5.5.3 NSIS MUST allow for low bandwidth consumption for the signaling 
     protocol 
    
   NSIS MUST allow for low bandwidth consumption in certain access 
   networks. Again only small sets of scenarios call for low bandwidth, 
   mainly those where wireless links are involved.  
 
     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                   [Page 15] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols        June 2003 
    
5.5.4 NSIS SHOULD allow to constrain load on devices 
    
   The NSIS architecture SHOULD give the ability to constrain the load 
   (CPU load, memory space, signaling bandwidth consumption and 
   signaling intensity) on devices where it is needed. One of the 
   reasons is that the protocol handling should have a minimal impact 
   on interior (core) nodes. 
    
   This can be achieved by many different methods. Examples include 
   message aggregation, header compression, minimizing functionality, 
   or ignoring signaling in core nodes. The framework may choose any 
   method as long as the requirement is met. 
    
5.5.5 NSIS SHOULD target the highest possible network utilization 
 
   This requirement applies specifically to QoS signaling. 
 
   There are networking environments that require high network 
   utilization for various reasons, and the signaling protocol SHOULD 
   to its best ability support high resource utilization while 
   maintaining appropriate service quality. 
    
   In networks where resources are very expensive (as is the case for 
   many wireless networks), efficient network utilization for signaling 
   traffic is of critical financial importance.  On the other hand 
   there are other parts of the network where high utilization is not 
   required.  
 
5.6 Flexibility 
 
   This section lists the various ways the protocol can flexibly be 
   employed. 
    
5.6.1 Flow aggregation 
    
   NSIS MUST allow for flow aggregation, including the capability to 
   select and change the level of aggregation. 
    
5.6.2 Flexibility in the placement of the NSIS Initiator/Responder 
    
   NSIS MUST be flexible in placing an NSIS Initiator and NSIS 
   Responder. The NSIS Initiator might be located at the sending or the 
   receiving side of a data stream, and the NSIS Responder naturally on 
   the other side. 
    
   Also network-initiated signaling and termination MUST be allowed in 
   various scenarios such as PSTN gateways, some VPNs, and mobility. 
   This means the NSIS Initiator and NSIS Responder might not be at the 
   end points of the data stream. 
    
5.6.3 Flexibility in the initiation of state change 
    


     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                   [Page 16] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols        June 2003 
    
   The NSIS Initiator or the NSIS Responder SHOULD be able to initiate 
   a change of state. In the example of resource reservation this is 
   often referred to as resource re-negotiation. It can happen due to 
   various reasons, such as local resource shortage (CPU, memory on 
   end-system) or a user changed application preference/profiles.  
    
5.6.4 SHOULD support network-initiated state change  
    
   NSIS SHOULD support network-initiated state change. In the QoS 
   example, this is used in cases, where the network is not able to 
   further guarantee resources and wants to e.g. downgrade a resource 
   reservation. 
    
5.6.5 Uni / bi-directional state setup 
    
   Both unidirectional as well as bi-direction state setup SHOULD be 
   possible. With bi-directional state setup we mean that the state for 
   bi-directional data flows is setup. The bi-directional data flows 
   have the same end-points, but the path in the two directions does 
   not need to be the same. 
    
   The goal of a bi-directional state setup is mainly an optimization 
   in terms of setup delay. There is no requirements on constrains such 
   as use of the same data path etc. 
    
5.7 Security 
    
   This section discusses security-related requirements. The NSIS 
   protocol MUST provide means for security, but it MUST be allowed 
   that nodes implementing NSIS signaling do not need use the security 
   means. 
    
5.7.1 Authentication of signaling requests  
    
   A signaling protocol MUST make provision for enabling various 
   entities to be authenticated against each other using strong 
   authentication mechanisms. The term strong authentication points to 
   the fact that weak plain-text password mechanisms must not be used 
   for authentication. 
    
5.7.2 Request Authorization  
    
   The signaling protocol MUST provide means to authorize state setup 
   requests. This requirement demands a hook to interact with a policy 
   entity to request authorization data. This allows an authenticated 
   entity to be associated with authorization data and to verify the 
   request. Authorization prevents state setup by unauthorized entities, 
   setups violating policies, and theft of service. Additionally it 
   limits denial of service attacks against parts of the network or the 
   entire network caused by unrestricted state setups. Additionally it 
   might be helpful to provide some means to inform other protocols of 
   participating nodes within the same administrative domain about a 
   previous successful authorization event. 
    
     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                   [Page 17] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols        June 2003 
    
5.7.3 Integrity protection  
    
   The signaling protocol MUST provide means to protect the message 
   payloads against modifications. Integrity protection prevents an 
   adversary from modifying parts of the signaling message and from 
   mounting denial of service or theft of service type of attacks 
   against network elements participating in the protocol execution. 
    
5.7.4 Replay protection 
    
   To prevent replay of previous signaling messages the signaling 
   protocol MUST provide means to detect old i.e. already transmitted 
   signaling messages. A solution must cover issues of synchronization 
   problems in the case of a restart or a crash of a participating 
   network element.  
    
5.7.5 Hop-by-hop security 
    
   Channel security between signaling entities MUST be implemented. It is 
   a well known and proven concept in Quality-of-Service and other 
   signaling protocols that allows intermediate nodes that actively 
   participate in the protocol to modify the messages as it is required 
   by processing rules. Note that this requirement does not exclude end-
   to-end or network-to-network security of a signaling message. End-to-
   end security between the NSIS Initiator and the NSIS Responder may be 
   used to provide protection of non-mutable data fields. Network-to-
   network security refers to the protection of messages over various 
   hops but not in an end-to-end manner i.e. protected over a particular 
   network. 
    
5.7.6 Identity confidentiality and network topology hiding 
    
   Identity confidentiality SHOULD be supported. It enables privacy and 
   avoids profiling of entities by adversary eavesdropping the signaling 
   traffic along the path. The identity used in the process of 
   authentication may also be hidden to a limited extent from a network 
   to which the initiator is attached. However the identity MUST provide 
   enough information for the nodes in the access network to collect 
   accounting data. 
    
   Network topology hiding MAY be supported to prevent entities along 
   the path to learn the topology of a network. Supporting this property 
   might conflict with a diagnostic capability. 
    
5.7.7 Denial-of-service attacks 
    
   A signaling protocol SHOULD provide prevention of Denial-of-service 
   attacks. To effectively prevent denial-of-service attacks it is 
   necessary that the used security and protocol mechanisms MUST have 
   low computational complexity to verify a state setup request prior to 
   authenticating the requesting entity. Additionally the signaling 
   protocol and the used security mechanisms SHOULD NOT require large 
   resource consumption on NSIS Entities (for example main memory or 

     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                   [Page 18] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols        June 2003 
    
   other additional message exchanges) before a successful 
   authentication is done.  
    
5.7.8 Confidentiality of signaling messages 
    
   Based on the signaling information exchanged between nodes 
   participating in the signaling protocol an adversary may learn both 
   the identities and the content of the signaling messages. To prevent 
   this from happening, confidentiality of the signaling message in a 
   hop-by-hop manner MAY be provided. Note that the protection can be 
   provided on a hop-by-hop basis for most message payloads since it is 
   required that entities which actively participating in the signaling 
   protocol must be able to read and eventually modify the content of 
   the signaling messages. 
    
5.7.9 Ownership of state 
    
   When existing states have to be modified then there is a need to use 
   a session identifier to uniquely identify the established state. A 
   signaling protocol MUST provide means of security protection to 
   prevent adversaries from modifying state.  
    
5.8 Mobility 
 
5.8.1 Allow efficient service re-establishment after handover 
    
   Handover is an essential function in wireless networks. After 
   handover, the states may need to be completely or partially re-
   established due to route changes. The re-establishment may be 
   requested by the mobile node itself or triggered by the access point 
   that the mobile node is attached to.  In the first case, the 
   signaling MUST allow efficient re-establishment after handover.  Re-
   establishment after handover MUST be as quick as possible so that 
   the mobile node does not experience service interruption or service 
   degradation. The re-establishment SHOULD be localized, and not 
   require end-to-end signaling. 
    
5.9 Interworking with other protocols and techniques 
 
   Hooks SHOULD be provided to enable efficient interworking between 
   various protocols and techniques including the following listed. 
    
5.9.1 MUST interwork with IP tunneling 
    
   IP tunneling for various applications MUST be supported. More 
   specifically IPSec tunnels are of importance. This mainly impacts 
   the identification of flows. When using IPSec, parts of information 
   commonly used for flow identification (e.g. transport protocol 
   information and ports) may not be accessible due to encryption.   
 
5.9.2 MUST NOT constrain either to IPv4 or IPv6 
    

     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                   [Page 19] 


                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols        June 2003 
    
5.9.3 MUST be independent from charging model 
    
   Signaling MUST NOT be constrained by charging models or the charging 
   infrastructure used.  
    
5.9.4 SHOULD provide hooks for AAA protocols 
    
   The NSIS SHOULD be developed with respect to be able to collect 
   usage records from one or more network elements. 
    
5.9.5 SHOULD work with seamless handoff protocols 
    
   An NSIS protocol SHOULD work with seamless handoff protocols such as 
   context transfer and candidate access router (CAR) discovery.  
    
5.9.6 MUST work with traditional routing 
    
   NSIS assumes traditional L3 routing, which is purely based on L3 
   destination addresses. NSIS MUST work with L3 routing, in particular 
   it MUST work in case of route changes. This means state on the old 
   route MUST be released and state on the new route MUST be 
   established by an NSIS protocol. 
    
   Networks, which do non-traditional routing, should not break NSIS 
   signaling. NSIS MAY work for some of these situations. Particularly, 
   combinations of NSIS unaware nodes and routing other then 
   traditional one causes some problems. Non-traditional routing 
   includes for example routing decisions based on port numbers, other 
   IP header fields than the destination address, or splitting traffic 
   based on header hash values. These routing environments result in 
   the signaling path being potentially different than the data path. 
    
5.10 Operational 
    
5.10.1 Ability to assign transport quality to signaling messages. 
    
   The NSIS architecture SHOULD allow the network operator to assign 
   the NSIS protocol messages a certain transport quality. As signaling 
   opens up for possible denial-of-service attacks, this requirement 
   gives the network operator a means, but also the obligation, to 
   trade-off between signaling latency and the impact (from the 
   signaling messages) on devices within the network. From protocol 
   design this requirement states that the protocol messages SHOULD be 
   detectable, at least where the control and assignment of the 
   messages priority is done. 
    
   Furthermore, the protocol design must take into account reliability 
   concerns. Communication reliability is seen as part of the quality 
   assigned to signaling messages. So procedures MUST be defined how an 
   NSIS signaling system behaves if some kind of request it sent stays 
   unanswered. The basic transport protocol to be used between adjacent 
   NSIS Entities MAY ensure message integrity and reliable transport. 
    

     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                   [Page 20] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols        June 2003 
    
5.10.2 Graceful fail over 
    
   Any unit participating in NSIS signaling MUST NOT cause further 
   damage to other systems involved in NSIS signaling when it has to go 
   out of service. 
    
5.10.3 Graceful handling of NSIS entity problems 
    
   NSIS entities SHOULD be able to detect a malfunctioning peer. It may 
   notify the NSIS Initiator or another NSIS entity involved in the 
   signaling process. The NSIS peer may handle the problem itself e.g. 
   switching to a backup NSIS entity. In the latter case note that 
   synchronization of state between the primary and the backup entity 
   is needed. 
    
6 Security Considerations 
    
   Section 5.7 of this document provides security related requirements 
   of a signaling protocol. 
    
7 References 
    
    
7.1 Normative References 
    
   [KEYWORDS] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate 
   Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997. 
    
    
7.2 Non-Normative References 
    
   [RSVP] Braden, R., Zhang, L., Berson, S., Herzog, A., Jamin, S., 
   "Resource Protocol (RSVP) -- Version 1 Functional Specification", 
   RFC 2205, September 1997. 
    
   [RSVP-TE] D. Awduche, L. Berger, D. Gan, T. Li, V. Srinivasan, G. 
   Swallow, "RSVP-TE: Extensions to RSVP for LSP Tunnels", RFC 3209, 
   December 2001. 
    
   [RFC3234] B. Carpenter, S. Brim, "Middleboxes: Taxonomy and Issues", 
   RFC 3234, February 2002. 
    
   [PPVPN_FW] R. Callon, M. Suzuki, "A Framework for Layer 3 Provider 
   Provisioned Virtual Private Networks", <draft-ietf-ppvpn-framework-
   08.txt>, March 2003 
    
8 Acknowledgments 
    
   Quite a number of people have been involved in the discussion of the 
   document, adding some ideas, requirements, etc. We list them without 
   a guarantee on completeness: Changpeng Fan (Siemens), Krishna Paul 
   (NEC), Maurizio Molina (NEC), Mirko Schramm (Siemens), Andreas 
   Schrader (NEC), Hannes Hartenstein (NEC), Ralf Schmitz (NEC), 
   Juergen Quittek (NEC), Morihisa Momona (NEC), Holger Karl (Technical 
     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                   [Page 21] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols        June 2003 
    
   University Berlin), Xiaoming Fu (Technical University Berlin), Hans-
   Peter Schwefel (Siemens), Mathias Rautenberg (Siemens), Christoph 
   Niedermeier (Siemens), Andreas Kassler (University of Ulm), Ilya 
   Freytsis. 
    
   Some text and/or ideas for text, requirements, scenarios have been 
   taken from an Internet Draft written by the following authors: David 
   Partain (Ericsson), Anders Bergsten (Telia Research), Marc Greis 
   (Nokia), Georgios Karagiannis (Ericsson), Jukka Manner (University 
   of Helsinki), Ping Pan (Juniper), Vlora Rexhepi (Ericsson), Lars 
   Westberg (Ericsson), Haihong Zheng (Nokia). Some of those have 
   actively contributed new text to this document as well. 
    
   Another Internet Draft impacting this document has been written by 
   Sven Van den Bosch, Maarten Buchli, and Danny Goderis (all Alcatel). 
   These people contributed also new text. 
    
   Thanks also to Kwok Ho Chan (Nortel) for text changes. And finally 
   thanks Alison Mankin for the thorough AD review. 
     
9 Author's Addresses 
    
   Marcus Brunner (Editor) 
   NEC Europe Ltd. 
   Network Laboratories 
   Kurfuersten-Anlage 36 
   D-69115 Heidelberg 
   Germany 
   E-Mail: brunner@ccrle.nec.de 
    
   Robert Hancock 
   Roke Manor Research Ltd 
   Romsey, Hants, SO51 0ZN 
   United Kingdom 
   E-Mail: robert.hancock@roke.co.uk 
    
   Eleanor Hepworth 
   Roke Manor Research Ltd 
   Romsey, Hants, SO51 0ZN 
   United Kingdom 
   E-Mail: eleanor.hepworth@roke.co.uk 
 
   Cornelia Kappler 
   Siemens AG 
   Berlin 13623 
   Germany 
   E-Mail: cornelia.kappler@icn.siemens.de 
 
   Hannes Tschofenig  
   Siemens AG 
   Otto-Hahn-Ring 6 
   81739 Munchen 
   Germany 
   Email: Hannes.Tschofenig@mchp.siemens.de 
     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                   [Page 22] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols        June 2003 
    
    
10 Appendix: Scenarios/Use cases 
    
   In the following we describe scenarios, which are important to 
   cover, and which allow us to discuss various requirements. Some 
   regard this as use cases to be covered defining the use of a 
   signaling protocol. In general, these scenarios consider the 
   specific case of signaling for QoS (resource reservation), although 
   many of the issues carry over directly to other signaling types. 
    
10.1 Terminal Mobility 
    
   The scenario we are looking at is the case where a mobile terminal 
   (MT) changes from one access point to another access point. The 
   access points are located in separate QoS domains. We assume Mobile 
   IP to handle mobility on the network layer in this scenario and 
   consider the various extensions (i.e., IETF proposals) to Mobile IP, 
   in order to provide 'fast handover' for roaming Mobile Terminals. 
   The goal to be achieved lies in providing, keeping, and adapting the 
   requested QoS for the ongoing IP sessions in case of handover. 
   Furthermore, the negotiation of QoS parameters with the new domain 
   via the old connection might be needed, in order to support the 
   different 'fast handover' proposals within the IETF.  
 
   The entities involved in this scenario include a mobile terminal, 
   access points, an access network manager, and communication partners 
   of the MT (the other end(s) of the communication association). 
   From a technical point of view, terminal mobility means changing the 
   access point of a mobile terminal (MT). However, technologies might 
   change in various directions (access technology, QoS technology, 
   administrative domain). If the access points are within one specific 
   QoS technology (independent of access technology) we call this 
   intra-QoS technology handoff. In the case of an inter-QoS technology 
   handoff, one change from e.g. a DiffServ to an IntServ domain, 
   however still using the same access technology. Finally, if the 
   access points are using different access technologies we call it 
   inter-technology hand-off. 
    
   The following issues are of special importance in this scenario: 
    
   1) Handoff decision 
    
   - The QoS management requests handoff. The QoS management can decide 
   to change the access point, since the traffic conditions of the new 
   access point are better supporting the QoS requirements. The metric 
   may be different (optimized towards a single or a group/class of 
   users). Note that the MT or the network (see below) might trigger 
   the handoff. 
    
   - The mobility management forces handoff. This can have several 
   reasons. The operator optimizes his network, admission is no longer 
   granted (e.g. emptied prepaid condition). Or another example is when 
   the MT is reaching the focus of another base station. However, this 
   might be detected via measurements of QoS on the physical layer and 
     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                   [Page 23] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols        June 2003 
    
   is therefore out of scope of QoS signaling in IP. Note again that 
   the MT or the network (see below) might trigger the handoff. 
    
   - This scenario shows that local decisions might not be enough. The 
   rest of the path to the other end of the communication needs to be 
   considered as well. Hand-off decisions in a QoS domain do not only 
   depend on the local resource availability, e.g., the wireless part, 
   but involve the rest of the path as well. Additionally, 
   decomposition of an end-to-end signaling might be needed, in order 
   to change only parts of it. 
    
   2) Trigger sources  
    
   - Mobile terminal: If the end-system QoS management identifies 
   another (better-suited) access point, it will request the handoff 
   from the terminal itself. This will be especially likely in the case 
   that two different provider networks are involved. Another important 
   example is when the current access point bearer disappears (e.g. 
   removing the Ethernet cable). In this case, the NSIS Initiator is 
   basically located on the mobile terminal. 
    
   - Network (access network manager): Sometimes, the handoff trigger 
   will be issued from the network management to optimize the overall 
   load situation. Most likely this will result in changing the base-
   station of a single providers network. Most likely the NSIS 
   Initiator is located on a system within the network. 
    
   3) Integration with other protocols 
    
   - Interworking with other protocol must be considered in one or the 
   other form. E.g., it might be worth combining QoS signaling between 
   different QoS domains with mobility signaling at hand-over. 
    
   4) Handover rates 
    
   In mobile networks, the admission control process has to cope with 
   far more admission requests than call setups alone would generate. 
   For example, in the GSM (Global System for Mobile communications) 
   case, mobility usually generates an average of one to two handovers 
   per call. For third generation networks (such as UMTS), where it is 
   necessary to keep radio links to several cells simultaneously 
   (macro-diversity), the handover rate is significantly higher. 
    
   5) Fast state installation 
    
   Handover can also cause packet losses. This happens when the 
   processing of an admission request causes a delayed handover to the 
   new base station. In this situation, some packets might be 
   discarded, and the overall speech quality might be degraded 
   significantly. Moreover, a delay in handover may cause degradation 
   for other users. In the worst-case scenario, a delay in handover may 
   cause the connection to be dropped if the handover occurred due to 
   bad air link quality. Therefore, it is critical that QoS signaling 
   in connection with handover be carried out very quickly. 
     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                   [Page 24] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols        June 2003 
    
    
   6) Call blocking in case of overload 
    
   Furthermore, when the network is overloaded, it is preferable to 
   keep s for previously established flows while blocking new requests. 
   Therefore, the resource reservation requests in connection with 
   handover should be given higher priority than new requests for 
   resource reservation. 
    
10.2 Wireless Networks 
    
   In this scenario, the user is using the packet services of a 
   wireless system (such as the 3rd generation wireless system 
   3GPP/UMTS, 3GPP2/cdma2000). The region between the End Host and the 
   Edge Node (Edge Router) connecting the wireless network to another 
   QoS domain is considered to be a single QoS domain. 
    
   The issues in such an environment regarding QoS include: 
    
   1) The wireless networks provide their own QoS technology with 
   specialized parameters to co-ordinate the QoS provided by both the 
   radio access and wired access networks. Provisioning of QoS 
   technologies within a wireless network can be described mainly in 
   terms of calling bearer classes, service options, and service 
   instances. These QoS technologies need to be invoked with suitable 
   parameters when higher layers trigger a request for QoS. Therefore 
   these involve mapping of the requested higher layer QoS parameters 
   onto specific bearer classes or service instances. The request for 
   allocation of resources might be triggered by signaling at the IP 
   level that passes across the wireless system, and possibly other QoS 
   domains. Typically, wireless network specific messages are invoked 
   to setup the underlying bearer classes or service instances in 
   parallel with the IP layer QoS negotiation, to allocate resources 
   within the radio access network. 
    
   2) The IP signaling messages are initiated by the NSIS initiator and 
   interpreted by the NSIS Forwarder. The most efficient placement of 
   the NSIS Initiator and NSIS Forwarder has not been determined in 
   wireless networks, but a few potential scenarios can be envisioned. 
   The NSIS Initiator could be located at the End Host (e.g. 3G User 
   equipment (UE)), the Access Gateway or at a node that is not 
   directly on the data path, such as a Policy Decision Function. The 
   Access Gateway could act as a proxy NSIS Initiator on behalf of the 
   End Host. The Policy Decision Function that controls per-
   flow/aggregate resources with respect to the session within its QoS 
   domain (e.g. the 3G wireless network) may act as a proxy NSIS 
   Initiator for the end host or the Access Gateway. Depending on the 
   placement of the NSIS Initiator, the NSIS Forwarder may be located 
   at an appropriate point in the wireless network. 
    
   3) The need for re-negotiation of resources in a new wireless domain 
   due to host mobility. In this case the NSIS Initiator and the NSIS 
   Forwarder should detect mobility events and autonomously trigger re-
   negotiation of resources. 
     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                   [Page 25] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols        June 2003 
    
 
10.3 An example scenario for 3G wireless networks 
 
   The following example is a pure hypothetical scenario, where an NSIS 
   signaling protocol might be used in a 3G environment. We do not 
   impose in any way, how a potential integration might be done. Terms 
   from the 3GPP architecture are used (P-CSCF, IMS, expanded below) in 
   order to give specificity, but in a hypothetical design, one that 
   reflects neither development nor review by 3GPP. The example should 
   help in the design of a NSIS signaling protocol such that it could 
   be used in various environments. 
    
   The 3G wireless access scenario is shown in Figure 1. The Proxy-Call 
   State Control Function (P-CSCF) is the outbound SIP proxy (only used 
   in integrated multimedia systems (IMS)). The Access Gateway is the 
   egress router of the 3G wireless domain and it connects the radio 
   access network to the Edge Router (ER) of the backbone IP network. 
   The Policy Decision Function (PDF) is an entity responsible for 
   controlling bearer level resource allocations/de-allocations in 
   relation to session level services e.g. SIP. The Policy Decision 
   Function may also control the Access Gateway to open and close the 
   gates and to configure per-flow policies, i.e. to authorize or 
   forbid user traffic. The P-CSCF (only used in IMS) and the Access 
   Gateway communicate with the Policy Decision Function, for network 
   resource allocation/de-allocation decisions. The User Equipment (UE) 
   or the Mobile Station (MS) consists of a Mobile Terminal (MT) and 
   Terminal Equipment (TE), e.g. a laptop. 
 
                           +--------+ 
                +--------->| P-CSCF |---------> SIP signaling 
               /           +--------+ 
              / SIP            | 
             |                 | 
             |              +-----+            +----------------+ 
             |              | PDF |<---------->| NSIS Forwarder |<---> 
             |              +-----+            +----------------+ 
             |                 |                  ^ 
             |                 |                  | 
             |                 |                  | 
             |                 |COPS              | 
             |                 |                  | 
         +------+          +---------+            | 
         | UE/MS|----------| Access  |<-----------+     +----+ 
         +------+          | Gateway |------------------| ER | 
                           +---------+                  +----+ 
    
                  Figure 1: 3G wireless access scenario 
    
   The PDF has all the required QoS information for per-flow or 
   aggregate admission control in 3G wireless networks. It receives 
   resource allocation/de-allocation requests from the P-CSCF and/or 
   Access Gateway etc. and responds with policy decisions. Hence the 
   PDF may be a candidate entity to host the functionality of the NSIS 
   Initiator, initiating the "NSIS" QoS signaling towards the backbone 
     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                   [Page 26] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols        June 2003 
    
   IP network. On the other hand, the UE/MS may act as the NSIS 
   Initiator or the Access Gateway may act as a Proxy NSIS Initiator on 
   behalf of the UE/MS. In the former case, the P-CSCF/PDF has to do 
   the mapping from codec types and media descriptors (derived from 
   SIP/SDP signaling) to IP traffic descriptor. In the latter case, the 
   UE/MS may use any appropriate QoS signaling mechanism as the NSIS 
   Initiator. If the Access Gateway is acting as the Proxy NSIS 
   initiator on behalf of the UE/MS, then it may have to do the mapping 
   of parameters from radio access specific QoS to IP QoS traffic 
   parameters before forwarding the request to the NSIS Forwarder. 
    
   The NSIS Forwarder is currently not part of the standard 3G wireless 
   architecture. However, to achieve end-to-end QoS a NSIS Forwarder is 
   needed such that the NSIS Initiators can request a QoS connection to 
   the IP network. As in the previous example, the NSIS Forwarder could 
   manage a set of pre-provisioned resources in the IP network, i.e. 
   bandwidth pipes, and the NSIS Forwarder perform per-flow admission 
   control into these pipes. In this way, a connection can be made 
   between two 3G wireless access networks, and hence, end-to-end QoS 
   can be achieved. In this case the NSIS Initiator and NSIS Forwarder 
   are clearly two separate logical entities. The Access Gateway or/and 
   the Edge Router in Fig.1 may contain the NSIS Forwarder 
   functionality, depending upon the placement of the NSIS Initiator as 
   discussed in scenario 2 in section 10.2. This use case clearly 
   illustrates the need for an NSIS QoS signaling protocol between NSIS 
   Initiator and NSIS Forwarder. An important application of such a 
   protocol may be its use in the end-to-end establishment of a 
   connection with specific QoS characteristics between a mobile host 
   and another party (e.g. end host or content server). 
    
10.4 Wired part of wireless network 
 
   A wireless network, seen from a QoS domain perspective, usually 
   consists of three parts: a wireless interface part (the "radio 
   interface"), a wired part of the wireless network (i.e., Radio 
   Access Network) and the backbone of the wireless network, as shown 
   in Figure 2. Note that this figure should not be seen as an 
   architectural overview of wireless networks but rather as showing 
   the conceptual QoS domains in a wireless network. 
    
   In this scenario, a mobile host can roam and perform a handover 
   procedure between base stations/access routers. In this scenario the 
   NSIS QoS protocol can be applied between a base station and the 
   gateway (GW).  In this case a GW can also be considered as a local 
   handover anchor point. Furthermore, in this scenario the NSIS QoS 
   protocol can also be applied either between two GWs, or between two 
   edge routers (ER). 
    
    
    
    
    
 
    
     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                   [Page 27] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols        June 2003 
    
                          |--| 
                          |GW| 
   |--|                   |--| 
   |MH|---                 . 
   |--|  / |-------|       . 
        /--|base   | |--|  . 
           |station|-|ER|... 
           |-------| |--|  . |--| back- |--|  |---|              |----| 
                           ..|ER|.......|ER|..|BGW|.."Internet"..|host| 
        -- |-------| |--|  . |--| bone  |--|  |---|              |----| 
   |--| \  |base   |-|ER|...     . 
   |MH|  \ |station| |--|        . 
   |--|--- |-------|             .          MH  = mobile host 
                              |--|          ER  = edge router 
      <---->                  |GW|          GW  = gateway 
     Wireless link            |--|          BGW = border gateway 
                                            ... = interior nodes 
            <-------------------> 
       Wired part of wireless network 
    
   <----------------------------------------> 
                Wireless Network 
    
      Figure 2. QoS architecture of wired part of wireless network 
    
   Each of these parts of the wireless network impose different issues 
   to be solved on the QoS signaling solution being used: 
    
    
   - Wireless interface: The solution for the air interface link 
     has to ensure flexibility and spectrum efficient transmission 
     of IP packets.  However, this link layer QoS can be solved in 
     the same way as any other last hop problem by allowing a 
     host to request the proper QoS profile. 
    
   - Wired part of the wireless network:  This is the part of 
     the network that is closest to the base stations/access 
     routers.  It is an IP network although some parts logically 
     perform tunneling of the end user data. In cellular networks, 
     the wired part of the wireless network is denoted as a 
     radio access network. 
    
     This part of the wireless network has different 
     characteristics when compared to traditional IP networks: 
    
         1. The network must support mobility. Many wireless 
            networks are able to provide a combination of soft 
            and hard handover procedures. When handover occurs, 
            reservations need to be established on new paths. 
            The establishment time has to be as short as possible 
            since long establishment times for s degrade 
            the performance of the wireless network.  Moreover, 
            for maximal utilization of the radio spectrum, frequent 
            handover operations are required. 
     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                   [Page 28] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols        June 2003 
    
    
         2. These links are typically rather bandwidth-limited. 
    
         3. The wired transmission in such a network contains a 
            relatively high volume of expensive leased lines. 
            Overprovisioning might therefore be prohibitively 
            expensive. 
    
         4. The radio base stations are spread over a wide 
            geographical area and are in general situated a large 
            distance from the backbone. 
    
   - Backbone of the wireless network: the requirements imposed 
     by this network are similar to the requirements imposed by 
     other types of backbone networks. 
    
   Due to these very different characteristics and requirements, often 
   contradictory, different QoS signaling solutions might be needed in 
   each of the three network parts. 
 
10.5 Session Mobility 
    
   In this scenario, a session is moved from one end-system to another. 
   Ongoing sessions are kept and QoS parameters need to be adapted, 
   since it is very likely that the new device provides different 
   capabilities. Note that it is open which entity initiates the move, 
   which implies that the NSIS Initiator might be triggered by 
   different entities. 
     
   User mobility (i.e., a user changing the device and therefore moving 
   the sessions to the new device) is considered to be a special case 
   within the session mobility scenario. 
 
   Note that this scenario is different from terminal mobility. Not the 
   terminal (end-system) has moved to a different access point. Both 
   terminals are still connected to an IP network at their original 
   points.  
    
   The issues include: 
    
   1) Keeping the QoS guarantees negotiated implies that the end-
   point(s) of communication are changed without changing the s.  
    
   2) The trigger of the session move might be the user or any other 
   party involved in the session.  
    
10.6 QoS reservation/negotiation from access to core network 
    
   The scenario includes the signaling between access networks and core 
   networks in order to setup and change s together with potential 
   negotiation. 
 
   The issues to be solved in this scenario are different from previous 
   ones. 
     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                   [Page 29] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols        June 2003 
    
     
   1) The entity of reservation is most likely an aggregate. 
    
   2) The time scales of s might be different (long living s of 
   aggregates, less often re-negotiation).  
    
   3) The specification of the traffic (amount of traffic), a 
   particular QoS is guaranteed for, needs to be changed. E.g., in case 
   additional flows are added to the aggregate, the traffic 
   specification of the flow needs to be added if it is not already 
   included in the aggregates specification.  
    
   4) The flow specification is more complex including network 
   addresses and sets of different address for the source as well as 
   for the destination of the flow.  
 
10.7 QoS reservation/negotiation over administrative boundaries 
    
   Signaling between two or more core networks to provide QoS is 
   handled in this scenario. This might also include access to core 
   signaling over administrative boundaries. Compared to the previous 
   one it adds the case, where the two networks are not in the same 
   administrative domain. Basically, it is the inter-domain/inter 
   provider signaling which is handled in here. 
    
   The domain boundary is the critical issue to be resolved. Which as 
   various flavors of issues a QoS signaling protocol has to be 
   concerned with.  
    
   1) Competing administrations: Normally, only basic information 
   should be exchanged, if the signaling is between competing 
   administrations. Specifically information about core network 
   internals (e.g., topology, technology, etc.) should not be 
   exchanged. Some information exchange about the "access points" of 
   the core networks (which is topology information as well) may need 
   to be exchanged, because it is needed for proper signaling. 
    
   2) Additionally, as in scenario 4, signaling most likely is based on 
   aggregates, with all the issues raise there. 
    
   3) Authorization: It is critical that the NSIS Initiator is 
   authorized to perform a QoS path setup. 
    
   4) Accountability: It is important to notice that signaling might be 
   used as an entity to charge money for, therefore the interoperation 
   with accounting needs to be available. 
 
10.8 QoS signaling between PSTN gateways and backbone routers 
    
   A PSTN gateway (i.e., host) requires information from the network 
   regarding its ability to transport voice traffic across the network. 
   The voice quality will suffer due to packet loss, latency and 
   jitter. Signaling is used to identify and admit a flow for which 
   these impairments are minimized.  In addition, the disposition of 
     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                   [Page 30] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols        June 2003 
    
   the signaling request is used to allow the PSTN GW to make a call 
   routing decision before the call is actually accepted and delivered 
   to the final destination. 
    
   PSTN gateways may handle thousands of calls simultaneously and there 
   may be hundreds of PSTN gateways in a single provider network. These 
   numbers are likely to increase as the size of the network increases. 
   The point being that scalability is a major issue. 
    
   There are several ways that a PSTN gateway can acquire assurances 
   that a network can carry its traffic across the network. These 
   include: 
    
     1. Over-provisioning a high availability network. 
     2. Handling admission control through some policy server 
        that has a global view of the network and its resources. 
     3. Per PSTN GW pair admission control. 
     4. Per call admission control (where a call is defined as 
        the 5-tuple used to carry a single RTP flow). 
    
   Item 1 requires no signaling at all and is therefore outside the 
   scope of this working group. 
    
   Item 2 is really a better informed version of 1, but it is also 
   outside the scope of this working group as it relies on a particular 
   telephony signaling protocol rather than a packet admission control 
   protocol. 
    
   Item 3 is initially attractive, as it appears to have reasonable 
   scaling properties, however, its scaling properties only are 
   effective in cases where there are relatively few PSTN GWs. In the 
   more general case were a PSTN GW reduces to a single IP phone 
   sitting behind some access network, the opportunities for 
   aggregation are reduced and the problem reduces to item 4. 
    
   Item 4 is the most general case. However, it has the most difficult 
   scaling problems. The objective here is to place the requirements on 
   Item 4 such that a scalable per-flow admission control protocol or 
   protocol suite may be developed. 
    
   The case where per-flow signaling extends to individual IP end-
   points allows the inclusion of IP phones on cable, DSL, wireless or 
   other access networks in this scenario. 
    
   Call Scenario 
    
   A PSTN GW signals end-to-end for some 5-tuple defined flow a 
   bandwidth and QoS requirement. Note that the 5-tuple might include 
   masking/wildcarding. The access network admits this flow according 
   to its local policy and the specific details of the access 
   technology.   
    
   At the edge router (i.e., border node), the flow is admitted, again 
   with an optional authentication process, possibly involving an 
     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                   [Page 31] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols        June 2003 
    
   external policy server.  Note that the relationship between the PSTN 
   GW and the policy server and the routers and the policy server is 
   outside the scope of NSIS. The edge router then admits the flow into 
   the core of the network, possibly using some aggregation technique. 
    
   At the interior nodes, the NSIS host-to-host signaling should either 
   be ignored or invisible as the Edge router performed the admission 
   control decision to some aggregate. 
    
   At the inter-provider router (i.e., border node), again the NSIS 
   host-to-host signaling should either be ignored or invisible, as the 
   Edge router has performed an admission control decision about an 
   aggregate across a carrier network.  
    
10.9 PSTN trunking gateway 
    
   One of the use cases for the NSIS signaling protocol is the scenario 
   of interconnecting PSTN gateways with an IP network that supports 
   QoS. 
   Four different scenarios are considered here. 
     1. In-band QoS signaling is used. In this case the Media Gateway 
        (MG) will be acting as the NSIS Initiator and the Edge Router 
        (ER) will be the NSIS Forwarder. Hence, the ER should do 
        admission control (into pre-provisioned traffic trunks) for the 
        individual traffic flows. This scenario is not further 
        considered here. 
     2. Out-of-band signaling in a single domain, the NSIS forwarder is 
        integrated in the MGC. In this case no NSIS protocol is 
        required. 
     3. Out-of-band signaling in a single domain, the NSIS forwarder is 
        a separate box. In this case NSIS signaling is used between the 
        MGC and the NSIS Forwarder. 
     4. Out-of-band signaling between multiple domains, the NSIS 
        Forwarder (which may be integrated in the MGC) triggers the 
        NSIS Forwarder of the next domain. 
    
   When the out-of-band QoS signaling is used the Media Gateway 
   Controller (MGC) will be acting as the NSIS Initiator.   
    
   In the second scenario the voice provider manages a set of traffic 
   trunks that are leased from a network provider. The MGC does the 
   admission control in this case. Since the NSIS Forwarder acts both 
   as a NSIS Initiator and a NSIS Forwarder, no NSIS signaling is 
   required. This scenario is shown in Figure 3. 
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                   [Page 32] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols        June 2003 
    
     +-------------+    ISUP/SIGTRAN     +-----+              +-----+ 
     | SS7 network |---------------------| MGC |--------------| SS7 | 
     +-------------+             +-------+-----+---------+    +-----+ 
           :                    /           :             \ 
           :                   /            :              \ 
           :                  /    +--------:----------+    \    
           :          MEGACO /    /         :           \    \     
           :                /    /       +-----+         \    \   
           :               /    /        | NMS |          \    \    
           :              /     |        +-----+          |     \   
           :              :     |                         |     :    
    +--------------+  +----+    |   bandwidth pipe (SLS)  |  +----+ 
    | PSTN network |--| MG |--|ER|======================|ER|-| MG |-- 
    +--------------+  +----+     \                       /   +----+ 
                                  \     QoS network     / 
                                   +-------------------+ 
    
                 Figure 3: PSTN trunking gateway scenario 
    
   In the third scenario, the voice provider does not lease traffic 
   trunks in the network. Another entity may lease traffic trunks and 
   may use a NSIS Forwarder to do per-flow admission control. In this 
   case the NSIS signaling is used between the MGC and the NSIS 
   Forwarder, which is a separate box here. Hence, the MGC acts only as 
   a NSIS Initiator. This scenario is depicted in Figure 4. 
    
      +-------------+    ISUP/SIGTRAN     +-----+              +-----+ 
      | SS7 network |---------------------| MGC |--------------| SS7 | 
      +-------------+             +-------+-----+---------+    +-----+ 
            :                    /           :             \ 
            :                   /         +-----+           \ 
            :                  /          | NF  |            \  
            :                 /           +-----+             \ 
            :                /               :                 \ 
            :               /       +--------:----------+       \  
            :       MEGACO :       /         :           \       : 
            :              :      /       +-----+         \      : 
            :              :     /        | NMS |          \     : 
            :              :     |        +-----+          |     : 
            :              :     |                         |     : 
     +--------------+  +----+    |   bandwidth pipe (SLS)  |  +----+  
     | PSTN network |--| MG |--|ER|======================|ER|-| MG |-- 
     +--------------+  +----+     \                       /   +----+ 
                                   \     QoS network     / 
                                    +-------------------+ 
    
                 Figure 4: PSTN trunking gateway scenario 
    
   In the fourth scenario multiple transport domains are involved. In 
   the originating network either the MGC may have an overview on the 
   resources of the overlay network or a separate NSIS Forwarder will 
   have the overview. Hence, depending on this either the MGC or the 
   NSIS Forwarder of the originating domain will contact the NSIS 
   Forwarder of the next domain. The MGC always acts as a NSIS 
     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                   [Page 33] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols        June 2003 
    
   Initiator and may also be acting as a NSIS Forwarder in the first 
   domain. 
    
10.10 An application requests end-to-end QoS path from the network 
    
   This is actually the conceptually simplest case. So a multimedia 
   application requests a guaranteed service from an IP network. We 
   assume here that the application is somehow able to specify the 
   network service. The characteristics here are that many hosts might 
   do it, but that the requested service is low capacity (bounded by 
   the access line). Note that there is an issue of scaling in the 
   number of applications requesting this service in the core of the 
   network. 
 
10.11 QOS for Virtual Private Networks 
    
   In a Virtual Private Network (VPN) [PPVPN_FW] a variety of tunnels 
   might be used between its edges. These tunnels could be for example, 
   IPSec, GRE, and IP-IP. One of the most significant issues in VPNs is 
   related to how a flow is identified and what quality a flow gets. A 
   flow identification might consist among others of the transport 
   protocol port numbers. In an IP-Sec tunnel this will be problematic 
   since the transport protocol information is encrypted. 
    
   There are two types of L3 VPNs, distinguished by where the endpoints 
   of the tunnels exist. The endpoints of the tunnels may either be on 
   the customer (CPE) or the provider equipment or provider edge (PE). 
    
   Virtual Private networks are also likely to request bandwidth or 
   other type of service in addition to the premium services the PSTN 
   GW are likely to use. 
    
10.11.1 Tunnel end points at the Customer premises 
    
   When the endpoints are the CPE, the CPE may want to signal across 
   the public IP network for a particular amount of bandwidth and QoS 
   for the tunnel aggregate. Such signaling may be useful when a 
   customer wants to vary their network cost with demand, rather than 
   paying a flat rate. Such signaling exists between the two CPE 
   routers. Intermediate access and edge routers perform the same exact 
   call admission control, authentication and aggregation functions 
   performed by the corresponding routers in the PSTN GW scenario with 
   the exception that the endpoints are the CPE tunnel endpoints rather 
   than PSTN GWs and the 5-tuple used to describe the RTP flow is 
   replaced with the corresponding flow spec to uniquely identify the 
   tunnels. Tunnels may be of any variety (e.g. IP-Sec, GRE, IP-IP). 
    
   In such a scenario, NSIS would actually allow partly for customer 
   managed VPNs, which means a customer can setup VPNs by subsequent 
   NSIS signaling to various end-point. Plus the tunnel end-points are 
   not necessarily bound to an application. The customer administrator 
   might be the one triggering NSIS signaling. 
    

     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                   [Page 34] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols        June 2003 
    
10.11.2 Tunnel end points at the provider premises 
    
   In the case were the tunnel end-points exist on the provider edge, 
   requests for bandwidth may be signaled either per flow, where a flow 
   is defined from a customers address space, or between customer 
   sites. 
    
   In the case of per flow signaling, the PE router must map the 
   bandwidth request to the tunnel carrying traffic to the destination 
   specified in the flow spec. Such a tunnel is a member of an 
   aggregate to which the flow must be admitted. In this case, the 
   operation of admission control is very similar to the case of the 
   PSTN GW with the additional level of indirection imposed by the VPN 
   tunnel. Therefore, authentication, accounting and policing may be 
   required on the PE router. 
    
   In the case of per site signaling, a site would need to be 
   identified. This may be accomplished by specifying the network 
   serviced at that site through an IP prefix. In this case, the 
   admission control function is performed on the aggregate to the PE 
   router connected to the site in question. 
 
Full Copyright Statement 
 
  Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002). All Rights Reserved. 
   
  This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
  others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 
  or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published 
  and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any 
  kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are 
  included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this 
  document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
  the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
  Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
  developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for 
  copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be 
  followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than 
  English. 
   
  The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be 
  revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns. 
   
  This document and the information contained herein is provided on an 
  "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING 
  TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING 
  BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION 
  HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF 
  MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
 
Notices 
    
   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to 
     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                   [Page 35] 

                 Requirements for Signaling Protocols        June 2003 
    
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in 
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights 
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it 
   has made any effort to identify any such rights.  Information on the 
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and 
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11.  Copies of 
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances 
   of licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made 
   to obtain a general license or permission for the use of such 
   proprietary rights by implementors or users of this specification 
   can be obtained from the IETF Secretariat. 
    
   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights, which may cover technology that may be required to practice 
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF Executive 
   Director. 
 




































     
   Brunner (Editor)         Informational                   [Page 36] 

