





Internet-Draft                                   Yoshihiro Ohba (Editor)
Expires: October, 2003                                              TAIS
                                                               Subir Das
                                                  Telcordia Technologies
                                                         Basavaraj Patil
                                                                   Nokia
                                                          Hesham Soliman
                                                                Ericsson
                                                             Alper Yegin
                                                         DoCoMo USA Labs


                                                          April 28, 2003


             Problem Statement and Usage Scenarios for PANA

                <draft-ietf-pana-usage-scenarios-06.txt>


Status of This Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC 2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents, valid for a maximum of six
   months, and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents
   at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.


Abstract

   Network access authentication is a function that is typically
   required in most scenarios.  This is accomplished in most networks
   via protocols such as PPP, PPPoE, IEEE 802.1X and others.  The PANA
   (Protocol for carrying Authentication for Network Access) WG is
   considering the network access authentication function being
   performed at or above the IP layer.  This document captures the
   various usage scenarios/applicability of a protocol that is used for
   network access authentication that is at layer-3 or above and
   additionally identifies the problem being addressed by the WG.







                          Expires October, 2003                 [Page 1]





Internet-Draft            PANA Usage Scenarios            April 28, 2003


Table of contents

   1         Introduction ............................................ 2
   2.        Acronyms ................................................ 2
   3.        Problem statement ....................................... 3
   4.        Usage scenarios ......................................... 5
   4.1.      PANA with physical layer security ....................... 5
   4.2.      PANA with link-layer security ........................... 5
   4.3.      PANA in the absence of any lower-layer security ......... 6
   4.4.      Mobile IP ............................................... 7
   4.5.      Personal area networks .................................. 8
   4.6.      Limited free access ..................................... 8
   5.        Security considerations ................................. 9
   6.        Acknowledgments ......................................... 9
   7.        References .............................................. 9
   7.1.      Normative references .................................... 9
   7.2.      Informative references ................................. 10
   8.        Authors' information ................................... 10
   9.        Intellectual property notices .......................... 11
   10.       Copyright notice ....................................... 11


1  Introduction

   Networks in most cases require some form of authentication in order
   to prevent unauthorized access.  Only authenticated and authorized
   clients are able to attach to an access network for sending and
   receiving IP packets.

   There are various mechanisms currently used by networks to prevent
   unauthorized access.  In its simplest form, unintended clients can be
   physically isolated from the access networks.  But there exist some
   scenarios where a solution based on physical security might not be
   practical.  Public access networks and wireless networks are such
   examples.  In the absence of physical security (and sometimes in
   addition to it) a higher layer access authentication mechanism is
   needed.  Link-layer based authentication mechanisms are used whenever
   they can serve the needs of a particular deployment model.  However,
   not all link-layers support multiple authentication methods or allow
   independent authentications for the link access and Internet service
   providers.  A higher layer authentication mechanism is needed
   whenever such additional requirements are not met by the underlying
   link-layers.  Generally a network or higher layer mechanism can be
   used instead of or in addition to available link-layer and physical
   security.  Currently there is not a standard protocol to perform
   network access authentication above the link-layer.  Instead, a
   number of ad-hoc and inadequate solutions are being used to overcome
   the problem.  PANA will be developed to fill this gap by defining a
   network-layer access authentication protocol.

   This document discusses the need for a standard network access
   authentication protocol and covers various usage scenarios where such
   a protocol is applicable.


2.  Acronyms




                          Expires October, 2003                 [Page 2]





Internet-Draft            PANA Usage Scenarios            April 28, 2003


   AAA: Authentication, Authorization and Accounting

   DSL: Digital Subscriber Line

   EAP: Extensible Authentication Protocol

   GPRS: General Packet Radio Service

   HDLC: High-level Data Link Control

   IKE: Internet Key Exchange

   ISP: Internet Service Provider

   MSC: Mobile Switching Center

   MN: Mobile Node

   MT: Mobile Termination

   NAI: Network Access Identifier

   NAP: Network Access Provider

   PPP: Point-to-Point Protocol

   PPPoE: PPP over Ethernet

   TE: Terminal Equipment

   UE: User Equipment

   VLR: Visiting Location Register


3.  Problem statement

   Access networks usually require clients to go through an
   authentication and authorization process for network access.  Network
   access authentication of clients necessitates a protocol between the
   client and the network to execute one or more authentication methods
   (e.g., PAP, CHAP, TLS, SIM, etc.).  With the increasing number of the
   various types of networks being deployed (e.g., GPRS, IEEE 802.11,
   DSL, etc.), it is important that the authentication methods are not
   tied to the underlying link-layer (technology specific).  An
   authentication protocol must be able to support various
   authentication methods regardless of the underlying access
   technology.

   Some deployment scenarios require a separation between a network
   access provider (NAP) and an Internet service provider (ISP), where
   the NAP provides physical and link-layer connectivity to an access
   network it manages, and the ISP provides Internet connectivity for
   the NAP.  An important aspect of network access is the ability to
   enable dynamic ISP selection during the initial connection process.
   This is usually achieved by either using link-layer specific
   selectors during link establishment or by presenting a client



                          Expires October, 2003                 [Page 3]





Internet-Draft            PANA Usage Scenarios            April 28, 2003


   identifier which carries the ISP domain information during the
   authentication process.  An example of such a client identifier would
   be the NAI[RFC2486] (e.g., john@anyisp.com.)  The authentication
   agent in the access network would consult the backend authentication
   servers in the given domain, and the respective ISP service will be
   used once the client access is authorized.  This is also essential in
   providing roaming service to clients.  A single authentication
   between the client and the ISP is generally sufficient for both NAP
   and ISP access by relying on the pre-established trust relation
   between the NAP and the ISP.  Nevertheless, there are some scenarios
   where NAPs and ISPs require independent authentication by the client.
   If the NAP authentication is performed using a link-layer mechanism,
   ISP authentication can be left to a network-layer mechanism.  An
   example of a multi-layer authentication can be seen in cdma2000
   networks as described in section 4.2.

   The Extensible Authentication Protocol (EAP) [RFC2284bis] offers a
   natural way to encapsulate many different authentication methods.
   Among the various types of link-layers, only IEEE 802 defines how to
   carry EAP on the link-layer [802.1X].  Other link-layers resort to
   using PPP/PPPoE [RFC1661,RFC2516] as a link-layer agnostic way of
   carrying EAP. The ungainly insertion of this extra layer incurs
   additional round-trips at connection time, generates overhead of PPP
   processing even for subsequent data packets, and forces the network
   topology into a point-to-point model. EAP could achieve greater
   applicability if it could be carried directly over IP. That way, the
   resulting IP packets could be carried over any link technology
   without incurring additional cost or limitation on the architectures.

   In general terms, PANA will be defined as a network-layer transport
   for EAP.  PANA can be used over any link-layer.  The primary purpose
   of PANA is to authenticate a client to a server for the purpose of
   network access.  Initial client authentication needs to be bound to
   subsequent traffic to prevent spoofing of data packets and resulting
   service theft.  Therefore, this authentication may be required to
   generate cryptographic keying material unless presence of a secure
   physical or link-layer channel is assured a priori.  The task of
   generating and distributing such keying material can be accomplished
   by various EAP methods.  Once the keying material is present, it can
   be used with link-layer ciphers or IPsec for providing subsequent
   per-packet authentication.  It should be noted that the keying
   material produced by the authentication methods is generally not
   readily usable by IPsec.  A key exchange protocol like IKE [RFC2409]
   may be used to create the required IPsec security associations.  The
   mechanisms that are used to turn keying material produced by the
   initial authentication method into link-layer or network-layer
   ciphers are outside the scope of PANA protocol.

   Until a standard solution like PANA is developed, architectures that
   use neither IEEE 802 nor PPP as link-layers are forced to design
   their own ad-hoc mechanisms to address the problem of authentication
   for network access.  One such mechanism is the application-layer
   authentication method implemented by http redirects and web-based
   login.  In addition to being a non-standard solution, this provides
   an incomplete network access authentication with well-known
   vulnerabilities, and therefore is regarded as a stop-gap mechanism.




                          Expires October, 2003                 [Page 4]





Internet-Draft            PANA Usage Scenarios            April 28, 2003


   Another method designed to provide network access authentication is
   based on overloading an existing network-layer protocol.  The Mobile
   IPv4 [RFC3344] protocol has a built-in authentication mechanism.
   Regardless of whether mobile nodes need to use a foreign agent in an
   access network, registration via a foreign agent can be required by
   using an appropriate flag in the agent advertisements.  This forces
   the nodes to register with a foreign agent, and therefore utilizes
   Mobile IPv4 for network access authentication.  Such a solution has
   very limited applicability as a link-layer agnostic method since it
   relies on the deployment of the Mobile IPv4 protocol.


4.  Usage scenarios

   In this section, the first three subsections describe generic PANA
   usage scenarios categorized in terms of lower-layer security.  The
   remaining subsections describe specific scenarios for Mobile IP,
   personal area networks, and limited free access.


4.1.  PANA with physical layer security

   Even in networks where a certain degree of security is provided at
   the physical layer, authenticating the client may still be essential
   if the physical layer does not provide the identity of the client.
   However, per-packet authentication and encryption may not be
   necessary.  DSL networks that are implemented on top of point-to-
   point phone lines are such an example.  In such networks, PANA can be
   used for client authentication and be the basis for an appropriate
   access control mechanism.

   In DSL networks, there are a number of deployment models with respect
   to client configuration and client authentication.  In DSL networks
   where PPP or PPPoE is used for both configuration and authentication,
   PANA may not be required.  On the other hand, there are some DSL
   networks that use some configuration method other than PPP or PPPoE,
   i.e., DHCP or static configuration.  Such networks use either an ad-
   hoc network access authentication method such as http-redirect with
   web-based login or no authentication method at all.  A standard,
   link-layer agnostic network access authentication would be an
   improvement for this type of network deployments.  In addition, the
   variations in DSL deployment scenarios, particularly the variation in
   physical topology between the DSL modem and the ISPs edge router,
   makes it difficult to define a single authentication scheme which
   operates at the link-layer and works with any physical topology.  It
   is possible that a link-layer agnostic, single network access
   authentication solution may be required in the future for DSL
   deployments as long as the variations in deployment topologies are
   expected to continue.


4.2.  PANA with link-layer security

   Certain cellular link-layers such as GSM and cdma2000 provide their
   own authentication mechanisms as well as ciphering of data sent over
   the radio link.  This technology specific authentication enables
   authorization for link access by the NAP, and can provide per-packet



                          Expires October, 2003                 [Page 5]





Internet-Draft            PANA Usage Scenarios            April 28, 2003


   authentication, integrity and replay protection at the link-layer.
   In the case where such access networks are used for accessing the
   Internet via some ISP, it does not provide authorization at the
   network-layer which can only be done by authenticating the client to
   an ISP.  So, this necessitates another layer of authentication.  It
   should be noted that this second authentication takes place over a
   secure channel.

   cdma2000 is a good example of such an architecture where multi-
   layered authentication for network access takes place.  cdma2000
   networks require the user/device to authenticate with the MSC/VLR
   before providing access to the packet data network.  The technology
   specific access authentication which uses the CAVE (cellular
   authentication and voice encryption) algorithm also provides cipher
   keys to the mobile and the base station for securing the link layer
   for all subsequent voice and data carried on the radio link.  In the
   Simple IP mode of operation in cdma2000 service, the ISP
   authentication is provided by using CHAP within PPP.  In the Mobile
   IP mode of cdma2000, the Mobile IPv4 protocol supports a
   challenge/response style authentication.  For a high level overview
   of the cdma2000 architecture refer to [RFC3141].

   As the packet data network architecture in cdma2000 evolves, PANA
   could be supported as a single unifying network-layer authentication
   mechanism.  This would result in the replacement of CHAP
   authentication via PPP with the added benefit of considering the use
   of running IP directly over a simplified framing protocol instead of
   PPP.  In the case of Mobile IP mode of operation the need for the
   challenge response scheme could be deprecated as well as enabling the
   smooth migration to Mobile IPv6 deployment, the reason being the
   decoupling of IP mobility from access authentication.


4.3.  PANA in the absence of any lower-layer security

   There are scenarios where neither physical nor link-layer access
   control is available on the network.  One possible cause of this
   scenario is due to the lack of adequate client authentication
   capabilities (i.e., authentication methods) on the link-layer
   technology being used even when the link-layer has sufficient cipher
   suite support.  It is desirable to support various authentication
   methods without being limited to the ones that are specific to the
   underlying technology.  Another cause for the lack of lower-layer
   authentication is due to the difficulty of deployment.  For example,
   physical security is not practical for public access wireless
   networks.

   In the absence of such lower-layer security and authentication
   mechanism not only are service providers unable to control the
   unauthorized use of their networks but also end-users feel insecure
   about using such networks at all.  In order to support authentication
   functionality in such systems, many providers today use a higher-
   layer authentication scheme, such as http-redirect commonly known as
   web-based login.  In this method, once the link is established,
   users' traffic is re-directed to a web server which in turn generates
   a web-based login forcing users to provide the authentication
   information.  While this method solves the problem partially by



                          Expires October, 2003                 [Page 6]





Internet-Draft            PANA Usage Scenarios            April 28, 2003


   allowing only authorized users to access the network, it however does
   not enable the lower-layer security such as, per-packet
   authentication and encryption over the radio link.  Moreover, it is a
   non-standard ad hoc solution that provides support for only a limited
   set of authentication methods.

   In such scenarios, a standard mechanism is necessary which can
   provide network access authentication irrespective of whether the
   underlying layers are secured or not.  A solution like PANA at the
   network layer may be adequate if it can specify appropriate
   authentication methods that can derive and distribute keys for
   authentication, integrity and confidentiality of data traffic either
   at the link or at the network layer.  For example, if link-layer does
   not support the desired authentication method but supports ciphering,
   PANA can be used to bootstrap the latter.  On the other hand, if
   link-layer neither supports the desired authentication method nor
   ciphering, PANA can be used to bootstrap higher layer security
   protocols, such as, IKE and IPsec.  Thus a successful PANA
   authentication can result in a secured network environment although
   the underlying layers were not secured to begin with.  Also assuming
   PANA will provide support to various authentication schemes,
   providers will have the advantage using a single framework across
   multiple environments.


4.4.  Mobile IP

   Mobile IPv4 defines its own authentication extensions to authenticate
   and authorize mobile nodes at the foreign agents and home agents.  In
   the co-located care-of-address mode, the mobile node itself is the
   tunnel end-point for packets tunneled from the home agent to the
   mobile.  In this mode of operation the mobile does not rely on the
   existence of a foreign agent in the visited network.  In this case, a
   mobile node can send its registration request directly to the home
   agent.  However even in the co-located care-of address case, the
   protocol has a way to require mobile nodes to register with a foreign
   agent by setting the Registration-Required bit in the agent
   advertisements.  This forces mobile nodes to send their registration
   requests via the foreign agent, even though they do not have to
   interact with that agent otherwise.  The intent of forcing the mobile
   to register via the foreign agent is primarily driven by the access
   networks requirement to authenticate mobile nodes before allowing
   access.

   This method can only be used in IPv4 networks where every client
   implements mobile node functionality.  Even for IPv4 clients, a
   better approach would be to replace this protocol-specific
   authentication method by a common authentication protocol such as
   PANA.  PANA can be used with any client regardless of Mobile IPv4
   support and it can support various authentication methods.  PANA can
   also be used with IPv6-only clients or dual-stack clients.  The
   Mobile IPv6 [MIPv6] protocol doesn't define a foreign agent in the
   access networks and provide any protocol support for access
   authentication.  PANA can provide the access network authentication
   in the case of Mobile IPv6.

   Network access authentication can be handled by PANA regardless of



                          Expires October, 2003                 [Page 7]





Internet-Draft            PANA Usage Scenarios            April 28, 2003


   the IP version of the clients and independently of whether they
   support or use Mobile IP.


4.5.  Personal area networks

   A personal area network (PAN) is the interconnection of devices
   within the range of an individual person.  For example connecting a
   cellular phone, PDA, and laptop together via short range wired or
   wireless links would form a PAN.

   Devices in a PAN can directly communicate with each other, and access
   the Internet if any one of them is specifically designated as a
   mobile router for providing gateway functionality.  Just like any
   access network, a PAN also requires authentication and authorization
   prior to granting access to its clients.  A mobile router can
   terminate the link-layer from different PAN nodes, and therefore it
   acts as the first-hop router for them.  Additionally, it can also
   perform access control as an authentication agent.  Different nodes
   might be using different link-layer technologies to connect to a
   mobile router.  Therefore, it is desirable to use authentication
   methods independent of the underlying link and rely on a link-layer
   agnostic authentication protocol like PANA to carry authentication
   information.

   Another characteristic of PANs is its small scale.  Only a handful of
   nodes are expected to be part of a given PAN without a need to
   support roaming in the PAN; therefore the authentication process does
   not necessarily require a managed backend AAA infrastructure for
   credential verification.  Locally stored information can be used in
   this kind of PANA deployment without relying on a AAA backend.

   The 3GPP architecture allows separation of MT (mobile termination,
   such as cellular phone) and TE (terminal equipment, such as laptop)
   [RFC3314].  TE can be connected to the Internet via MT by
   establishing a PPP connection.  One or more TEs can be connected to a
   MT to form a PAN.  The current architecture does not allow direct
   communication between the TEs (if more than one are connected to the
   MT) without having to go through the cellular interface of the MT.
   This architecture will benefit from using shared links (e.g.,
   Ethernet) between the TE and MT.  Shared links would allow TEs to
   communicate directly to each other without having to send data
   through the power-limited MT or over the expensive air interface.
   PANA can be used for authenticating PAN nodes when shared links are
   used between the TEs and MT.


4.6.  Limited free access

   Certain networks might allow clients to access a limited topology
   without any explicit authentication and authorization.  However, the
   policy may be such that any access beyond this topology requires
   authentication and authorization.  For example, in an airport
   network, information such as, flight arrival and departure gate
   numbers, airport shops and restaurants, etc., is offered as free
   services by the airlines or airport authorities for their passengers.
   In order to access such information, users can simply plug in their



                          Expires October, 2003                 [Page 8]





Internet-Draft            PANA Usage Scenarios            April 28, 2003


   devices into the network without performing any authentication.  In
   fact, the network will only offer link-layer connectivity and limited
   network layer access to users.  On the other hand, access to further
   services or sites using such local networks requires authentication
   and authorization.  If users want such services, the access network
   can detect that attempt and initiate authentication.  This also
   allows the network to initiate the authentication whenever
   appropriate.  Once users perform the authentication it will be
   allowed to go beyond the free access zone.  PANA can be an enabler to
   such limited free access scenarios and can offer a flexible access
   control framework for public access networks.


5.  Security considerations

   This document identifies the need for a standard network-layer
   authentication protocol and illustrates a number of possible usage
   scenarios.  The actual protocol design is not specified in this
   document, neither are the security considerations around it.  The
   scenarios described in this document are used as input to a separate
   security threats analysis document [SECTHREAT].  Eventually, the
   requirements are derived from both the scenarios described in this
   document and also the threats analyzed in the latter document.  These
   requirements are being collected in the [PANAREQ] document.


6.  Acknowledgments

   The authors would like to thank Bernard Aboba, James Carlson, Jacques
   Caron, Francis Dupont, Paal Engelstad, Henry Haverinen, Prakash
   Jayaraman, James Kempf, Pete McCann, Thomas Narten, Erik Nordmark,
   Mohan Parthasarathy, Reinaldo Penno, Phil Roberts, David Spence,
   Barani Subbiah, Hannes Tschofenig, George Tsirtsis, John Vollbrecht,
   Cliff Wang and the rest of the PANA Working Group for the ideas and
   support they have given to this document.


7.  References

7.1.  Normative references

   [MIPv6] D. Johnson, et al., "Mobility Support in IPv6", (draft-ietf-
       mobileip-ipv6-21.txt).

   [PANAREQ] R. Penno, et al., "Protocol for Carrying Authentication for
       Network Access (PANA) Requirements and Terminology" (draft-ietf-
       pana-requirements-05.txt).

   [RFC1661] W. Simpson, "The Point-to-Point Protocol (PPP)", RFC 1661
       (STD 51), July 1994.

   [RFC2284bis] L. Blunk, et al., "Extensible Authentication Protocol
       (EAP)" (draft-ietf-eap-rfc2284bis-02.txt).

   [RFC2409] D. Harkins and D. Carrel, "The Internet Key Exchange
       (IKE)", RFC 2409, November 1998.




                          Expires October, 2003                 [Page 9]





Internet-Draft            PANA Usage Scenarios            April 28, 2003


   [RFC2486] B. Aboba, et al., "The Network Access Identifier", RFC
       2486, January 1999.

   [RFC2516] L. Mamakos, et al., "A Method for Transmitting PPP Over
       Ethernet (PPPoE)", RFC 2516, February 1999.

   [RFC3314] M. Wasserman et al., "Recommendations for IPv6 in Third
       Generation Partnership Project (3GPP) Standards", RFC 3314,
       September 2002.

   [RFC3344] C. Perkins, "IP Mobility Support for IPv4", RFC 3344,
       August 2002.

   [SECTHREAT] M. Parthasarathy, "PANA Threat Analysis and security
       requirements" (draft-ietf-pana-threats-eval-03.txt).

7.2.  Informative references

   [802.1X] IEEE Standard for Local and Metropolitan Area Networks,
       "Port-Based Network Access Control", IEEE Std 802.1X-2001.

   [RFC3141] T. Hiller et al., "CDMA2000 Wireless Data Requirements for
       AAA", RFC 3141, June 2001.


8.  Authors' information

   Yoshihiro Ohba
   Toshiba America Information Systems, Inc.
   9740 Irvine Blvd.
   Irvine, CA 92618-1697
   USA
   Phone: +1 949 583 3273
   Email: yohba@tari.toshiba.com

   Subir Das
   MCC 1D210R, Telcordia Technologies
   445 South Street, Morristown, NJ 07960
   Phone: +1 973 829 4959
   email: subir@research.telcordia.com

   Basavaraj Patil
   Nokia
   6000 Connection Dr.
   Irving, TX. 75039
   USA
   Phone:  +1 972-894-6709
   Email:  Basavaraj.Patil@nokia.com

   Hesham Soliman
   Ericsson Radio Systems AB
   Torshamnsgatan 29,
   Kista, Stockholm 16480
   Sweden
   Phone:  +46 8 4046619
   Fax:    +46 8 4047020
   Email: Hesham.Soliman@era.ericsson.se



                          Expires October, 2003                [Page 10]





Internet-Draft            PANA Usage Scenarios            April 28, 2003


   Alper E. Yegin
   DoCoMo USA Labs
   181 Metro Drive, Suite 300
   San Jose, CA, 95110
   USA
   Phone: +1 408 451 4743
   Email: alper@docomolabs-usa.com


9.  Intellectual property notices

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it
   has made any effort to identify any such rights.  Information on the
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11.  Copies of
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of
   licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to
   obtain a general license or permission for the use of such
   proprietary rights by implementors or users of this specification can
   be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF Executive
   Director.


10.  Copyright notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003).  All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION



                          Expires October, 2003                [Page 11]





Internet-Draft            PANA Usage Scenarios            April 28, 2003


   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


























































                          Expires October, 2003                [Page 12]


