


Network Working Group                                           J. Jeong
Internet-Draft                                   Sungkyunkwan University
Intended status: Standards Track                             S. Cespedes
Expires: September 14, 2017                         Universidad de Chile
                                                              N. Benamar
                                                Moulay Ismail University
                                                               J. Haerri
                                                                 EURECOM
                                                           M. Wetterwald
                                                            FBConsulting
                                                          March 13, 2017


 Survey on IP-based Vehicular Networking for Intelligent Transportation
                                Systems
           draft-jeong-ipwave-vehicular-networking-survey-01

Abstract

   This document surveys the IP-based vehicular networks, which are
   considered a key component of Intelligent Transportation Systems
   (ITS).  The main topics of vehicular networking are vehicle-to-
   vehicle (V2V), vehicle-to-infrastructure (V2I), and infrastructure-
   to-vehicle (I2V) networking.  This document deals with some critical
   aspects in vehicular networking, such as IP address
   autoconfiguration, vehicular network architecture, routing, mobility
   management, and security.  This document also surveys standard
   activities for vehicular networks.  Finally, this document summarizes
   and analyzes the previous research activities that use IPv4 or IPv6
   for vehicular networking.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.



Jeong, et al.          Expires September 14, 2017               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft    IP-based Vehicular Networking Survey        March 2017


   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 14, 2017.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2017 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.  Requirements Language  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   4.  IP Address Autoconfiguration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     4.1.  Automatic IP Address Configuration in VANETs . . . . . . .  5
     4.2.  Routing and Address Assignment using Lane/Position
           Information in a Vehicular Ad-hoc Network  . . . . . . . .  5
     4.3.  GeoSAC: Scalable Address Autoconfiguration for VANET
           Using Geographic Networking Concepts . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     4.4.  Key Observations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   5.  Vehicular Network Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     5.1.  VIP-WAVE: On the Feasibility of IP Communications in
           802.11p Vehicular Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     5.2.  IPv6 Operation for WAVE - Wireless Access in Vehicular
           Environments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     5.3.  A Framework for IP and non-IP Multicast Services for
           Vehicular Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     5.4.  Joint IP Networking and Radio Architecture for
           Vehicular Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     5.5.  Mobile Internet Access in FleetNet . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     5.6.  A Layered Architecture for Vehicular Delay-Tolerant
           Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     5.7.  Key Observations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   6.  Vehicular Network Routing  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     6.1.  An IP Passing Protocol for Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks
           with Network Fragmentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12



Jeong, et al.          Expires September 14, 2017               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft    IP-based Vehicular Networking Survey        March 2017


     6.2.  Experimental Evaluation for IPv6 over VANET Geographic
           Routing  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     6.3.  Key Observations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   7.  Mobility Management in Vehicular Networks  . . . . . . . . . . 14
     7.1.  A Hybrid Centralized-Distributed Mobility Management
           for Supporting Highly Mobile Users . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
     7.2.  A Hybrid Centralized-Distributed Mobility Management
           Architecture for Network Mobility  . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
     7.3.  NEMO-Enabled Localized Mobility Support for Internet
           Access in Automotive Scenarios . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
     7.4.  Network Mobility Protocol for Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks  . 17
     7.5.  Performance Analysis of PMIPv6-Based Network MObility
           for Intelligent Transportation Systems . . . . . . . . . . 17
     7.6.  A Novel Mobility Management Scheme for Integration of
           Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks and Fixed IP Networks  . . . . . 18
     7.7.  SDN-based Distributed Mobility Management for 5G
           Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
     7.8.  IP Mobility Management for Vehicular Communication
           Networks: Challenges and Solutions . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
     7.9.  Key Observations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
   8.  Vehicular Network Security . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
     8.1.  Securing Vehicular IPv6 Communications . . . . . . . . . . 21
     8.2.  Providing Authentication and Access Control in
           Vehicular Network Environment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
     8.3.  Key Observations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
   9.  Standard Activities for Vehicular Networks . . . . . . . . . . 22
     9.1.  IEEE Guide for Wireless Access in Vehicular
           Environments (WAVE) - Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
     9.2.  IEEE Standard for Wireless Access in Vehicular
           Environments (WAVE) - Networking Services  . . . . . . . . 23
     9.3.  ETSI Intelligent Transport Systems: Transmission of
           IPv6 Packets over GeoNetworking Protocols  . . . . . . . . 24
     9.4.  ISO Intelligent Transport Systems: Communications
           Access for Land Mobiles (CALM) Using IPv6 Networking . . . 24
   10. Summary and Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
   11. Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
   12. Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
   13. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
     13.1. Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
     13.2. Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
   Appendix A.  Changes from
                draft-jeong-ipwave-vehicular-networking-survey-00 . . 31









Jeong, et al.          Expires September 14, 2017               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft    IP-based Vehicular Networking Survey        March 2017


1.  Introduction

   Nowadays vehicular networks have been focused on the driving safety,
   driving efficiency, and infotainment in road networks.  For the
   driving safety, IEEE has standardized Wireless Access in Vehicular
   Environments (WAVE) standards, such as IEEE 802.11p, IEEE 1609.3, and
   IEEE 1609.4 [VIP-WAVE].  Along with these WAVE standards, IPv6 and
   Mobile IP protocols (e.g., MIPv4 and MIPv6) can be extended to
   vehicular networks.

   This document surveys the IP-based vehicular networking for
   Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS), such as IP address
   autoconfiguration, vehicular network architecture, vehicular network
   routing (for multi-hop V2V, V2I, and V2V), mobility management, and
   security.  This document summarizes and analyzes the previous
   research activities using IPv4 or IPv6 for vehicular networking.

   Based on the survey of this document, we can specify the requirements
   for vehicular networks for the intended purposes, such as the driving
   safety, driving efficiency, and infotainment.  As a consequence, this
   will make it possible to design the network architecture and
   protocols for vehicular networking.

2.  Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].

3.  Terminology

   This document defines the following new terms:

   o  Road-Side Unit (RSU): A node that has Dedicated Short-Range
      Communications (DSRC) device for wireless communications with
      vehicles and is connected to the Internet.  An RSU is usually
      deployed at an intersection.

   o  Vehicle: A node that has DSRC device for wireless communications
      with vehicles and RSUs.  A vehicle may also have a GPS-navigation
      system for efficient driving.

   o  Traffic Control Center (TCC): A node that maintains road
      infrastructure information (e.g., RSUs and traffic signals),
      vehicular traffic statistics (e.g., average vehicle speed and
      vehicle inter-arrival time per road segment), and vehicle
      information (e.g., a vehicle's identifier, position, direction,
      speed, and trajectory as a navigation path).  TCC is included in a



Jeong, et al.          Expires September 14, 2017               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft    IP-based Vehicular Networking Survey        March 2017


      vehicular cloud for vehicular networks.

4.  IP Address Autoconfiguration

   This section surveys IP address autoconfiguration schemes for
   vehicular networks.

4.1.  Automatic IP Address Configuration in VANETs

   Fazio et al. proposed a vehicular address configuration called VAC
   for automatic IP address configuration in Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks
   (VANET) [Address-Autoconf].  VAC uses a distributed dynamic host
   configuration protocol (DHCP).  This scheme uses a leader playing a
   role of a DHCP server within a cluster having connected vehicles
   within a VANET.  In a connected VANET, vehicles are connected with
   each other with the communication range.  In this VANET, VAC
   dynamically elects a leader-vehicle to quickly provide vehicles with
   unique IP addresses.  The leader-vehicle maintains updated
   information on configured addressed in its connected VANET.  It aims
   at the reduction of the frequency of IP address reconfiguration due
   to mobility.

   VAC defines the concept of SCOPE as a delimited geographic area where
   IP addresses are guaranteed to be unique.  When it is allocated an IP
   address from a leader-vehicle with a scope, a vehicle is guaranteed
   to have a unique IP address while moving within the scope of the
   leader-vehicle.  If it moves out of the scope of the leader vehicle,
   it needs to ask for another IP address from another leader-vehicle so
   that its IP address can be unique within the scope of the new leader-
   vehicle.  This approach may allow for less frequent change of an IP
   address than the address allocation from a fixed Internet gateway.

   Thus, VAC can support a feasible address autoconfiguration for V2V
   scenarios, but the overhead to guarantee the uniqueness of IP
   addresses is not ignorable under high-speed mobility.

4.2.  Routing and Address Assignment using Lane/Position Information in
      a Vehicular Ad-hoc Network

   Kato et al. proposed an IPv6 address assignment scheme using lane and
   position information [Address-Assignment].  In this addressing
   scheme, each lane of a road segment has a unique IPv6 prefix.  When
   it moves in a lane in a road segment, a vehicle autoconfigures its
   IPv6 address with its MAC address and the prefix assigned to the
   lane.  A group of vehicles constructs a connected VANET within the
   same subnet such that their IPv6 addresses have the same prefix.
   Whenever it moves to another lane, a vehicle updates its IPv6 address
   with the prefix corresponding to the new lane and also joins the



Jeong, et al.          Expires September 14, 2017               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft    IP-based Vehicular Networking Survey        March 2017


   group corresponding to the lane.

   However, this address autoconfiguration scheme may have much overhead
   in the case where vehicles change their lanes frequently in highway.

4.3.  GeoSAC: Scalable Address Autoconfiguration for VANET Using
      Geographic Networking Concepts

   Baldessari et al. proposed an IPv6 scalable address autoconfiguration
   scheme called GeoSAC for vehicular networks [GeoSAC].  GeoSAC uses
   geographic networking concepts such that it combines the standard
   IPv6 ND and geographic routing functionality.  It matches
   geographically-scoped network partitions to individual IPv6
   multicast-capable links.  In the standard IPv6, all nodes within the
   same link must communicate with each other, but due to the
   characteristics of wireless links, this concept of a link is not
   clear in vehicular networks.  GeoSAC defines a link as a geographic
   area having a network partition.  This geographic area can have a
   connected VANET.  Thus, vehicles within the same VANET in a specific
   geographic area are regarded as staying in the same link, that is, an
   IPv6 multicast link.

   This paper identifies four key requirements of IPv6 address
   autoconfiguration for vehicular networks: (i) the configuration of
   globally valid addresses, (ii) a low complexity for address
   autoconfiguration, (iii) a minimum signaling overhead of address
   autoconfiguration, (iv) the support of network mobility through
   movement detection, (v) an efficient gateway selection from multiple
   RSUs, (vi) a fully distributed address autoconfiguration for network
   security, (vii) the authentication and integrity of signaling
   messages, and (viii) the privacy protection of vehicles' users.

   To support the proposed link concept, GeoSAC performs ad hoc routing
   for geographic networking in a sub-IP layer called Car-to-Car (C2C)
   NET.  Vehicles within the same link can receive an IPv6 router
   advertisement (RA) message transmitted by an RSU as a router, so they
   can autoconfigure their IPv6 address based on the IPv6 prefix
   contained in the RA and perform Duplicate Address Detection (DAD) to
   verify the uniqueness of the autoconfigured IP address by the help of
   the geographic routing within the link.

   For location-based applications, to translate between a geographic
   area and an IPv6 prefix belonging to an RSU, this paper takes
   advantage of an extended DNS service, using GPS-based addressing and
   routing along with geographic IPv6 prefix format [GeoSAC].

   Thus, GeoSAC can support the IPv6 link concept through geographic
   routing within a specific geographic area.



Jeong, et al.          Expires September 14, 2017               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft    IP-based Vehicular Networking Survey        March 2017


4.4.  Key Observations

   High-speed mobility should be considered for a light-overhead address
   autoconfiguration.  A cluster leader can have an IPv6 prefix
   [Address-Autoconf].  Each lane in a road segment can have an IPv6
   prefix [Address-Assignment].  A geographic region under the
   communication range of an RSU can have an IPv6 prefix [GeoSAC].

   IPv6 Neighbor Discovery (ND) should be extended to support the
   concept of a link for an IPv6 prefix in terms of multicast.  Ad Hoc
   routing is required for the multicast in a connected VANET with the
   same IPv6 prefix [GeoSAC].  A rapid DAD should be supported to
   prevent or reduce IPv6 address conflicts.

5.  Vehicular Network Architecture

   This section surveys vehicular network architectures based on IP
   along with various ratio technologies.

5.1.  VIP-WAVE: On the Feasibility of IP Communications in 802.11p
      Vehicular Networks

   Cespedes et al. proposed a vehicular IP in WAVE called VIP-WAVE for
   I2V and V2I networking [VIP-WAVE].  IEEE 1609.4 specified a WAVE
   stack of protocols and includes IPv6 as a network layer protocol in
   data plane.  The standard WAVE does not support DAD, seamless
   communications for Internet services, and multi-hop communications
   between a vehicle and an infrastructure node (e.g., RSU).  To
   overcome these limitations of the standard WAVE for IP-based
   networking, VIP-WAVE enhances the standard WAVE by the following
   three schemes: (i) an efficient mechanism for the IPv6 address
   assignment and DAD, (ii) on-demand IP mobility based on Proxy Mobile
   IPv6 (PMIPv6), and (iii) one-hop and two-hop communications for I2V
   and V2I networking.

   In WAVE, IPv6 neighbor discovery (ND) protocol is not recommended due
   to the overhead of ND against the timely and prompt communications in
   vehicular networking.  By WAVE service advertisement (WAS) management
   frame, an RSU can provide vehicles with IP configuration information
   (e.g., IPv6 prefix, prefix length, gateway, router lifetime, and DNS
   server) without using ND.  However, WAVE devices may support
   readdressing to provide pseudonymity, so a MAC address of a vehicle
   may be changed or randomly generated.  This update of the MAC address
   may lead to the collision of an IPv6 address based on a MAC address,
   so VIP-WAVE includes a light-weight, on-demand ND to perform DAD.

   For IP-based Internet services, VIP-WAVE adopts PMIPv6 for network-
   based mobility management in vehicular networks.  In VIP-WAVE, RSU



Jeong, et al.          Expires September 14, 2017               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft    IP-based Vehicular Networking Survey        March 2017


   plays a role of mobile anchor gateway (MAG) of PMIPv6, which performs
   the detection of a vehicle as a mobile node in a PMIPv6 domain and
   registers it into the PMIPv6 domain.  For PMIPv6 operations, VIP-WAVE
   requires a central node called local mobility anchor (LMA), which
   assigns IPv6 prefixes to vehicles as mobile nodes and forwards data
   packets to the vehicles moving in the coverage of RSUs under its
   control through tunnels between MAGs and itself.

   For two-hop communications between a vehicle and an RSU, VIP-WAVE
   allows an intermediate vehicle between the vehicle and the RSU to
   play a role of a packet relay for the vehicle.  When it becomes out
   of the communication range of an RSU, a vehicle searches for another
   vehicle as a packet relay by sending a relay service announcement.
   When it receives this relay service announcement and is within the
   communication range of an RSU, another vehicle registers itself into
   the RSU as a relay and notifies the relay-requester vehicle of a
   relay maintenance announcement.

   Thus, VIP-WAVE is a good candidate for I2V and V2I networking,
   supporting an enhanced ND, handover, and two-hop communications
   through a relay.

5.2.  IPv6 Operation for WAVE - Wireless Access in Vehicular
      Environments

   Baccelli et al. provided an analysis of the operation of IPv6 as it
   has been described by the IEEE WAVE standards 1609 [IPv6-WAVE].
   Although the main focus of WAVE has been the timely delivery of
   safety related information, the deployment of IP-based infotainment
   applications is also considered.  Thus, in order to support
   infotainment traffic, WAVE supports IPv6 and transport protocols such
   as TCP and UDP.

   In the analysis provided in [IPv6-WAVE], it is identified that the
   IEEE 1609.3 standard's recommendations for IPv6 operation over WAVE
   are rather minimal.  Protocols on which the operation of IPv6 relies
   for IP address configuration and IP-to-link-layer address translation
   (e.g., IPv6 NP protocol) are not recommended in the standard.
   Additionally, IPv6 works under certain assumptions for the link model
   that do not necessarily hold in WAVE.  For instance, IPv6 assumes
   symmetry in the connectivity among neighboring interfaces.  However,
   interference and different levels of transmission power may cause
   unidirectional links to appear in a WAVE link model.  Also, in an
   IPv6 link, it is assumed that all interfaces which are configured
   with the same subnet prefix are on the same IP link.  Hence, there is
   a relationship between link and prefix, besides the different scopes
   that are expected from the link-local and global types of IPv6
   addresses.  Such a relationship does not hold in a WAVE link model



Jeong, et al.          Expires September 14, 2017               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft    IP-based Vehicular Networking Survey        March 2017


   due to node mobility and highly dynamic topology.

   Baccellii et al. concluded that the use of the standard IPv6 protocol
   stack, as the IEEE 1609 family of specifications stipulate, is not
   sufficient.  Instead, the addressing assignment should follow
   considerations for ad-hoc link models, defined in [RFC5889], which
   are similar to the characteristics of the WAVE link model.  In terms
   of the supporting protocols for IPv6, such as ND, DHCP, or stateless
   auto-configuration, which rely largely on multicast, do not operate
   as expected in the case where the WAVE link model does not have the
   same behavior expected for multicast IPv6 traffic due to nodes'
   mobility and link variability.  Additional challenges such as the
   support of pseudonimity through MAC address change along with the
   suitability of traditional TCP applications are discussed by the
   authors since they require the design of appropriate solutions.

5.3.  A Framework for IP and non-IP Multicast Services for Vehicular
      Networks

   Jemaa et al. presented a framework that enables deploying multicast
   services for vehicular networks in Infrastructure-based scenarios
   [Vehicular-Network-Framework].  This framework deals with two phases:
   (i) Initialization or bootstrapping phase that includes a geographic
   multicast auto-configuration process and a group membership building
   method and (ii) Multicast traffic dissemination phase that includes a
   network selecting mechanism on the transmission side and a receiver-
   based multicast delivery in the reception side.  To this end, authors
   define a distributed mechanism that allows the vehicles to configure
   a common multicast address: Geographic Multicast Address Auto-
   configuration (GMAA), which allows a vehicle to configure its own
   address without signaling.  A vehicle may also be able to change the
   multicast address to which it is subscribed when it changes its
   location.

   This framework suggests a network selecting approach that allows IP
   and non-IP multicast data delivery in the sender side.  Then, to meet
   the challenges of multicast address auto-configuration, the authors
   propose a distributed geographic multicast auto-addressing mechanism
   for multicast groups of vehicles, and a simple multicast data
   delivery scheme in hybrid networks from a server to the group of
   moving vehicles.  However, this study lacks simulations related to
   performance assessment.

5.4.  Joint IP Networking and Radio Architecture for Vehicular Networks

   Petrescu et al. defined the joined IP networking and radio
   architecture for V2V and V2I communication in [Joint-IP-Networking].
   The paper proposes to consider an IP topology in a similar way as a



Jeong, et al.          Expires September 14, 2017               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft    IP-based Vehicular Networking Survey        March 2017


   radio link topology, in the sense that an IP subnet would correspond
   to the range of 1-hop vehicular communication.  The paper defines
   three types of vehicles: Leaf Vehicle (LV), Range Extending Vehicle
   (REV), and Internet Vehicle (IV).  The first class corresponds to the
   largest set of communicating vehicles (or network nodes within a
   vehicle), while the role of the second class is to build an IP relay
   between two IP-subnet and two sub-IP networks.  Finally, the last
   class corresponds to vehicles being connected to Internet.  Based on
   these three classes, the paper defines six types of IP topologies
   corresponding to V2V communication between two LVs in direct range,
   or two LVs over a range extending vehicle, or V2I communication again
   either directly via an IV, via another vehicles being IV, or via an
   REV connecting to an IV.

   Considering a toy example of a vehicular train, where LV would be in-
   wagon communicating nodes, REV would be inter-wagon relays, and IV
   would be one node (e.g., train head) connected to Internet.  Petrescu
   et al. defined the required mechanisms to build subnetworks, and
   evaluated the protocol time that is required to build such networks.
   Although no simulation-based evaluation is conducted, the initial
   analysis shows a long initial connection overhead, which should be
   alleviated once the multi-wagon remains stable.  However, this
   approach does not describe what would happen in the case of a dynamic
   multi-hop vehicular network, where such overhead would end up being
   too high for V2V/V2I IP-based vehicular applications.

   One other aspect described in this paper is to join the IP-layer
   relaying with radio-link channels.  This paper suggests to separate
   different subnetworks in different WiFi/ITS-G5 channels, which could
   be advertised by the REV.  Accordingly, the overall interference
   could be controlled within each subnetwork.  This statement is
   similar to multi-channel topology management proposals in multi-hop
   sensor networks, yet adapted to an IP topology.

   In conclusion, this paper proposes to classify an IP multi-hop
   vehicular network in three classes of vehicles: Leaf Vehicle (LV),
   Range Extending Vehicle (REV), and Internet Vehicle (IV).  It
   suggests that the generally complex multi-hop IP vehicular topology
   could be represented by only six different topologies, which could be
   further analyzed and optimized.  A prefix dissemination protocol is
   proposed for one of the topologies.

5.5.  Mobile Internet Access in FleetNet

   Bechler et al. described the FleetNet project approach to integrate
   Internet Access in future vehicular networks [FleetNet].  The paper
   is most probably one of the first paper to address this aspect, and
   in many ways, introduces concepts that will be later used in MIPv6 or



Jeong, et al.          Expires September 14, 2017              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft    IP-based Vehicular Networking Survey        March 2017


   other subsequent IP mobility management schemes.  The paper describes
   a V2I architecture consisting of Vehicles, Internet Gateways (IGW),
   Proxy, and Corresponding Nodes (CN).  Considering that vehicular
   networks are required to use IPv6 addresses and also the new wireless
   access technology ITS-G5 (new at that time), one of the challenges is
   to bridge the two different networks (i.e., VANET and IP4/IPv6
   Internet).  Accordingly, the paper introduces a Fleetnet Gateway
   (FGW), which allows vehicles in IPv6 to access the IPv4 Internet and
   to bridge two types of networks and radio access technologies.
   Another challenge is to keep the active addressing and flows while
   vehicles move between FGWs.  Accordingly, the paper introduces a
   proxy node, a cranked-up MIP Home Agent, which can re-route flows to
   the new FGW as well as acting as a local IPv4-IPv6 NAT.

   The authors from the paper mostly observed two issues that VANET
   brings into the traditional IP mobility.  First, VANET vehicles must
   mostly be addressed from the Internet directly, and do not
   specifically have a Home Network.  Accordingly, VANET vehicles
   require a globally (predefined) unique IPv6 address, while an IPv6
   co-located care-of address (CCoA) is a newly allocated IPv6 address
   every time a vehicle would enter a new IGW radio range.  Second,
   VANET links are known to be unreliable and short, and the extensive
   use of IP tunneling on-the-air was judged not efficient.
   Accordingly, the first major architecture innovation proposed in this
   paper is to re-introduce a foreign agent (FA) in MIP located at the
   IGW, so that the IP-tunneling would be kept in the back-end (between
   a Proxy and an IGW) and not on the air.  Second, the proxy has been
   extended to build an IP tunnel and be connected to the right FA/IWG
   for an IP flow using a global IPv6 address.

   This is a pioneer paper, which contributed to changing MIP and led to
   the new IPv6 architecture currently known as Proxy-MIP and the
   subsequent DMM-PMIP.  Three key messages can be yet kept in mind.
   First, unlike the Internet, vehicles can be more prominently directly
   addressed than the Internet traffic, and do not have a Home Network
   in the traditional MIP sense.  Second, IP tunneling should be avoided
   as much as possible over the air.  Third, the protocol-based mobility
   (induced by the physical mobility) must be kept hidden to both the
   vehicle and the correspondent node (CN).

5.6.  A Layered Architecture for Vehicular Delay-Tolerant Networks

   Soares et al. addressed the case of delay tolerant vehicular network
   [Vehicular-DTN].  For delay tolerant or disruption tolerant networks,
   rather than building a complex VANET-IP multi-hop route, vehicles may
   also be used to carry packets closer to the destination or directly
   at the destination.  The authors built the well-accepted DTN Bundle
   architecture and protocol to propose a VANET extension.  They



Jeong, et al.          Expires September 14, 2017              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft    IP-based Vehicular Networking Survey        March 2017


   introduced three types of VANET nodes: (i) terminal nodes (requiring
   data), (ii) mobile nodes (carrying data along their routes), and
   (iii) relay nodes (storing data at cross-roads of mobile nodes as
   data hotspot).

   The major innovation in this paper is to propose a DTN VANET
   architecture separating a Control plane and a Data plane.  The
   authors claimed it to be designed to allow full freedom to select the
   most appropriate technology, as well as allow to use out-of-band
   communication for small Control plane packets and use DTN in-band for
   the Data plane.  The paper then further describes the different
   layers from the Control and the Data planes.  One interesting aspect
   is the positioning of the Bundle layer between L2 and L3, rather than
   above TCP/IP as for the DTN Bundle architecture.  The authors claimed
   this to be required first to keep bundle aggregation/disaggregation
   transparent to IP, as well as to allow bundle transmission over
   multiple access technologies (described as MAC/PHY layers in the
   paper).

   Although the DTN architectures evolved since the paper has been
   written, this paper addresses IP mobility management from a different
   approach.  The innovative aspect is an early proposal to separate the
   Control from the Data plane to allow a large flexibility in a Control
   plane to coordinate a heterogeneous radio access technology (RAT)
   Data plane.

5.7.  Key Observations

   Unidirectional links exist and must be considered.  Control Plane
   must be separated from Data Plane.  ID/Pseudonym change requires a
   lightweight DAD.  IP tunneling should be avoided.  Vehicles do not
   have a Home Network.  Protocol-based mobility must be kept hidden to
   both the vehicle and the correspondent node (CN).  An ITS
   architecture may be composed of three types of vehicles: Leaf
   Vehicle, Range Extending Vehicle, and Internet Vehicle.

6.  Vehicular Network Routing

   This section surveys routing in vehicular networks.

6.1.  An IP Passing Protocol for Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks with Network
      Fragmentation

   Chen et al. tackled the issue of network fragmentation in VANET
   environments [IP-Passing-Protocol].  The paper proposes a protocol
   that can postpone the time to release IP addresses to the DHCP server
   and select a faster way to get the vehicle's new IP address, when the
   vehicle density is low or the speeds of vehicles are varied.  In such



Jeong, et al.          Expires September 14, 2017              [Page 12]

Internet-Draft    IP-based Vehicular Networking Survey        March 2017


   circumstances, the vehicle may not be able to communicate with the
   intended vehicle either directly or through multi-hop relays as a
   consequence of network fragmentation.

   The paper claims that although the existing IP passing and mobility
   solutions may reduce handoff delay, but they cannot work properly on
   VANET especially with network fragmentation.  This is due to the fact
   that messages cannot be transmitted to the intended vehicles.  When
   network fragmentation occurs, it may incur longer handoff latency and
   higher packet loss rate.  The main goal of this study is to improve
   existing works by proposing an IP passing protocol for VANET with
   network fragmentation.

   The paper makes the assumption that on the highway, when a vehicle
   moves to a new subnet, the vehicle will receive broadcast packet from
   the target Base Station (BS), and then perform the handoff procedure.
   The handoff procedure includes two parts, such as the layer-2 handoff
   (new frequency channel) and the layer-3 handover (a new IP address).
   The handoff procedure contains movement detection, DAD procedure, and
   registration.  In the case of IPv6, the DAD procedure is time
   consuming and may cause the link to be disconnected.

   This paper proposes another handoff mechanism.  The handoff procedure
   contains the following phases.  The first is the information
   collecting phase, where each mobile node (vehicle) will broadcast its
   own and its neighboring vehicles' locations, moving speeds, and
   directions periodically.  The remaining phases are, the fast IP
   acquiring phase, the cooperation of vehicle phase, the make before
   break phase, and the route redirection phase.

   Simulations results show that for the proposed protocol, network
   fragmentation ratio incurs less impact.  Vehicle speed and density
   has great impact on the performance of the IP passing protocol
   because vehicle speed and vehicle density will affect network
   fragmentation ratio.  A longer IP lifetime can provide a vehicle with
   more chances to acquire its IP address through IP passing.
   Simulation results show that the proposed scheme can reduce IP
   acquisition time and packet loss rate, so extend IP lifetime with
   extra message overhead.

6.2.  Experimental Evaluation for IPv6 over VANET Geographic Routing

   Tsukada et al. presented a work that aims at combining IPv6
   networking and a Car-to-Car Network routing protocol (called C2CNet)
   proposed by the Car2Car Communication Consortium (C2C-CC), which is
   an architecture using a geographic routing protocol
   [VANET-Geo-Routing].  In C2C-CC architecture, C2CNet layer is located
   between IPv6 and link layers.  Thus, an IPv6 packet is delivered with



Jeong, et al.          Expires September 14, 2017              [Page 13]

Internet-Draft    IP-based Vehicular Networking Survey        March 2017


   outer C2CNet header, which introduces the challenge of how to support
   the communication types defined in C2CNet in IPv6 layer.

   The main goal of GeoNet is to enhance these specifications and create
   a prototype software implementation interfacing with IPv6.  C2CNet is
   specified in C2C-CC as a geographic routing protocol.

   In order to assess the performance of this protocol, the authors
   measured the network performance with UDP and ICMPv6 traffic using
   iperf and ping6.  The test results show that IPv6 over C2CNet does
   not have too much delay (less than 4ms with a single hop) and is
   feasible for vehicle communication.  In the outdoor testbed, they
   developed AnaVANET to enable hop-by-hop performance measurement and
   position trace of the vehicles.

   The combination of IPv6 multicast and GeoBroadcast was implemented,
   however, the authors did not evaluate the performance with such a
   scenario.  One of the reasons is that a sufficiently high number of
   receivers are necessary to properly evaluate multicast but
   experimental evaluation is limited in the number of vehicles (4 in
   this study).

6.3.  Key Observations

   IP address autoconfiguration should be manipulated to support the
   efficient networking.  Due to network fragmentation, vehicles cannot
   communicate with each other temporarily.  IPv6 ND should consider the
   temporary network fragmentation.  IPv6 link concept can be supported
   by Geographic routing to connect vehicles with the same IPv6 prefix.

7.  Mobility Management in Vehicular Networks

   This section surveys mobility management schemes in vehicular
   networks to support handover.

7.1.  A Hybrid Centralized-Distributed Mobility Management for
      Supporting Highly Mobile Users

   Nguyen et al. proposed a hybrid centralized-distributed mobility
   management called H-DMM to support highly mobile vehicles [H-DMM].
   The legacy DMM is not suitable for high-speed scenarios because it
   requires additional registration delay proportional to the distance
   between a vehicle and its anchor network.  H-DMM is designed to
   satisfy a set of requirements, such as service disruption time, end-
   to-end delay, packet delivery cost, and tunneling cost.

   H-DMM adopts a central node called central mobility anchor (CMA),
   which plays the role of a local mobility anchor (LMA) in PMIPv6.



Jeong, et al.          Expires September 14, 2017              [Page 14]

Internet-Draft    IP-based Vehicular Networking Survey        March 2017


   When it enters a mobile access router (MAR) as an access router, a
   vehicle obtains a prefix from the MAR (called MAR-prefix) according
   to the legacy DMM protocol.  In addition, it obtains another prefix
   from the CMA (called LMA-prefix) for a PMIPv6 domain.  Whenever it
   performs a handover between the subnets for two adjacent MARs, a
   vehicle keeps the LMA-prefix while obtaining a new prefix from the
   new MAR.  For a new data exchange with a new CN, the vehicle can
   select the MAR-prefix or the LMA-prefix for its own source IPv6
   address.  If the number of active prefixes is greater than a
   threshold, the vehicle uses the LMA-prefix-based IPv6 address as its
   source address.  In addition, it can continue receiving data packets
   with the destination IPv6 addresses based on the previous prefixes
   through the legacy DMM protocol.

   Thus, H-DMM can support an efficient tunneling for a high-speed
   vehicle that moves fast across the subnets of two adjacent MARs.
   However, when H-DMM asks a vehicle to perform DAD for the uniqueness
   test of its configured IPv6 address in the subnet of the next MAR,
   the activation of the configured IPv6 address for networking will
   take a delay.  This indicates that a proactive DAD by a network
   component (i.e., MAR and LMA) can shorten the address configuration
   delay of the current DAD triggered by a vehicle.

7.2.  A Hybrid Centralized-Distributed Mobility Management Architecture
      for Network Mobility

   Nguyen et al. proposed H-NEMO, a hybrid centralized-distributed
   mobility management scheme to handle IP mobility of moving vehicles
   [H-NEMO].  The standard Network Mobility (NEMO) basic support, which
   is a centralized scheme for network mobility, provides IP mobility
   for a group of users in a moving vehicle, but also inherits the
   drawbacks from Mobile IPv6, such as suboptimal routing and signaling
   overhead in nested scenarios as well as reliability and scalability
   issues.  On the contrary, distributed schemes such as the recently
   proposed Distributed Mobility Management (DMM) locates the mobility
   anchor at the network edge and enables mobility support only to
   traffic flows that require such support.  However, in high speed
   moving vehicles, DMM may suffer from high signaling cost and high
   handover latency.

   The proposed H-NEMO architecture is not designed for a specific
   wireless technology.  Instead, it defines a general architecture and
   signaling protocol so that a mobile node can obtain mobility from
   fixed locations or mobile platforms, and also allows the use of DMM
   or Proxy Mobile IPv6 (PMIPv6), depending on flow characteristics and
   mobility patterns of the node.  For IP addressing allocation, a
   mobile router (MR) or the mobile node (MN) connected to an MR in a
   NEMO obtain two sets of prefixes: one from the central mobility



Jeong, et al.          Expires September 14, 2017              [Page 15]

Internet-Draft    IP-based Vehicular Networking Survey        March 2017


   anchor and one from the mobile access router (MAR).  In this way, the
   MR/MN may choose a more stable prefix for long-lived flows to be
   routed via the central mobility anchor and the MAR-prefix for short-
   lived flows to be routed following the DMM concept.  The multi-hop
   scenario is considered under the concept of a nested-NEMO.

   Nguyen et al. did not provide simulation-based evaluations, but they
   provided an analytical evaluation that considered signaling and
   packet delivery costs, and showed that H-NEMO outperforms the
   previous proposals, which are either centralized or distributed ones
   with NEMO support.  In particular cases, such as the signaling cost,
   H-NEMO is more costly than centralized schemes when the velocity of
   the node is increasing, but behaves better in terms of packet
   delivery cost and handover delay.

7.3.  NEMO-Enabled Localized Mobility Support for Internet Access in
      Automotive Scenarios

   In [NEMO-LMS], authors proposed an architecture to enable IP mobility
   for moving networks in a network-based mobility scheme based on
   PMIPv6.  In PMIPv6, only mobile terminals are provided with IP
   mobility.  Different from host-based mobility, PMIPv6 shifts the
   signaling to the network side, so that the mobile access gateway
   (MAG) is in charge of detecting connection/disconnection of the
   mobile node, upon which the signaling to the Local Mobility Anchor
   (LMA) is triggered to guarantee a stable IP addressing assignment
   when the mobile node performs handover to a new MAG.

   Soto et al. proposed NEMO support in PMIPv6 (N-PMIP).  In this
   scheme, the functionality of the MAG is extended to the mobile router
   (MR), also called a mobile MAG (mMAG).  The functionality of the
   mobile terminal remains unchanged, but it can receive an IPv6 prefix
   belonging to the PMIPv6 domain through the new functionality of the
   mMAG.  Therefore, in N-PMIP, the mobile terminal connects to the MR
   as if it is connecting to a fixed MAG, and the MR connects to the
   fixed MAG with the standardized signaling of PMIPv6.  When the mobile
   terminal roams to a new MAG or a new MR, the network forwards the
   packets through the LMA.  Hence, N-PMIP defines an extended
   functionality in the LMA that enables a recursive lookup.  First, it
   locates the binding entry corresponding to the mMAGr.  Next, it
   locates the entry corresponding to the fixed MAG, after which the LMA
   can encapsulate packets to the mMAG to which the mobile terminal is
   currently connected.

   The performance of N-PMIP was evaluated through simulations and
   compared to a NEMO+MIPv6+PMIPv6 scheme, with better results obtained
   in N-PMIP.  The work did not consider the case of multi-hop
   connectivity in the vehicular scenario.  In addition, since the MR



Jeong, et al.          Expires September 14, 2017              [Page 16]

Internet-Draft    IP-based Vehicular Networking Survey        March 2017


   should be a trusted entity in the PMIP domain, it requires specific
   security associations that were not addressed in [NEMO-LMS].

7.4.  Network Mobility Protocol for Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks

   Chen et al. proposed a network mobility protocol to reduce handoff
   delay and maintain Internet connectivity to moving vehicles in a
   highway [NEMO-VANET].  In this work, vehicles can acquire IP
   addresses from other vehicles through V2V communications.  At the
   time the vehicle goes out of the coverage of the base station,
   another vehicle may assist the roaming car to acquire a new IP
   address.  Also, cars on the same or opposite lane are entitled to
   assist the vehicle to perform a pre-handoff.

   Authors assumed that the wireless connectivity is provided by WiFi
   and WiMAX access networks.  Also, they considered scenarios in which
   a single vehicle, i.e., a bus, may need two mobile routers in order
   to have an effective pre-handoff procedure.  Evaluations are
   performed through simulations and the comparison schemes are the
   standard NEMO Basic Support protocol and the fast NEMO Basic Support
   protocol.  Authors did not mention applicability of the scheme in
   other scenarios such as in urban transport schemes.

7.5.  Performance Analysis of PMIPv6-Based Network MObility for
      Intelligent Transportation Systems

   Lee et al. proposed P-NEMO, which is an IP mobility management scheme
   to maintain the Internet connectivity at the vehicle as a mobile
   network, and provides a make-before-break mechanism when vehicles
   switch to a new access network [PMIPv6-NEMO-Analysis].  Since the
   standard PMIPv6 only supports mobility for a single node, the
   solution in [PMIPv6-NEMO-Analysis] adapts the protocol to reduce the
   signaling when a local network is to be served by the in-vehicle
   mobile router.  To achieve this, P-NEMO extends the binding update
   lists at both MAG and LMA, so that the mobile router (MR) can receive
   a home network prefix (HNP) and a mobile network prefix (MNP).  The
   latter prefix enables mobility for the moving network, instead of a
   single node as in the standard PMIPv6.

   An additional feature is proposed by Lee et al. named fast P-NEMO
   (FP-NEMO).  It adopts the fast handover approach standardized for
   PMIPv6 in [RFC5949] with both predictive and reactive modes.  The
   difference of the proposed feature with the standard version is that
   by using the extensions provided by P-NEMO, the predictive
   transferring of the context from the old MAG to the new MAG also
   includes information for the moving network, i.e., the MNP, so that
   mobility support can be achieved not only for the mobile router, but
   also for mobile nodes traveling with the vehicle.



Jeong, et al.          Expires September 14, 2017              [Page 17]

Internet-Draft    IP-based Vehicular Networking Survey        March 2017


   The performance of P-NEMO and F-NEMO is only evaluated through an
   analytical model that is compared to the standard NEMO-BS.  No
   comparison was provided to other schemes that enable network mobility
   in PMIPv6 domains, such as the one presented in [NEMO-LMS].

7.6.  A Novel Mobility Management Scheme for Integration of Vehicular Ad
      Hoc Networks and Fixed IP Networks

   Peng et al. proposed a novel mobility management scheme for
   integration of VANET and fixed IP networks [Vehicular-Network-MM].
   The proposed scheme deals with mobility of vehicles based on a street
   layout instead of a general two dimensional ad hoc network.  This
   scheme makes use of the information provided by vehicular networks to
   reduce mobility management overhead.  It allows multiple base
   stations that are close to a destination vehicle to discover the
   connection to the vehicle simultaneously, which leads to an
   improvement of the connectivity and data delivery ratio without
   redundant messages.  The performance was assessed by using a road
   traffic simulator called SUMO (Simulation of Urban Mobility).

7.7.  SDN-based Distributed Mobility Management for 5G Networks

   Nguyen et al. extended their previous works on a vehicular adapted
   DMM considering a Software-Defined Networking (SDN) architecture
   [SDN-DMM].  On one hand, in their previous work, Nguyen et al.
   proposed DMM-PMIP and DMM-MIP architectures for VANET.  The major
   innovation behind DMM is to distribute the Mobility Functions (MF)
   through the network instead of concentrating them in one bottleneck
   MF, or in a hierarchically organized backbone of MF.  Highly mobile
   vehicular networks impose frequent IP route optimizations that lead
   to suboptimal routes (detours) between CN and vehicles.  The
   suboptimality critically increases by nested or hierarchical MF
   nodes.  Therefore, flattening the IP mobility architecture
   significantly reduces detours, as it is the role of the last MF to
   get the closest next MF (in most cases nearby).  Yet, with an MF
   being distributed throughout the network, a Control plane becomes
   necessary in order to provide a solution for CN to address vehicles.
   The various solutions developed by Nguyen at al. not only showed the
   large benefit of a DMM approach for IPv6 mobility management, but
   also emphasized the critical role of an efficient Control plane.

   One the other hand, SDN recently appeared and gained a big attention
   from the Internet Networking community due to its capacity to provide
   a significantly higher scalability of highly dynamic flows, which is
   required by future 5G dynamic networks.  In particular, SDN also
   suggests a strict separation between a Control plane (SDN-Controller)
   and a Data plane (OpenFlow Switches) based on the OpenFlow standard.
   Such an architecture has two advantages that are critical for IP



Jeong, et al.          Expires September 14, 2017              [Page 18]

Internet-Draft    IP-based Vehicular Networking Survey        March 2017


   mobility management in VANET.  First, unlike traditional routing
   mechanisms, OpenFlow focuses on flows rather than optimized routes.
   Accordingly, they can optimize routing based on flows (grouping
   multiple flows in one route, or allowing one flow to have different
   routes), and can detect broken flows much earlier than the
   traditional networking solutions.  Second, SDN controllers may
   dynamically reprogram (reconfigure) OpenFlow Switches (OFS) to always
   keep an optimal route between CN and a vehicular node.

   Nguyen et. al observed the mutual benefits IPv6 DMM could obtain from
   an SDN architecture, and then proposed an SDN-based DMM for VANET.
   In their proposed architecture, a PMIP-DMM is used, where MF is OFS
   for the Data plane, and one or more SDN controllers handle the
   Control plane.  The evaluation and prototype in the paper prove that
   the proposed architecture can provide a higher scalability than the
   standard DMM.

   This paper makes several observations leading to a strong suggestions
   that IP mobility management should be based on an SDN architecture.
   First, SDN will be integrated into future Internet and 5G in a near
   future.  Second, after separating the Identity and Routing
   addressing, IP mobility management further requires to separate the
   Control from the Data plane if it needs to remain scalable for VANET.
   Finally, Flow-based routing (in particular OpenFlow standard) will be
   required in future heterogeneous vehicular networks (e.g., multi-RAT
   and multi-protocol) and the SDN coupled with DMM provides a double
   benefit of dynamic flow detection/reconfiguration and short(-er)
   route optimizations.

7.8.  IP Mobility Management for Vehicular Communication Networks:
      Challenges and Solutions

   Cespedes et al. provided a survey of the challenges for NEMO Basic
   Support for VANET [Vehicular-IP-MM].  NEMO allows the management of a
   group of nodes (a mobile network) rather than a single node.
   However, although a vehicle and even a platoon of vehicles could be
   seen as a group of nodes, NEMO has not been designed considering the
   particularities of VANET.  For example, NEMO builds a tunnel between
   an MR (on board of a vehicle) and its HA, which in a VANET context is
   suboptimal, for instance due to over-the-air tunneling cost, the
   detour taken to pass by the MR's HA even if the CN is nearby, or the
   route optimization when the MR moves to a new AR.

   Cespedes et al. first summarize the requirements of IP mobility
   management, such as reduced power at end-device, reduced handover
   event, reduced complexity, or reduced bandwidth consumption.  VANET
   adds the following requirements, such as minimum signaling for route
   optimization (RO), per-flow separability, security and binding



Jeong, et al.          Expires September 14, 2017              [Page 19]

Internet-Draft    IP-based Vehicular Networking Survey        March 2017


   privacy protection, multi-homing, and switching HA.  As observed,
   these provide several challenges to IP mobility and NEMO BS for
   VANET.

   Cespedes et al. then describe various optimization schemes available
   for NEMO BS.  Considering a single hop connection to CN, one major
   optimization direction is to avoid the HA detour and reach the CN
   directly.  In that direction, a few optimizations are proposed, such
   as creating an IP tunnel between the MR and the CR directly, creating
   an IP tunnel between the MR and a CR (rather than the HA), a
   delegation mechanism allowing Visiting Nodes to use MIPv6 directly
   rather than NEMO or finally intra-NEMO optimization for a direct path
   within NEMO bypassing HAs.

   Specific to VANET, multi-hop connection is possible to the fixed
   network.  In that case, NEMO BS must be enhanced to avoid that the
   path to immediate neighbors must pass by the respective HAs instead
   of directly.  More specifically, two approaches are proposed to rely
   on VANET sub-IP multi-hop routing to hide a NEMO complex topology
   (e.g., Nested NEMO) and provide a direct route between two VANET
   nodes.  Generally, one major challenge is security and privacy when
   opening a multi-hop route between a VANET and a CN.  Heterogeneous
   multi-hop in a VANET (e.g., relying on various access technologies)
   corresponds to another challenge for NEMO BS as well.

   Cespedes et al. conclude their paper with an overview of critical
   research challenges, such as Anchor Point location, the optimized
   usage of geographic information at the subIP as well as at the IP
   level to improve NEMO BS, security and privacy, and the addressing
   allocation schema for NEMO.

   In summary, this paper illustrates that NEMO BS for VANET should
   avoid the HA detour as well as opening IP tunnels over the air.
   Also, NEMO BS could use geographic information for subIP routing when
   a direct link between vehicles is required to reach an AR, but also
   anticipate handovers and optimize ROs.  From an addressing
   perspective, dynamic MNP assignments should be preferred, but should
   be secured in particular during binding update (BU).

7.9.  Key Observations

   Mobility Management (MM) solution design varies, depending on
   scenarios: highway vs. urban roadway.  Hybrid schemes (NEMO + PMIP,
   PMIP + DMM, etc.) usually show better performance than pure schemes.
   Most schemes assume that IP address configuration is already set up.
   Most schemes have been tested only at either simulation or analytical
   level.  SDN can be considered as a player in the MM solution.




Jeong, et al.          Expires September 14, 2017              [Page 20]

Internet-Draft    IP-based Vehicular Networking Survey        March 2017


8.  Vehicular Network Security

   This section surveys security in vehicular networks.

8.1.  Securing Vehicular IPv6 Communications

   Fernandez et al. proposed a secure vehicular IPv6 communication
   scheme using Internet Key Exchange version 2 (IKEv2) and Internet
   Protocol Security (IPsec) [Securing-VCOMM].  This scheme aims at the
   security support for IPv6 Network Mobility (NEMO) for in-vehicle
   devices inside a vehicle via a Mobile Router (MR).  An MR has
   multiple wireless interfaces, such as 3G, IEEE 802.11p, WiFi, and
   WiMAX.  The proposed architecture consists of Vehicle ITS Station
   (Vehicle ITS-S), Roadside ITS Station (Roadside ITS-S), and Central
   ITS Station (Central ITS-S).  Vehicle ITS-S is a vehicle having a
   mobile Network along with an MR.  Roadside ITS-S is an RSU as a
   gateway to connect vehicular networks to the Internet.  Central ITS-S
   is a TCC as a Home Agent (HA) for the location management of vehicles
   having their MR.

   The proposed secure vehicular IPv6 communication scheme sets up IPsec
   secure sessions for control and data traffic between the MR in a
   Vehicle ITS-S and the HA in a Central ITS-S.  Roadside ITS-S plays a
   role of an Access Router (AR) for Vehicle ITS-S's MR to provide the
   Internet connectivity for Vehicle ITS-S via wireless interfaces, such
   as IEEE 802.11p, WiFi, and WiMAX.  In the case where Roadside ITS-S
   is not available to Vehicle ITS-S, Vehicle ITS-S communicates with
   Central ITS-S via cellular networks (e.g., 3G).  The secure
   communication scheme enhances the NEMO protocol that interworks with
   IKEv2 and IPsec in network mobility in vehicular networks.

   The authors implemented their scheme and evaluated its performance in
   a real testbed.  This testbed supports two wireless networks, such as
   IEEE 802.11p and 3G. The in-vehicle devices (or hosts) in Vehicle
   ITS-S are connected to an MR of Vehicle ITS-S via IEEE 802.11g.  The
   test results show that their scheme supports promising secure IPv6
   communications with a low impact on communication performance.

8.2.  Providing Authentication and Access Control in Vehicular Network
      Environment

   Moustafa et al. proposed a security scheme providing authentication,
   authorization, and accounting (AAA) services in vehicular networks
   [VNET-AAA].  This secuirty scheme aims at the support of safe and
   reliable data services in vehicular networks.  It authenticates
   vehicles as mobile clients to use the network access and various
   services that are provided by service providers.  Also, it ensures a
   confidential data transfer between communicating parties (e.g.,



Jeong, et al.          Expires September 14, 2017              [Page 21]

Internet-Draft    IP-based Vehicular Networking Survey        March 2017


   vehicle and infrastructure node) by using IEEE 802.11i (i.e., WPA2)
   for secure layer-2 links.

   The authors proposed a vehicular network architecture consisting of
   three entities, such as Access network, Wireless mobile ad hoc
   networks (MANETs), and Access Points (APs).  Access network is the
   fixed network infrastructure forming the back-end of the
   architecture.  Wireless MANETs are constructed by moving vehicles
   forming the front-end of the architecture.  APs is the IEEE 802.11
   WLAN infrastructure forming the interface between the front-end and
   back-end of the architecture.

   For AAA services, the proposed architecture uses a Kerberos
   authentication model that authenticates vehicles at the entry point
   with the AP and also authorizes them to the access of various
   services.  Since vehicles are authenticated by a Kerberos
   Authentication Server (AS) only once, the proposed security scheme
   can minimize the load on the AS and reduce the delay imposed by layer
   2 using IEEE 802.11i.

8.3.  Key Observations

   The security for vehicular networks should provide vehicles with AAA
   services in an efficient way.  It should consider not only horizontal
   handover, but also vertical handover since vehicles have multiple
   wireless interfaces.

9.  Standard Activities for Vehicular Networks

   This section surveys standard activities for vehicular networks in
   standards developing organizations.

9.1.  IEEE Guide for Wireless Access in Vehicular Environments (WAVE) -
      Architecture

   IEEE 1609 is a suite of standards for Wireless Access in Vehicular
   Environments (WAVE) developed in the IEEE Vehicular Technology
   Society (VTS).  They define an architecture and a complementary
   standardized set of services and interfaces that collectively enable
   secure vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V) and vehicle-to-infrastructure (V2I)
   wireless communications.

   IEEE 1609.0 provides a description of the WAVE system architecture
   and operations (called WAVE reference model) [WAVE-1609.0].  The
   reference model of a typical WAVE device includes two data plane
   protocol stacks (sharing a common lower stack at the data link and
   physical layers): (i) the standard Internet Protocol Version 6 (IPv6)
   and (ii) the WAVE Short Message Protocol (WSMP) designed for



Jeong, et al.          Expires September 14, 2017              [Page 22]

Internet-Draft    IP-based Vehicular Networking Survey        March 2017


   optimized operation in a wireless vehicular environment.  WAVE Short
   Messages (WSM) may be sent on any channel.  IP traffic is only
   allowed on service channels (SCHs), so as to offload high-volume IP
   traffic from the control channel (CCH).

   The Layer 2 protocol stack distinguishes between the two upper stacks
   by the Ethertype field.  Ethertype is a 2-octet field in the Logical
   Link Control (LLC) header, used to identify the networking protocol
   to be employed above the LLC protocol.  In particular, it specifies
   the use of two Ethertype values (i.e., two networking protocols),
   such as IPv6 and WSMP.

   Regarding the upper layers, while WAVE communications use standard
   port numbers for IPv6-based protocols (e.g., TCP, UDP), they use a
   Provider Service Identifier (PSID) as an identifier in the context of
   WSMP.

9.2.  IEEE Standard for Wireless Access in Vehicular Environments (WAVE)
      - Networking Services

   IEEE 1609.3 defines services operating at the network and transport
   layers, in support of wireless connectivity among vehicle-based
   devices, and between fixed roadside devices and vehicle-based devices
   using the 5.9 GHz Dedicated Short-Range Communications/Wireless
   Access in Vehicular Environments (DSRC/WAVE) mode [WAVE-1609.3].

   WAVE Networking Services represent layer 3 (networking) and layer 4
   (transport) of the Open Systems Interconnection (OSI) communications
   stack.  The purpose is then to provide addressing and routing
   services within a WAVE system, enabling multiple stacks of upper
   layers above WAVE Networking Services and multiple lower layers
   beneath WAVE Networking Services.  Upper layer support includes in-
   vehicle applications offering safety and convenience to users.

   The WAVE standards support IPv6.  IPv6 was selected over IPv4 because
   IPv6 is expected to be a viable protocol into the foreseeable future.
   Although not described in the WAVE standards, IPv4 has been tunnelled
   over IPv6 in some WAVE trials.

   The document provides requirements for IPv6 configuration, in
   particular for the address setting.  It specifies the details of the
   different service primitives, among which is the WAVE Routing
   Advertisement (WRA), part of the WAVE Service Advertisement (WSA).
   When present, the WRA provides information about infrastructure
   internetwork connectivity, allowing receiving devices to be
   configured to participate in the advertised IPv6 network.  For
   example, an RSU can broadcast in the WRA portion of its WSA all the
   information necessary for an OBU to access an application-service



Jeong, et al.          Expires September 14, 2017              [Page 23]

Internet-Draft    IP-based Vehicular Networking Survey        March 2017


   available over IPv6 through the RSU as a router.  This feature
   removes the need for an IPv6 Router Advertisement message, which are
   based on ICMPv6.

9.3.  ETSI Intelligent Transport Systems: Transmission of IPv6 Packets
      over GeoNetworking Protocols

   ETSI published a standard specifing the transmission of IPv6 packets
   over the ETSI GeoNetworking (GN) protocol [ETSI-ITS-IPv6].  The IPv6
   addressing and forwarding is defined in ETSI EN 302 636-4-1
   [ETSI-ITS-Addressing] via a protocol adaptation sub-layer referred to
   as the GN6ASL (GeoNetworking to IPv6 Adaptation Sub-Layer).  It
   enables an ITS station (ITS-S) running the GN protocol and an IPv6-
   compliant protocol layer to: (i) exchange IPv6 packets with other
   ITS-S; (ii) acquire globally routable IPv6 unicast addresses and
   communicate with any IPv6 host located in the Internet, providing
   IPv6 connectivity to the Internet is reachable directly or via other
   relay ITS stations; (iii) perform the operations required by RFC 3963
   [RFC3963] for a Mobile Router.

   The document introduces three types of virtual link, the first one
   providing symmetric reachability by means of stable geographically
   scoped boundaries and two others that can be used when the dynamic
   definition of the broadcast domain is required.  The combination of
   these three types of virtual link in the same station allows running
   the Neighbour Discovery (ND) protocol including Stateless Address
   Autoconfiguration (SLAAC) as specified in RFC 4862 [RFC4862] as well
   as to distribute other IPv6 link-local multicast traffic and, at the
   same time, to reach nodes that are outside specific geographic
   boundaries.  The IPv6 virtual link types are provided by the GN6ASL
   to IPv6 in the form of virtual network interfaces.

   The document also describes how to support bridging on top of the
   GN6ASL, how IPv6 packets are encapsulated IN GN packets and
   delivered, as well as the support of IPv6 multicast and anycast
   traffic, and neighbour discovery.  For latency reasons, the standard
   strongly recommends to use SLAAC for the address configuration.

   Finally, the document includes the required operations to support the
   change of pseudonym, e.g., changing IPv6 addresses when the GN
   address is changed, in order to prevent attackers from tracking the
   ITS-S.

9.4.  ISO Intelligent Transport Systems: Communications Access for Land
      Mobiles (CALM) Using IPv6 Networking

   ISO published a standard specifying the IPv6 network protocols and
   services [ISO-ITS-IPv6].  These services are necessary to support the



Jeong, et al.          Expires September 14, 2017              [Page 24]

Internet-Draft    IP-based Vehicular Networking Survey        March 2017


   global reachability of ITS stations (ITS-S), the continuous Internet
   connectivity for ITS-S, and the handover functionality required to
   maintain such connectivity.  This functionality also allows legacy
   devices to effectively use an ITS-S as an access router to connect to
   the Internet.  Essentially, this specification describes how IPv6 is
   configured to support ITS-S and provides the associated management
   functionality.

   The requirements apply to all types of nodes implementing IPv6:
   personal, vehicle, roadside, or central node.  The standard defines
   IPv6 functional modules that are necessary in an IPv6 ITS-S, covering
   IPv6 forwarding, interface between IPv6 and lower layers (e.g., LAN
   interface), mobility management, and IPv6 security.  It defines the
   mechanisms to be used to configure the IPv6 address for static nodes
   as well as for mobile nodes, while maintaining the addressing
   reachability from the Internet.

10.  Summary and Analysis

   This document surveyed state-of-the-arts technologies for IP-based
   vehicular networks, such as IP address autoconfiguration, vehicular
   network architecture, vehicular network routing, and mobility
   management.

   Through this survey, it is learned that IPv6-based vehicular
   networking can be well-aligned with IEEE WAVE standards for various
   vehicular network applications, such as driving safety, efficient
   driving, and infotainment.  However, since the IEEE WAVE standards do
   not recommend to use the IPv6 neighbor discovery (ND) protocol for
   the communication efficiency under high-speed mobility, it is
   necessary to adapt the ND for vehicular networks with such high-speed
   mobility.

   The concept of a link in IPv6 does not match that of a link in VANET
   because of the physical separation of communication ranges of
   vehicles in a connected VANET.  That is, in a linear topology of
   three vehicles (Vehicle-1, Vehicle-2, and Vehicle-3), Vehicle-1 and
   Vehicle-2 can communicate directly with each other.  Vehicle-2 and
   Vehicle-3 can communicate directly with each other.  However,
   Vehicle-1 and Vehicle-3 cannot communicate directly with each other
   due to the out-of-communication range.  For the link in IPv6, all of
   three vehicles are on a link, so they can communicate directly with
   each other.  On the other hand, in VANET, this on-link communication
   concept is not valid in VANET.  Thus, the IPv6 ND should be extended
   to support this multi-link subnet of a connected VANET through either
   ND proxy or VANET routing.

   For IP-based networking, IP address autoconfiguration is a



Jeong, et al.          Expires September 14, 2017              [Page 25]

Internet-Draft    IP-based Vehicular Networking Survey        March 2017


   prerequisite function.  Since vehicles can communicate intermittently
   with TCC via RSUs through V2I communications, TCC can play a role of
   a DHCP server to allocate unique IPv6 addresses to the vehicles.
   This centralized address allocation can remove the delay of the DAD
   procedure for testing the uniqueness of IPv6 addresses.

   For routing and mobility management, most of vehicles are equipped
   with a GPS navigator as a dedicated navigation system or a smartphone
   App. With this GPS navigator, vehicles can share their current
   position and trajectory (i.e., navigation path) with TCC.  TCC can
   predict the future positions of the vehicles with their mobility
   information (i.e., the current position, speed, direction, and
   trajectory).  With the prediction of the vehicle mobility, TCC
   supports RSUs to perform data packet routing and handover
   proactively.

11.  Security Considerations

   Security and privacy are important aspects in vehicular networks.
   Only valid vehicles should be allowed to participate in vehicular
   networking.  Vehicle Identification Number (VIN) and user certificate
   can be used to authenticate a vehicle and user through road
   infrastructure, such as Road-Side Unit (RSU) connected to an
   authentication server in Traffic Control Center (TCC).

12.  Acknowledgements

   This work was supported by Institute for Information & communications
   Technology Promotion (IITP) grant funded by the Korea government
   (MSIP) (No.R-20160222-002755, Cloud based Security Intelligence
   Technology Development for the Customized Security Service
   Provisioning).  This work was supported in part by ICT R&D program of
   MSIP/IITP (14-824-09-013, Resilient Cyber-Physical Systems Research)
   and the DGIST Research and Development Program (CPS Global Center)
   funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT & Future Planning.  This work
   was supported in part by the French research project DataTweet (ANR-
   13-INFR-0008) and in part by the HIGHTS project funded by the
   European Commission I (636537-H2020).

13.  References

13.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]                      Bradner, S., "Key words for use in
                                  RFCs to Indicate Requirement Levels",
                                  BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC5889]                      Baccelli, E. and M. Townsley, "IP



Jeong, et al.          Expires September 14, 2017              [Page 26]

Internet-Draft    IP-based Vehicular Networking Survey        March 2017


                                  Addressing Model in Ad Hoc Networks",
                                  RFC 5889, September 2010.

   [RFC5949]                      Yokota, H., Chowdhury, K., Koodli, R.,
                                  Patil, B., and F. Xia, "Fast Handovers
                                  for Proxy Mobile IPv6", RFC 5949,
                                  September 2010.

13.2.  Informative References

   [Address-Autoconf]             Fazio, M., Palazzi, C., Das, S., and
                                  M. Gerla, "Automatic IP Address
                                  Configuration in VANETs",
                                  ACM International Workshop on
                                  Vehicular Inter-Networking,
                                  September 2016.

   [Address-Assignment]           Kato, T., Kadowaki, K., Koita, T., and
                                  K. Sato, "Routing and Address
                                  Assignment using Lane/Position
                                  Information in a Vehicular Ad-hoc
                                  Network", IEEE Asia-Pacific Services
                                  Computing Conference, December 2008.

   [GeoSAC]                       Baldessari, R., Bernardos, C., and M.
                                  Calderon, "GeoSAC - Scalable Address
                                  Autoconfiguration for VANET Using
                                  Geographic Networking Concepts",
                                  IEEE International Symposium on
                                  Personal, Indoor and Mobile Radio
                                  Communications, September 2008.

   [VIP-WAVE]                     Cespedes, S., Lu, N., and X. Shen,
                                  "VIP-WAVE: On the Feasibility of IP
                                  Communications in 802.11p Vehicular
                                  Networks", IEEE Transactions on
                                  Intelligent Transportation Systems,
                                  March 2013.

   [IPv6-WAVE]                    Baccelli, E., Clausen, T., and R.
                                  Wakikawa, "IPv6 Operation for WAVE -
                                  Wireless Access in Vehicular
                                  Environments", IEEE Vehicular
                                  Networking Conference, December 2010.

   [Vehicular-Network-Framework]  Jemaa, I., Shagdar, O., and T. Ernst,
                                  "A Framework for IP and non-IP
                                  Multicast Services for Vehicular



Jeong, et al.          Expires September 14, 2017              [Page 27]

Internet-Draft    IP-based Vehicular Networking Survey        March 2017


                                  Networks", Third International
                                  Conference on the Network of the
                                  Future, November 2012.

   [Joint-IP-Networking]          Petrescu, A., Boc, M., and C. Ibars,
                                  "Joint IP Networking and Radio
                                  Architecture for Vehicular Networks",
                                  11th International Conference on ITS
                                  Telecommunications, August 2011.

   [FleetNet]                     Bechler, M., Franz, W., and L. Wolf,
                                  "Mobile Internet Access in FleetNet",
                                  13th Fachtagung Kommunikation in
                                  verteilten Systemen, February 2001.

   [Vehicular-DTN]                Soares, V., Farahmand, F., and J.
                                  Rodrigues, "A Layered Architecture for
                                  Vehicular Delay-Tolerant Networks",
                                  IEEE Symposium on Computers and
                                  Communications, July 2009.

   [IP-Passing-Protocol]          Chen, Y., Hsu, C., and W. Yi, "An IP
                                  Passing Protocol for Vehicular Ad Hoc
                                  Networks with Network Fragmentation",
                                  Elsevier Computers & Mathematics with
                                  Applications, January 2012.

   [VANET-Geo-Routing]            Tsukada, M., Jemaa, I., Menouar, H.,
                                  Zhang, W., Goleva, M., and T. Ernst,
                                  "Experimental Evaluation for IPv6 over
                                  VANET Geographic Routing",
                                  IEEE International Wireless
                                  Communications and Mobile Computing
                                  Conference, June 2010.

   [H-DMM]                        Nguyen, T. and C. Bonnet, "A Hybrid
                                  Centralized-Distributed Mobility
                                  Management for Supporting Highly
                                  Mobile Users", IEEE International
                                  Conference on Communications,
                                  June 2015.

   [H-NEMO]                       Nguyen, T. and C. Bonnet, "A Hybrid
                                  Centralized-Distributed Mobility
                                  Management Architecture for Network
                                  Mobility", IEEE International
                                  Symposium on a World of Wireless,
                                  Mobile and Multimedia Networks,



Jeong, et al.          Expires September 14, 2017              [Page 28]

Internet-Draft    IP-based Vehicular Networking Survey        March 2017


                                  June 2015.

   [NEMO-LMS]                     Soto, I., Bernardos, C., Calderon, M.,
                                  Banchs, A., and A. Azcorra, "NEMO-
                                  Enabled Localized Mobility Support for
                                  Internet Access in Automotive
                                  Scenarios", IEEE Communications
                                  Magazine, May 2009.

   [NEMO-VANET]                   Chen, Y., Hsu, C., and C. Cheng,
                                  "Network Mobility Protocol for
                                  Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks",
                                  Wiley International Journal of
                                  Communication Systems, November 2014.

   [PMIPv6-NEMO-Analysis]         Lee, J., Ernst, T., and N.
                                  Chilamkurti, "Performance Analysis of
                                  PMIPv6-Based Network MObility for
                                  Intelligent Transportation Systems",
                                  IEEE Transactions on Vehicular
                                  Technology, January 2012.

   [Vehicular-Network-MM]         Peng, Y. and J. Chang, "A Novel
                                  Mobility Management Scheme for
                                  Integration of Vehicular Ad Hoc
                                  Networks and Fixed IP Networks",
                                  Springer Mobile Networks and
                                  Applications, February 2010.

   [SDN-DMM]                      Nguyen, T., Bonnet, C., and J. Harri,
                                  "SDN-based Distributed Mobility
                                  Management for 5G Networks",
                                  IEEE Wireless Communications and
                                  Networking Conference, April 2016.

   [Vehicular-IP-MM]              Cespedes, S., Shen, X., and C. Lazo,
                                  "IP Mobility Management for Vehicular
                                  Communication Networks: Challenges and
                                  Solutions", IEEE Communications
                                  Magazine, May 2011.

   [Securing-VCOMM]               Fernandez, P., Santa, J., Bernal, F.,
                                  and A. Skarmeta, "Securing Vehicular
                                  IPv6 Communications",
                                  IEEE Transactions on Dependable and
                                  Secure Computing, January 2016.

   [VNET-AAA]                     Moustafa, H., Bourdon, G., and Y.



Jeong, et al.          Expires September 14, 2017              [Page 29]

Internet-Draft    IP-based Vehicular Networking Survey        March 2017


                                  Gourhant, "Providing Authentication
                                  and Access Control in Vehicular
                                  Network Environment", IFIP TC-
                                  11 International Information Security
                                  Conference, May 2006.

   [WAVE-1609.0]                  IEEE 1609 Working Group, "IEEE Guide
                                  for Wireless Access in Vehicular
                                  Environments (WAVE) - Architecture",
                                  IEEE Std 1609.0-2013, March 2014.

   [WAVE-1609.3]                  IEEE 1609.3 Working Group, "IEEE
                                  Standard for Wireless Access in
                                  Vehicular Environments (WAVE) -
                                  Networking Services", IEEE Std 1609.3-
                                  2016, April 2016.

   [ETSI-ITS-IPv6]                ETSI Technical Committee Intelligent
                                  Transport Systems, "Intelligent
                                  Transport Systems (ITS); Vehicular
                                  Communications; GeoNetworking; Part 6:
                                  Internet Integration; Sub-part 1:
                                  Transmission of IPv6 Packets over
                                  GeoNetworking Protocols", ETSI EN 302
                                  636-6-1, October 2013.

   [ETSI-ITS-Addressing]          ETSI Technical Committee Intelligent
                                  Transport Systems, "Intelligent
                                  Transport System (ITS); Vehicular
                                  Communications; GeoNetworking; Part 4:
                                  Geographical Addressing and Forwarding
                                  for Point-to-Point and Point-to-
                                  Multipoint Communications; Sub-part 1:
                                  Media Independent Functionalities",
                                  ETSI EN 302 636-1-1, October 2013.

   [RFC3963]                      Devarapalli, V., Wakikawa, R.,
                                  Petrescu, A., and P. Thubert, "Network
                                  Mobility (NEMO) Basic Support
                                  Protocol", RFC 3963, January 2005.

   [RFC4862]                      Thomson, S., Narten, T., and T.
                                  Jinmei, "IPv6 Stateless Address
                                  Autoconfiguration", RFC 4862,
                                  September 2007.

   [ISO-ITS-IPv6]                 ISO/TC 204, "Intelligent Transport
                                  Systems - Communications Access for



Jeong, et al.          Expires September 14, 2017              [Page 30]

Internet-Draft    IP-based Vehicular Networking Survey        March 2017


                                  Land Mobiles (CALM) - IPv6
                                  Networking", ISO 21210:2012,
                                  June 2012.

Appendix A.  Changes from
             draft-jeong-ipwave-vehicular-networking-survey-00

   The following changes are made from
   draft-jeong-ipwave-vehicular-networking-survey-00:

   o  Section 9, standard activities about vehicular networks are added
      in the standards developing organizations, such as IEEE, ETSI, and
      ISO.

Authors' Addresses

   Jaehoon Paul Jeong
   Department of Software
   Sungkyunkwan University
   2066 Seobu-Ro, Jangan-Gu
   Suwon, Gyeonggi-Do  440-746
   Republic of Korea

   Phone: +82 31 299 4957
   Fax:   +82 31 290 7996
   EMail: pauljeong@skku.edu
   URI:   http://iotlab.skku.edu/people-jaehoon-jeong.php


   Sandra Cespedes
   Department of Electrical Engineering
   Universidad de Chile
   Av. Tupper 2007, Of. 504
   Santiago,   8370451
   Chile

   Phone: +56 2 29784093
   EMail: scespede@niclabs.cl













Jeong, et al.          Expires September 14, 2017              [Page 31]

Internet-Draft    IP-based Vehicular Networking Survey        March 2017


   Nabil Benamar
   Department of Computer Sciences
   High School of Technology of Meknes
   Moulay Ismail University
   Morocco

   Phone: +212 6 70 83 22 36
   EMail: benamar73@gmail.com


   Jerome Haerri
   Communication Systems Department
   EURECOM
   Sophia-Antipolis
   France

   Phone: +33 4 93 00 81 34
   EMail: jerome.haerri@eurecom.fr


   Michelle Wetterwald
   FBConsulting
   21, Route de Luxembourg
   Wasserbillig, Luxembourg  L-6633
   Luxembourg

   EMail: Michelle.Wetterwald@gmail.com
























Jeong, et al.          Expires September 14, 2017              [Page 32]

