


Network Working Group                                             P. Kim
Internet-Draft                              Korea Polytechnic University
Expires: April 25, 2009                                          S. Shin
                                                                     NIA
                                                        October 26, 2008


           Measuring IP Performance Metrics on Mobile Network
                  draft-pskim-ippm-nemo-measurement-00

    
Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.   

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 25, 2009.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).












Kim and Shin               Expires April 25, 2009              [Page 1]

Internet-Draft        Measuring IP Performance Metrics         Oct 2008

Abstract

   In this draft, the new measurement scheme of IP performance metrics 
   is proposed for the mobile network in heterogeneous wireless network 
   environment. In the proposed scheme, all mobile nodes (MNs) inside 
   the mobile network can get IP performance metrics irrespective of 
   the presence or absence of measurement functionality. That is, the 
   proposed scheme does not require the MN to be involved in measuring 
   IP performance metrics. The multihomed mobile router (MR) with 
   heterogeneous wireless interfaces measures IP performance metrics 
   on behalf of the MNs inside the mobile network. Then, when MNs want 
   to understand the condition of multiple communication paths, MNs can 
   get measured IP performance metrics from the MR using L3 messages. 
   The proposed scheme can reduce burden and power consumption of MNs 
   with limited resource and battery power since MNs don't measure 
   directly IP performance metrics. In addition, the proposed scheme 
   can reduce considerably traffic overhead over wireless links on 
   measurement paths since signaling messages and injected testing 
   traffic are reduced. 

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  2
   2.  Characteristics of End-to-End Path  . . . . .  . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Proposed Measurement Scheme for IP Performance Metrics . . . .  5
   3.1 Overview of Proposed Scheme . . . . . . . . .  . . . . . . . .  5
   3.2 Main Components . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  . . . . . . . .  5   
   3.3 Operation Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . .  . . . . . . . .  6      
   3.4 Advantage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  . . . . . . . .  7
   4.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . .  8


1.  Introduction

   Understanding the dynamic properties of the end-to-end IP 
   performance metrics, such as delay, jitter, bandwidth, packet loss, 
   is beneficial for the proper resource management in existing wired 
   and emerging wireless Internet services. The increasing trend in 
   the wireless Internet services means that the requested performance 
   for a certain service might not be guaranteed, not only because of 
   the air interface bandwidth limitation, but also due to a limitation 
   in the transport network's available bandwidth. Measuring IP 
   performance metrics is a very challenging task due to the 
   heterogeneity of the current systems and the different traffic 
   characteristics of different data flows[1]. In the recent decade, 
   the IP Performance Metrics (IPPM) working group defined a set of 
   standard metrics and has developed schemes for accurately measuring 
   these performance metrics.

Kim and Shin               Expires April 25, 2009              [Page 2]

Internet-Draft        Measuring IP Performance Metrics         Oct 2008

   In the near future, airplanes, automobiles, and even people will 
   carry entire networks of IP devices that connect to the Internet, 
   which is called the mobile network. To deal with the mobility 
   support of mobile networks, the Network Mobility (NEMO) protocols
   was created[2]. Through NEMO protocols, mobile nodes (MNs) on the 
   mobile network are unaware of their network's mobility; however, 
   they are provided with uninterrupted Internet access even when the 
   network changes its attachment point to the Internet. 
   
   Meanwhile, to access the Internet, today's mobile hosts often have 
   more than one wireless interfaces such as WLAN(802.11a/b/g), 
   WMAN(802.16e, WiBro), WWAN(3G, HSDPA), WPAN(802.15), etc. These 
   mobile hosts are called "multi-homing capable" because they can 
   connect to heterogeneous multiple networks. In recent, the 
   multi-homing has been investigated from an end-node point of view 
   not from a site point of view [3]. Once multiple wireless interfaces 
   are offered, users may want to select the most appropriate set of 
   wireless interface(s) depending on the network environment, 
   particularly in wireless networks which are mutable and less 
   reliable than wired networks. Users may also want to select the most 
   appropriate wireless interface per communication type or to combine 
   a set of interfaces to get sufficient bandwidth or more bandwidth 
   using bandwidth aggregation mechanism.

   In this draft, a measurement scheme of IP performance metrics is 
   considered for the mobile network in heterogeneous wireless network 
   environment. There can be often many mobile nodes (MNs) in the 
   mobile network. The mobile router (MR) in the mobile network is 
   capable of changing its point of attachment to the Internet without 
   disrupting higher layer connections of attached devices. To consider 
   the heterogeneous wireless network environment, the MR is assumed to 
   be multi-homing, that is, have heterogeneous multiple wireless 
   interfaces, which enables the multi-path communication outside the 
   mobile network. Thus, MNs inside the mobile network can select the 
   most appropriate communication path depending on the network 
   environment and then communicate with corresponding hosts, such as 
   the IPTV server, media streaming server, web server, FTP server, 
   etc, via the multihomed MR. If MNs want to understand the condition 
   of multiple communication paths, they measure directly IP 
   performance metrics for each path. Therefore, all MNs inside the 
   mobile network are required to be involved in measuring IP 
   performance metrics and thus have to implement measurement 
   functionality, which can be somewhat burdensome and power 
   consumptive for MNs with limited resource and battery power. In 
   addition, there can be the number of measurement signaling messages 
   and injected testing traffic as shown in the active measurement 
   techniques, which can cause considerable traffic overhead over 
   wireless links on measurement paths. Therefore, to resolve these 
   problems, an alternative measurement scheme of IP performance 
   metrics for the mobile network should be developed. 
   
Kim and Shin               Expires April 25, 2009              [Page 3]

Internet-Draft        Measuring IP Performance Metrics         Oct 2008
   
   Therefore, in this draft, the new measurement scheme of IP 
   performance metrics is proposed for the mobile network in 
   heterogeneous wireless network environment. In the proposed scheme, 
   all MNs inside the mobile network can get IP performance metrics 
   irrespective of the presence or absence of measurement 
   functionality. That is, the proposed scheme does not require the MN 
   to be involved in measuring IP performance metrics. The multihomed 
   MR measures IP performance metrics on behalf of the MNs inside the 
   mobile network. Then, when MNs want to understand the condition of 
   multiple communication paths, MNs can get measured IP performance 
   metrics from the MR using L3 messages. These L3 messages can be 
   defined newly or reused by existing ICMP messages in [4]. The 
   proposed scheme can reduce burden and power consumption of MNs with 
   limited resource and battery power since MNs don't measure directly 
   IP performance metrics. In addition, the proposed scheme can reduce 
   considerably traffic overhead over wireless links on measurement 
   paths since signaling messages and injected testing traffic are 
   reduced.

2.  Characteristics of End-to-End Path

   This draft considers the mobile network in heterogeneous wireless 
   network environment. The mobile router (MR) is capable of changing 
   its point of attachment to the mobile network, moving from one link 
   to another link. To consider the heterogeneous wireless network 
   environment, the MR is assumed to be multi-homing, that is, have 
   heterogeneous multiple network interfaces which are categorized by 
   internal and external wireless interfaces. Internal wireless 
   interfaces are connected to MNs inside the mobile network and would 
   be WLAN (802.11a/b/g). External wireless interfaces are connected to 
   external base stations for WMAN (802.16e, WiBro) and WWAN 
   (3G, HSDPA). Therefore, the MR enables the multi-path communication 
   outside the mobile network through these heterogeneous wireless 
   interfaces. Meanwhile, mobile nodes (MNs) inside the mobile network 
   are assumed to have single network interface or heterogeneous 
   multiple wireless interfaces. Corresponding hosts (CHs) can be the 
   IPTV server, media streaming server, web server, FTP server, etc. 
   MNs inside the mobile network can communicate with CHs on multiple 
   paths via the multihomed MR.  
    
   The end-to-end multi-path from MNs inside the mobile network to CHs 
   outside the mobile network via the multihomed MR consists of 
   following three links.

   (1) Link between MN and MR

   Inside the mobile network, the WLAN(802.11a/b/g) will be generally 
   adopted as an air technology due to high transmission speed and 
   moderate coverage. Thus, MNs with WLAN interface can communicate via 
   the MR with internal WLAN interface inside the mobile network.

Kim and Shin               Expires April 25, 2009              [Page 4]

Internet-Draft        Measuring IP Performance Metrics         Oct 2008

   (2) Link between MR and External BSs

   Outside the mobile network, WMAN(802.16e, WiBro) and WWAN(3G, HSDPA) 
   will be generally adopted as an air technology due to wide coverage. 
   Thus, the MR with external WMAN and WWAN interfaces can communicate 
   via corresponding base stations (BSs). However, in this wireless 
   link, it is difficult to expect higher transmission speed than that 
   of the wireless link between MNs and MR using WLAN.

   (3) Link between External BSs and CHs

   This link consists generally of routers with high processing speed 
   and wired networks with high transmission speed. 

3.  Proposed Measurement Scheme for IP Performance Metrics
   
   3.1 Overview of Proposed Scheme
   
   If MNs inside the mobile network measure directly IP performance 
   metrics, they are required to be involved in the measurement 
   procedure and thus have to implement measurement functionality, 
   which can be somewhat burdensome and power consumptive for MNs with
   limited resource and battery power. In addition, there can be the 
   number of measurement signaling messages and injected testing 
   traffic, which can cause considerable traffic overhead over the 
   wireless links, such as link between MN and MR, and link between MR 
   and external BS, on measurement paths. In addition, as mentioned 
   before, the wireless link between MR and external BS is likely to be 
   overloaded network link, that is, "bottleneck link". Moreover, if 
   there are many mobile networks connected to external BS, this 
   link is likely to be "tight link". This means that IP performance 
   metrics of the end-to-end multi-path might be mostly influenced by 
   the wireless link between MR and external BS. 
   
   With the consideration of these problems, in this draft, the new 
   measurement scheme of IP performance metrics is proposed for the 
   mobile network in heterogeneous wireless network environment. In the 
   proposed scheme, all MNs inside the mobile network can get IP 
   performance metrics irrespective of the presence or absence of 
   measurement functionality. That is, the proposed scheme does not 
   require the MN to be involved in measuring IP performance metrics. 
   The multihomed MR with heterogeneous wireless interfaces measures IP
   performance metrics on behalf of the MNs inside the mobile network. 
    
   3.2 Main Components

   Main components on the end-to-end measurement path consist of MNs, 
   the multihomed MR, and the measurement server. 
  
 
  
Kim and Shin               Expires April 25, 2009              [Page 5]

Internet-Draft        Measuring IP Performance Metrics         Oct 2008
    
   MNs inside the mobile network are assumed to have a single network 
   interface or heterogeneous multiple network interfaces. When MNs want 
   to get IP performance metrics to understand the condition of multiple 
   communication paths, they can request to the MR using the L3 message. 
   Also, MNs can get IP performance metrics that the MR provides 
   periodically.
   
   The multihomed MR measures IP performance metrics on behalf of the 
   MNs inside the mobile network. Since the MR have heterogeneous 
   external wireless interfaces such as WMAN (802.16e, WiBro) and WWAN 
   (3G, HSDPA), the MR enables the multi-path communication outside the 
   mobile network and thus can measure IP performance metrics for all 
   paths through these heterogeneous external wireless interfaces.
   
   The measurement server is a host that receives testing traffic, 
   calculates performance statistics, and response results of IP 
   performance metrics to the MR.
   
   3.3 Operation Procedure

   (1) Operation between MR and Measurement Server

   On the multi-path between the multihomed MR and the measurement 
   server, IP performance metrics can be measured using existing 
   measurement schemes. Existing measurement schemes can be classified 
   into two categories: passive measurement and active measurement [1]. 
   Passive measurement schemes use the trace history of existing data 
   transmission. While potentially very efficient and accurate, their 
   scope is limited to network paths that have recently carried user 
   traffic. Active measurement schemes, on the other hand, require 
   injecting testing traffic into network in order to realize 
   measurements. The basic idea of active measurement is that the 
   multihomed MR injects test traffic into the network to the 
   measurement server. Then, the measurement server receives testing 
   traffic, calculates performance statistics, and response results of 
   IP performance metrics to the multihomed MR. The MR receives and 
   stores them to provide for MNs inside the mobile network.

   (2) Operation between MR and MNs

   When MNs want to get IP performance metrics from the MR to 
   understand the condition of multiple communication paths, following 
   two methods can be available:

   - Unsolicited Reqeust and Response : Irrespective of the request of 
     MNs, the MR broadcasts periodically measured IP performances 
     metrics to MNs inside the mobile network.
   - Solicited Request and Response : A specific MN requests and then 
     the MR unicasts measured IP performance metrics to the 
     corresponding MN.

Kim and Shin               Expires April 25, 2009              [Page 6]

Internet-Draft        Measuring IP Performance Metrics         Oct 2008

   Request and Response messages can be defined by the Internet Control 
   Message Protocol (ICMP) message format in [4]. For example, for 
   unsolicited request and response, the unsolicited router 
   advertisement (RA) message format in [5] can be reused by the 
   modification of type field. For solicited request and response, 
   route solicitation (RS) and router advertisement (RA) message 
   formats in [5] can be reused by the modification of type field.  
   
   Using obtained IP performance metrics, MNs can understand the 
   condition of multiple communication paths for each heterogeneous 
   multiple wireless interfaces. Then, MNs may want to select the most 
   appropriate path per communication type. If the condition of all 
   communication paths is unfavorable, MNs with heterogeneous multiple 
   wireless interfaces can connect to the corresponding BS directly, 
   not via the MR.

   3.4 Advantages

   The proposed scheme can reduce burden and power consumption of MNs 
   with limited resource and battery power since MNs don't measure 
   directly IP performance metrics. In addition, the proposed scheme 
   can reduce considerably traffic overhead over wireless links on 
   measurement paths since signaling messages and injected testing 
   traffic are reduced.

4.  References

4.1.  Informative references

   
   [1] Paxson, V., G. Alimes, J. Mahdavi and M. Mathis, "Framework for 
       IP Performance Metrics", IETF RFC 2330, May 1998.
   [2] Thubert, P., A. Petrescu, R. Wakikawa and V. Devarapalli, 
       "Network Mobility (NEMO) Basic Support Protocol", RFC 3963, 
       Jan 2005.
   [3] Ernst, T. et al, "Motivations and Scenarios for Using Multiple 
       Interfaces and Global Addresses", ietf-monami6-multihoming-
       motivation-scenario-03 (work in progress), May 2008.
   [4] Conta, A., S. Deering, M. Gupta, "Internet Control Message 
       Protocol (ICMPv6) for the Internet Protocol Version 6 (IPv6) 
       Specification", IETF RFC 4443, March 2006.
   [5] Narten, T., E. Nordmark, W. Simpson, "Neighbor Discovery for 
       IP Version 6 (IPv6)", IETF RFC 2461, December 1998.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Kim and Shin               Expires April 25, 2009              [Page 7]

Internet-Draft        Measuring IP Performance Metrics         Oct 2008
 
     
Authors' Addresses

   Pyungsoo Kim
   Department of Electronics Engineering,
   Korea Polytechnic University,
   2121 Jungwang-Dong, Shiheung City,
   Gyeonggi-Do  429-793
   KOREA

   Phone: +82 31 8041 0489
   EMail: pskim@kpu.ac.kr
   
   Sun-Young Shin
   National Information Society Agency
   NIA Bldg. 77, Myuko-Dong, Jung-Gu
   Seoul, 110-775
   KOREA
   
   Email: shinsy@nia.or.kr
   
Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.  

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.




Kim and Shin               Expires April 25, 2009              [Page 8]

Internet-Draft        Measuring IP Performance Metrics         Oct 2008

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.
   
   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.
           

Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).
   
   






























   
Kim and Shin               Expires April 25, 2009              [Page 9]
