   Network Working Group                              Eiji Oki (Editor) 
   Internet Draft                                                   NTT 
   Category: Informational 
   Expires: September 2007 
                                                             March 2007 
    
        PCC-PCE Communication Requirements for Inter-Layer Traffic 
                               Engineering 
                                      
                  draft-ietf-pce-inter-layer-req-04.txt 
                                      
   Status of this Memo 
    
   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any 
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware 
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes 
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.   
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
   at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts as 
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt. 
    
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
   Abstract 
    
   The Path Computation Element (PCE) provides functions of path 
   computation in support of traffic engineering in Multi-Protocol 
   Label Switching (MPLS) and Generalized MPLS (GMPLS) networks. 
    
   MPLS and GMPLS networks may be constructed from layered service 
   networks. It is advantageous for overall network efficiency to 
   provide end-to-end traffic engineering across multiple network 
   layers. PCE is a candidate solution for such requirements. 
    
   Generic requirements for a communication protocol between Path 
   Computation Clients (PCCs) and PCEs are presented in "PCE 
   Communication Protocol Generic Requirements". This document 
   complements the generic requirements and presents a detailed set of 
   PCC-PCE communication protocol requirements for inter-layer traffic 
   engineering. 
    
   Conventions used in this document 
    
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in 
   this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 
   [RFC2119]. 
     
   Oki et al.             Expires September 2007              [Page 1]
   Internet Draft draft-ietf-pce-inter-layer-req-04.txt  March 2007 
                                                                        
   Table of Contents 
    
   1. Contributors...................................................2 
   2. Terminology....................................................2 
   3. Introduction...................................................3 
   4. Motivation for PCE-Based Inter-Layer Path Computation..........3 
   5. PCC-PCE Communication Requirements for Inter-Layer Traffic 
   Engineering.......................................................4 
   5.1.  PCC-PCE Communication.......................................4 
   5.1.1.  Control of Inter-Layer Path Computation...................4 
   5.1.2.  Control of The Type of Path to be Computed................4 
   5.1.3.  Communication of Inter-Layer Constraints..................5 
   5.1.4.  Adaptation Capability.....................................5 
   5.1.5.  Cooperation Between PCEs..................................5 
   5.1.6.  Inter-Layer Diverse paths.................................6 
   5.2.  Supportive Network Models...................................6 
   6. Manageability considerations...................................6 
   6.1.	Control of Function and Policy...............................6
   6.2.	Information and Data Models..................................6
   6.3.	Liveness Detection and Monitoring............................6
   6.4.	Verifying Correct Operation..................................7
   6.5.	Requirements on Other Protocols and Functional Components....7
   6.6.	Impact on Network Operation..................................7
   7. Security Considerations........................................7 
   8. Acknowledgments................................................8 
   9. References.....................................................8 
   9.1.  Normative Reference.........................................8 
   9.2.  Informative Reference.......................................8 
   10.  Authors' Addresses...........................................8 
   11.  Intellectual Property Statement..............................9 
  
1. Contributors 
    
   The following are the authors that contributed to the present 
   document:  
    
   Eiji Oki (NTT)  
   Jean-Louis Le Roux (France Telecom)   
   Kenji Kumaki (KDDI) 
   Adrian Farrel (Old Dog Consulting)  
    
2. Terminology 
    
   LSP: Label Switched Path. 
    
   LSR: Label Switching Router. 
    
   PCC: Path Computation Client: any client application requesting a 
   path computation to be performed by a Path Computation Element. 
    
   PCE: Path Computation Element: an entity (component, application or 
   network node) that is capable of computing a network path or route 
   based on a network graph and applying computational constraints. 
    
   PCECP: PCE Communication Protocol, a protocol for communication 
   between PCCs and PCEs. 
    
   TED: Traffic Engineering Database which contains the topology and 
   resource information of the domain. The TED may be fed by IGP 
   extensions or potentially by other means. 
    
   TE LSP: Traffic Engineering Label Switched Path. 
     
   Oki et al.            Expires Septermber 2007             [Page 2]

   Internet Draft draft-ietf-pce-inter-layer-req-04.txt  March 2007                                                                     
    
   TE LSP head-end: head/source/ingress of the TE LSP.  
        
   TE LSP tail-end: tail/destination/egress of the TE LSP. 
    
3. Introduction 
    
   The Path Computation Element (PCE) defined in [RFC4655] is an entity 
   that is capable of computing a network path or route based on a 
   network graph, and applying computational constraints.  
    
   A network may comprise of multiple layers. These layers may 
   represent separations of technologies (e.g., packet switch capable 
   (PSC), time division multiplex (TDM), lambda switch capable (LSC)) 
   [RFC3945], separation of data plane switching granularity levels 
   (e.g., PSC-1 and  PSC-2, or VC4 and VC12) [MRN-REQ], or a 
   distinction between client and server networking roles (e.g., 
   commercial or administrative separation of client and server 
   networks). In this multi-layer network, LSP in lower layers are used 
   to carry upper-layer LSPs. The network topology formed by lower-
   layer LSPs and advertised to the higher layer is called a Virtual 
   Network Topology (VNT) [MRN-REQ].  
    
   It is important to optimize network resource utilization globally, 
   i.e. taking into account all layers, rather than optimizing resource 
   utilization at each layer independently. This allows achieving 
   better network efficiency. This is what we call Inter-layer traffic 
   engineering. This includes mechanisms allowing to compute end-to-end 
   paths across layers, as known as inter-layer path computation, and 
   mechanisms for control and management of the VNT by setting up and 
   releasing LSPs in the lower layers [MRN-REQ]. 
    
  Inter-layer traffic engineering is included in the scope of the PCE 
  architecture [RFC4655], and PCE can provide a suitable mechanism for 
  resolving inter-layer path computation issues. The applicability of 
  the PCE-based path computation architecture to inter-layer traffic 
  engineering is described in [PCE-INTER-LAYER-FRWK]. 
    
   This document presents a set of PCC-PCE communication protocol 
   (PCECP) requirements for inter-layer traffic engineering. It 
   supplements the generic requirements documented in [RFC4657].  
    
4. Motivation for PCE-Based Inter-Layer Path Computation 
    
   [RFC4206] defines a way to signal a higher-layer LSP, whose explicit 
   route includes hops traversed by LSPs in lower layers. The 
   computation of end-to-end paths across layers is called Inter-Layer 
   Path Computation. 
    
   An LSR in the higher-layer might not have information on the lower-
   layer topology, particularly in an overlay or augmented model, and 
   hence might not be able to compute an end-to-end path across layers. 
    
   PCE-based inter-layer path computation, consists of relying on one 
   or more PCEs to compute an end-to-end path across layers. This could 
   rely on a single PCE path computation where the PCE has topology 
   information about multiple layers and can directly compute an end-
   to-end path across layers considering the topology of all of the 
   layers. Alternatively, the inter-layer path computation could be 
   performed as a multiple PCE computation where each member of a set 
     
   Oki et al.            Expires Septermber 2007             [Page 3] 

   Internet Draft draft-ietf-pce-inter-layer-req-04.txt  March 2007 
                                                                        
   of PCEs has information about the topology of one or more layers, 
   but not all layers, and collaborate to compute an end-to-end path. 
    
   Consider a two-layer network where the higher-layer network is a 
   packet-based IP/MPLS or GMPLS network and the lower-layer network is 
   a GMPLS optical network. An ingress LSR in the higher-layer network 
   tries to set up an LSP to an egress LSR also in the higher-layer 
   network across the lower-layer network, and needs a path in the 
   higher-layer network. However, suppose that there is no TE link 
   between border LSRs, which are located on the boundary between the 
   higher-layer and lower-layer networks, and that the ingress LSR does 
   not have topology visibility in the lower layer. If a single-layer 
   path computation is applied for the higher-layer, the path 
   computation fails. On the other hand, inter-layer path computation 
   is able to provide a route in the higher-layer and a suggestion that 
   a lower-layer LSP be setup between border LSRs, considering both 
   layers' TE topologies.  
    
   Further discussion of the application of PCE to inter-layer path 
   computation can be found in [PCE-INTER-LAYER-FRWK]. 
    
5. PCC-PCE Communication Requirements for Inter-Layer Traffic 
  Engineering 
    
   This section sets out additional requirements not covered in 
   [RFC4657] specific to the problems of multi-layer TE. 
    
5.1.  PCC-PCE Communication 
    
   The PCC-PCE communication protocol MUST allow requests and replies 
   for inter-layer path computation. 
    
   This requires no additional messages, but implies the following 
   additional constraints to be added to the PCC-PCE communication 
   protocol. 
    
 5.1.1. Control of Inter-Layer Path Computation 
    
   A request from a PCC to a PCE SHOULD indicate whether inter-layer 
   path computation is allowed. In the absence of such an indication, 
   the default is that inter-layer path computation is not allowed. 
   Therefore, a request from a PCC to a PCE MUST support the inclusion 
   of such an indication. 
    
 5.1.2. Control of The Type of Path to be Computed 
    
   The PCE computes and returns a path to the PCC that the PCC can use 
   to build a higher-layer or lower-layer LSP once converted to an 
   Explicit Route Object (ERO) for use in RSVP-TE signaling. There are 
   two options [PCE-INTER-LAYER-FRWK]. 
    
   - Option 1: Mono-layer path. The PCE computes a "mono layer" path, 
   i.e. a path that includes only TE-links from the same layer.  
   - Option 2: Multi-layer path. The PCE computes a "multi-layer" path, 
   i.e. a path that includes TE links from distinct layers [RFC4206]. 
    
   A request from a PCC to a PCE MUST allow control of the type of the 
   path to be computed by selection from the following list:  

   Oki et al.            Expires Septermber 2007             [Page 4] 

  Internet Draft draft-ietf-pce-inter-layer-req-04.txt  March 2007 
                                                                        
   - a mono-layer path that is specified by strict hop(s). The path may 
   include virtual TE link(s). 
   - a mono-layer path that includes loose hop(s). 
   - a multi-layer path that can include the complete path of one or 
   more lower-layer LSPs not yet established. 
    
   When multi-layer path computation is requested, a response from a 
   PCE to a PCC MUST support the inclusion, as part of end-to-end path, 
   of the path of the lower-layer LSPs to be established.  
    
   If a response message from a PCE to PCC carries a mono-layer path 
   that is specified by strict hops but includes virtual TE link(s), or  
   includes loose hop(s), or carries a multi-layer path that can 
   include the complete path of one or more lower-layer LSPs not yet 
   established, the signaling of the higher-layer LSP may trigger the 
   establishment of the lower-layer LSPs (nested signaling). The nested 
   signaling may increase the higher-layer connection setup latency. An 
   ingress LSR for the higher-layer LSP, or a PCC, needs to know 
   whether nested signaling is required or not.  
    
   A request from a PCC to a PCE MUST allow indicating whether nested 
   signaling is acceptable or not. 
 
   A response from a PCE to a PCC MUST allow indicating whether the 
   computed path triggers nested signaling or not. 
    
 5.1.3. Communication of Inter-Layer Constraints 
    
   A request from a PCC to a PCE MUST support the inclusion of 
   constraints for multi-layer path. This includes control over which 
   network layers may, must, or must not be included in the computed 
   path. Such control may be expressed in terms of the switching types 
   of the layer networks. 
    
   The path computation request MUST also allow for different objective 
   functions to be applied within different network layers. For example, 
   the path in a packet-network may need to be optimized for least 
   delay using the IGP metric as a measure of delay, while the path in 
   an under-lying TDM network might be optimized for fewest hops. 
    
 5.1.4. Adaptation Capability 
    
   It MUST be possible for the path computation request to indicate the 
   desired adaptation function at the egress of the LSP that is being 
   computed. This will be particularly important where the egress LSR 
   participates in more than one layer network but may not be capable 
   of all associated adaptations. 
    
 5.1.5. Cooperation Between PCEs 
    
   When each layer is controlled by a PCE, which only has access to the 
   topology information of its layer, the PCEs of each layer need to 
   cooperate to perform inter-layer path computation. In this case, 
   communication between PCEs is required for inter-layer path 
   computation. A PCE that behaves as a client is defined as a PCC 
   [RFC4655].  
 
   The PCC-PCE communication protocol MUST allow requests and replies 
   for multiple PCE inter-layer path computation. 
     
   Oki et al.            Expires Septermber 2007             [Page 5] 

   Internet Draft draft-ietf-pce-inter-layer-req-04.txt  March 2007 
                                                                        
 5.1.6. Inter-Layer Diverse paths 
    
   The PCE communication protocol MUST allow for the computation of 
   diverse inter-Layer paths. A request from a PCC to a PCE MUST 
   support the inclusion of multiple path request, with the desired 
   level of diversity at each layer (link, node, SRLG). 
    
5.2.  Supportive Network Models 
    
   The PCC-PCE communication protocol SHOULD allow several 
   architectural alternatives for interworking between MPLS and GMPLS 
   networks: overlay, integrated and augmented models [RFC3945]. 
    
6. Manageability considerations 
 
      
6.1.  Control of Function and Policy 
    
   An individual PCE MAY elect to support inter-layer computations and 
   advertise its capabilities as described in the previous sections. 
   PCE implementations MAY provide a configuration switch to allow 
   support of inter-layer path computations to be enabled or disabled. 
   When the level of support is changed, this SHOULD be re-advertised. 
    
   However, a PCE MAY also elect to support inter-layer computations, 
   but not to advertise the fact, so that only those PCCs configured to 
   know of the PCE and its capabilities can use it.  
   
  Support for, and advertisement of support for, inter-layer path 
  computation MAY be subject to policy and a PCE MAY hide its inter-
  layer capabilities from certain PCCs by not advertising them through 
  the discovery protocol, and not reporting them to the specific PCCs 
  in any PCECP capabilities exchange. Further, a PCE MAY be directed 
  by policy to refuse an inter-layer path computation request for any 
  reason including, but not limited to, the identity of the PCC that 
  makes the request. 
   
      
6.2. Information and Data Models 
    
   PCECP protocol extensions to support inter-layer computations MUST 
   be accompanied by MIB objects for the control and monitoring of the 
   protocol and of the PCE that performs the computations. The MIB 
   objects MAY be provided in the same MIB module as used for general 
   PCECP control and monitoring or MAY be provided in a new MIB module. 
    
   The MIB objects MUST provide the ability to control and monitor all 
   aspects of PCECP relevant to inter-layer path computation. 
    
6.3. Liveness Detection and Monitoring 
    
   No changes are necessary to the liveness detection and monitoring   
   requirements as already embodied in [RFC4657]. It should be noted,   
   however, that inter-layer path computations might require extended 
   cooperation between PCEs (as is also the case for inter-AS and 
   inter-area computations) and so the liveness detection and 
   monitoring SHOULD be applied to each PCECP communication and 
   aggregated to report the behavior of an individual PCECP request to 
   the originating PCC. 
     
   Oki et al.            Expires Septermber 2007             [Page 6] 

   Internet Draft draft-ietf-pce-inter-layer-req-04.txt  March 2007 
                                                                        
   In particular, where a request is forwarded between PCEs multiple 
   times neither the PCC not the first PCE can monitor the liveness of 
   inter PCE-PCE connections or of the PCEs themselves. In this case, 
   suitable performance of the original PCECP request relies on each 
   PCE operating correct monitoring procedures and correlating any 
   failures back to the PCECP requests that are outstanding. These 
   requirements are no different from those for any cooperative PCE 
   usage, and are expected to be already covered by general and by 
   inter-AS and inter-area implementations. 
    
6.4. Verifying Correct Operation 
 
   There are no additional requirements beyond those expressed in 
   [RFC4657] for verifying the correct operation of the PCECP. Note 
   that verification of the correct operation of the PCE and its 
   algorithms is out of scope for the protocol requirements, but a PCC 
   MAY send the same request to more than one PCE and compare the 
   results. 
 
6.5. Requirements on Other Protocols and Functional Components 
    
   A PCE operates on a topology graph that may be built using 
   information distributed by TE extensions to the routing protocol 
   operating within the network. In order that the PCE can select a 
   suitable path for the signaling protocol to use to install the 
   inter-layer LSP, the topology graph must include information about 
   the inter-layer signaling and forwarding (i.e. adaptation) 
   capabilities of each LSR in the network. 
    
   Whatever means is used to collect the information to build the 
   topology graph MUST include the requisite information. If the TE 
   extensions to the routing protocol are used, these SHOULD satisfy 
   the requirements as described in [MRN-REQ]. 
    
6.6. Impact on Network Operation 
    
   The use of a PCE to compute inter-layer paths is not expected to 
   have significant impact on network operations. But it should be 
   noted that the introduction of inter-layer support to a PCE that 
   already provides mono-layer path computation might change the 
   loading of the PCE and that might have an impact on the network 
   behavior especially during recovery periods immediately after a 
   network failure. 
    
   On the other hand, it is envisioned that the use of inter-layer path 
   computation will have significant benefits to the operation of a 
   multi-layer network including improving the network resource usage 
   and enabling a greater number of higher-layer LSPs to be supported. 
    
7. Security Considerations 
    
   Inter-layer traffic engineering with PCE may raise new security 
   issues when PCE-PCE communication is done between different layer 
   networks for inter-layer path computation. Security issues may also 
   exist when a single PCE is granted full visibility of TE information 
   that applies to multiple layers. 
    
   It is expected that solutions for inter-layer protocol extensions 
   will address these issues in detail using security techniques such 
   as authentication. 

     
   Oki et al.            Expires Septermber 2007             [Page 7] 

   Internet Draft draft-ietf-pce-inter-layer-req-04.txt  March 2007 
                                                                        
    
8. Acknowledgments 
    
  We would like to thank Kohei Shiomoto, Ichiro Inoue, and Dean Cheng 
  for their useful comments. 
    
9. References 
    
9.1.  Normative Reference 
    
   [RFC2119] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to indicate 
   requirements levels", RFC 2119, March 1997. 
    
   [RFC3945] Mannie, E., "Generalized Multi-Protocol Label Switching 
   Architecture", RFC 3945, October 2004. 
    
   [RFC4206] Kompella, K., and Rekhter, Y., "Label Switched Paths (LSP) 
   Hierarchy with Generalized Multi-Protocol Label Switching (GMPLS) 
   Traffic Engineering (TE)", RFC 4206, October 2005. 
  
9.2.  Informative Reference 
    
   [RFC4655] A. Farrel, JP. Vasseur and J. Ash, "A Path Computation 
   Element (PCE)-Based Architecture", RFC 4655, September 2006. 
    
   [RFC4657] J. Ash, J.L Le Roux et al., " Path Computation Element 
   (PCE) Communication Protocol Generic Requirements", RFC 4657, 
   September 2006. 
    
   [RFC4674] JL Le Roux et al., "Requirements for Path Computation 
   Element (PCE) Discovery", RFC 4674, September 2006. 
    
   [MRN-REQ] K. Shiomoto et al., "Requirements for GMPLS-based multi-
   region and multi-layer networks (MRN/MLN)", draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-
   mln-reqs (work in progress). 
    
   [PCE-INTER-LAYER-FRWK] E. Oki et al., "Framework for PCE-Based 
   Inter-Layer MPLS and GMPLS Traffic Engineering", draft-oki-pce-
   inter-layer-frwk (work in progress) 
    
10.     Authors' Addresses 
    
   Eiji Oki  
   NTT  
   3-9-11 Midori-cho,  
   Musashino-shi, Tokyo 180-8585, Japan 
   Email: oki.eiji@lab.ntt.co.jp 
    
   Jean-Louis Le Roux  
   France Telecom R&D,   
   Av Pierre Marzin,   
   22300 Lannion, France  
   Email: jeanlouis.leroux@orange-ftgroup.com 
    
   Kenji Kumaki 
   KDDI Corporation 
   Garden Air Tower 
   Iidabashi, Chiyoda-ku, 
     
   Oki et al.            Expires Septermber 2007             [Page 8] 

   Internet Draft draft-ietf-pce-inter-layer-req-04.txt  March 2007 
                                                                        
   Tokyo 102-8460, JAPAN 
   Phone: +81-3-6678-3103 
   Email: ke-kumaki@kddi.com 
    
   Adrian Farrel 
   Old Dog Consulting 
   Email: adrian@olddog.co.uk 
    
11.     Intellectual Property Statement 
    
   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed 
   to pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described 
   in this document or the extent to which any license under such 
   rights might or might not be available; nor does it represent that 
   it has made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  
   Information on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC 
   documents can be found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 
    
   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use 
   of such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository 
   at http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 
    
   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF at ietf-
   ipr@ietf.org. 
    
   Disclaimer of Validity 
    
   This document and the information contained herein are provided on 
   an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE 
   REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE 
   IETF TRUST AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL 
   WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY 
   WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE 
   ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS 
   FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
    
   Copyright Statement 
    
   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007). 
    
   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions 
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors 
   retain all their rights.







     
   Oki et al.            Expires Septermber 2007             [Page 9]     