



TEAS Working Group                                             Y. Zhuang
Internet-Draft                                                     Q. Wu
Intended status: Standards Track                                  Huawei
Expires: March 21, 2016                                        A. Farrel
                                                        Juniper Networks
                                                      September 18, 2015


              Architecture for Scheduled Use of Resources
                draft-zhuang-teas-scheduled-resources-00

Abstract

   Time-Scheduled reservation of traffic engineering (TE) resources can
   be used to provide resource booking for TE Label Switched Paths so as
   to better guarantee services for customers and to improve the
   efficiency of network resource usage into the future.  This document
   provides a framework that describes and discusses the architecture
   for the scheduled reservation of TE resources.  This document does
   not describe specific protocols or protocol extensions needed to
   realize this service.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on March 21, 2016.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2015 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents



Zhuang, et al.           Expires March 21, 2016                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft         Scheduled Use of Resources         September 2015


   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Problem statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     2.1.  Provisioning TE-LSPs and TE Resources . . . . . . . . . .   3
     2.2.  Selecting the Path of an LSP  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     2.3.  Looking at Future Demands on TE Resources . . . . . . . .   4
     2.4.  Requisite State Information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   3.  Architectural Concepts  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     3.1.  Where is Scheduling State Held? . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     3.2.  What State is Held? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   4.  Architecture Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     4.1.  Service Request . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     4.2.  Initialization and Recovery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   5.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   6.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10

1.  Introduction

   Traffic Engineering Label Switched Paths (TE-LSPs) are connection
   oriented tunnels in packet and non-packet networks [RFC3209],
   [RFC3945].  TE-LSPs may reserve network resources for use by the
   traffic they carry, thus providing some guarantees of service
   delivery and allowing a network operator to plan the use of the
   resources across the whole network.

   In some technologies (such as wavelength switched optical networks)
   the resource is synonymous with the label that is switched on the
   path of the LSP so that it is not possible to establish an LSP that
   can carry traffic without assigning a concrete resource to the LSP.
   In other technologies (such as packet switched networks) the
   resources assigned to an LSP are a measure of the capacity of a link
   that is dedicated for use by the traffic on the LSP.  In all cases,
   network planning consists of selecting paths for LSPs through the
   network so that there will be no contention for resources; LSP
   establishment is the act of setting up an LSP and reserving resources
   within the network; and network optimization or re-optimization is
   the process of re-positioning LSPs in the network to make the
   unreserved network resources more useful for potential future LSPs
   while ensuring that the established LSPs continue to fulfil their
   objectives.



Zhuang, et al.           Expires March 21, 2016                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft         Scheduled Use of Resources         September 2015


   It is often the case that it is known that an LSP will be needed at
   some time in the future.  While a path for that LSP could be computed
   using knowledge of the currently established LSPs and the currently
   available resources, this does give any degree of certainty that the
   necessary resources will be available when it is time to set up the
   new LSP.  Yet setting up the LSP ahead of the time when it is needed
   (which would guarantee the availability of the resources) is wasteful
   since the network resources could be used for some other purpose in
   the meantime.

   Similarly, it may be known that an LSP will no longer be needed after
   some future time and that it will be torn down releasing the network
   resources that were assigned to it.  This information can be helpful
   in planning how a future LSP is placed in the network.

   Time-Scheduled (TS) reservation of TE resources can be used to
   provide resource booking for TE-LSPs so as to better guarantee
   services for customers and to improve the efficiency of network
   resource usage into the future.  This document provides a framework
   that describes and discusses the architecture for the scheduled
   reservation of TE resources.  This document does not describe
   specific protocols or protocol extensions needed to realize this
   service.

2.  Problem statement

2.1.  Provisioning TE-LSPs and TE Resources

   TE-LSPs in existing networks are provisioned using RSVP-TE as a
   signaling protocol [RFC3209][RFC3473] or by direct control of network
   elements such as in the Software Defined Networking paradigm.

   TE resources are reserved at the point of use.  That is, the
   resources (wavelengths, timeslots, bandwidth, etc.) are reserved for
   use on a specific link and are tracked by the Label Switching Routers
   (LSRs) at the end points of the link.  Those LSRs learn which
   resources to reserve during the LSP setup process.

   The use of TE resources can be varied by changing the parameters of
   the LSP that uses them, and the resources can be released by tearing
   down the LSP.

2.2.  Selecting the Path of an LSP

   Although TE-LSPs can determine their paths hop-by-hop using the
   shortest path toward the destination to route the signaling protocol
   messages [RFC3209], in practice this option is not applied because it
   does not look far enough ahead into the network to verify that the



Zhuang, et al.           Expires March 21, 2016                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft         Scheduled Use of Resources         September 2015


   desired resources are available.  Instead, the full length of the
   path of an LSP is computed ahead of time either by the head-end LSR
   of a signaled LSP, or by Path Computation Element (PCE) functionality
   in a dedicated server or built into network management software
   [RFC4655].

   Such full-path computation is applied in order that an end-to-end
   view of the available resources in the network can be used to
   determine the best likelihood of establishing a viable LSP that meets
   the service requirements.  Even in this situation, however, it is
   possible that two LSPs being set up at the same time will compete for
   scarce network resources meaning that one or both of them will fail
   to be established.  This situation is avoided by using a centralized
   PCE that is aware of the LSP setup requests that are in progress.

2.3.  Looking at Future Demands on TE Resources

   While path computation as described in Section 3.2 takes account of
   the currently available network resources, and can act to place LSPs
   in the network so that there is the best possibility of future LSPs
   being accommodated, it cannot handle all eventualities.  It is simple
   to construct scenarios where LSPs that are placed one at a time lead
   to further LSPs being blocked, but where foreknowledge of all of the
   LSPs would have made it possible for them all to be set up.

   If, therefore, we were able to know in advance what LSPs were going
   to be requested we could plan for them and ensure resources were
   available.  Furthermore, such an approach enables a commitment to be
   made to a service user that an LSP will be set up and available at a
   specific time.

   This service can be achieved by tracking the current use of network
   resources and also a future view of the resource usage.  We call this
   time-scheduled TE (TS-TE) resource reservation.

2.4.  Requisite State Information

   In order to achieve the TS-TE resource reservation, the use of
   resources on the path needs to be scheduled.  Scheduling state is
   used to indicate when resources are reserved and when they are
   available for use.

   A simple information model for one piece of scheduling state is as
   follows:







Zhuang, et al.           Expires March 21, 2016                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft         Scheduled Use of Resources         September 2015


      { link id;
        resource id or reserved capacity;
        reservation start time;
        reservation end time
      }

   The resource that is scheduled can be link capacity, physical
   resources on a link, CPU utilization, memory, buffers on an
   interfaces, etc.  For any one resource there could be multiple pieces
   of scheduling state, and for any one link, the timing windows might
   overlap.

   There are multiple ways to realize this information model and
   different ways to store the data.  For example, the resource state
   could be expressed as a start time and a duration.  This document
   does not spend any more time on discussion of encoding of state
   information except to discuss the location of storage of the state
   information and the recovery of the information after failure events.

   This scheduling state information can be used by applications to book
   resources for future or now, so as to maximize chance of services
   being delivered.  Also, it can avoid contention for resources of
   LSPs.

3.  Architectural Concepts

   This section examines several important architectural concepts that
   lead to design decisions that will influence how networks can achieve
   TS-TE in a scalable and robust manner.

3.1.  Where is Scheduling State Held?

   The scheduling state information described in Section 3.4 has to be
   held somewhere.  There are two places where this makes sense:

   o  In the network nodes where the resources exist;

   o  In a central scheduling controller where decisions about resource
      allocation are made.

   The first of these makes policing of resource allocation easier.  It
   means that many points in the network can request immediate or
   scheduled LSPs with the associated resource reservation and that all
   such requests can be correlated at the point where the resources are
   allocated.  However, this approach has some scaling and technical
   problems:





Zhuang, et al.           Expires March 21, 2016                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft         Scheduled Use of Resources         September 2015


   o  The most obvious issue is that each network node must retain the
      full time-based state for all of its resources.  In a busy network
      with a high arrival rate of new LSPs and a low hold time for each
      LSP, this could be a lot of state.  Yet network nodes are normally
      implemented with minimal spare memory.

   o  In order that path computation can be performed, the computing
      entity normally known as a Path Computation Element (PCE)
      [RFC4655] needs access to a database of available links and nodes
      in the network, and of the TE properties of the links.  This
      database is known as the Traffic Engineering Database (TED) and is
      usually populated from information advertised in the IGP by each
      of the network nodes or exported using BGP-LS [I-D.ietf-idr-ls-
      distribution].  To be able to compute a path for a future LSP the
      PCE needs to populate the TED with all of the future resource
      availability: if this information is held on the network nodes it
      must also be advertised in the IGP.  This could be a significant
      scaling issue for the IGP and the network nodes as all of the
      advertised information is held at every network node and must be
      periodically refreshed by the IGP.

   o  When a normal node restarts it can recover resource reservation
      state from the forwarding hardware, from NVRAM, or from adjacent
      nodes through the signaling protocol [RFC5063].  If scheduling
      state is held at the network nodes it must also be recovered after
      the restart of a network node.  This cannot be achieved from the
      forwarding hardware because the reservation will not have been
      made, could require additional expensive NVRAM, or might require
      that all adjacent nodes also have the scheduling state in order to
      reinstall it on the restarting node.  This is potentially complex
      processing with scaling and cost implications.

      Conversely, if the scheduling state is held centrally it is easily
      available at the point of use.  That is, the PCE can utilize the
      state to plan future LSPs and can update that stored information
      with the scheduled reservation of resources for those future LSPs.
      This approach also has several issues:

      *  If there are multiple controllers then they must synchronise
         their stored scheduling state as they each plan future LSPs,
         and must have a mechanism to resolve resource contention.  This
         is relatively simple and is mitigated by the fact that there is
         ample processing time to replan future LSPs in the case of
         resource contention.

      *  If other sources of immediate LSPs are allowed (for example,
         other controllers or autonomous action by head-end LSRs) then
         the changes in resource availability caused by the setup or



Zhuang, et al.           Expires March 21, 2016                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft         Scheduled Use of Resources         September 2015


         teardown of these LSPs must be reflected in the TED (by use of
         the IGP as currently) and may have an impact of planned future
         LSPs.  This impact can be mitigated by replanning future LSPs
         or through LSP preemption.

      *  If other sources of planned LSPs are allowed, they can request
         path computation and resource reservation from the centralized
         PCE using the PCE Communication Protocol (PCEP) [RFC5440].

      *  If the scheduling state is held centrally at a PCE, the state
         must be held and restored after a system restart.  This is
         relatively easy to achieve on a central server that can have
         access to non-volatile storage.

   Thus the architectural conclusion is that scheduling state should be
   held centrally at the point of use and not in the network devices.

3.2.  What State is Held?

   As already described, the PCE needs access to an enhanced, time-based
   TED.  But it must be noted that service requests for future LSPs are
   known in terms of the LSPs whose paths are computed and for which
   resources are scheduled.  For example, if the requester of a future
   LSP decides to cancel the request or to modify the request, the PCE
   must be able to map this to the resources that were reserved.

   This suggests that the PCE needs an LSP Database {LSP-DB) [I-D.ietf-
   pce-stateful-pce] that contains information not only about LSPs that
   are active in the network, but also those that are planned.

   It is an implementation choice how the TED and LSP-DB are stored both
   for dynamic use and for recovery after failure or restart, but it may
   be noted that all of the information in the scheduled TED can be
   recovered from the active network state and from the scheduled LSP-
   DB.

4.  Architecture Overview

   The architectural considerations and conclusions described in the
   previous section lead to the architecture described in this section.











Zhuang, et al.           Expires March 21, 2016                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft         Scheduled Use of Resources         September 2015


          -------------------
         | Service Requester |
          -------------------
                     ^
                    a|
                     v
                  -------   b   --------
                 |       |<--->| LSP-DB |
                 |       |      --------
                 |  PCE  |
                 |       |  c    -----
                 |       |<---->| TED |
                  -------        -----
                  ^     ^
                  |     |
                 d|     |e
                  |     |
            ------+-----+--------------------
                  |     |          Network
                  |     --------
                  |    | Router |
                  v     --------
                -----          -----
               | LSR |<------>| LSR |
                -----     f    -----

           Reference Architecture for Scheduled Use of Resources

4.1.  Service Request

   As shown in Figure 1, some component in the network requests a
   service.  This may be an application, a Network Management System
   (NMS), an LSR, or any component that qualifies as a Path Computation
   Client (PCC).  We show this on the figure as the "Service Requester"
   and it sends a request to the PCE for an LSP to be set up at some
   time (either now or in the future).  The request, indicated on
   Figure 1 by the arrow (a) includes all of the parameters of the LSP
   that the requester wishes to supply such as bandwidth, start time,
   and end time.

   The PCE enters the LSP request in its LSP-DB (b), and uses
   information from its TED (c) to compute a path.  It updates the
   future resource availability in the TED so that further path
   computations can take account of the scheduled resource usage.

   When it is time for the LSP to be set up, the PCE sends a PCEP
   Initiate request to the head end LSR (d) providing the path to be




Zhuang, et al.           Expires March 21, 2016                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft         Scheduled Use of Resources         September 2015


   signaled as well as other parameters such as the bandwidth of the
   LSP.

   As the LSP is signaled between LSRs (f) the use of resources in the
   network is updated and distributed using the IGP.  This information
   is shared with the PCE either through the IGP or using BGP-LS (e),
   and the PCE updates the information stored in its TED (c).

   When an LSP is no longer required (either because the Service
   Requester has cancelled the request, or because the LSP's scheduled
   lifetime has expired) the PCE can remove it.  If the LSP is currently
   active, the PCE instructs the head-end LSR to tear it down (d), and
   the network resource usage will be updated by the IGP and advertised
   back to the PCE through the IGP or BGP-LS (e).  Once the LSP is no
   longer active, the PCE can remove it from the LSP-DB (b).

4.2.  Initialization and Recovery

   When a PCE in the architecture shown in Figure 1 is initialized, it
   must learn state from the network, from its stored databases, and
   potentially from other PCEs in the network.

   The first step is to get an accurate view of the topology and
   resource availability in the network.  This would normally involve
   reading the state direct from the network via the IGP or BGP-LS (e),
   but might include receiving a copy of the TED from another PCE.  Note
   that a TED stored from a previous instantiation of the PCE is
   unlikely to be valid.

   Next, the PCE must construct a time-based TED to show scheduled
   resource usage.  How it does this is implementation specific: it may
   recover a time-based TED previously saved to non-volatile storage, or
   it may reconstruct the time-based TED from information retrieved from
   the LSP-DB previously saved to non-volatile storage.  If there is
   more than one PCE active in the network, the recovering PCE will need
   to synchronize the LSP-DB and time-based TED with other PCEs.

5.  Acknowledgements

   This work has benefited from the discussions of resource scheduling
   over the years.  In particular the DRAGON project [The-DRAGON-
   Project] and [draft-yong-ccamp-ason-gmpls-autobw-service-00] both of
   which provide approaches to auto-bandwidth services in GMPLS
   networks.







Zhuang, et al.           Expires March 21, 2016                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft         Scheduled Use of Resources         September 2015


6.  Informative References

   [DRAGON]   "http://www.maxgigapop.net/wp-content/uploads/
              The-DRAGON-Project.pdf".

   [I-D.ietf-pce-stateful-pce]
              Crabbe, E., Minei, I., Medved, J., and R. Varga, "PCEP
              Extensions for Stateful PCE", draft-ietf-pce-stateful-
              pce-11 (work in progress), April 2015.

Authors' Addresses

   Yan Zhuang
   Huawei
   101 Software Avenue, Yuhua District
   Nanjing, Jiangsu  210012
   China

   Email: zhuangyan.zhuang@huawei.com


   Qin Wu
   Huawei
   101 Software Avenue, Yuhua District
   Nanjing, Jiangsu  210012
   China

   Email: bill.wu@huawei.com


   Adrian Farrel
   Juniper Networks

   Email: adrian@olddog.co.uk

















Zhuang, et al.           Expires March 21, 2016                [Page 10]
