
                                                                        
   Internet Draft                                               P. Pale 
                                                            K. Cerovski 
   Document: draft-pale-email-00.txt                          FER-UNIZG 
   Expires: September 2004                                   March 2004 
    
    
                     Forming Intuitive Email Addresses 

    
Status of this Memo 
    
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.  
    
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that      
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress". 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
    
    
    
    
Abstract 
    
   This memo presents a proposal for an efficient and simple way of 
   forming email addresses.  The goal is to achieve easier, more 
   productive communication between email users, in particular by making 
   addresses intuitive and thus easy to remember, or guess-enabled on 
   material-world data about the correspondent, as well as independent 
   from technical or organizational specifics of email services. 
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
 
 
Pale & Cerovski        Expires - September 2004               [Page 1] 
 
Internet Draft    Forming Intuitive Email Addresses        March 2004 
 
 
Table of Contents 
    
   1. Introduction...................................................3 
   2. Method for Address Forming, General Issue......................3 
   3. Method for Address Forming, Resolving Duplicate Names..........4 
   4. Security Considerations........................................5 
   5. References.....................................................6 
   6. Acknowledgments................................................6 
   7. Author's Addresses.............................................6 
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
 
 
Pale & Cerovski        Expires - September 2004               [Page 2] 
 
Internet Draft    Forming Intuitive Email Addresses        March 2004 
 
    
1. Introduction 
    
   There are many ways to form an email address.  For example, a person 
   called NIKOLA TESLA, working at INNOVATION company registered in 
   CROATIA, might have any or all of the following email addresses: 
    
      ntesla@server10.innovation.hr 
      nikolat@server1.lab.innovation.hr 
      ntes@lab.innovation.hr 
    
   It is a problem to remember any of the addresses in the given 
   example.  Further, these addresses are dependent on computer names 
   and organization of the company's network, and are thus subject to 
   change even if the user's status and position in company have not 
   changed at all.  Finally, it is not possible to guess a person's 
   email address even if her name and affiliation are known.  
    
    
    
    
    
2. Method for Address Forming, General Issue 
    
   A more efficient and intuitive way, by itself, is to form the 
   addresses containing person's name and affiliation only, without 
   other, technical designators. 
   In specific, a simple rule is proposed: 
    
      "first-name"."family-name"@"domain-of-the-organization" 
    
   According to this rule, NIKOLA TESLA affiliated with the company 
   INNOVATION registered in CROATIA would now have the following email 
   address: 
    
      nikola.tesla@innovation.hr 
    
   This form of email address is easy to remember.  It is even possible 
   to guess a person's address based on that person's name and 
   affiliation. 
   Finally, the proposed form is fully independent of the internal 
   company structure, technical solutions etc.  All changes are 
   accommodated in the configuration of the technical infrastructure, 
   and are thereby not reflected in the email address itself. 
   The only case when the address needs to be changed is when email user 
   changes the organization she works for. 
    
    
    
 
 
Pale & Cerovski        Expires - September 2004               [Page 3] 
 
Internet Draft    Forming Intuitive Email Addresses        March 2004 
 
    
   When publishing email addresses, capital letters are recommended at 
   the beginning of the "name" and "family-name", but are not mandatory.  
   In the same manner, capital letters in the company's name should be 
   used in the way they appear on business cards: with the first capital 
   letter, all capital letters or any combination.  This, again, is not 
   mandatory. 
   Thus, easier to read and remember form of email address would be: 
    
      Nikola.Tesla@Innovation.hr    
    
   The dot "." as a separator between "name" and "family-name" is 
   optional, but highly recommended.  Although it could, for instance, 
   be replaced by dash "-", underscore "_", or completely omitted, it is 
   strongly recommended to use the separator and to use the dot ".". 
   In case of announcing an email address over the audio channel only (a 
   telephone or radio broadcast), in some languages it is hard to 
   distinguish between dash and underscore.  Further, dash is sometimes 
   part of a person's name or family name, which adds to confusion. 
   Finally, dots being used as separators on both sides of at "@" symbol 
   add to the intuitiveness of the email address and make it even easier 
   to remember. 
    
    
    
    
    
3. Method for Address Forming, Resolving Duplicate Names 
    
   If there is more than one person with the same name working at the 
   same company, then a third identifier can be introduced, along with 
   "first-name" and "family-name".  It could be the "middle-name" or a 
   "nickname".  For example, if NIKOLA TESLA'S middle name is MARKO, and 
   his nickname GENIUS, he might have the following email addresses: 
    
      Nikola.Marko.Tesla@Innovation.hr 
      Nikola.Tesla.Genius@Innovation.hr 
    
   Should the guessability of the email address be an issue, the 
   organization or company could install an automated software which 
   would accept incoming messages and if the address is not precise 
   enough, e.g. Nikola.Tesla@Innovation.hr, return the message to the 
   sender with an explanation and a list of possible matches, such as: 
    
   "There is more than one user with the same first name and family 
   name.  Your request needs to be more specific.  Currently, listed 
   users are: 
      Nikola.Marko.Tesla@Innovation.hr 
      Nikola.Ivan.Tesla@Innovation.hr 
 
 
Pale & Cerovski        Expires - September 2004               [Page 4] 
 
Internet Draft    Forming Intuitive Email Addresses        March 2004 
 
    
   This is an automated response.  Please do not reply to it." 
    
    
    
    
    
4. Security Considerations 
    
   The form of email address described in this memo raises no new 
   security issues itself, but the proposed method, due to the 
   guessability of email addresses (e.g., its transparency), could 
   indirectly increase spam problems. 
   However, such spams would be dealt with the same manner as for any 
   other form of email address. 
    
   The proposed method of forming email addresses has been used in 
   Croatia for the past ten years.  During that time there were no 
   problems spotted, associated with it.     
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
 
 
Pale & Cerovski        Expires - September 2004               [Page 5] 
 
Internet Draft    Forming Intuitive Email Addresses        March 2004 
 
    
5. References 
    
   1 Postel, J., "SIMPLE MAIL TRANSFER PROTOCOL", STD 10, RFC 821, 
      August 1982. 
    
   2 Klensin, J., Freed, N., Moore, K., "SMTP Service Extension for 
      Message Size Declaration", STD 10, RFC 1870, November 1995. 
    
    
    
6. Acknowledgments 
    
   The authors would like to thank Croatian Academic and Research 
   Network û CARNet for accepting the proposed method and actively 
   promoting and supporting it for over a decade.  Over this time, no 
   drawbacks or problems have been detected. 
    
    
    
7. Author's Addresses 
    
   Predrag Pale 
   Faculty of Electrical Engineering and Computing 
   University of Zagreb 
   Unska 3, 10000 Zagreb 
   Croatia 
   Email: Predrag.Pale@FER.hr 
    
   Kristijan Cerovski 
   Faculty of Electrical Engineering and Computing 
   University of Zagreb 
   Unska 3, 10000 Zagreb 
   Croatia 
   Email: Kristijan.Cerovski@FER.hr 














 
 
Pale & Cerovski        Expires - September 2004               [Page 6] 
