


Network Working Group                                        M. Mealling
Internet-Draft                                   Network Solutions, Inc.
Expires: May 18, 2001                                  November 17, 2000


                         The IANA XML Registry
               draft-mealling-iana-xmlns-registry-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents
   at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

     The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
     http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

     The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
     http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.
   This Internet-Draft will expire on May 18, 2001.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2000). All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   This documenet describes an IANA maintained registry for IETF
   standards which use XML related items such as Namespaces, DTD,
   Schemas, and RDF Schemas.

1. Introduction

   Over the past few years XML has become a widely used method for data
   markup. There have already been several IETF Working Groups that
   have produced standards that define XML DTDs, XML Namespaces and XML
   Schemas. EAch one of these technologies uses URIs[1] to identify
   their respective versions. For example, a given XML document defines
   its DTD using the DOCTYPE element. This element, like SGML, has a
   PUBLIC and a SYSTEM identifier. It is standard practice within W3C
   standards to forego the use of the PUBLIC identifier in favor of
   'well known' SYSTEM identifiers. There have been several IETF
   standards that have simply created non-existent URIs in order to


Mealling                  Expires May 18, 2001                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft             IANA XML Registry               November 2000


   simply identify but not resolve the SYSTEM identifier for some given
   XML document. 

   This document seeks to standardize this practice by creating an IANA
   maintained registry of XML elements so that document authors and
   implementors have a well maintained and authoritative location for
   their XML elements. As part of this standard, the IANA will both
   house the public representation of the document and assign it a
   Uniform Resource Name that can be used as the URI in any URI based
   identification components of XML. 

2. Registerable Documents

2.1 The Assigned URIs

   All elements registered in this registry will generate a URN of the
   form: 

   	urn:iana:xml:<class>:<id>


    where <class> is the type of the document being registered (see
   below). <id^gt; is a unique id generated by the IANA based on any
   means the IANA deems necessary to maintain uniqueness. 

   The IANA will also maintain a file server available via at least
   HTTP that contains all of the registered elements in some publicly
   accessible file space (in the same way that all of the IANAs
   registered elements are available via
   http://www.isi.edu/in-notes/iana/assignments/. 

2.2 Document Types

   The list of types of XML documents that can be registered with the
   IANA are: 
   dtD -- An XML document that contains a DOCTYPE element can identify
      its DTD via both a PUBLIC identifier and a SYSTEM identifier. The
      URN assigned by the IANA can be used as the value of the SYSTEM
      identifier.
   ns -- XML Namespaces are named by a URI. They have no real,
      machine-parseable representation other than the specifications
      that define them. Thus the element registered will be the
      specification (or a pointer to it). The URN assigned by the IANA
      will be the XML Namespace's name.
   xmlschema -- XML Schemas are also identified by a URI but their
      contents are machine parseable. The IANA registered document will
      be the XML Schema file. The URN the IANA assigns can be used as
      the URI for the schema.  
   rdfschema -- The Resource Description Format (RDF) is an XML


Mealling                  Expires May 18, 2001                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft             IANA XML Registry               November 2000


      serialization of a connected graph based data model used for
      metadata expression. RDF makes use of schemas for RDF that
      express grammars about relationships between URIs. These grammars
      are identified by URIs. The URN assigned by the IANA can be used
      as the identifying URI.

3. Registration Procedures1

   Until such time as the IANA requests or implements an automated
   process for the registration of these elements, any specifications
   wishing to do so must make that request part of the IANA
   considerations section of their respective documents 

4. IANA Considerations

   This documents seeks to create a rather large registry for which the
   IANA (at the direction of the IESG) will primarily be responsible.
   The amount of effort required to maintain this registry is not
   insignificant and the policies and procedures surrounding any
   approval process are non-trivial. 

References

   [1]  Berners-Lee, T., Fielding, R.T. and L. Masinter, "Uniform
        Resource Identifiers (URI): Generic Syntax", RFC 2396, August
        1998.

Author's Address

   Michael Mealling
   Network Solutions, Inc.
   505 Huntmar Park Drive
   Herndon, VA  22070
   US

   Phone: +1 770-921-2251
   EMail: michaelm@netsol.com
   URI:   http://www.netsol.com













Mealling                  Expires May 18, 2001                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft             IANA XML Registry               November 2000


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2000). All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implmentation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph
   are included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Acknowledgement

   Funding for the RFC editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.



















Mealling                  Expires May 18, 2001                  [Page 4]

