Network Working Group                                         A. Mankin 
Internet Draft                                                          
Expires: January 2007                                          S. Hayes 
                                                                Ericsson  
                                                           July 12, 2006 
 
                                      
            Requirements for IETF Technical Publication Service 
                        draft-mankin-pub-req-10.txt 


    

Status of this Memo 

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any 
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware 
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes 
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79. 

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html 

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 12, 2007. 

  

Abstract 

   The work of the IETF is to discuss, develop, and disseminate 
   technical specifications to support the Internet's operation.  
   Technical publication is the process by which that output is 
   disseminated to the community at large. As such, it is important to 
   understand the requirements on the publication process. 



 
 
 
Mankin & Hayes            Expires December 12, 2007                  [Page 1] 

Internet-Draft          draft-mankin-techspec-pub-req-10              July 2006 
    

Table of Contents 

    
   1. Introduction...................................................2 
   2. Scope..........................................................3 
      2.1. Stages in the Technical Specification Publication Lifetime4 
   3. Technical Publication Tasks and Requirements...................5 
      3.1. Pre-approval Review or Editing............................6 
      3.2. Preliminary Specification Availability....................7 
      3.3. Post-approval Editorial Cleanup (Non-author Editing)......7 
      3.4. Validation of References..................................9 
      3.5. Validation of Formal Languages...........................10 
      3.6. Insertion of Parameter Values............................10 
      3.7. Post-approval, Pre-publication Technical Corrections.....11 
      3.8. Allocation of Permanent Stable Identifiers...............12 
      3.9. Document Format Conversions..............................12 
      3.10. Language Translation....................................13 
      3.11. Publication Status Tracking.............................13 
      3.12. Expedited Handling......................................14 
      3.13. Exception Handling......................................15 
      3.14. Notification of publication.............................15 
      3.15. Post-publication Corrections............................15 
      3.16. Indexing: Maintenance of the Catalog....................16 
      3.17. Access to Published Documents...........................17 
      3.18. Maintenance of a Vocabulary Document....................17 
      3.19. Providing Publication Statistics and Status Reports.....18 
      3.20. Process and Document Evolution..........................18 
      3.21. Tutorial and Help Services..............................19 
   4. Technical Publisher Performance Goals.........................20 
      4.1. Publication Timeframes...................................20 
      4.2. Publication Throughput...................................21 
   5. IETF Implications of Technical Publication Requirements.......21 
   6. IANA Considerations...........................................22 
   7. Security Considerations.......................................22 
   8. Acknowledgments...............................................23 
   Author's Addresses...............................................23 
   Intellectual Property Statement..................................23 
   Disclaimer of Validity...........................................24 
   Copyright Statement..............................................24 
   Acknowledgment...................................................24 
    
1. Introduction 

   The work of the IETF is to discuss, develop, and disseminate 
   technical specifications to support the Internet's operation.  
   Therefore an important output of the IETF is published technical 
   specifications. The IETF technical publisher is responsible for the 
 
 
Mankin & Hayes             Expires January 12, 2007                  [Page 2] 

Internet-Draft          draft-mankin-techspec-pub-req-10              July 2006 
    

   final steps in the production of the published technical 
   specifications.  This document sets forth requirements on the duties 
   of the IETF technical publisher and how it interacts with the IETF in 
   the production of those publications. 

   The term "technical specification" is used here purposefully to refer 
   to the technical output of the IETF. This document does not engage in 
   the debate about whether it is expressed as RFCs or otherwise, what 
   "is" an RFC, how to classify them, etc.  These issues are considered 
   out of scope. 

   The intention of this document is to clarify the IETF's consensus on 
   its requirements for its technical publication service.  It is 
   expected to be used in the preparation of future contracts.  This 
   document is not a discussion of how well the current technical 
   publisher (the RFC Editor) fulfils those requirements. 

2. Scope 

   The scope of this document is the requirements for the technical 
   publication process for IETF.  Requirements on a technical publisher 
   can be expressed in terms of both what tasks the IETF technical 
   publisher is responsible for and performance targets the IETF 
   technical publisher should meet.  The functions provided by the 
   technical publisher are sometimes referred to as editorial management 
   (RFC2850). 

   This draft specifically addresses those documents published by the 
   IETF technical standards process.  In all cases, the requirements 
   have been written in generic terms, so that they may be used to 
   express the requirements of other publication streams, elsewhere. 
    
   The list of potential technical publication tasks was derived by 
   considering the tasks currently performed by the RFC editor as well 
   as the responsibilities of the technical publishers in other 
   standards organizations including 3GPP, ATIS, ETSI, IEEE, and ITU. 

   This requirements documents focuses on process issues in how the IETF 
   technical publisher serves the IETF.  There are related issues 
   regarding non-technical aspects of document content that are not 
   addressed in this requirements document.  Issues not addressed in 
   this document are: 

   o  Policies governing the acceptable input and output document 
      formats (including figures, etc.), 

 
 
Mankin & Hayes             Expires January 12, 2007                  [Page 3] 

Internet-Draft          draft-mankin-techspec-pub-req-10              July 2006 
    

   o  Policies governing the acceptable character sets 
      (internationalization) 

   o  Policies governing the layout and style of published documents 

   o  Policies governing the contents of non-technical sections 
      (acknowledgement sections, reference classifications, etc.) 

   It is realized that the above policies are also an important aspect 
   in determining the final published product from IETF.  These policies 
   are likely to evolve as part of the ongoing IETF dialog.  The IETF 
   technical publisher should be part of the discussions of these 
   policies and be prepared to implement and facilitate policy changes 
   as they are determined by IETF consensus.  This requirement is 
   captured under the discussion of process and document evolution. 

2.1. Stages in the Technical Specification Publication Lifetime 

   Figure 1 below provides a useful summary of where technical 
   publication falls in the current lifetime of a document in the IETF 
   standards process.  This figure shows a Working Group (WG) document 
   and the reviews including Working Group Last Call (WGLC), Area 
   Director (AD) review, IETF Last Call (IETF LC), IANA review, and IESG 
   review.  The document shepherd (shown in the diagram as "Shepherd" is 
   an individual designated by the IESG to shepherd a document through 
   the reviews and the publication process.  The lifetime is very 
   similar for AD-sponsored IETF documents, such as documents that 
   update IETF protocols where there is no longer a working group, or 
   documents on interdisciplinary topics. 


















 
 
Mankin & Hayes             Expires January 12, 2007                  [Page 4] 

Internet-Draft          draft-mankin-techspec-pub-req-10              July 2006 
    

    

              Actors      Formal       Actors            Actors 
                          Reviews 

 
           |  Author,   | WGLC      | IESG,      |    |  IANA,  
           |  Editor,   | AD        | Shepherd,  |  A |  Tech  
           |  IETF Sec- | IETF LC   | Editor,    |  P |  Publisher,  
           |  retariat  | IANA      | WG         |  P |  input from  
           |            | IESG      |            |  R |  authors, et al  
           |            |           |            |  O |  
   Actions |  Creation, |           | Resolution |  V |  non-author  
           |  Editing,  |           | of all     |  A |  editing,  
           |  Draft Pub,|           | reviews    |  L |  other  
           |  Tracking  |           |            |    |  publication  
        
           |---------------| |---------------------| |----------------|  
        
                In WG               Out of WG          Post-approval  

               Figure 1: Stages of a Working Group Document 

   Note that in some cases a single submission may actually consist of 
   multiple source documents (supporting files, code, etc.). 

   Under the IETF standards process stream the post-approval processing 
   is initiated by the IESG after technical approval. 

3. Technical Publication Tasks and Requirements 

   Standards development organizations all have technical publication as 
   part of their process.  However, the boundaries between what is done 
   by the technical committees and the technical publisher vary.  

   The following are potential tasks of a technical publisher.  The 
   following list was derived after analyzing the technical publication 
   policies of the IETF and other standards development organizations.   

   1.  Pre-approval review or editing 

   2.  Preliminary specification availability 

   3.  Post-approval editorial cleanup 

   4.  Validation of references 

 
 
Mankin & Hayes             Expires January 12, 2007                  [Page 5] 

Internet-Draft          draft-mankin-techspec-pub-req-10              July 2006 
    

   5.  Validation of formal languages 

   6.  Insertion of parameter values 

   7.  Post-approval, pre-publication corrections 

   8.  Allocation of permanent stable identifiers 

   9.  Document format conversions 

   10. Language translation 

   11. Publication status tracking 

   12. Expedited handling 

   13. Exception handling 

   14. Notification of publication 

   15. Post-publication corrections (errata) 

   16. Indexing: maintenance of the catalog 

   17. Access to published documents 

   18. Maintenance of a vocabulary document 

   19. Providing publication statistics and status reports 

   20. Process and document evolution 

   21. Tutorial and help services 

   For each of these tasks we discuss its relevance to IETF and how it 
   is realized within the IETF processes.  Based upon this information 
   we derive requirements on the IETF technical publisher 

3.1. Pre-approval Review or Editing 

   Task Description: In many cases the technical publisher may provide a 
   review or editing service to improve document quality prior to the 
   approval of a document.  This review process would normally address 
   issues such as grammar, spelling, formatting, adherence to pre-
   approval boilerplate, document structure, proper use of keywords (RFC 
   2119), etc.  

 
 
Mankin & Hayes             Expires January 12, 2007                  [Page 6] 

Internet-Draft          draft-mankin-techspec-pub-req-10              July 2006 
    

   The primary advantage of pre-approval review is that review of the 
   changes is handled as part of the regular review and approval 
   process. 

   Discussion: Pre-approval review is not part of the normal process 
   flow with the IETF but this concept has been explored in the early 
   copy editing experiment.  Early feedback from the experiment has been 
   promising, however, the effectiveness of early copy-editing is still 
   being evaluated. 

   Derived Requirements: 

   Req-PREEDIT-1: The IETF technical publisher should be capable of 
   performing an editorial review of documents early enough to allow any 
   changes to be reviewed within the technical review process.  This 
   review should strive to maintain consistency in appearance with 
   previously published documents. For the IETF standards process stream 
   this review is expected to be performed before WG last call and 
   provide feedback to the authors to improve quality of the documents.  
   For the IETF standards process stream the publisher should not 
   perform a technical review of the document.   

3.2. Preliminary Specification Availability 

   Task Description: Some standards organizations require their 
   publisher to make available a preliminary version of a document (with 
   appropriate caveats) to make the information available to the 
   industry as early as possible.  This document is provided "as is" 
   after the approval.  This document is withdrawn once the final 
   document is published. 

   Discussion: This is not required.  A final approved version is 
   available as a draft.  If publication can take more than 6 months, it 
   may be necessary to request that the draft version remains available. 

   Derived Requirements: none 

3.3. Post-approval Editorial Cleanup (Non-author Editing) 

   Task Description: Most technical publishers do an editorial review to 
   ensure the quality of published documents.  Typically this may 
   address issues such as grammar, spelling, readability, formatting, 
   adherence to boilerplate, document structure, proper use of keywords, 
   etc.  Since any proposed changes occur after approval, a review and 
   signoff mechanism should usually be established to ensure that the 
   required changes are truly editorial.  Since such changes occur 
   outside of the normal approval process, it is desirable that such 
 
 
Mankin & Hayes             Expires January 12, 2007                  [Page 7] 

Internet-Draft          draft-mankin-techspec-pub-req-10              July 2006 
    

   changes are minimized.  Most standards organizations target "light" 
   editing due to the dangers of changing agreed text. 

   Discussion: Within IETF, the RFC Editor does post-approval cleanup 
   review and editing.  The ambition level for cleanup can vary from: 

   o  Corrections to errors only, 

   o  Light rewriting, 

   o  Significant editing of documents with less skillful WG editors, 
      and minimal editing when the WG editors were skilled, 

   o  Rewriting of all documents to the dictates of a style manual 

   At times in the past year, stylistic editing has resulted in a 
   substantial number of changes in many documents.  These changes must 
   then be vetted by all the authors followed by subsequent rounds of 
   author acceptance and re-vetting.  This can add up to a substantial 
   delay in the publication process which must be weighed against the 
   incremental gain in communication improvement accomplished by the 
   cleanup. 

   Changes to improve readability (or possibly even grammar) can end up 
   inadvertently affecting consensus wording or technical meaning.  Note 
   that pre-approval editing to some extent avoids this problem. 

   In specific instances it may be necessary to require that text be 
   published "verbatim" even if doing so introduces what is perceived as 
   poor readability or stylistic inconsistency.  Examples of this 
   include: 

   - "Boilerplate" agreed on in an IETF working group to apply to all 
   instances of derivative works (e.g., IANA registration documents, 
   Management Information Bases (MIBs), etc.) 

   - Text referring to other organizations' work - which has been 
   carefully phrased and arranged with representatives of that other 
   organization to deal with some politically sensitive issue. 

   If pre-approval editing or review is done it may be possible to 
   reduce or even eliminate entirely the post-approval editing task in 
   some cases.  Pre-approval editing may be more efficient since a 
   separate change control process is not required. 

   Derived Requirements: 

 
 
Mankin & Hayes             Expires January 12, 2007                  [Page 8] 

Internet-Draft          draft-mankin-techspec-pub-req-10              July 2006 
    

   o  Req-POSTEDIT-1 - The IETF technical publisher should review the 
      document for grammar, spelling, formatting, alignment with 
      boilerplate, document structure, proper use of keywords, etc. The 
      review should strive to maintain consistency in appearance with 
      previously published documents. In the IETF standards process 
      stream, the publisher should not perform a technical review of the 
      document. 

   o  Req-POSTEDIT-2 - All changes made to post-approval documents 
      should be tracked and the changes must be signed off on by the 
      appropriate technical representatives.  For the IETF standards 
      process stream this includes the authors and an individual 
      authorized to approve changes (an Area Director or document 
      shepherd. 

   o  Req-POSTEDIT-3 - The IETF technical publisher should exercise 
      restraint in making stylistic changes that introduce a substantial 
      review load but only provides incremental increase in the clarity 
      of the specification.  Specific guidelines on the types of changes 
      allowed may be further specified, but ultimately restraint in 
      editing must be imposed by the IETF technical publisher.  Changes 
      for stylistic consistency should be done only when there are major 
      problems with the quality of the document. 

   o  Req-POSTEDIT-4 - The IETF technical publisher should exercise 
      restraint in making changes to improve readability that may change 
      technical and consensus wording.  Specific guidelines on the types 
      of changes allowed may be further specified, but ultimately 
      restraint in editing must be imposed by the IETF technical 
      publisher. 

   o  Req-POSTEDIT-5 - In specific instances, where some or all of 
      document text is the result of a careful negotiation of 
      contributions (within or between working groups, reviewers, 
      etc.), the technical publisher may be required to publish that 
      text verbatim.   In the IETF standards process verbatim 
      publication may be requested by the IESG.  It is the expectation 
      of the IETF community that this will not be done often.   

3.4. Validation of References 

   Task Description: Most standards organizations require that normative 
   references be publicly available.  Some technical publishers verify 
   the validity and availability of references (including referenced 
   clauses and figures).  Although some editorial clean-up of references 
   may be obvious, the issue becomes more severe when reference links 
   are broken, are not publicly available, or refer to obsoleted 
 
 
Mankin & Hayes             Expires January 12, 2007                  [Page 9] 

Internet-Draft          draft-mankin-techspec-pub-req-10              July 2006 
    

   documents.  Such faults may be viewed as a post-approval fault found 
   in the document.  Most publishers have the ability to put a document 
   on hold awaiting the publication of a reference expected to be 
   available soon. 

   Discussion: The RFC Editor may put a document on hold waiting for the 
   availability of other IETF documents.  Incorrect references are 
   handled like any other fault detected in the editorial review. 

   Derived Requirements: 

   o  Req-REFVAL-1 - The IETF technical publisher should ensure that all 
      references within specifications are currently available and are 
      expected to remain available.   

   o  Req-REFVAL-2 - The IETF technical publisher should delay 
      publication until all required (normative) references are ready 
      for publication. 

3.5. Validation of Formal Languages 

   Task Description: If the Specification contains a formal language 
   section (such as a MIB), the technical publisher may be required to 
   validate this using a tool. 

   Discussion: The RFC Editor syntactically validates sections of a 
   document containing MIBs, Augmented Backus Naur Form (ABNF), 
   eXtensible Markup Language (XML), Abstract Syntax Notation One 
   (ASN.1) and possibly other formal languages. 

   Derived Requirements: 

   o  Req-FORMALVAL-1 - The IETF technical publisher should validate the 
      syntax of sections of documents containing formal languages.  In 
      particular ASN.1, ABNF, and XML should be verified using 
      appropriate tools. 

3.6. Insertion of Parameter Values 

   Task Description: The Technical Publisher is expected to work with 
   IANA (or possibly other organizations maintaining registries) to 
   populate assigned protocol parameter values when required, prior to 
   publication.  The population of these parameters values should not 
   require technical expertise by the technical publisher. 

   Discussion: Within IETF, IANA normally does its allocations as an 
   early step in the technical publication process. 
 
 
Mankin & Hayes             Expires January 12, 2007                 [Page 10] 

Internet-Draft          draft-mankin-techspec-pub-req-10              July 2006 
    

   Derived Requirements: 

   o  Req-PARAMEDIT-1 - The IETF technical publisher should work with 
      IANA in the population of required parameter values into 
      documents. 

3.7. Post-approval, Pre-publication Technical Corrections 

   Task Description: Regardless of efforts to minimize their occurrence, 
   it is always possible that technical flaws will be discovered in the 
   window between document approval and publication.  The technical 
   publisher may be requested to incorporate technical changes into the 
   document prior to publication.  Such changes necessitate a review and 
   sign-off procedure.  Another option is to disallow such corrections 
   and treat them as you would post-publication errata.  Note that this 
   task is distinct from post-approval changes that might originate due 
   to editorial review because they originate from outside the technical 
   publisher.  For severe flaws, it should always be possible to 
   withdraw the document from the publication queue (See section 3.13). 

   Discussion: IETF allows minor technical corrections during the 
   publication process.  This should ideally be a rare occurrence.  
   Since any changes introduced during the post-approval phase can lead 
   to publication delays it is important that only changes with 
   technical merit be permitted.  In particular stylistic changes should 
   be discouraged.  IETF processes must be in place to vet changes 
   proposed by the author, but this is not specifically a requirement on 
   the technical publisher.   

   The interaction between the authors and the technical publisher must 
   be sufficiently well policed that untracked and unapproved changes 
   cannot be introduced by the author or other parties. 

   Derived Requirements: 

   o  Req-POSTCORR-1 - The IETF technical publisher should permit the 
      incorporation of technical changes detected after approval, but 
      pre-publication.   

   o  Req-POSTCORR-2 - The IETF technical publisher should only allow 
      post-approval technical changes which have been approved by the 
      appropriate party.  In the IETF standards process stream this 
      includes the individual designated by the IESG (sometimes referred 
      to as the document shepherd and currently an AD). 



 
 
Mankin & Hayes             Expires January 12, 2007                 [Page 11] 

Internet-Draft          draft-mankin-techspec-pub-req-10              July 2006 
    

   o  Req-POSTCORR-3 - The IETF technical publisher should alert the 
      appropriate authority when it feels that a requested change is 
      suspect (e.g., an unapproved technical alteration) or 
      unreasonable (e.g., massive editorial changes).  Further 
      processing of the draft should be suspended pending a response by 
      that authority.  For the IETF standards process stream, that 
      authority is appointed by the IESG and is usually the document 
      shepherd.  

   o  Req-POSTCORR-4 - The IETF technical publisher should ensure that 
      any source documents associated with a publication are updated in 
      conjunction with their associated specifications. 

3.8. Allocation of Permanent Stable Identifiers 

   Task Description: For a document to be referenced, it must have a 
   unique permanent identifier.  In some standards organization, it is 
   the technical publisher that generates this identifier.  In other 
   cases the identifier may be allocated earlier in the process.   

   Discussion: Currently, the RFC Editor allocates RFC numbers and other 
   identifiers (the current IETF stable identifiers) when the document 
   is near the end of the publication process.  Having identifiers 
   allocated early was considered, but a definite need could not be 
   established. 

   Derived Requirements: 

   o  Req-PERMID-1 - The IETF technical publisher should allocate stable 
      identifiers as part of the publication process. 

   o  Req-PERMID-2 - The IETF technical publisher should assign 
      additional permanent identifiers associated with various classes 
      of documents as directed by the appropriate authority.  For the 
      IETF standards process stream, that authority is the IESG. 

3.9. Document Format Conversions 

   Task Description: The technical publisher is responsible for 
   converting the documents into one or more output formats (text, 
   portable document format (pdf), etc.).  In some standards 
   organizations, the technical publisher may be required to accept 
   input documents in various formats and produce a homogeneous set of 
   output documents. 

   Discussion: Currently, the RFC Editor accepts input as an ascii text 
   file.  The RFC editor has also accepted supplementary formats that 
 
 
Mankin & Hayes             Expires January 12, 2007                 [Page 12] 

Internet-Draft          draft-mankin-techspec-pub-req-10              July 2006 
    

   were used to generate the ascii text (xml and nroff). The documents 
   are published as ascii text and pdf files. 

   Derived Requirements: 

   o  Req-DOCCONVERT-1 - The IETF technical publisher should accept as 
      input ascii text files and publish documents as ascii text files 
      and pdf files. 

   o  Req-DOCCONVERT-2 - The technical publisher should accept 
      supplemental files that may contain information such as: code, 
      formal descriptions (XML, ASN.1, etc.) graphics, data files, etc.  
      Supplemental files may also include enhanced versions of the 
      document containing graphics or sections not presentable in text 
      format.  Any supplemental files, barring any changes to the IETF 
      process rules, will be associated with the published IETF 
      documents, but may not be editable by the publisher. 

3.10. Language Translation 

   Task Description: Some standards organizations require publication of 
   documents in multiple languages.  This translation is the 
   responsibility of the technical publisher. 

   Discussion: IETF specifications are published only in English. 

   Derived Requirements: none 

3.11. Publication Status Tracking 

   Task Description: The technical publisher should have the ability to 
   provide status information on the status of a document.  This may 
   involve developing a process model or a checklist and providing 
   information on a document's state, outstanding issues, and 
   responsibility tokens.  Depending on the need for transparency, this 
   information may need to be available online and continuously updated. 

   Discussion: The RFC Editor currently provides status information via 
   the RFC editor queue.  Each document is attributed a status (AUTH48, 
   RFC-EDITOR, IANA, ISR, etc.)  Items may stay on the queue for a long 
   time without changing status.  This status tracking information is 
   not integrated with the IESG tracking tools.  Within the IETF, the 
   PROTO team is considering requirements for marking the token-holder 
   accurately during long waiting periods, and others are looking into 
   improved notification tools. Requirements on the IETF technical 
   publisher for improved status integration and visibility could be met 

 
 
Mankin & Hayes             Expires January 12, 2007                 [Page 13] 

Internet-Draft          draft-mankin-techspec-pub-req-10              July 2006 
    

   by collaborations with these efforts, or by providing public access 
   to email logs regarding publications, or by some other proposal. 

   Derived Requirements: 

   o  Req-STATUSTRK-1 - The IETF technical publisher should make state 
      information publicly available for each document in the 
      publication process. It is desirable that this information be 
      available through a documented interface to facilitate tools 
      development.  

   o  Req-STATUSTRK-2 - The IETF technical publisher should integrate 
      its state information with the IETF tools to provide end-to-end 
      status tracking of documents.  For the documents in the IETF 
      standards process stream it is expected that documents should be 
      able to move seamlessly from the IETF standards tracking system 
      into the technical publication tracking system.   

   o  Req-STATUSTRK-3  - The IETF technical publisher should provide 
      external visibility of not only the fact that a document is in an 
      extended waiting period, but also the token-holder and 
      circumstances of the wait. 

3.12. Expedited Handling 

   Task Description: In some cases (such as when the documents are 
   needed by another standards body), it should be possible for the 
   approving organization to request expedited publication of a 
   document.  Ideally, this should not skip any of the publication 
   steps, but allocates it higher priority in the work queue to ensure 
   earlier publication than normal.  Expedited publication should be 
   used sparingly since as with any priority scheme, overuse will negate 
   its benefits. 

   Discussion: The fast-tracking procedure is used to expedite 
   publication of a document at the request of the IESG. Fast-tracking 
   is generally employed when an external organization has a looming 
   publication deadline and a need to reference a document currently in 
   the RFC editors queue.  Having short publication times would likely 
   reduce the need for fast-tracking. 

   Since fast tracking is disruptive to the workflow it is recommended 
   that expedited handling be phased out as soon as alternative ways of 
   achieving timely publication are in place. 

   Derived Requirements: 

 
 
Mankin & Hayes             Expires January 12, 2007                 [Page 14] 

Internet-Draft          draft-mankin-techspec-pub-req-10              July 2006 
    

   o  Req-EXPEDITE-1 - The IETF technical publisher should expedite the 
      processing of specific documents at the request of an appropriate 
      authority.  For the IETF standards process stream, that authority 
      is the IESG or the IAB. 

3.13. Exception Handling 

   Task Description: It should be possible for various reasons for a 
   document to be withdrawn from publication or the publication put on 
   hold.  Reasons for this could be due to an appeals process, detection 
   of a serious technical flaw, or determination that the document is 
   unsuitable for publication. 

   Discussion: For various reasons a document can be withdrawn before 
   publication.   

   Derived Requirements: 

   o  Req-EXCEPTIONS-1 - The IETF technical publisher should permit 
      documents to be withdrawn from publication at the direction of an 
      appropriate authority.  For the IETF standards process stream, 
      that authority is the IESG. 

   o  Req-EXCEPTIONS-2 - The IETF technical publisher should permit 
      documents to be put on hold awaiting the outcome of an appeal at 
      the direction of an appropriate authority.  For the IETF standards 
      process stream, that authority is the IESG. 

3.14. Notification of publication 

   Task Description: The technical publisher should provide a mechanism 
   for alerting the community at large of the availability of published 
   documents. 

   Discussion: The RFC Editor notifies of document publication on the 
   rfc-dist and ietf-announce mailing lists. 

   o  Req-PUBNOTIFY-1 - The IETF technical publisher should announce the 
      availability of published documents. 

3.15. Post-publication Corrections 

   Task Description: If corrections are identified after publication, 
   the technical publisher should be able to publish errata that can be 
   linked with the original document. 


 
 
Mankin & Hayes             Expires January 12, 2007                 [Page 15] 

Internet-Draft          draft-mankin-techspec-pub-req-10              July 2006 
    

   Discussion: The RFC Editor maintains a list of errata.  Pointers to 
   relevant errata are presented as output from the RFC Editor search 
   engine. 

   Derived Requirements: 

   o  Req-ERRATA-1 - The IETF technical publisher should maintain errata 
      for published documents. The process for review, updating, and 
      approval of errata for IETF documents will be defined by the IETF.  

   o  Req-ERRATA-2 - The IETF technical publisher should provide 
      information on relevant errata as part of the information 
      associated with a RFC.   

3.16. Indexing: Maintenance of the Catalog 

   Task Description: The technical publisher normally provides and 
   maintains the master catalog of publications of that organization.  
   As the publishers of the organization's output, the technical 
   publisher is expected to be the definitive source of publications and 
   maintainer of the database of published documents.   This also 
   includes the cataloging and storage of meta-information associated 
   with documents such as its history, status (updated, obsoleted, 
   etc.), document categories (standard, draft standard, bcp, etc.) 

   Discussion: The RFC Editor maintains the catalog.  The RFC editor is 
   also responsible for the permanent archival of specifications.  Meta 
   information associated with an RFC should also be maintained.  Since 
   this is the definitive archive, sufficient security should be in 
   place to prevent tampering with approved documents. 

   o  Req-INDEX-1 - The IETF technical publisher should maintain the 
      index of all IETF published documents. It is desirable that the 
      interface to the index be documented to facilitate tools 
      development.  

   o  Req-INDEX-2 - The IETF technical publisher should provide the 
      permanent archive for published documents.   

   o  Req-INDEX-3 - Meta information associated with a published 
      document must be stored and updated as its status changes.   

   o  Req-INDEX-4 - The archive must be sufficiently secure to prevent 
      the modification of published documents by external parties. 



 
 
Mankin & Hayes             Expires January 12, 2007                 [Page 16] 

Internet-Draft          draft-mankin-techspec-pub-req-10              July 2006 
    

   o  Req-INDEX-5 - The IETF technical publisher should provide the 
      permanent archive of any source documents associated with a 
      published specification. 

   o  Req-INDEX-6 - An appropriate authority can indicate to the 
      publisher that it should change the status of a document (e.g., 
      to Historical) and this should be reflected in the index.  For 
      the IETF standards process stream, the indicating authority is the 
      IESG. 

3.17. Access to Published Documents 

   Task Description: The technical publisher should facilitate access to 
   the documents published.  It is assumed that the technical publisher 
   will provide online tools to search for and find information within 
   the archive of published documents.  These access tools should 
   facilitate understanding the state of the document (identification of 
   replacement or updated documents, linkage to pertinent errata) 

   Discussion: Documents and status may be accessed via the RFC Editor's 
   web page 

   Derived Requirements: 

   o  Req-PUBACCESS-1 - The IETF technical publisher should provide 
      search tools for finding and retrieving published documents. 

   o  Req-PUBACCESS-2 - The IETF technical publisher tool should return 
      relevant meta information associated with a published document 
      (e.g., category of document, type of standard (if standards 
      track), obsoleted by or updated by information, associated 
      errata).  

   o  Req-PUBACCESS-3  - The IETF Technical Publication search tools 
      should be integrated with the IETF search tools.  For the IETF 
      standards process stream, this refers to integration with the 
      search tools used by the IETF standards process. 

3.18. Maintenance of a Vocabulary Document 

   Task Description: Some standards organizations require the technical 
   publisher to maintain a publicly available vocabulary document or 
   database containing common terms and acronyms. The goal is provide 
   consistency of terminology between documents. 

   Discussion: The RFC Editor does not maintain a public document or 
   database of terms or acronyms. 
 
 
Mankin & Hayes             Expires January 12, 2007                 [Page 17] 

Internet-Draft          draft-mankin-techspec-pub-req-10              July 2006 
    

   Derived Requirements: none 

3.19. Providing Publication Statistics and Status Reports 

   Task Description: The technical publisher may be required to 
   periodically or continuously measure their performance.  In many 
   standards organizations performance targets are set in terms of 
   timeliness, throughput, etc. 

   Discussion: The IETF technical publisher currently provides monthly 
   statistics on arrivals and completions of documents by category.  In 
   addition a status report is provided at each IETF meeting.  Other 
   statistics can be used to judge the health of the editing process. 
   Many of these statistics could be gathered using sampling techniques 
   to avoid excessive load on the technical publisher. 

   Derived Requirements: 

   o  Req-STATS-1 - The IETF technical publisher should provide publicly 
      available monthly statistics on average queue times and documents 
      processed.  The presentation should provide a historical context 
      to identify trends (see Goal-THROUGHPUT-1).  For the IETF 
      standards process, this should include queue arrivals, 
      completions, documents on the queue, and the number of documents 
      in each state at the end of the month. 

   o  Req-STATS-2 - The IETF technical publisher should provide periodic 
      status reports to the IETF meetings to apprise the community of 
      their work and performance. 

   o  Req-STATS-3 - The IETF technical publisher should provide publicly 
      available monthly statistics on the types of editorial corrections 
      being found during reviews as well as the percent of corrections 
      which are rejected by the authors.  

   o  Req-STATS-4 - The IETF technical publisher should provide publicly 
      available monthly statistics on author requested changes to 
      documents under publication.  This statistic should also include 
      changes required by other authorities outside of the technical 
      publisher empowered to make changes.  For the IETF standards 
      process, the designated authority would be the IESG or its 
      designees. 

3.20. Process and Document Evolution 

   Task Description: The guidelines and rules for an organization's 
   publication output will change over time.  New sections will be added 
 
 
Mankin & Hayes             Expires January 12, 2007                 [Page 18] 

Internet-Draft          draft-mankin-techspec-pub-req-10              July 2006 
    

   to documents, styles and conventions will change, boilerplate will be 
   changed, etc.  Similarly, the specific processes for publication of a 
   specification will change.  The technical publisher is expected to be 
   involved in these discussions and accommodate these changes as 
   required. 

   Discussion: Over time, the IETF consensus on what should be in a 
   published document has changed.  Processes interfacing with the 
   publisher have also changed.  Such changes are likely to continue in 
   the future.  The RFC editor has been involved in such discussions and 
   provided guides, policies, faqs, etc. to document the current 
   expectations on published documents. 

   Derived Requirements: 

   o  Req-PROCESSCHG-1 - The IETF technical publisher should participate 
      in the discussions of changes to author guidelines and publication 
      process changes. 

   o  Req-PROCESSCHG-2 - The IETF technical publisher should 
      participate in and support process experiments involving the 
      technical publication process. 

3.21. Tutorial and Help Services 

   Task Description: The technical publisher may be required to provide 
   tutorials, mentoring, help-desks, online tools, etc. to facilitate 
   smooth interaction with the technical publisher and IETF community 
   awareness of document guidelines, procedures, etc.  In many 
   organizations the publisher maintains a style manual giving explicit 
   guidance to authors on how to write a specification. 

   Discussion: Guidelines are provided to the authors on how to write a 
   RFC as well as occasional tutorial presentations.  The RFC Editor 
   provides a help desk at IETF meetings. 

   Derived Requirements: 

   o  Req-PUBHELP-1 - The IETF technical publisher should provide and 
      maintain documentation giving guidance to authors on the layout, 
      structure, expectations, etc. required to develop documents 
      suitable for publication.  For the IETF standards process stream, 
      the technical publisher should follow IESG guidance in specifying 
      documentation guidelines. 



 
 
Mankin & Hayes             Expires January 12, 2007                 [Page 19] 

Internet-Draft          draft-mankin-techspec-pub-req-10              July 2006 
    

   o  Req-PUBHELP-2 - The IETF technical publisher should provide 
      tutorials to the IETF community to educate authors on the 
      processes and expectations of the IETF technical publisher. 

   o  Req-PUBHELP-3 - The IETF technical publisher should provide a 
      contact e-mail address and correspond as required to progress the 
      publication work.  The publisher should address queries from both 
      inside and outside of the IETF community. 

   o  Req-PUBHELP-4 - The IETF technical publisher should provide a 
      help desk at IETF meetings. 

4. Technical Publisher Performance Goals 

   A Technical Publisher is typically measured not only on what they do 
   but how well they perform the tasks.  The expectations in this 
   section are treated as goals instead of requirements because: 

   - Achieving a given level of performance is not totally under the 
     control of the technical publisher.  Publication is a process and 
     the goals are of the process, not just the publisher. 

   - The actual performance objectives will be set contractually.  The 
     values herein represent values which the IETF community feels are 
     desirable and reasonable for work progress without consideration of 
     financial or other factors. 

   Goals are set forth in the following areas: 

   1. Publication timeframes 

   2. Publication throughput  

4.1. Publication Timeframes 

   Goal Description: This is a measure of the time from entry into the 
   RFC editor queue until the documents are published. The metrics are 
   defined in (req-STATS-1).  

   Discussion: Long publication times create both internal and external 
   difficulties.  Internal difficulties include the migration of authors 
   to other activities and the accumulation of tempting post-approval 
   fixes to be added to the document.  External difficulties include the 
   inability of other standards organizations to reference IETF 
   publications for lack of a RFC number. 

   Derived Goals: 
 
 
Mankin & Hayes             Expires January 12, 2007                 [Page 20] 

Internet-Draft          draft-mankin-techspec-pub-req-10              July 2006 
    

   o  Goal-TIMEFRAMES-1 - The consensus of the IETF community is that 
      an average publication time of under a month is desirable.  It is 
      understood that in some cases there will be delays outside of the 
      publisher's control. The actual performance targets and metrics 
      are expected to be determined as part of the contract negotiation 
      process. 

   o  Goal-TIMEFRAMES-2 - The consensus of the IETF community is that 
      the time required for a pre-approval review should be under 10 
      days. The actual performance targets and metrics are expected to 
      be determined as part of the contract negotiation process. 

4.2. Publication Throughput 

   Goal Description: The number of documents published during a given 
   time period is a measure of publisher throughput.  Some publishers 
   also provide the data in terms of pages produced.  The counts should 
   be separated by categories of documents.  The metrics are defined in 
   (req-STATS-1). 

   Discussion: The RFC editor currently provides monthly statistics on 
   the arrival and completion of documents onto the RFC queue.  This is 
   sorted by category of document.  This provides a measure of the 
   delays in the publication process. 

   Derived Goals: 

   o  Goal-THROUGHPUT-1 - Although minor variations are expected, there 
      should be no long term growth trend in the length of the 
      publication queue.  The actual performance targets and metrics 
      are expected to be determined as part of the contract negotiation 
      process. 

5. IETF Implications of Technical Publication Requirements 

   Requirements on technical publication process have so far been stated 
   in terms of requirements on the technical publisher.  However it must 
   be recognized that many of these requirements have implications on 
   the processes and tools within the IETF itself.  It is anticipated 
   that these processes will be documented in companion documents. 

   The following is a list of potential issues that should be addressed 
   within the IETF based on the requirements applied to the technical 
   publisher: 



 
 
Mankin & Hayes             Expires January 12, 2007                 [Page 21] 

Internet-Draft          draft-mankin-techspec-pub-req-10              July 2006 
    

   o  Pre- vs Post-approval Editing: If emphasis switches from post-
      approval editing to pre-approval editing, then IETF processes must 
      be adapted to make use of this service.  The processes for post-
      approval editing can also be streamlined. 

   o  Post-approval Editorial Cleanup: IETF must define under what 
      conditions the publisher should be instructed to bypass or 
      minimize post-approval editing. 

   o  Approval of post-approval, pre-publication technical corrections: 
      Since the technical publisher can only accept approved changes, it 
      must be clear who is allowed to approve technical changes.  This 
      process within the IETF needs to be decided and documented. 

   o  Allocation of Permanent Stable Identifiers: IETF needs to clearly 
      identify the naming/numbering schemes and classes of documents to 
      which those names and numbers apply.  Furthermore, the 
      responsibility for allocation of those names/numbers needs to be 
      identified. 

   o  Expedited Handling: If publication timelines can be reduced 
      sufficiently, then expedited handling may no longer be needed.  

   o  Post-publication Corrections: Appropriate processes must be 
      defined with the IETF to ensure that errata are appropriately 
      vetted and authorized. 

   o  Indexing: Appropriate processes must be defined within the IETF 
      to decide and inform the technical publisher of status changes to 
      published documents as the result of an appeal, legal action, or 
      some other procedural action. 

6. IANA Considerations 

   Any new requirements that result from this discussion need to be 
   reviewed by IANA and the IETF to understand to what extent, if any, 
   the work flow of the documents through IANA are affected. 

   Interactions with IANA on parameter validation is discussed in 
   section 3.6. 

7. Security Considerations 

   There is a tussle between the sought-for improvements in readability 
   and the specific language that has often been negotiated carefully 
   for the security content of IETF documents.  As with other text, 
   extreme caution is needed in modifying any text in the security 
 
 
Mankin & Hayes             Expires January 12, 2007                 [Page 22] 

Internet-Draft          draft-mankin-techspec-pub-req-10              July 2006 
    

   considerations.  This issue is assumed to have been dealt with under 
   the section 3.3. 

   The processes for the publication of documents should prevent the 
   introduction of unapproved changes (see section 3.7).  Since the IETF 
   publisher maintains the index of publications, sufficient security 
   should be in place to prevent these published documents from being 
   changed by external parties (see section 3.16) 

8. Acknowledgments 

   Bert Wijnen has provided input on the early copy edit experiment and 
   made useful comments throughout the document.  Leslie Daigle has 
   contributed strongly to this text.  Thanks to Steve Barclay, John 
   Meredith, Yvette Ho Sang, and Sami Trabulsi for discussions of the 
   publication practices of ATIS, ETSI, IEEE, and ITU.  Other 
   acknowledgements to date: a discussion on the wg chairs mailing list, 
   Henning Schulzrinne, Henrik Levkowetz. 

 

Author's Addresses 

   Allison Mankin 
   Washington, DC 
   USA 
       
   Phone: +1 301 728 7199 
   Email: mankin@psg.com 
   URI: http://www.psg.com/~mankin/ 
    

   Stephen Hayes 
   Ericsson 
   3634 Long Prairie Rd. 
   Ste 108-125 
   Flower Mound, TX 75022 
   USA 
       
   Phone: +1 469 360 8500 
   Email: stephen.hayes@ericsson.com 
 

Intellectual Property Statement 

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to 
 
 
Mankin & Hayes             Expires January 12, 2007                 [Page 23] 

Internet-Draft          draft-mankin-techspec-pub-req-10              July 2006 
    

   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in 
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights 
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has 
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information 
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be 
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of 
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at 
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org 

Disclaimer of Validity 

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an 
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS 
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET 
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, 
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE 
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED 
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 

Copyright Statement 

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006). 

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions 
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors 
   retain all their rights. 

Acknowledgment 

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the 
   Internet Society. 

    



 
 
Mankin & Hayes             Expires January 12, 2007                 [Page 24] 

