


MANET Autoconfiguration (Autoconf)                     E. Baccelli (Ed.)
Internet-Draft                                                     INRIA
Expires: February 2, 2008                                        K. Mase
                                                      Niigata University
                                                              S. Ruffino
                                                          Telecom Italia
                                                                S. Singh
                                                                 Samsung
                                                             August 2007


 Address Autoconfiguration for MANET: Terminology and Problem Statement
                    draft-ietf-autoconf-statement-01

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on February 2, 2008.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).









Baccelli (Ed.), et al.  Expires February 2, 2008                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft      MANET Autoconf Problem Statement         August 2007


Abstract

   Traditional dynamic IPv6 address assignment solutions are not adapted
   to mobile ad hoc networks.  This document elaborates on this problem,
   states the need for new solutions, and requirements to these
   solutions.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Deployment Scenarios . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     3.1.  Standalone MANET . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     3.2.  Connected MANET  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     3.3.  Deployment Scenarios Selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   4.  Problem Statement  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     4.1.  MANET Autoconfiguration Goals  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     4.2.  Existing Protocols' Shortcomings . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
       4.2.1.  Lack of Multi-hop Support  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
       4.2.2.  Lack of Dynamic Topology Support . . . . . . . . . . .  8
       4.2.3.  Lack of Network Merging Support  . . . . . . . . . . .  8
       4.2.4.  Lack of Network Partitioning Support . . . . . . . . .  9
     4.3.  MANET Autoconfiguration Issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
       4.3.1.  Address and Prefix Generation  . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
       4.3.2.  Prefix and Address Uniqueness Requirements . . . . . . 10
       4.3.3.  MANET Border Routers Related Issues  . . . . . . . . . 10
   5.  Solutions Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   6.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   7.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   8.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   Contributors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 18

















Baccelli (Ed.), et al.  Expires February 2, 2008                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft      MANET Autoconf Problem Statement         August 2007


1.  Introduction

   A Mobile Ad hoc NETwork (also known as a MANET [2] [1]) consists of a
   loosely connected set of MANET routers.  Each MANET router embodies
   IP routing/forwarding functionality and may also incorporate host
   functionality.  These routers dynamically self-organize and maintain
   a routing structure among themselves, regardless of the availability
   of a connection to any infrastructure.  MANET routers may be mobile
   and may communicate over symmetric or assymetric wireless links.
   They may thus join and leave the MANET at any time.

   However, prior to participation in IP communication, each MANET
   router that does not benefit from appropriate static configuration
   needs to automatically acquire at least one IP address, that may be
   required to be unique within a given scope, or to be topologically
   appropriate.

   Standard automatic IPv6 address/prefix assignment solutions [5], [3]
   [4] do not work "as-is" on MANETs due to ad hoc networks' unique
   characteristics [2], therefore new or modified mechanisms are needed.
   This document thus details and categorizes the issues that need to be
   addressed.





























Baccelli (Ed.), et al.  Expires February 2, 2008                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft      MANET Autoconf Problem Statement         August 2007


2.  Terminology

   This document uses the MANET architecture terminology defined in [2],
   as well as the following terms :

   MANET Local address (MLA)  - An IP address configured on an interface
      of a router in a MANET and valid for communication inside this
      MANET.

   Global address  - An IP address configured on a MANET router and
      valid for communication with routers in the Internet, as well as
      internally within the MANET.

   Standalone MANET  - An independent ad hoc network, which does not
      contain a border router through which it is connected to the
      Internet.

   Network merger  - The process by which two or more previously
      disjoint ad hoc networks get connected.

   Network partitioning  - The process by which an ad hoc network splits
      into two or more disconnected ad hoc networks.

   Address generation  - The process of selecting a tentative address in
      view to configure an interface.

   Address assignment  - The process of configuring a generated address
      on an interface.

   Pre-service address uniqueness  - The property of an address which is
      assigned at most once within a given scope, and which is unique,
      before it is being used.

   In-service address uniqueness  - The property of an address which was
      assigned at most once within a given scope, and which remains
      unique over time, after the address has started being used.















Baccelli (Ed.), et al.  Expires February 2, 2008                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft      MANET Autoconf Problem Statement         August 2007


3.  Deployment Scenarios

   Automatic configuration of IP addresses and/or prefixes on MANET
   interfaces is necessary in a number of deployment scenarios.  This
   section outlines the different categories of scenarios that are
   considered.

3.1.  Standalone MANET

   Standalone MANETs are not connected to any external network: all
   traffic is generated by routers and hosts in the MANET and destined
   to routers or hosts in the same MANET.

   Routers joining a standalone MANET may either have (i) no previous
   configuration, or (ii) pre-configured local or global IP addresses
   (or prefixes).  Due to potential network partitions and mergers,
   standalone MANETs may be composed of routers of either types.

   Typical instances of this scenario include private or temporary
   networks, set-up in areas where neither wireless coverage nor network
   infrastructure exist (e.g. emergency networks for disaster recovery,
   or conference-room networks).

3.2.  Connected MANET

   Connected MANETs have, contrary to standalone MANETs, connectivity to
   one or more external networks (leaf networks, or other networks that
   provide Internet connectivity) by means of one or more MANET border
   router [2].  MANET routers may generate traffic destined to remote
   hosts across these external networks, as well as to destination
   inside the MANET.

   Again, routers joining a connected MANET may either (i) have no
   previous configuration, or (ii) already own pre-configured local or
   global IP addresses (or prefixes).

   Typical instances of this scenario include public wireless networks
   of scattered fixed WLAN Access Points participating in a MANET of
   mobile users, and acting as MANET border routers.  Another example of
   such a scenario is coverage extension of a fixed wide-area wireless
   network, where one or more mobile routers in the MANET are connected
   to the Internet through technologies such as UMTS or WiMAX.

3.3.  Deployment Scenarios Selection

   Both "Standalone MANET" and "Connected MANET" scenarios are to be
   addressed by solutions for MANET autoconfiguration.  Note that
   solutions should also aim at addressing cases where a MANET transits



Baccelli (Ed.), et al.  Expires February 2, 2008                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft      MANET Autoconf Problem Statement         August 2007


   from one scenario to an other.


















































Baccelli (Ed.), et al.  Expires February 2, 2008                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft      MANET Autoconf Problem Statement         August 2007


4.  Problem Statement

   This section details the goals of MANET autoconfiguration, and
   highlights the shortcomings of existing autoconfiguration protocols.
   A taxonomy of autoconfiguration issues on MANETs is then elaborated.

4.1.  MANET Autoconfiguration Goals

   A MANET router needs to configure IP addresses and/or prefixes on its
   non-MANET interfaces.  In addition, it needs to configure a link
   local address, a /128 and/or an MLA on its MANET interface.  A MANET
   router may also configure a IP prefix shorter than /128 on its MANET
   interface, provided prefix uniqueness is guaranteed [2].

   The primary goal of MANET autoconfiguration is thus to provide
   mechanisms for IPv6 prefix allocation and address assignment, that
   are suited for mobile ad hoc environments.  Note that this task is
   distinct from that of propagating knowledge about address or prefix
   location, as a routing protocol does (see for example [8], [9]), or
   as described in [7].

   The mechanisms employed by solutions to be designed must address the
   distributed, multi-hop nature of MANETs [2], and be able to follow
   topology and connectivity changes by (re)configuring addresses and/or
   prefixes accordingly.

4.2.  Existing Protocols' Shortcomings

   Traditional dynamic IP address assignment protocols, such as [5], [3]
   or [4], do not work as-is on MANETs due to these networks' unique
   properties.  This section overviews the shortcomings of these
   solutions in mobile ad hoc environments.

4.2.1.  Lack of Multi-hop Support

   Traditional solutions assume that a broadcast directly reaches every
   router or host on the subnetwork, whereas this generally is not the
   case in MANETs (see [2]).  Some routers in the MANET will typically
   assume multihop broadcast, and expect to receive through several
   intermediate relayings by peer MANET routers.  For example, in Fig.
   1, the MANET router MR3 cannot communicate directly with a DHCP
   server [4] that would be available through a MANET border router,
   since the server and the MANET router are not located on the same
   logical link.  While some DHCP extensions (such as the relay-agent
   [11]) overcome this issue in a static network, it is not the case in
   a dynamic topology, as explained below.





Baccelli (Ed.), et al.  Expires February 2, 2008                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft      MANET Autoconf Problem Statement         August 2007


                                                       ----- MR1...MR3
                                                      /      .
              +-------------+         +------------+ /       .
              |             |   p2p   |  MANET     |/        .
              |  ISP Edge   |   Link  |  Border    |         .
              |   Router    +---------+  Router    |\        .
              |             |         |            | \       .
              +-------------+         +------------+  \----- MR2

                       Fig. 1. Connected MANET router topology.



4.2.2.  Lack of Dynamic Topology Support

   A significant proportion of the routers in the MANET may be mobile
   with wireless interface(s), leading to ever changing neighbor sets
   for most MANET routers (see [1]).  Therefore, network topology may
   change rather dynamically compared to traditional networks, which
   invalidates traditional delegation solutions that were developed for
   infrastructure-based networks, such as [11], which do not assume
   intermittent reachability of configuration server(s), and a
   potentially ever changing hierarchy among devices.  For instance, in
   Fig. 1, even if MR1 would be able to delegate prefixes to MR3 with
   DHCP [4], it cannot be assumed that MR1 and MR3 will not move and
   become unable to communicate directly.

4.2.3.  Lack of Network Merging Support

   Network merging is a potential event that was not considered in the
   design of traditional solutions, and that may greatly disrupt the
   autoconfiguration mechanisms in use (see [2]).  Examples of network
   merging related issues include cases where a MANET A may feature
   routers and hosts that use IP addresses that are locally unique
   within MANET A, but this uniqueness is not guaranteed anymore if
   MANET A merges with another MANET B. If address uniqueness is
   required within the MANET (see Section 4.3.2), issues arise that were
   not accounted for in traditional networks and solutions.  For
   instance, [5] and [3] test address uniqueness via messages that are
   sent to neighbors only, and as such cannot detect the presence of
   duplicate addresses configured within the network but located several
   hops away.  However, since MANETs are generally multi-hop, detection
   of duplicate addresses over several hops is a feature that may be
   required for MANET interface address assignment (see Section 4.3.2).







Baccelli (Ed.), et al.  Expires February 2, 2008                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft      MANET Autoconf Problem Statement         August 2007


4.2.4.  Lack of Network Partitioning Support

   Network partitioning is a potential event that was not considered in
   the design of traditional solutions, and that may invalidate usual
   autoconfiguration mechanisms (see [2]).  Examples of related issues
   include cases such as a standalone MANET, whereby connection to the
   infrastructure is not available, possibly due to network partitioning
   and loss of connectivity to a MANET border router.  The MANET must
   thus function without traditional address allocation server
   availability.  While stateless protocols such as [5] and [3] could
   provide IP address configuration (for MANET interfaces, loopback
   interfaces), these solutions do not provide any mechanism for
   allocating "unique prefix(es)" to routers in order to enable the
   configuration of host interfaces.



                          ----- MR1...MR3...MR5
                         /      .
                        /       .
                       /        .
                    MR4         .
                       \        .
                        \       .
                         \----- MR2

                       Fig. 2. Standalone MANET router topology.




4.3.  MANET Autoconfiguration Issues

   Taking into account the shortcomings of traditional solutions, this
   section categorizes general issues with regards to MANET
   autoconfiguration.

4.3.1.  Address and Prefix Generation

   The distributed nature of MANETs brings the need for address
   generation algorithms that are not always based on traditional
   "client-server" schemes and hierarchies to provide MANET routers with
   addresses and prefixes.  In addition, the multi-hop aspect of mobile
   ad hoc networking makes it difficult to totally avoid address and
   prefix duplication a priori over all the MANET.






Baccelli (Ed.), et al.  Expires February 2, 2008                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft      MANET Autoconf Problem Statement         August 2007


4.3.2.  Prefix and Address Uniqueness Requirements

   If prefix or address uniqueness is required within a specific scope,
   and if the address/prefix generation mechanism in use does not
   totally avoid address/prefix duplication, then additional issues
   arise.  This section overviews these problems.

   Pre-service Issues -- One category of problems due to address or
   prefix uniqueness requirements are called pre-service issues.
   Conceptually, they relate to the fact that before a generated address
   or prefix is assigned and used, it should be verified that it will
   not create an address conflict within the specified scope.  This is
   essential in the context of routing, where it is desireable to reduce
   the risks of loops due to routing table pollution with duplicate
   addresses.

   In-Service Issues -- Another category of problems due to address and
   prefix uniqueness are called in-service issues.  They come from the
   fact that even if an assigned address or prefix is currently unique
   within the specified scope, it cannot be ensured that it will indeed
   remain unique over time.

   Phenomena such as MANET merging and MANET partitioning may bring the
   need for checking the uniqueness (within the specified scope) of
   addresses or prefixes that are already assigned and used.  This need
   may depend on (i) the probability of address conflicts, (ii) the
   amount of the overhead for checking uniqueness of addresses, and
   (iii) address/prefix uniqueness requirements from applications.

   For instance, if (i) is extremely low and (ii) significant, checking
   uniqueness of addresses and prefixes may not be used.  If on the
   other hand (i) is not extremely low, checking uniqueness of addresses
   and prefixes should be used.  In any case, if the application has a
   hard requirement for address uniqueness assurance, checking
   uniqueness of addresses and prefixes should always be used, no matter
   how unlikely is the event of address conflict.

4.3.3.  MANET Border Routers Related Issues

   Another category of problems concern MANET border router(s)
   management.

   In the case where multiple MANET border routers are available in the
   MANET, providing access to multiple address configuration servers,
   specific problems arise.  One problem is the way in which global
   prefixes are managed within the MANET.  If one prefix is used for the
   whole MANET, partitioning of the MANET may result in invalid routes
   towards MANET routers, over the Internet.  On the other hand, the use



Baccelli (Ed.), et al.  Expires February 2, 2008               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft      MANET Autoconf Problem Statement         August 2007


   of multiple network prefixes guarantees traffic is unambiguously
   routed from the hosts/routers in the Internet towards the MANET
   border router responsible for one particular prefix.  However,
   asymmetry in the routers' choice of ingress/egress MANET border
   router can lead to non-optimal paths followed by inbound/outbound
   data traffic, or to broken connectivity, if egress filtering is being
   done.

   When a device changes its MANET border router attachment, some routes
   may be broken, affecting MANET packet forwarding performance and
   applications.  In a multiple border router / multiple-prefixes MANET,
   frequent reconfiguration could cause a large amount of control
   signalling (for instance if [5] is used "as-is").






































Baccelli (Ed.), et al.  Expires February 2, 2008               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft      MANET Autoconf Problem Statement         August 2007


5.  Solutions Considerations

   Solutions must achieve their task with (i) low overhead, due to
   scarse bandwidth, and (ii) low delay/convergence time, due to the
   dynamicity of the topology.  The evaluation of such criteria may
   depend on the targeted network properties, which include (but are not
   limited to) node cardinality, node mobility characteristics, etc.

   Solutions are to be designed to work at the network layer and thus to
   apply to all link types.  However, in situations where link-layer
   multicast is needed it is possible that on some link types (e.g.
   NBMA links), alternative mechanisms or protocols specifying operation
   over a particular link type would be required.

   Solutions must interact with existing protocols in a way that
   leverages as much as possible appropriate mechanisms that are
   deployed.  For instance, besides the possible use of the well-known
   IPv6 multicast addresses defined for neighbor discovery in [3] (e.g.
   for Duplicate Address Detection), solutions may as well use some
   addresses defined in [10] for auto-configuration purposes.

   Solutions must also take into account the security and trust issues
   that are specific to ad hoc networking (see Section 6).




























Baccelli (Ed.), et al.  Expires February 2, 2008               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft      MANET Autoconf Problem Statement         August 2007


6.  Security Considerations

   Address configuration in MANET could be prone to security attacks, as
   in other types of IPv6 networks.  Security threats to IPv6 neighbor
   discovery were discussed in SEND WG and described in [6]: three
   different trust models are specified, with varying levels of trust
   among network nodes and routers.  Among them, the model by which no
   trust exists among nodes may be suitable a priori for most ad hoc
   networks.  However, the other two models may be applicable in some
   cases, for example when a trust relationship exists between an
   operator and some MANET routers, or between military devices that are
   in the same unit.  Although [6] does not explicitly address MANETs,
   the trust models it provides for ad hoc networks can be valid also in
   the context of MANET autoconfiguration.

   It is worth noting that analysis of [6] is strictly related to
   Neighbor Discovery, Neighbor Unreachability Detection and Duplicate
   Address Detection procedures, as defined in [3] and [5].  As
   explained in the present document, current standard procedures cannot
   be used as-is in MANET context to achieve autoconfiguration of MANET
   routers and, therefore, design of new mechanisms can be foreseen.

   In this case, although security threats and attacks defined in [6]
   could also apply in presence of new solutions, additional threats and
   attacks could be possible (e.g., non-cooperation in message
   forwarding in multi-hop communications).  Therefore, the security
   analysis has to be further extended to include threats, specific to
   multi-hop networks and related to the particular address
   configuration solution.

   General security issues of ad hoc routing protocols' operations are
   not in the scope of MANET autoconfiguration.



















Baccelli (Ed.), et al.  Expires February 2, 2008               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft      MANET Autoconf Problem Statement         August 2007


7.  IANA Considerations

   This document does currently not specify IANA considerations.
















































Baccelli (Ed.), et al.  Expires February 2, 2008               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft      MANET Autoconf Problem Statement         August 2007


8.  Informative References

   [1]   Macker, J. and S. Corson, "MANET Routing Protocol Performance
         Issues and Evaluation Considerations", RFC 2501, January 1999.

   [2]   Macker, J., Chakeres, I., and T. Clausen, "Mobile Ad hoc
         Network Architecture", ID draft-ietf-autoconf-manetarch,
         February 2007.

   [3]   Narten, T., Nordmark, E., and W. Simpson, "Neighbor Discovery
         for IPv6", RFC 2461, December 1998.

   [4]   Droms, R., Bound, J., Volz, B., Lemon, T., Perkins, C., and M.
         Carney, "Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol for IPv6",
         RFC 3315, July 2003.

   [5]   Narten, T. and S. Thomson, "IPv6 Stateless Address
         Autoconfiguration", RFC 2462, December 1998.

   [6]   Nikander, P., Kempf, J., and E. Nordmark, "IPv6 Neighbor
         Discovery (ND) Trust Models and Threats", RFC 3756, May 2004.

   [7]   Draves, R. and D. Thaler, "Default Router Preferences and More-
         Specific Routes", RFC 4191, 2005.

   [8]   Moy, J., "OSPF version 2", RFC 2328, 1998.

   [9]   Moy, J., Coltun, R., and D. Ferguson, "OSPF for IPv6",
         RFC 2740, 1999.

   [10]  Chakeres, I., "Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA)
         Allocations for the  Mobile Ad hoc Networks (MANET) Working
         Group", ID draft-ietf-manet-iana, May 2007.

   [11]  Patrick, M., "DHCP Relay Agent Information Option", RFC 3046,
         2001.















Baccelli (Ed.), et al.  Expires February 2, 2008               [Page 15]

Internet-Draft      MANET Autoconf Problem Statement         August 2007


Contributors

   This document is the result of joint efforts, including those of the
   following contributers, listed in alphabetical order: C. Adjih, C.
   Bernardos, T. Boot, T. Clausen, C. Dearlove, H. Moustafa, C. Perkins,
   A. Petrescu, P. Ruiz, P. Stupar, F. Templin, D. Thaler, K. Weniger.













































Baccelli (Ed.), et al.  Expires February 2, 2008               [Page 16]

Internet-Draft      MANET Autoconf Problem Statement         August 2007


Authors' Addresses

   Emmanuel Baccelli
   INRIA

   Phone: +33 1 69 33 55 11
   Email: Emmanuel.Baccelli@inria.fr


   Kenichi Mase
   Niigata University

   Phone: +81 25 262 7446
   Email: Mase@ie.niigata-u.ac.jp


   Simone Ruffino
   Telecom Italia

   Phone: +39 011 228 7566
   Email: Simone.Ruffino@telecomitalia.it


   Shubhranshu Singh
   Samsung

   Phone: +82 31 280 9569
   Email: Shubranshu@gmail.com























Baccelli (Ed.), et al.  Expires February 2, 2008               [Page 17]

Internet-Draft      MANET Autoconf Problem Statement         August 2007


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Baccelli (Ed.), et al.  Expires February 2, 2008               [Page 18]

