Internet Draft                                              Luis Sanchez, BBN
draft-ops-ip-config-management-reqmnts-00.txt         Keith McCloghrie, Cisco
Expires in January 14, 2001                       Jon Saperia, JDS Consultant
                                                                July 14, 2000

   Requirements for Configuration Management of IP-based networks

   Status of this Memo

    This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance
    with all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

    Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
    Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
    other groups may also distribute working documents as
    Internet-Drafts.

    Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
    months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
    documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-
    Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as "work
    in progress."

    The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
    http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

    The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
    http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   Abstract

    This document is the output of a design team chartered with the
    identification of a global set of configuration management
    requirements for IP-based networks. 























Sanchez, McCloghrie, Saperia                                    [page 1]

Internet Draft          expires in January 14, 2001        July 14, 2000

   Table of Contents

    1.0  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
        1.1 Motivation, Scope and Goals of this document . . . . . . . 2
        1.2 Requirements Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
        1.3 Audience . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
        1.4 Definition of Technical Terms. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3

    2.0 Statement of the Problem  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4

    3.0 Requirements for an IP-based Configuration Management System . 7

    4.0 Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8

    Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8

    References. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8




































Sanchez, McCloghrie, Saperia                                    [page 2]

Internet Draft          expires in January 14, 2001        July 14, 2000

1.0 Introduction

1.1 Motivation, Scope and Goals of this document

    Over the past several months, a number of IETF working groups have
    introduced new technologies which offer integrated and
    differentiated services.  To support these new technologies,
    working group members found that they had new requirements for
    configuration of these technologies. One of these new requirements
    was for the provisioning (configuration) of behavior at the
    network level.

    An example of this type of configuration would be instructing all
    routers in a network to provide 'gold' service to a particular set
    of customers. Depending on the specific network equipment and
    definition of 'gold' service, this configuration request might
    translate to different configuration parameters on different
    vendors equipment and many individual configuration commands at
    the router. This higher level of configuration management has come
    to commonly be known as policy based management.

    Working groups associated with these new technologies believed
    that the existing SNMP based management framework, while adequate
    for fault, configuration management at the individual instance
    (e.g., interface) level, performance and other management
    functions commonly associated with it, was not able to meet these
    new needs.  As a result they began working on new solutions and
    approaches.
 
    COPS [COPS] for RSVP [RSVP] provides routers with the opportunity
    to ask their Policy Server for an admit/reject decision for a
    particular RSVP session. This model allows routers to outsource
    their resource allocation decisions to some other entity. However,
    this model does not work with DiffServ [DSARCH] where there is no
    signalling protocol. Therefore, the policies that affect resource
    allocation decisions must be provisioned to the routers. It became
    evident that there was a need for coordinating both RSVP-based and
    DiffServ-based policies to provide end2end QoS. Working groups
    began to extend and leverage approaches such as COPS for RSVP to
    support Diffserv policies. This gave birth to COPS-PR [COPS-PR].

    These extensions caused concern that the IETF was about to develop
    a set of fragmented solutions which were locally optimized for
    specific technologies and not well integrated in the existing
    Internet Management Framework. The concern prompted some of the
    Area Directors associated with the Operations and Management,
    Transport and General areas, and some IAB members to organize a
    two day meeting in mid September 1999. The primary purpose of the
    meeting was to examine the requirements for configuration
    management and evaluate the COPS/PIB and SNMP/MIB approaches in
    light of these requirements.


Sanchez, McCloghrie, Saperia                                    [page 3]

Internet Draft          expires in January 14, 2001        July 14, 2000

    At the end of the two day meeting there was no consensus on
    several issues and as a result a number of 'design teams' were
    created.  This document is the output of the design team chartered
    with the identification of a global set of configuration
    management requirements. This document has benefited from feedback
    received during the Configuration Management BOF that took place
    on November 11, 1999 during the 46th IETF in Washington DC,
    USA. The document has also benefited from comments sent to the
    confmgt@ops.ietf.org mailing list.

1.2 Requirements Terminology

    Keywords "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT"
    and "MAY" that appear in this document are to be interpreted as
    described in RFC 2119 [Bra97].

1.3 Audience

    The target audience for this document includes system designers,
    implementers of network configuration and management technology
    and others interested in gaining a general background
    understanding of the issues related to configuration management in
    general, and in the Internet in particular along with associated
    requirements. This document assumes that the reader is familiar
    with the Internet Protocol, related networking technology, and
    general network management terms and concepts.

1.4 Definition of Terms

    Device-Local Configuration

    Configuration data that is specific to a particular network
    device. This is the finest level of granularity for configuring
    network devices.

    Network-Wide Configuration

    Configuration data that is not specific to any particular network
    device and from which multiple device-local configurations can
    be derived. Network-wide configuration provides a level of
    abstraction above device-local configurations.

    Configuration Data Translator

    A function that transforms Configuration Management Data
    (high-level policies) or Network-wide configuration data
    (middle-level policies) into device local configurations
    (low-level policies) based on the generic capabilities of network
    devices.  This function can be performed either by devices
    themselves or by some intermediate entity.





Sanchez, McCloghrie, Saperia                                    [page 4]

Internet Draft          expires in January 14, 2001        July 14, 2000

2.0 Statement of the Problem

    Configuring large networks is becoming an increasingly difficult
    task. The problem intensifies as networks increase their size, not
    only in terms of number of devices, but also with a greater
    variety of devices, with each device having increasing
    functionality and complexity.  That is, networks are getting more
    complex in multiple dimensions simultaneously (number of devices,
    time scales for configuration, etc.)  making the task of
    configuring these more complex.

    In the past, configuring a network device has been a three step
    process. The network operator, engineer or entity responsible for
    the network created a model of the network and its expected
    behavior. Next, this (model + expected behavior) was formalized
    and recorded in the form of high-level policies. Finally, these
    policies were then translated into device-local configurations and
    provisioned into each network device for enforcement. 
    
    Any high-level policy changes (changes in the network topology
    and/or its expected behavior) needed to be translated and
    provisioned to all network devices affected by the change. Figure
    1 depicts this model and shows how high-level policies for a
    network could be translated into four device-local
    configurations. In this model, network operators or engineers
    functioned as configuration data translators; they translated the
    high-level policies to device-local configuration data.

    A configuration data translator could take the topology
    independent behavior description such as high-level policies
    (first input source) combine it with topology information (second
    input source) as well as status/performance/monitoring information
    (third input source) to derive device-local configurations. Note
    that there could be several configuration data translators
    operating in tandem on a set of devices. However, there could be
    only one configuration data translator operating at a particular
    device at any given instance.

















Sanchez, McCloghrie, Saperia                                    [page 5]

Internet Draft          expires in January 14, 2001        July 14, 2000

                     Configuration Management
                    Data (High-level Policies)
                                |
                                |
                                |
                                |
        Network                 V                Network
        Topology ----->   Configuration    <---- Status/performance
        Information     Data Translator(s)       Information
                                |
                                |
                                |
                                |
          -------------------------------------------------
          |               |               |               |
        Device          Device          Device          Device
        Local           Local           Local           Local
        Conf(1)         Conf(2)         Conf(3)         Conf(4)


    Figure 1. Current model for configuring network devices.

    Historically, network operators and engineers used protocols and
    mechanisms such as SNMP and CLI applications to provision or
    configure network devices. In their current versions, these
    mechanisms have proven to be difficult to use because of their
    low-level of granularity and their device-specific nature. This
    problem is worse when provisioning multiple network devices
    requiring large amounts of configuration data.

    It is evident that network administrators and existing
    configuration management software can not keep up with the growth
    in complexity of networks and that an efficient, integrated
    configuration management solution is needed. Several IETF Working
    Groups working on this problem converged into adding a layer of
    abstraction to the traditional configuration management process
    described in figure 1. Figure 2 depicts this process after the
    layer of abstraction is added. As in the previous figure, first
    the network operator, engineer or entity responsible for the
    network creates a model of the network and its expected
    behavior. This is formalized and recorded in the form of
    high-level policies.

    These policies are combined with topology information as well as
    status/performance information to generate network-wide
    configuration data. These middle level-policies are simpler to
    manage and represent behaviors shared by multiple network devices.








Sanchez, McCloghrie, Saperia                                    [page 6]

Internet Draft          expires in January 14, 2001        July 14, 2000


                       Configuration Management
                      Data (High-level Policies)
                                 |
                                 |
                                 |
                                 |
        Network                  V                 Network
        Topology ----->     Network-Wide     <---- Status/performance
        Information        Configuration           Information
                                Data
                                 |
                                 |
                                 |
                                 |
                                 V
                          Configuration
                         Data Translator(s)
                                 |
                                 |
                                 |
                                 |
          -------------------------------------------------
          |               |               |               |
        Device          Device          Device          Device
        Local           Local           Local           Local
        Conf(1)         Conf(2)         Conf(3)         Conf(4)

    Figure 2. Propose model for configuring network devices.

    Device local configurations are generated by automated
    configuration data translators and are supplied to each network
    device for enforcement. Note how this model only describes the
    function of the configuration data translators and it does not
    dictate its functional location. This is to say that translators
    may reside outside of the devices (as it was the case in figure 1
    since they were humans) or may be possibly collocated with each
    device.

    As in the previous model, any high-level policy changes (changes
    in the network topology and/or its expected behavior) needs to be
    propagated to all network devices affected by the change. However,
    in the configuration model depicted in figure 2 network operators
    and engineers can specify the behavior of the network in a
    simplified manner reducing the amount of device specific knowledge
    needed.

    One should keep in mind that in some cases per instance device
    local configuration is needed in network devices. An integrated
    solution MUST allow room for this. Also, the introduction of
    automated configuration data translators assumes that all
    information needed to make an error free conversion of
    network-wide configuration data into device-local configuration
    data is available. In the event that such data is not available
    the solution MUST detect this and act accordingly.

Sanchez, McCloghrie, Saperia                                    [page 7]

Internet Draft          expires in January 14, 2001        July 14, 2000


3.0 Requirements for an IP-based Configuration Management System

    The IETF currently agrees upon the following requirements for
    configuration management. An integrated configuration management
    solution MUST:

    1) provide means by which the behavior of the network can be
       specified at a level of abstraction (network-wide
       configuration) higher than a set of configuration information
       specific to individual devices,

    2) be capable of translating network-wide configurations into
       device-local configuration. The identification of the relevant
       subset of the network-wide policies to be down-loaded is
       according to the capabilities of each device,

    3) be able to interpret device-local configuration, status and
       monitoring information within the context of network-wide
       configurations,

    4) be capable of provisioning (e.g., adding, modifying, deleting,
       dumping, restoring) complete or partial configuration data to
       network devices simultaneously or in a synchronized fashion as
       necessary,

    5) provide means by which network devices can send feedback
       information (configuration data confirmation, network status
       and monitoring information, specific events, etc.) to the
       management system,

    6) be capable of provisioning complete or partial configuration
       data to network devices dynamically as a result of network
       specific or network-wide events,

    7) provide efficient and reliable means compared to current
       versions of today's mechanisms (CLI, SNMP) to provision large
       amounts of configuration data,

    8) provide secure means to provision configuration data. The
       system must provide support for access control, authentication,
       integrity-checking, replay- protection and/or privacy security
       services. The minimum level of granularity for access control
       and authentication is host based. The system SHOULD support
       user/role based access control and authentication for users in
       different roles with different access privileges,

    9) provide expiration time and effective time capabilities to
       configuration data. It is required that some configuration data
       items be set to expire, and other items be set to never expire,

   10) provide error detection (including data-specific errors) and
       failure recovery mechanisms (including prevention of
       inappropriately partial configurations when needed) for the
       provisioning of configuration data,

Sanchez, McCloghrie, Saperia                                    [page 8]

Internet Draft          expires in January 14, 2001        July 14, 2000


   11) eliminate the potential for mis-configuration occurring through
       concurrent shared write access to the device's configuration
       data,

   12) provide facilities (with host and user-based authentication
       granularity) to help in tracing back configuration changes,

   13) allow for the use of redundant components, both network
       elements and configuration application platforms, and for the
       configuration of redundant network elements.        

   14) be flexible and extensible to accommodate future
       needs. Configuration management data models are not fixed for
       all time and are subject to evolution like any other management
       data model. It is therefore necessary to anticipate that
       changes will be needed, but it is not possible to anticipate
       what those changes might be.  Such changes could be to the
       configuration data model, supporting message types, data types,
       etc., and to provide mechanisms that can deal with these
       changes effectively without causing inter-operability problems
       or having to replace/update large amounts of fielded networking
       devices,

   15) leverage knowledge of the existing SNMP management
       infrastructure. The system MUST leverage knowledge of and
       experience with MIBs and SMI.

Security Considerations

    This document reflects the current requirements that the IETF
    believes configuration management systems MUST have to properly
    support IP-based networks. The authors believes that a
    configuration management system MUST provide mechanisms by which
    one can ascertain the integrity and authenticity of the
    configuration data at all times. In some cases the privacy of the
    data is important therefore configuration management system MUST
    provide facilities to support this services as required not only
    while the data is stored but also during provisioning or
    reception. Requirements eight and twelve capture the required
    security services.
	 
Acknowledgments

    The authors thank Juergen Schoenwaelder for his contributions to
    this document. The authors also thank Walter Weiss and Andrew
    Smith for providing feedback to early versions of this
    document. Finally, the authors thank the IESG for motivating and
    supporting this work.

References

     [Bra97] Bradner, S., "Key Words for use in RFCs to indicate
     Requirement Levels", RFC2119, March 1997.


Sanchez, McCloghrie, Saperia                                    [page 9]

Internet Draft          expires in January 14, 2001        July 14, 2000


     [COPS] Boyle, J., Cohen, R., Durham, D., Herzog, S., Rajan, R.,
     and A.  Sastry, "The COPS (Common Open Policy Service) Protocol",
     draft-ietf-rap-cops-07.txt, work-in-progress, August 1999.

     [RSVP] Braden, R. ed. et al., "Resource ReSerVation Protocol
     (RSVP) Version 1 - Functional Specification", RFC 2205, September
     1997.

     [COPS-RSVP] Boyle, J., Cohen, R., Durham, D., Herzog, S., Rajan,
     R., and A.  Sastry, "COPS usage for RSVP",
     draft-ietf-rap-cops-rsvp-05.txt, work-in-progress, June 1999.

     [COPS-PROV] Reichmeyer, F., Herzog, S., Chan, K., Durham, D.,
     Yavatkar, R., Gai, S., McCloghrie, K., and A. Smith, "COPS Usage
     for Policy Provisioning", draft-ietf-rap-pr-00.txt,
     work-in-progress, June 1999.

Disclaimer

    The views and specification here are those of the authors and are
    not necessarily those of their employers.  The authors and their
    employers specifically disclaim responsibility for any problems
    arising from correct or incorrect implementation or use of this
    specification.

    Copyright (C) The Internet Society (November 1997).  All
    Rights Reserved.

    This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished
    to others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise
    explain it or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied,
    published and distributed, in whole or in part, without
    restriction of any kind, provided that the above copyright notice
    and this paragraph are included on all such copies and derivative
    works.  However, this document itself may not be modified in any
    way, such as by removing the copyright notice or references to the
    Internet Society or other Internet organizations, except as needed
    for the purpose of developing Internet standards in which case the
    procedures for copyrights defined in the Internet Standards
    process must be followed, or as required to translate it into
    languages other than English. The limited permissions granted above
    are perpetual and will not be revoked by the Internet Society or
    its successors or assigns.

    This document and the information contained herein is provided on
    an "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
    ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR
    IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
    THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
    WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.





Sanchez, McCloghrie, Saperia                                   [page 10]

Internet Draft          expires in January 14, 2001        July 14, 2000


Author Information

    Keith McCloghrie                    Jon Saperia
    Cisco Systems, Inc.                 JDS Consulting, Inc.
    170 West Tasman Drive               174 Chapman Street
    San Jose, CA  95134-1706            Watertown, MA 02472
    USA                                 USA
    Email: kzm@cisco.com                Email: saperia@mediaone.net
    Phone: +1 (408) 526-5260            Telephone: +1 (617) 744-1079

    Luis A. Sanchez
    BBN Technologies
    10 Moulton Street
    Cambridge, MA  02138
    USA
    Email: lsanchez@bbn.com
    Telephone: +1 (617) 873-3351







































Sanchez, McCloghrie, Saperia                                   [page 10]
