



Internet Engineering Task Force                            C. Wendt, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                                   Comcast
Intended status: Informational                           October 8, 2015
Expires: April 10, 2016


                             Verified Token
                     draft-wendt-verified-token-00

Abstract

   This memo defines a token format for verifying with non-repudiation
   the originator of a set of information.  The originator uses a
   cryptographic signature generally with a key that proves
   authorization from a trust anchor to prove to a terminating party
   that the originator is both an authorized sender and the information
   wasn't altered or modified in transit.  The token incorporates the
   ability for the originator to assert a application specific but
   extensible set of information that could include network identity,
   device identity, realm of origin, and other metadata.  Verification
   of this information in the telephony world is important for
   validating telephone calls and the telephone numbers they are
   presenting and can be utilized as an important tool for combat
   spoofing of identity and other forms of impersonation.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 10, 2016.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2015 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.





Wendt                    Expires April 10, 2016                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft               Verified Token                 October 2015


   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Token Overview  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  Verified Token (VT) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     3.1.  Verified Token Header . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     3.2.  Verified Token Claim  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     3.3.  Verified Token Signature  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   4.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     4.1.  Validation of the Issuer and Certificate Signature  . . .   5
     4.2.  Avoidance of replay and cut and paste attacks . . . . . .   5
   5.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   6.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   Appendix A.  Example Usage of Verified Tokens for SIP . . . . . .   7
   Appendix B.  Example Reference Tokens . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7

1.  Introduction

   This document will define a method for the creation and verification
   of an extensible canonical token that is intended for
   cryptographically verifying both an originator, the validity of the
   originator, information associated with a specific transaction and an
   application specific a set of information through digital signatures
   and the associated chain of trust.  A goal of this approach is to be
   implementable in a straight-forward, extensible way.  A second goal
   is to be separable from any specific signaling call logic, so
   creation and verification of information can be implemented in a
   flexible way with minimal dependence on specific signaling
   constructs.  A third goal is to utilize as much as possible existing
   technologies and infrastructure dependency to allow flexible
   deployment strategies.  Deployment specifics will be out of scope for
   this document to allow industry specific solutions for managing PKI
   and other dependencies.







Wendt                    Expires April 10, 2016                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft               Verified Token                 October 2015


2.  Token Overview

   Tokens are a convenient way of encapsulating information with
   associated cryptographic signatures.  They are used in many
   applications that require authentication, authorization, encryption
   and other use cases that involve digital signatures.  JWT [RFC7519]
   and JWS [RFC7515] are designed to provide a compact form for many of
   these purposes and define a specific form for specifying information
   associated with the token and an extensible mechanisms for applying
   digital signatures and the cryptographic algorithms used.  JWT has
   the form "header.claim.signature" and JWS provides standard ways to
   form a digital signature.  Note: In this document, we will focus on
   digital signatures, but JWT and JWS also support HMAC symmetric key
   based algorithms as well.

3.  Verified Token (VT)

   The Verify Token (VT) is constructed based on JWT [RFC7519] and JWS
   [RFC7515] specifications.  JWS defines the use of JSON data
   structures in a specified canonical format for signing data
   corresponding to JOSE header, JWS Payload, and JWS Signature.  JWT
   defines specific set of claims that are represented by specified key
   value pairs which can be extended with custom keys for specific
   applications.

3.1.  Verified Token Header

   The JWS token header is a JOSE header that defines the type and
   encryption algorithm used in the token.  An example of the header for
   the case of a RSASSA-PKCS1-v1_5 SHA-256 digital signature would be
   the following,

               { "typ":"JWT",
                 "alg":"RS256"}

   This represents that the encoded token is a JWT, and the JWT is a JWS
   using the RSASSA-PKCS1-v1_5 SHA-256 algorithm.

   For Verified Token the "typ" header MUST be "JWT".

   Because Verified Token is defined for use with PKI based digital
   signatures, the "alg" header is recommended to be one of the
   following algorithms as defined in JWA [RFC7518]:

   o  RS256

   o  ES256




Wendt                    Expires April 10, 2016                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft               Verified Token                 October 2015


   The "alg" header could optionally be one of the following:

   o  RS384

   o  RS512

   o  ES384

   o  ES512

3.2.  Verified Token Claim

   The token claim should consist of the information which needs to be
   verified at the terminating party.  This claim should correspond to a
   JWT claim [RFC7519] and be encoded as defined by the JWS Payload
   [RFC7515].

   The Verified Token should use a number of standard defined token
   headers as well as some addition custom headers specifically required
   for two party communications with an originator and terminator.
   These headers or key value pairs will be explained here, but some of
   the security implications will be explained further in the security
   considerations section below.

   The JSON claim MUST include the following registered JWT defined
   claims unless noted optional:

   o  "iss" - required - principal that issued and signed the JWT.  This
      is an https URL with the domain of the authorized originator of
      the token (e.g. "https://pstn.example.com)

   o  "jti" - required - unique identifier of the JWT, useful for both
      tracking and avoiding replay of JWT

   o  "iat" - required - issued at, time the JWT was issued, used for
      expiration

   Verified Token specific claims MUST be included unless noted
   optional:

   o  "orig" - required - the identity claimed by the originating party.
      (e.g. for SIP, the FROM or PAI associated e.164 telephone number,
      TEL or SIP URI) This MAY be in URI format as defined in [RFC3986]
      or an application specific identity string.

   o  "term" - required - the terminating identity claimed by the
      originating party. (e.g. for SIP, the TO associated e.164




Wendt                    Expires April 10, 2016                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft               Verified Token                 October 2015


      telephone number, TEL or SIP URI) This MAY be in URI format as
      defined in [RFC3986] or an application specific identity string.

   NOTE: for identities such as SIP URIs where there is a domain
   associated with a user part, i.e. user@domain, the domain in the
   claim, may or may not correspond to either the TO/FROM/PAI and/or the
   "iss".  The determination of the validity of the claimed identity,
   either user part alone or the full user@domain would be up to the
   application.

   An example claim is as follows,

                 { "orig":"+12155551212",
                   "term":"sip:+12155551213@example.com",
                   "iss":"https://pstn.example.com",
                   "jti": "FAhNaPk0onffyJvykJZC2A==",
                   "iat": 1443208345 }


3.3.  Verified Token Signature

   The signature of the verified token is computed fully as specified by
   JWS.

4.  Security Considerations

   There are a number of security considerations required for preventing
   various attacks on the validity or impersonation of the signature.

4.1.  Validation of the Issuer and Certificate Signature

   Use of X.509 based signatures for the JWT implies normal validation
   of the certificate ownership based on the binding of the public key
   certificate to the distinguished name representing the authorized
   originator.  The iss field of the signed claim should also match this
   distinguished name of the certificate used for signing the verified
   token.

4.2.  Avoidance of replay and cut and paste attacks

   There are a number of security considerations for use of the token
   for avoidance of replay and cut and paste attacks.

   Verified tokens must be sent along with other application level
   protocol information (e.g. for SIP an INVITE as defined in
   [RFC3261]).  There should be a link between various information
   provided in the token and information provided by the application
   level protocol information.



Wendt                    Expires April 10, 2016                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft               Verified Token                 October 2015


   These would include:

   o  "iat" claim should closely correspond to a date/time the message
      was originated.  It should also be within a relative delta time
      that is reasonable for clock drift and transmission time
      characteristics associated with the application using the verified
      token.

   o  "jti" claim could be used to exactly correspond to a unique
      identifier (e.g.  INSIPID for SIP)

   o  "term" claim is included to prevent the ability to use a
      previously originated message to send to another terminating party

5.  Acknowledgements

   Particular thanks to members of the ATIS and SIP Forum NNI Task Group
   including Martin Dolly, Richard Shockey, Jim McEchern, John Barnhill,
   Christer Holmberg, Victor Pascual Avila, Mary Barnes, Eric Burger for
   their review, ideas, and contributions also thanks to Henning
   Schulzrinne, Russ Housley, Jon Peterson, Alan Johnston for valuable
   feedback on the technical and security aspects of the document.

   Would also like to acknowledge the RFC4474bis framework for providing
   inspiration on this document particularly the security protection
   aspects.

6.  References

   [RFC3261]  Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston,
              A., Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley, M., and E.
              Schooler, "SIP: Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC3261, June 2002,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3261>.

   [RFC3986]  Berners-Lee, T., Fielding, R., and L. Masinter, "Uniform
              Resource Identifier (URI): Generic Syntax", STD 66, RFC
              3986, DOI 10.17487/RFC3986, January 2005,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3986>.

   [RFC7515]  Jones, M., Bradley, J., and N. Sakimura, "JSON Web
              Signature (JWS)", RFC 7515, DOI 10.17487/RFC7515, May
              2015, <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7515>.

   [RFC7518]  Jones, M., "JSON Web Algorithms (JWA)", RFC 7518, DOI
              10.17487/RFC7518, May 2015,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7518>.




Wendt                    Expires April 10, 2016                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft               Verified Token                 October 2015


   [RFC7519]  Jones, M., Bradley, J., and N. Sakimura, "JSON Web Token
              (JWT)", RFC 7519, DOI 10.17487/RFC7519, May 2015,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7519>.

Appendix A.  Example Usage of Verified Tokens for SIP

   Specific usage of verified tokens shall be defined for various usage,
   however to serve as an example and illustrate the need to link
   certain message metadata for security reasons as discussed in the
   security considerations section above

Appendix B.  Example Reference Tokens

   Example tokens with corresponding certificates and keys to serve as
   test data for reference implementation.

Author's Address

   Chris Wendt (editor)
   Comcast
   One Comcast Center
   Philadelphia, PA  19103
   USA

   Email: chris-ietf@chriswendt.net


























Wendt                    Expires April 10, 2016                 [Page 7]
