
 Internet Draft                                              Eunsook Kim 
 Internet Engineering Task Force                             Jong-Hwa Yi 
 draft-ekim-xcon-cpcp-bb-00.txt                                     ETRI 
 October 2003                                                            
 Expires April 2004                                                      
  
     
           Conference Policy Control Protocol Building Blocks 
                  <draft-ekim-xcon-cpcp-bb-00.txt> 
  
  
 Status of this Memo 
  
     This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
     all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026. 
      
     Internet-Drafts are valid for a maximum of six months and may be 
     updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any time. It 
     is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference material or 
     to cite them other than as a "work in progress". 
      
     The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
     http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt  
     The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
     http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
  
  
 Copyright Notices 
  
    Copyright (c) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved. 
     
     
 Abstract 
  
    In a tightly coupled conference, conference participants can 
    communicate with the conference policy server using a conference 
    policy control protocol (CPCP). This document generally describes 
    how to use CPCP to efficiently provide and augment interaction 
    between clients and conference policy server. This document 
    describes what information is needed for conference policy control, 
    and what operation is needed to manipulate and interact with the 
    policy information. It is noted that the purpose of this draft is 
    not to suggest a new mechanism of CPCP, but to suggest building 
    block approach to CPCP work. 
      
  
  




   
 EKim, et al               Expires April 2004                  [Page 1] 
 INTERNET DRAFT        CPCP Building Block       October 2003 

  
 Table of Contents 
  
    1. Introduction 
    2. Terminology 
    3. Overall Architecture 
    4. Overview of CPCP operations 
    5. Body of CPCP Messages 
    6. Conference Policy Information 
    7. CPCP Operations 
    8. Requirements from other functions 
    9. Security Considerations 
    10. IANA Considerations 
    11. References 
        Acknowledgements 
        Authors' Addresses 
        Full Copyright Statement 
  
  
  
 1. Introduction 
  
    The conferencing framework document [2], which describes overall 
    architectures, terminology, and protocol components needed for 
    multi-party conferencing, defines a conference policy server where 
    conference users can store and manipulate the conference policy. 
     
    There is a unique conference policy for each conference, and the 
    conference policy is represented by a URI. The URI points to a 
    conference policy server. 
     
    The framework document also describes the major conferencing 
    operations, and many of them can be performed by the conference 
    policy control protocol (CPCP): creating conferences, adding 
    participants, conditional joins, removing participants, approving 
    policy changes, destroying conferences, obtaining membership 
    information, adding and removing media. The conference policy is 
    also used by focus to make authorization decisions and guide its 
    overall behavior.  
     
    This document defines general operations of the conference policy 
    control based on the framework and the conference policy 
    requirements documents [3,4]. The clients send conference policy 
    control requests to the conference policy server to manipulate and 
    interact with the conference policy. Then the server responds the 
    requests with corresponding results. The protocol specification is 
    out of the scope of this document. 
     
    This document is intended to continue a discussion to explore 
    standard operations for conference policy control. Please send 
    comments to the mailing list <xcon@ietf.org> 
   
 ekim, et al               Expires April 2004                  [Page 2] 
 INTERNET DRAFT        CPCP Building Block       October 2003 

      
  
 1.1 Conventions of This Document 
  
    The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
    "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in 
    this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119. 
     
  
  
 2. Terminology 
                   
    ACL: Access Control List 
    Chair groups: a group of participants who charge in a conference 
                  and have certain privileges to manipulate the other∆s  
                  privileges 
    CPS: Conference Policy Server 
    participants: conference clients who join a conference 
    users: the same with participants 
     
  
 3. Overall Architecture  
  
  
  
                         +----------------+ 
                         +       CPS      +    +----------+ 
                         +----------------+----+policy DB + 
                         + xcap/soap/etc. +    +----------+ 
                         +----------------+ 
                         + HTTP / others  + 
        +--------+      /+----------------+  
      +--------+ +    /          |           
    +--------+ + +  /CPCP        |           
    + conf.  + +  /              |      
    + client +--/                |         
    +--------+  \                |         
                  \SIP           |          
                   \             |         
                     \+------------+   +-------+ 
                       + Conference +   +       + 
                      +  Server    +---+ mixer + 
                      +  (Focus)   +   +       + 
                      +------------+   +-------+ 
     
     
     
    Conference clients can request to CPS to create a conference, 
    destroy a conference, modify a conference policy data, get 
    membership information, add participants, remove participants, 
    change/add/remove privileges from certain participants by CPCP. 
   
 ekim, et al               Expires April 2004                  [Page 3] 
 INTERNET DRAFT        CPCP Building Block       October 2003 

     
    CPCP is an independent protocol from signaling like SIP or H.323.  
    Each request and response MUST contain XML body, and it can carry 
    on XCAP, SOAP, or other standardized mechanism. (note. if XCON 
    decides a standardized mechanism among them, the architecture will 
    be changed.)  
     
    In SIP based conferencing system, CPS should invoke a focus when 
    there is a request to create a conference. It also SHOULD notify 
    focus of a request asking to invite or eject participants. Focus 
    MAY ask to CPS of authentication of participants. 
     
     
     
 4. Overview of CPCP Operations 
     
    The CPCP operations can categorize by conference management, 
    participant management, privilege management, floor control 
    management and media policy management. 
     
    Each operation contains XML body that includes a unique request id 
    in order to CPS to recognize whether the request is a duplicated 
    one or not. Clients send a request operation with the request id to 
    CPS, and the CPS send a corresponding response operation to the 
    clients with returning the same request id. 
     
    The operations can categorize conference management, participant 
    management, privilege management, floor management, and media 
    management. 
     
    The operations about Conference management perform creation and 
    destruction of a main conference and a sidebar. To create a 
    conference, to terminate a conference, to manipulate conference 
    information, to read conference information, to create a sidebar, 
    and to terminate a sidebar will be included. 
     
    The operations about participant management carry out manipulation 
    of ACL, Char group, or sidebar users. To add users into ACL, to 
    delete users from ACL, to add sidebar participants, to delete 
    sidebar participants, to invite users, to eject users, to add chair 
    group, to delete a chair, to read ACL information, and to read 
    sidebar user information will be performed. The CPS SHOULD notify 
    the conference application server (focus) of invite users and eject 
    users operations, and corresponding call signaling should be 
    followed. 
     
    To give privileges and to withdraw privileges are the operations 
    about privilege management. Each participant has its own privileges 
    and has different role according to the privileges. In an initial 
    state, only a head chair or chair groups have the privilege of 
    giving privileges to other participants. Some special privileges 
   
 ekim, et al               Expires April 2004                  [Page 4] 
 INTERNET DRAFT        CPCP Building Block       October 2003 

    like conference destroying or ejecting participants also are 
    recommended to share only within chair groups.  
     
    Floor control and Media policy managements in CPCP are only related 
    to who have the privileges to manipulate the information. 
     
    When it uses XCAP [9] to carry and process the operations, HTTP 
    commands will deliver requesting XML document. If it uses SOAP to 
    come up with the operation, SOAP commands defined by mapping CPCP 
    will be used. The detail binding behaviors will be described in 
    protocol specification documents. The use of XCAP for CPCP is 
    describing in [8]. 
  
  
  
 5. Body of CPCP messages 
  
    XML document is used for the conference policy control message body. 
    It MUST be based on XML 1.0 and MUST be encoded using UTF-8. The 
    namespace URI for elements defined by this specification is a URN 
    [5], using the namespace identifier 'ietf' defined by [6] and 
    extended by [7]. This URN is: 
     
    urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:conference-policy 
     
    A conference policy document begins with the root element tag, 
    Êconference-policy∆.  
     
    General conference information, participants list and information, 
    privileges list, floor control or media policy data will be 
    included in the body. Each operation can use a single element or 
    multiple elements. 
     
  
  
 6. Conference Policy information 
  
    This chapter describes the detail elements of the conference policy 
    information. A conference is described as a 'conference-policy' 
    element. The corresponding XML schema is described as following: 
     
    <xs:element name="conference-policy"> 
      <xs:complexType name="conference"> 
        <xs:sequence> 
         <xs:element name="conference-management" minOccurs="0"/> 
         <xs:element name="participant-management" minOccurs="0"/> 
         <xs:element name="sidebar-management" minOccurs="0"/> 
         <xs:element name="floor-manangement" minOccurs="0"/> 
         <xs:element name="media-management" minOccurs="0"/> 
        </xs:sequence> 

   
 ekim, et al               Expires April 2004                  [Page 5] 
 INTERNET DRAFT        CPCP Building Block       October 2003 

        <xs:attribute name="conf-id" type="xs:nonNegativeInteger" 
    use="required"/> 
      </xs:complexType> 
    </xs:element> 
     
     
 6.1 General conference information  
  
    The element of general conference information will be used for the 
    operations of conference management - create or terminate a 
    conference, or create or terminate a sidebar. Participants 
    authenticated also can request to read the conference information. 
     
    It contains conference URI, conference display name, Subject, 
    Keyword, language, conference type, security policy, conference 
    time, maximum number of participants, media information, and chair 
    information. Other features MAY be extended. 
     
    The conference display name and conference subject stand for the 
    name and the subject of the conference, respectively.  
     
    The optional element, conference type describes the type of the 
    conference model: 'open', 'closed static', 'closed dynamic'. Each 
    value contains the following meaning: 
     
    * open conference: everyone can join a conference without  
                       restriction 
    * closed conference: only pre-determined, pre-announced users 
                    determined during runtime can join a session 
        - static model: the group of participants does not change  
                        during runtime of the session. 
        - dynamic model: the group of participants might change during 
     
    In security policy, it is announced which security mechanism is 
    used. 'TLS', 'SMIME', 'authentication mechanism', and 'password' 
    can be listed. 'authentication mechanism' may have three types: 
    'string', 'digest', and 'none'. 
     
    The element of conference time is for reporting runtime of the 
    session. It can be expressed with 'start time' and 'end time' 
    describing when the conference will be started and terminated.  
     
    Maximum number of Participants defines how many users can take part 
    in the conference at the same time. It would be set by 
    consideration of capacity of video handling. 
     
    The element of media information has the type 'mideaType', 
    consisted of audio, video, wb, and text. It defines which media 
    will be used in the conference.  
     

   
 ekim, et al               Expires April 2004                  [Page 6] 
 INTERNET DRAFT        CPCP Building Block       October 2003 

    The chair information defines who charge the conference. It 
    describes a user or user group having special privileges to access 
    conference policy information. Depends on conference policy, only 
    chair group may change conference policy data or privileges of the 
    other users, and eject other participants.  
     
     
 6.2 Participants information 
  
    Conference participants consist of ACL (Access Control List), Chair 
    group, and sidebar users. Each user MUST be identified with a 
    unique URI, and MAY have display name. It has certain privileges by 
    user type.  
     
  
 6.2.1 privileges information 
     
    Privileges to manipulate the conference policy data are listed as 
    following: 
     
        Right to destroy the ongoing conference 
        Right to modify the conference policy 
        Right to read the conference policy information 
        Right to add a user in ACL 
        Right to expel a user from the conference 
        Right to modify chair group information 
        Right to add a user to the chair group 
        Right to expel a chair from the chair group 
        Right to award privileges to others 
        Right to withdraw privileges from others 
        Right to manage media policy 
        Right to manage floor control policy 
        Right to control sidebars 
         
     
    They are assigned to the conference participants. It can be 
    modified during the conference. 
  
  
 6.4 floor-control information 
     
    The information is not about operations of floor-control, but those 
    who have privileges of floor control.  
     
    TBD 
  
  
 6.5 media-control information 
     
    The information is not about operations of media-control, but media 
    server information and those who have privileges of media control.  
   
 ekim, et al               Expires April 2004                  [Page 7] 
 INTERNET DRAFT        CPCP Building Block       October 2003 

     
    TBD 
  
  
 7. CPCP Operations  
  
    The clients send conference control requests to the CPS to 
    manipulate and interact with the conference policy. Then the server 
    responds the requests with corresponding results. 
     
     
    The major conferencing operations can categorize by conference 
    management, membership management, media management and floor 
    management operations. 
     
    Operations performed for conference management can include creating 
    and destroying conferences, approving policy changes, creating and 
    destroying sidebar, creating and destroying cascading conference, 
    and notifying for cascading conference. 
     
    Membership management operations can cover of adding, removing, 
    blocking or ejecting participants, of requesting conditional joins, 
    and obtaining membership information. Manipulating user privileges 
    is also included in the membership management operations.  
     
    Media management operations are about adding and removing media, 
    granting media change, and changing media policy.  
     
    Floor management operations handle requesting and granting floor, 
    and manipulating floor controller. 
     
     
    About clients' requests from the above operations, the server MUST 
    response the results with the corresponding return value such as a 
    new conference URI for a request of creating a conference. When it 
    fails, it will return error code with reason of user terminated, 
    media connection failure, internal error, registration failure, 
    authorization failure, no resources, bad or missing parameter, no 
    permission, or not found the requested XML.  
     
     
 7.1 Operations of conference management 
     
 7.1.1 Create conference 
  
    Every user who is authenticated by the CPS can issue this operation.  
    The operation contains an XML instance derived from the defined XML 
    schema explained in chapter 5. 
     
    For a conference, 'conf-URI' MUST be unique, and it MUST be a valid 
    SIP or SIPS URI. 
   
 ekim, et al               Expires April 2004                  [Page 8] 
 INTERNET DRAFT        CPCP Building Block       October 2003 

     
    When a client sends the operation, CPS creates a 'conf-URI' and 
    sends the client the URI, indicating a focus address. The CPS 
    initiates the focus, as well. 
     
    Clients MAY request the operation with a 'conf-URI', which they 
    eager to use. If the requested URI has no error or causes any 
    conflict, CPS MAY accept the requested URI. 
     
     
 7.1.2 Destroy conference 
     
    When a conference is destroyed, the conference and media policies 
    associated with it are destroyed. If there are still participants 
    in the conference, only authorized chair group MUST issue this 
    operation. 
     
    The destroy conference command takes one mandatory element, 'conf-
    URI' and an optional element, 'conf-name'. The response of the 
    command is indicating whether the conference has been successfully 
    destroyed or not.  
     
     
 7.1.3 Read conference policy information 
  
    This operation is for obtaining the conference policy information, 
    such as the general information of the conference, access control 
    list, the current member list, or the chair group list in a 
    conference, etc. The corresponding response will be returned 
    containing in a XML body. 
  
  
 7.2 Operations of membership management 
  
 7.2.1 Add users in ACL 
  
    This operation is for adding one or more users in the access 
    control list (ACL) in a conference. An authorized client can 
    specify any SIP URI that is to be added, if it is not already in 
    the participants list.  
     
    The XML body contains the 'conf-URI' identifying the conference, 
    and the target 'SIP-URI' identifying the will-be-added user. The 
    response of the operation is indicating whether the users has been 
    successfully added or not to the ACL. The CPS SHOULD inform of this 
    request to the focus in order to trigger INVITE message to the 
    targeted user. 
  
  
 7.2.2 Eject Users from a conference 
  
   
 ekim, et al               Expires April 2004                  [Page 9] 
 INTERNET DRAFT        CPCP Building Block       October 2003 

    The authorized chair group members only allow executing this 
    operation.  
    The XML body contains the 'conf-URI' identifying the conference, 
    and the target 'SIP-URI' identifying the will-be-expelled user. The 
    response of the operation is indicating whether the users has been 
    successfully ejected or not from the ACL. The CPS SHOULD inform of 
    this request to the focus in order to trigger BYE message to the 
    targeted user.  
  
       
 7.2.3 Award user privileges  
  
    This operation is executed to changes the privileges of the 
    specified users. Only authorized members can issue this operation. 
     
    It carry the 'target-user' indicating one ore more target users who 
    will get the privileges and 'privilege types', defining the type of 
    privileges. The response of the command is indicating whether the 
    requested changes have been successfully performed or not.  
  
    TBD 
     
     
 7.2.4 Withdraw user privileges  
  
  
    This operation requests to hand off the privileges of the specified 
    users. Only authorized members can issue this command. 
     
    The parameters and usage of this operation are the same with the 
    operation of awarding user privileges. The only difference is that 
    it is used for take away the privileges from the 'target-user'. The 
    response of the command is indicating whether the privileges have 
    been successfully deprived or not.  
     
    TBD 
     
     
 7.3 Operations of media management 
  
    TBD 
     
     
 7.5 Operations of floor management 
  
    TBD 
     
     
     
 8. Security Considerations  
  
   
 ekim, et al               Expires April 2004                 [Page 10] 
 INTERNET DRAFT        CPCP Building Block       October 2003 

    Conference policy servers MUST use appropriate authentication to 
    ensure the commands to manipulate or interact the conference policy 
    data originated from trusted parties. Other SIP considerations 
    apply [1]. The further concerned security issues will be identified 
    as the further works go on. 
  
  
 9. IANA considerations 
  
    The following URN sub-namespace should be registered.  
     
    URI: urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:conference-policy 
     
     
     
     
 10. References 
  
    [1] J. Rosenberg, H. Schulzrinne, et al, "SIP: Session Initiation 
        Protocol, " RFC3261, Internet Engineering Task Force, Jun. 2002. 
     
    [2] J. Rosenberg, "A framework for conferencing with the session 
        initiation protocol," Internet Draft, Internet Engineering Task 
        Force, Feb. 2003. Work in progress. 
     
    [3] P. Koskelainen, "Requirements for conference policy protocol," 
        Internet Draft, Internet Engineering Task Force, June 2003. 
        Work in progress. 
     
    [4] O. Levin, "Conference Policy Control Protocol for Centralized 
        Conferencing," Internet Draft, Internet Engineering Task Force, 
        June 2003. Work in progress. 
      
    [5] R. Moats, "URN syntax, " RFC2141, Internet Engineering Task 
        Force, May 1997. 
     
    [6] R. Moats, "A URN namespace for IETF documents, " RFC2648, 
        Internet Engineering Task Force, Aug. 1999. 
     
    [7] M. Mealling, "The IETF XML registry, " Internet Draft, Internet 
        Engineering Task Force, Jul. 2002. Work in progress. 
     
    [8] P. Koskelainen, H. Khartabil, "An Extensible Markup Language 
        (XML) Configuration Access Protocol (XCAP) Usage for Conference 
        Policy Manipulation, " Internet Draft, Internet Engineering 
        Task Force, June. 2003. Work in progress. 
     
    [9] J. Rosenburg, "The Extensible Markup Language (XML) 
        Configuration Access Protocol (XCAP), " IETF Internet Draft, 
        Jun. 2003. Work in progress. 
     
   
 ekim, et al               Expires April 2004                 [Page 11] 
 INTERNET DRAFT        CPCP Building Block       October 2003 

     
     
     
     
     
     
     
 Acknowledgement 
  
    The CPCP draft by O. Levin, and the CPCP requirement by P. 
    Koskelainen give good motivation and information to write this 
    draft.  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 Authors' Addresses 
  
          Eunsook Kim 
          eunah@etri.re.kr 
          361 Gajeong-Dong Yuseong-Gu, Deajon 305-350, Korea 
           
          Jong-Hwa Yi 
          jhyiee@etri.re.kr 
          361 Gajeong-Dong Yuseong-Gu, Deajon 305-350, Korea 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 Full Copyright Statement 
  
  Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003).  All Rights Reserved. 
  
  This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
  others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 
  or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published 
  and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any 
  kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are 
  included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this 
  document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
  the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
  Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
  developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for 
  copyrights defined in the Internet languages other than English. 
  
   
 ekim, et al               Expires April 2004                 [Page 12] 
 INTERNET DRAFT        CPCP Building Block       October 2003 

  The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be 
  revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns. 
  
  This document and the information contained herein is provided on an 
  "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING 
  TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING 
  BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION 
  HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF 
  MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
  









































   
 ekim, et al               Expires April 2004                 [Page 13] 
