              draft-caviglia-ccamp-pc-spc-grsvpte-ext-00 February 2007 
 
 
   Network Working Group                                                
   Internet Draft                                        Diego Caviglia 
                                                             (Ericsson) 
                                                          Dino Bramanti 
                                                             (Ericsson) 
                                                        Dan Li (Huawei) 
                                                                        
   Document: draft-caviglia-ccamp-pc-spc-grsvpte-ext-00                 
   Proposed Status: Updates RFC 3473                                    
   Expires: July 2007                                    February 2007 
    
    
     GRSVP-TE Signaling Extension For The Conversion Between Permanent 
       Connections And Soft Permanent Connections In A GMPLS enabled 
                             Transport Network 
    
    
    
Status of this Memo 
 
   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any 
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware 
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes 
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79. 
 
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet- 
   Drafts. 
 
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
 
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt. 
 
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
 
   This Internet-Draft will expire on July 19, 2007. 
 
Copyright Notice 
 
 
 
Caviglia et al.         Expires - August 2007                [Page 1] 
              draft-caviglia-ccamp-pc-spc-grsvpte-ext-00 February 2007 
 
 
   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007). 
    
Abstract 
    
   In a transport network scenario, where Data Plane connections 
   controlled either by GMPLS (Soft Permanent Connections - SPC) or by 
   Management System (Permanent Connections - PC) may independently 
   coexist, the ability of transforming an existing PC into a SPC and 
   vice versa - without actually affecting Data Plane traffic being 
   carried over it - is a valuable option. This applies especially when 
   a GMPLS based Control Plane is first introduced into an existing 
   network and there may be the need, from a Carrier point of view, to 
   pass under GMPLS control existing connections already set up over 
   Data Plane. In other terms, such operation could be seen as a way of 
   transferring the ownership and control of an existing and in-use Data 
   Plane connection between the Management Plane and the Control Plane, 
   leaving its Data Plane state untouched. 
   This memo provides a minor extension to GRSVP-TE signaling protocol, 
   within GMPLS architecture, to enable such transfer of ownership and 
   describes the proposed procedures. 
    
    
Conventions used in this document 
                                                                   
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [i]. 
    
    
Table of Contents 
    
   1. Introduction...................................................3 
   2. Motivation.....................................................3 
   3. Overview Of Proposed GRSVP-TE Based Solution...................3 
   4. LSP Control Handover Procedure Between Management And Control 
   Planes............................................................4 
      4.1 MP to CP handover: LSP Ownership Transfer From Management 
      Plane To Control Plane.........................................5 
      4.2 MP to CP Handover Procedure Failure Handling...............8 
      4.3 CP to MP handover - LSP Ownership Transfer From Control Plane 
      To     Management Plane........................................8 
      4.4 CP to MP Handover Procedure Failure Handling...............9 
   5. Alternative Way Of Retrieving Information Needed For MP To CP 
   Handover..........................................................9 
   6. RSVP Message Formats..........................................10 
      6.1 Objects Modification......................................11 
   7. Security Considerations.......................................11 
   8. IANA Consideration............................................11 

 
 
Caviglia et al.         Expires - August 2007                [Page 2] 
              draft-caviglia-ccamp-pc-spc-grsvpte-ext-00 February 2007 
 
 
   9. Normative References..........................................11 
   10. Informative References.......................................12 
   11. Acknowledgments..............................................12 
   12. Author's Addresses...........................................12 
    
    
1.   Introduction 
    
   In a typical, traditional transport network scenario, Data Plane 
   connections between two endpoints are controlled basically by means 
   of a Network Management System (NMS) operating within Management 
   Plane (MP). NMS/MP is the owner of such transport connections, being 
   responsible of their set up, tear down and maintenance. The adoption 
   of a GMPLS Control Plane over networks that are already in service - 
   controlled by NMS at Management Plane level - introduces the need for 
   a procedure able to coordinate a control handover of a generic data 
   plane connection from MP to CP. In addition, the control handover in 
   the opposite direction, from CP to MP should be possible as well.   
    
    
2.   Motivation 
    
   The main motivation behind this work is the definition of a simple 
   and very low impacting procedure that satisfies the requirements 
   defined in [8]. Such procedure is aimed at giving the transport 
   network operators the chance to convert existing LSP provisioned as 
   PC by NMS to SPC without disrupting user traffic flowing on it. 
   Conversion from PC to SPC (i.e. when existing data plane connection 
   ownership and control is passed from MP to CP) has been proposed as 
   mandatory requirement, while the opposite operation, SPC to SC 
   conversion, has been considered as a nice-to-have feature that can be 
   seen as a back-out option. 
   For more details on requirements and motivations please refer to [8]. 
 
    
    
3.   Overview Of Proposed GRSVP-TE Based Solution  
    
   Proposed procedure requires, as the only tiny modification to 
   standard GRSVP-TE signalling, the utilization of a newly introduced 
   flag, here named Handover flag, in the Administrative Status Object 
   (RFC 3471[4] and RFC 3473 [5]).  
   The point is that standard GRSVP-TE signaling flow can be used to 
   inform nodes about the ownership handover request regarding one LSP 
   that is already in place on their data plane, where such flow has to 
   be flagged in order to discriminate it from normal LSP setup/release 
   procedure. When a LSP owned by Management Plane (i.e. a PC) has to be 
   handed over to Control Plane (i.e. converted into a SPC), a signaling 
   set-up with HANDOVER flag set has to be sent from ingress node.  
 
 
Caviglia et al.         Expires - August 2007                [Page 3] 
              draft-caviglia-ccamp-pc-spc-grsvpte-ext-00 February 2007 
 
 
    
   For the opposite procedure (when a LSP owned and controlled by 
   Control Plane has to be handed over to Management Plane, i.e. SPC to 
   PC conversion - or back out procedure for previous case) a signaling 
   tear-down with HANDOVER flag set has to be sent from ingress or 
   egress node, following the same procedure of a normal tear-down, from 
   which is recognizable again by reading flag value. 
    
   So, basically the HANDOVER flag is introduced and exploited to tell 
   apart a normal set-up (or tear-down) procedure - that has to trigger 
   an action on data plane state at each addressed node along the path 
   as usual - from the LSP ownership handover procedure that MUST leave 
   untouched data plane state.   
    
   This is in some way similar as an approach to the Restart Procedure, 
   (Section 4.3 RFC 3473 [5]), in the sense that the status of the 
   physical resources at Data Plane has to stay unmodified but the 
   associated information allowing its control has to be transferred.  
   The modification proposed in this document refers only to 
   Administrative Status object, that is, the message flow is left 
   unmodified for both set-up and deletion. 
    
   It is worth stressing that, when the LSP over data plane is adopted 
   either by CP or MP, i.e. at the end of signaling with Handover flag 
   set, normal CP procedures or MP procedures have to take their place 
   as usual when needed. This means that a LSP formerly owned by MP, 
   signalled within CP with Handover flag set (i.e. handed over to CP) 
   can be controlled by usual relevant Control Plane signaling flows 
   (i.e. with Handover flag not set). The same applies when considering 
   the handover of a LSP from CP to MP when, at the end of procedure, 
   the LSP belongs to Management Plane and can be fully controlled by 
   NMS. In other words, after the LSP handover procedures have taken 
   place, the LSP is not different from the other LSP owned by handover 
   destination entity and it has to be treated with usual rules for that 
   entity. 
    
   Following paragraphs give detailed description of proposed "MP to CP 
   handover" and "CP to MP handover" procedure, focussing based on 
   Handover flag usage. Handover of a bidirectional LSP is assumed. The 
   case of unidirectional LSP can be easily derived from that. 
    
    
4.   LSP Control Handover Procedure Between Management And Control Planes 
    
   The procedure described below implies that Resv Confirm message in 
   LSP setup signaling flow SHOULD be supported in order to manage at 
   best LSP Ownership Handover procedure between Control and Management 
   planes. If Resv Confirm is not present in message set used for LSP 
   setup, the procedure below is still applicable using the simple 
 
 
Caviglia et al.         Expires - August 2007                [Page 4] 
              draft-caviglia-ccamp-pc-spc-grsvpte-ext-00 February 2007 
 
 
   Path/Resv sequence (with handover flag set as detailed in the 
   following). In such a case, handover related operations that are 
   described as triggered by reception of Resv Confirm, MUST be executed 
   at the reception of Resv message. 
    
    
4.1     MP to CP handover: LSP Ownership Transfer From Management Plane To 
    Control Plane 
    
   Let's consider the case of a Data Plane connection between two nodes 
   acting as ingress and egress for a LSP. Let's assume that Management 
   Plane has the ownership and control of the LSP and that we want to 
   hand it over to Control Plane. 
   At the ingress node NMS initiates the transfer of LSP related 
   information residing within Management Plane to GRSVP-TE records 
   within Control Plane. We assume that this happens under operator or 
   management application control and in particular that: 
    
   - Control requests are sent to the ingress LSR by the MP 
    
   - The MP has some way of knowing when the CP has completed its task 
     or has failed. 
 
   Ingress node collects from MP all the LSP related information needed 
   at Control Plane level. The way this operation is done and where such 
   information is collected within MP is outside the scope of this memo. 
   A relevant part of such information is represented by the LSP path, 
   which has to be handed over to CP to be used by signaling entity to 
   fill the Explicit Route Object (ERO) during setup. 
   In order to support the MP to CP handover of LSP, the ERO object in 
   the Path message MUST be filled with all the LSP relevant information 
   down to the Label level.  That can be done by means of the object and 
   procedures defined in [5]. 
   The precise filling of the ERO object is needed as we are assuming 
   that the LSP already exists in data plane and that every signaling 
   relevant info about it is available and accessible to MP in terms of 
   required LSP parameters to build a GRSVP-TE PATH message. After the 
   collection of all the LSP related information, the ingress node 
   issues a GRSVP-TE PATH message including the Administrative Status 
   Object with HANDOVER flag set. 
   Upon reception of such GRSVP-TE PATH, a node MUST be able to 
   understand that a MP to CP handover procedure is in progress by 
   reading the Handover flag. 
   Either the ingress node of the LSP (upon request from MP) and 
   intermediate and egress nodes (when receiving a Path message 
   containing an Administrative Status object with the Handover flag 
   set) is informed about the fact that a LSP adoption procedure is 
   requested or ongoing. The node assumes that a Data Plane resource 
   related to the info carried in Path Message is already allocated and 
 
 
Caviglia et al.         Expires - August 2007                [Page 5] 
              draft-caviglia-ccamp-pc-spc-grsvpte-ext-00 February 2007 
 
 
   in place. The node SHOULD check however the consistence of the actual 
   Data Plane status of such resource: 
    
   - If the check goes OK, then a GRSVP-TE record for the LSP is 
     created associating it to the corresponding Data Plane state. The 
     node accepts all the LSP information carried in PATH (if the node 
     is not ingress of the LSP, otherwise the information is sent from 
     relevant MP entity) and stores it in Path State Block. After that, 
     the procedure goes on as described below. 
    
   - If the check goes NOT OK, that is actual Data Plane state for the 
     indicated resource is different from the one indicated in the Path 
     message, then: 
 
        o A PathErr with Path State Removed flag set should be generated 
 
        o GMPLS Control Plane state information about it is not accepted 
          by the handover destination entity 
 
    
   In both cases, no operation is done over Data Plane. In case of 
   positive check, no change is required at that level since the 
   connection is already set up and in service. In case of negative 
   check, a mismatch or some other error has occurred and no LSP control 
   handover is possible. The procedure rolls back and information 
   transfer process from MP to CP at ingress node of the LSP has to be 
   fixed and reinitiated. A node participating in a MP to CP handover 
   procedure MUST in fact keep track of the special 'handover' condition 
   of the LSP involved, by retaining handover flag status within GRSVP-
   TE records. 
   This is important because during handover procedure no other Data 
   Plane, Control Plane or Management Plane action has to be taken on 
   the LSP outside the control of the procedure itself. Such special 
   state regarding the involved LSP has to be retained until the 
   procedure itself has correctly ended. 
   After propagating handover Path, a node MUST wait for a Resv message 
   including Administrative Status Object with handover flag set. After 
   receiving it, the actual migration of LSP information is complete. 
   However, Handover flag is cleared in Path/Resv state block of the 
   involved LSP, only by reception of ResvConfirm message (or Resv 
   message, if ResvConfirm is not supported). After the flag is cleared, 
   the LSP is left completely under control of GRSVP- TE within Control 
   Plane. This means that any memory about the former MP ownership of 
   the LSP is lost. 
   The following example covers all possible MP to CP Handover 
   scenarios, either in case of success or failure. In the example we 
   assume that Data Plane connection, whose control and control 
   information has to be handed over from MP to CP, is TDM based (either 
   SDH or SONET). A more generic case, where the Data Plane resource 
 
 
Caviglia et al.         Expires - August 2007                [Page 6] 
              draft-caviglia-ccamp-pc-spc-grsvpte-ext-00 February 2007 
 
 
   making up the LSP is not tied to a specific technology, can easily be 
   derived from this one. The table refers to possible cases when a node 
   at CP level has received LSP information provided by MP and verifies 
   if handover is feasible. 
    
   Let's consider a LSP over the network, connecting a ingress node I 
   with an egress node E. Let's call timeslot A and B the Data Plane 
   resources referred by control information involved in Handover in a 
   given node traversed by the LSP. This means that Handover flagged 
   signaling refers to A-B cross-connection over Data Plane. 
   The ingress node initiates the procedure upon request from Management 
   Plane. The way LSP related information is passed from MP to ingress 
   node is outside the scope of this procedure description. 
   Intermediates nodes and egress node receive the request for LSP 
   adoption and the information needed for the operation from Handover 
   flagged GRSVP-TE signaling. 
   The symbol <----> in table below indicates that the two Timeslots 
   involved in Data Plane cross-connection are actually cross-connected 
   over Data Plane, hence Data Plane state corresponds to the indication 
   provided by LSP data held by MP and in the process of being handed 
   over to CP. 
    
         |Actual Data|Control Plane  |Management Plane|Data Plane 
         |Plane State|LSP data record|LSP data record |Resources check 
   Case 1|  A<---->B |No info yet    |MP expects A-B  |OK to MP to CP 
         |           |               |                |LSP handover 
   Case 2|  A<---->C |No info yet    |MP expects A-B  |NOT OK for MP to 
         |           |               |                |CP LSP handover 
    
   Case 1: 
   - LSP info from Management Plane to be used for LSP control hand 
     over to GRSVP-TE matches Data Plane state in terms of involved 
     resources 
   - LSP data record is not owned yet by Control Plane, hence LSP 
     control is still up to MP 
   - Checks are OK, so GRSVP-TE state (related to involved LSP) is 
     associated to Data Plane state after Handover flagged signaling 
     flow (Path/Resv/Resv Confirm with Handover flag set) has ended. 
   - At the end of signaling the LSP is completely under CP control. 
   - No actions are taken in the Data Plane. 
    
    
   Case 2: 
   - LSP info from Management Plane to be used for LSP control hand 
     over to GRSVP-TE doesn't match Data Plane state in terms of 
     involved resources. 
   - Control Plane does not own LSP data record yet; hence LSP control 
     is still up to MP. 
 
 
Caviglia et al.         Expires - August 2007                [Page 7] 
              draft-caviglia-ccamp-pc-spc-grsvpte-ext-00 February 2007 
 
 
   - Checks are NOT OK. A-B connection is not actually present over 
     Data Plane and indicated resources are used within other context 
     (A is x-connected to C). 
   - GRSVP-TE state (related to involved LSP) is not associated to the 
     cross connection after Handover flagged Path message. 
   - A PathErr with Path State Removed flag set MUST be sent Upstream. 
   - LSP ownership remains completely under MP control. Handover has 
     failed. 
   - No actions are taken in the Data Plane. 
    
    
4.2     MP to CP Handover Procedure Failure Handling 
    
   When a mismatch is detected between LSP information owned by MP (and 
   going to be handed over to CP) and the actual Data Plane state 
   corresponding to that LSP, actions have to be taken to roll back the 
   LSP ownership handover correctly. 
   If such mismatch is detected at LSP ingress node, the issue has to be           
   resolved directly between ingress node and MP designed entity and 
   this lies outside the scope of this memo. No Control plane signaling 
   is involved yet at this stage. 
   If the mismatch is detected at intermediate or egress nodes, when the 
   LSP control information arrives at the node via handover flagged Path 
   message, the node MUST reject it by issuing PathErr with Path State 
   Removed towards the ingress node. In such a way the procedure is 
   interrupted at that node, upstream nodes are informed and no changes 
   are done over control and Data Plane. When a node receives PathErr 
   with Path State Removed referred to a LSP, whose data record at CP 
   has handover flag set (being in 'handover state'), it MUST clear such 
   LSP data record and propagate the PathErr message upstream. 
   No Data Plane actions have to be taken in this case as well. 
   The same applies to PathTear message. 
    
    
4.3     CP to MP handover - LSP Ownership Transfer From Control Plane To     
    Management Plane 
    
   Let's now consider the case of LSP Ownership Transfer From Control 
   Plane To Management Plane. The scenario is still a Data Plane 
   connection between two nodes acting as ingress and egress for a LSP. 
   But let's assume in this case that Control Plane has the ownership 
   and control of the LSP and that we want to hand it over to Management 
   Plane. This means that at the end of such procedure, the Data Plane 
   state related to that connection is still untouched, but the LSP 
   related information record is no more owned by GRSVP-TE over Control 
   Plane. 
   In other words, after LSP ownership transfer from CP to MP, the LSP 
   is no more under control of GRSVP-TE, which is no more able to "see" 
   the LSP itself. This Section covers the procedure needed to manage 
 
 
Caviglia et al.         Expires - August 2007                [Page 8] 
              draft-caviglia-ccamp-pc-spc-grsvpte-ext-00 February 2007 
 
 
   this procedure as a dual, opposite procedure respect to the one 
   described in previous section.  
   The procedure is performed at a signaling level as described in 
   Section 7.2.1 of the RFC 3473 [5]. 
    
   At LSP ingress node, relevant MP entity requests the ownership of the 
   LSP, How this is done is outside the scope of memo. Ingress node and 
   MP exchange the relevant information for this task and then 
   propagates it over Control Plane by means of GRSVP-TE tear down 
   signaling flow as detailed below. 
   Ingress node MUST send out a Path Down message, with Handover and 
   Reflect bits in Admin Status set. No action is taken over Data Plane 
   and Control Plane keeps track of special handover state the LSP is 
   in. 
   Transit and Egress nodes, upon reception of such handover Path Down, 
   propagate it without any Data Plane action, retaining the handover 
   state information associated to the LSP. After that, every node waits 
   until the Handover bit is received back in the Resv. Then a PathTear 
   is issued and the whole LSP information record is cleared from GRSVP-
   TE data structures. In other words, a normal LSP tear down signaling 
   is exchanged between nodes traversed by the LSP, but handover flag 
   set in Path Down message indicates that no Data Plane action has to 
   correspond to Control Plane signaling. At the end of handover tear 
   down signaling flow, the LSP is released from Control Plane point of 
   view, but its Data Plane state is still unmodified and it is now 
   owned and controllable by MP. 
    
    
4.4     CP to MP Handover Procedure Failure Handling 
    
   Failures during CP to MP handover procedure MUST be managed at 
   signaling level as in normal LSP tear down procedure. The only 
   difference is the handover flag set in Administrative Status Object 
   inside Path Down message which MUST be read by receiving node and 
   imposes that no action has to be made over Data Plane resource whose 
   corresponding Control Plane record is involved in handover procedure. 
    
    
5.   Alternative Way Of Retrieving Information Needed For MP To CP 
   Handover 
    
   An alternative way of getting the LSP related information required 
   for the MP to CP handover is also proposed in this draft. The 
   rationale behind this way is that only a minimal set of information 
   is handed over from MP to CP at LSPs Ingress node. Instead of 
   collecting within MP all the LSP relevant information down to the 
   Label level, formatting it to an ERO and passing it to CP, as in 
   previously described solution, it is possible to start with a minimum 
   amount of information. At the ingress node, the information needed to 
 
 
Caviglia et al.         Expires - August 2007                [Page 9] 
              draft-caviglia-ccamp-pc-spc-grsvpte-ext-00 February 2007 
 
 
   specify the LSP is the outgoing interface ID, upstream label and 
   downstream label of this interface and the incoming interface ID of 
   egress node. The remaining information about an existing LSP can then 
   be collected hop by hop, as the signalling is going on, by looking up 
   the cross-connection table in data plane at each node along the LSP 
   path.  
    
   Starting from the information available at ingress TNE about the 
   outgoing interface ID of that ingress node, the incoming interface ID 
   of next hop can be found by looking up the link resource 
   table/database in TNE itself. Following the similarity existing 
   between the MP to CP handover procedure and the Restart Procedure, 
   the Recovery Label Object MUST be used to carry the downstream label 
   and the Upstream Label Object MUST be used to carry the upstream 
   label to the next node.  
   The Path message is hence built with the Recovery Label Object (RFC 
   3473[5]) and the Upstream Label Object (RFC 3473[5]), where the 
   upstream label and downstream label of ingress outgoing interface of 
   the LSP are included in these two objects. In addition to above 
   mentioned objects, the Path message MUST include the Administrative 
   Status Object with HANDOVER flag set, as already defined in previous 
   chapter for the detailed ERO based way of proceeding. Such handover 
   Path is sent to the incoming interface of next hop. When this Path 
   message reaches the second node along the LSP path, the information 
   about incoming interface ID and the upstream and downstream labels of 
   this interface is extracted from it and it is used to find next hop 
   outgoing interface ID and the upstream/ downstream labels by looking 
   up the data plane cross-connection table. After having determined in 
   this way the parameters describing the LSPs next hop, the outgoing 
   Path message to be sent is built replacing the Recovery Label Object 
   and Upstream Label Object content with the looked-up values of 
   upstream and downstream labels. Re-iterating this procedure for each 
   transit node along the LSP path, it is possible to make the handover 
   Path message reach the egress node, exactly following the LSP that is 
   in place over data plane. The ERO MAY in this case be included in the 
   Path message as an optional object, and MAY be filled with the LSP 
   relevant information down to either the port level with interface ID 
   or the Label level with upstream and downstream labels. The ERO can 
   be used to check the consistence of resource in data plane down to 
   the port level or label level at each intermediate node along the LSP 
   path. 
    
    
6.   RSVP Message Formats 
    
   This memo does not introduce any modification in RSVP messages. 
    
    

 
 
Caviglia et al.         Expires - August 2007               [Page 10] 
              draft-caviglia-ccamp-pc-spc-grsvpte-ext-00 February 2007 
 
 
6.1    Objects Modification 
    
   This memo introduces a new flag into the Administrative Status 
   object. 
   The Admin_Status Object is defined in RFC 3473 [5]. 
   This document uses the H-bit of the Admin_Status object. The bit is 
   bit number (TBD by IANA). 
    
   Handover signaling (H): 1 bit 
    
   When set, indicates that a Handover procedure for the transfer of LSP 
   ownership between Management and Control Planes is ongoing . 
    
    
7.   Security Considerations 
    
   The procedures described in this document rely completely on GRSVP-TE 
   messages and mechanism. The use of Handover Flag set in Admin Status 
   Object basically informs the receiving entity that no operations are 
   to be done over Data Plane as consequence of such special signaling 
   flow. Using specially flagged signaling messages we want to limit the 
   function of setup and tear down messages to Control Plane, making 
   them not effective over related Data Plane resource usage. So, no 
   additional or special issues are arisen by adopting this procedure, 
   that aren't already brought up by the use of the same messages, 
   without handover flag setting, for LSP control. For GRSVP-TE Security 
   please refer to [3]. 
    
    
8.   IANA Consideration 
    
   IANA has been asked to manage the bit allocations for the 
   Administrative Status object [6]. 
   This document requires the allocation of the Handover bit: the H-bit. 
   IANA is requested to allocate a bit for this purpose. 
    
    
9.   Normative References 
 
   [1] Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3", BCP 
   9, RFC 2026, October 1996. 
    
   [2] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement 
   Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997 
    
   [3] Crocker, D. and Overell, P.(Editors), "Augmented BNF for Syntax 
   Specifications: ABNF", RFC 2234, Internet Mail Consortium and Demon 
   Internet Ltd., November 1997 
    
 
 
Caviglia et al.         Expires - August 2007               [Page 11] 
              draft-caviglia-ccamp-pc-spc-grsvpte-ext-00 February 2007 
 
 
   [4] L. Berger (Ed.) "Generalized Multi-Protocol Label Switching 
   (GMPLS) Signaling Functional Description", RFC 3471, January 2003 
    
   [5] L. Berger (Ed.) "Generalized Multi-Protocol Label Switching 
   (GMPLS) Signaling Resource ReserVation Protocol-Traffic Engineering 
   (RSVP-TE) Extensions", RFC 3473, January 2003 
    
    
10.    Informative References 
    
    
   [6] Zamfir, A., "Component Link Recording and Resource Control for 
   GMPLS Link Bundles", draft-zamfir-explicit-resource-control-bundle-
   03, February 2004 - work in progress. 
    
   [7] L. Berger (Ed.) "GMPLS - Communication of Alarm Information", 
   draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-alarm-spec-02.txt, November 2004, work in 
   progress. 
    
   [8] D. Caviglia, D. Bramanti, D. Li "GMPLS Requirements for the 
   Conversion Between Permanent Connections and Switched Connections in 
   a Generalized Multiprotocol Label Switching (GMPLS) Network", draft-
   caviglia-ccamp-pc-and-sc-reqs-04.txt, September 2006 
 
11.    Acknowledgments 
    
   We wish to thank Adrian Farrel for his editorial assistance and 
   precious advices to prepare this draft for publication. We also wish 
   to thank Nicola Ciulli that contributed to initial stage of this 
   draft. 
    
    
12.    Author's Addresses 
    
   Diego Caviglia 
   Ericsson 
   Via A. Negrone 1/A 
   Genova-Sestri Ponente, Italy 
   Phone: +390106003738 
   Email: diego.caviglia@marconi.com 
    
   Dino Bramanti 
   Ericsson 
   Via Moruzzi 1 
   C/O Area Ricerca CNR 
   Pisa, Italy 
   Email: dino.bramanti@marconi.com 
    
   Dan Li 
 
 
Caviglia et al.         Expires - August 2007               [Page 12] 
              draft-caviglia-ccamp-pc-spc-grsvpte-ext-00 February 2007 
 
 
   Huawei Technologies Co., LTD. 
   Huawei Base, Bantian, Longgang, 
   Shenzhen 518129 P.R.China 
   Email: danli@huawei.com  
   Tel: +86-755-28972910  
    
    
   Full Copyright Statement 
    
   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007). 
    
   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions 
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors 
   retain all their rights. 
    
   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an 
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS 
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND 
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS 
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF 
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED 
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
    
   Intellectual Property 
    
   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to 
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in 
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights 
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has 
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information 
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be 
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 
    
   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of 
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 
    
   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF at ietf-
   ipr@ietf.org. 
                     
 

 
 
Caviglia et al.         Expires - August 2007               [Page 13] 
