



Network Working Group                                         J. Klensin
Internet-Draft
Expires: December 29, 2005                                       V. Cerf
                                                                     MCI
                                                              S. Bradner
                                                      Harvard University
                                                           June 27, 2005


              Registration Policies for the IETF and IANA
                 draft-klensin-iana-reg-policy-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 29, 2005.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).

Abstract

   For many years, the IETF has maintained, via the IANA, registries of
   protocol and parameter names and numbers.  The primary purpose of
   these registries is to ensure that different methods and options are
   properly identified and distinguished.  Registration of such names or
   numbers generally does not necessarily imply approval of the



Klensin, et al.         Expires December 29, 2005               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft            Registration Policies                June 2005


   technology in the corresponding protocol.  Instead, registration
   represents the desire to keep distinct options identified, separated,
   and public to avoid conflicts in use.  In recent years, various
   changes in the nature of the instructions given to the IANA,
   increased perceptions of scarcity in the number spaces associated
   with some of the parameters, and other issues have led to a shift in
   emphasis from "registration to keep identifiers unique" toward
   evaluations of the quality of proposals of and preferences among
   protocols.  This document argues that shift is undesirable.  It
   articulates and clarifies the principles that the reasons for
   evaluation of registration requests is to ensure a minimum quality of
   definition, that any assertions of scarcity to restrict registrations
   must be accompanied by a plan for eliminating the scarcity problem,
   and that, if such a plan is not possible, to establish criteria for
   making decisions that are as specific and objective as possible.

   This document is intended to update the general considerations of RFC
   2434, the specific allocation rules of RFC 2780, and the evaluation
   criteria associated with other documents that condition an IANA
   registration on Expert Review with IESG oversight or on IESG or IETF
   action.

   [[NOTE IN DRAFT: The length of this abstract exceeds the RFC Editor's
   recommended limits.  It will be shortened in future versions, but the
   longer one is believed to be helpful for I-D announcements, etc.]]


























Klensin, et al.         Expires December 29, 2005               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft            Registration Policies                June 2005


Table of Contents

   1.   Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   2.   Registration Principle: Clarity of Definition  . . . . . . .   6
   3.   Registration Principle: Allocating Scarcity  . . . . . . . .   6
     3.1  Scarcity in Parameter Spaces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     3.2  Scaling and Scarcity Reduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   4.   Multiple category or arc registrations . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   5.   Interpretation of Requirements for IESG Review or
        Standards Action . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   6.   Internationalization Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   7.   IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   8.   Security considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   9.   Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   10.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     10.1   Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     10.2   Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
        Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
        Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . .  12
































Klensin, et al.         Expires December 29, 2005               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft            Registration Policies                June 2005


1.  Introduction

   For many years, the IETF has maintained, via the IANA registries of
   protocol and parameter names and numbers.  The original purpose of
   these registries was to ensure that different methods and options are
   properly identified and distinguished.  Registration did not imply
   approval of the technology in the corresponding protocol.  Instead,
   registration represented only the desire to keep distinct options
   identified, separated, and public to avoid conflicts.

   In recent years, the previous very general instructions to the IANA
   about registrations have been superceded by the inclusion of specific
   instructions in RFCs that define IETF protocols.  These instructions
   have included rules for the establishment of the relevant registries
   themselves and details on how requests should be submitted, and new
   values defined, for any paramaters defined by the RFC.  In addition a
   number of RFCs have been produced to provide instructions for IETF
   protocols that were defined before such instructions began to be
   included.  Examples of those RFCs of registration instructions
   include [RFC2780], [RFC2939], [RFC3171], [RFC3228], [RFC3383],
   [RFC3438], [RFC3474], [RFC3475], [RFC3476], [RFC3575], [RFC3737],
   [RFC3818], [RFC3968], and [RFC3969].  These instructions, coupled
   with increased perceptions of scarcity in the number spaces
   associated with some parameters, have led to a shift in emphasis from
   "registration to keep identifiers unique" and toward evaluations of
   the quality of proposals and preferences about protocol design.

   The distinction between requiring clarity and lack of obvious
   conflict in a registration and blocking on unless the quality of the
   underlying protocol was adequate was, in retrospect, further muddied
   by [RFC2434] (which describes elements of the registration model) in
   different places, as

   o  "To insure that such quantities have consistent values and
      interpretations in different implementations, their assignment
      must be administered by a central authority." (abstract, repeated
      in first paragraph of section 1)
   o  "... preferred way of insuring review, and is particularly
      important if any potential interoperability issues can arise.
      [...]  A new option may define fields that need to be parsed and
      acted on, which (if specified poorly) may not fit cleanly with the
      architecture of other options or the base protocols on which they
      are built." (section 2)
   o  "Even when the space is essentially unlimited, however, it is
      usually desirable to have a minimal review to prevent the hoarding
      of or unnecessary wasting of a space." (section 2)





Klensin, et al.         Expires December 29, 2005               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft            Registration Policies                June 2005


   RFC 2434 was used as the primary guideline for the RFCs listed above
   that define IANA considerations for particular protocols.  All three
   of the above statements are consistent with other text in RFC 2434,
   but the intent of the review is left open.  In other words, it
   specifies how a review is to be performed, but not the criteria to be
   used.  The present document argues that the apparent recent shift
   from "evaluate a registration request for clarity and to avoid
   interoperability problems" is undesirable and explicitly sets out
   evaluation principles for registrations.  While it may be completely
   reasonable to require some specific level of approval of a protocol
   with an associated parameter value, especially when the specification
   for that allocation explicitly designates IETF approval and
   endorsement (see Section 4), this should not be used as a
   justification to require "approval" of registrations in general.  For
   registrations, the principal reasons for review are to ensure
   adequate quality in the definitions to permit interoperability, to
   avoid redundant or spurious registrations, and to provide those who
   request the registrations an opportunity for non-binding IETF
   community advice on the nature of the parameters being proposed for
   registration or the protocol elements associated with them.  A
   secondary, but still important, reason involves verification that the
   proposed protocol does not contain elements that are likely to cause
   serious harm to the Internet.  However, the threshold for rejecting a
   registration on the basis of "serious harm" should be very high and
   represent broad and obvious community consensus.  This is the case
   first because there might otherwise be suspicion that a claim of harm
   was being used to try to block an unpopular protocol or to give a
   favored one some advantage.  Second, from a registration standpoint,
   the best way to handle a dangerous protocol may be to give it clear
   and distinct parameter values so its effects can be easily and
   accurately identified and quarantined.

   This document articulates and clarifies the principles that (i) the
   reasons for evaluation of registration requests is to ensure a
   minimum quality of definition, (ii) any assertion of a danger to the
   Internet or to the stable operation of other protocols (especially
   IETF Standards Track ones) must by supported by a public discussion
   to which all relevant parties can contribute, and (iii) that any
   assertions of scarcity to restrict registrations MUST be accompanied
   by a plan for eliminating the scarcity problem or a conclusion,
   supported by IETF consensus, that it is not possible to do so and a
   corresponding rationing plan for the remaining space.  These
   principles derive from the assumption that growth and innovation on
   the Internet continue to be core values of the IETF and the Internet
   community.

   In summary, unless the "scarcity" rules of Section 3 apply, this
   document updates all "IANA registration" documents and "IANA



Klensin, et al.         Expires December 29, 2005               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft            Registration Policies                June 2005


   considerations" sections of documents to clarify the point that
   registration review is to focus on the issues above, rather than on
   concerns about, e.g., whether one protocol approach is better than
   another one.

2.  Registration Principle: Clarity of Definition

   By longstanding IANA tradition, almost all protocol number or
   parameter registrations must be associated with a description of what
   the parameter represents.  As mentioned in RFC 2434, while those
   descriptions are normally public, the IETF and IANA have sometimes
   made provisions for non-public definitions.  But, in all cases, the
   definitions must be sufficiently clear to avoid any interoperability
   problems.  Over the years, IANA has regularly sent registration
   requests back to the originator for clarification.  Today, part of
   the purpose of review of registration requests in the IETF is to make
   determinations about whether an appropriate level of clarity has been
   achieved and about whether the documentation supplied is adequate.

3.  Registration Principle: Allocating Scarcity

   As suggested in section 2 of [RFC2434], the size of a name space in
   which parameters are to be allocated determines whether care must be
   taken "to insure that the space doesn't become exhausted".  However,
   that level of care MUST NOT be interpreted or implemented in an
   attempt to apply a single standard of taste or style to the Internet
   or otherwise as a mechanism for attempting to suppress innovation.  A
   limited space requires diligent evaluation of requests to avoid
   spurious or vanity registrations and unnecessary ones, including
   registrations that are unlikely to ever be used.  However, unless
   extraordinary circumstances arise, such evaluation must be carried
   out on the assumption that the size of the name space is, and will
   remain, adequate for all legitimate registrations of values that will
   be used with the associated protocols.

3.1  Scarcity in Parameter Spaces

   The size requirements for a particular name space may occasionally be
   underestimated, creating a requirement to minimize allocations and
   registrations in that particular name space to avoid a clear danger
   of running out of the space.  If that situation arises for a
   particular name space, and its existence is confirmed by the IESG
   after an IETF review and Last Call as described in [RFC2026], then
   new registrations may be temporarily restricted to those required to
   meet the needs of IETF protocol development.  However, such
   restrictions MUST NOT be applied without initiation of a plan to
   eliminate the scarcity, as discussed in the next subsection.




Klensin, et al.         Expires December 29, 2005               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft            Registration Policies                June 2005


3.2  Scaling and Scarcity Reduction

   Difficulties with scaling are always a significant risk factor on the
   Internet, with regard to both protocol design and administrative
   procedures.  When a parameter field is of fixed length, estimates
   must be made, sometimes under considerable uncertainty and with high
   costs associated with incremental size, as to how much parameter
   capacity is needed.  If such an estimate is incorrect and a
   significant danger arises of running out of space, "conservation",
   i.e., restrictions on registrations or allocations to save space,
   will delay the date on which no further space is available, but will
   not eliminate the risk of that occurring.  Because of the damaging
   effects on Internet innovation of rejecting otherwise-legitimate
   registrations because of name space exhaustion, a decision that a
   name space is facing a capacity crisis MUST BE made explicitly by the
   community, as outlined above, and MUST BE associated with a plan to
   expand the relevant name space unless that is deemed to be infeasible
   (see below).  A plan to expand the name space MAY take the form of
   chartering a Working Group or creating an IAB workshop to develop a
   plan within an appropriate time, or other approaches may be used.

   A determination that the expansion of a name space is infeasible MUST
   include criteria for making allocations in the balance of the
   existing space and those criteria must be fair and balanced.  The
   determination of infeasbility and the allocation plan MUST represent
   the consensus of the IETF community, determined through the same
   mechanisms used to approve a document as a BCP (see [RFC2026]).

   It is the explicit intent of this specification that registration
   requests not be rejected for reasons of name space shortages unless
   either an effort has been initiated to eliminate the shortage or a
   formal determination has been made by the community that it is
   infeasible to do so.

4.  Multiple category or arc registrations

   In a number of cases, registration procedures or protocols have
   provided for registrations in a number of different categories, where
   those categories are associated with different levels of requirements
   for registration but where interoperability may be achieved by the
   use of any of the categories.  Examples of this approach include the
   distinction between "user" and "system" port numbers most recently
   described in [RFC2780] and the distinctions among the various
   registration arcs for media type registrations described in
   [RFC2048].

   A decision by the IESG or other designated party to require that a
   registration be made in a different arc or subsidiary name space than



Klensin, et al.         Expires December 29, 2005               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft            Registration Policies                June 2005


   was proposed is not to be considered a rejection of the registration
   request under the terms of this document.

5.  Interpretation of Requirements for IESG Review or Standards Action

   A requirement for IESG approval, Standards Action, or RFC Publication
   implies that IESG approval is an acceptable alternative to the other
   two, not an exceptional case unless the requirement contains
   additional provisions specifying the conditions for IESG review and
   approval.  Because, for reasons discussed above, the action on a
   registration request SHOULD BE to permit the registration unless
   special circumstances apply, the IESG MUST NOT deny a registration
   request for other than reasons of clarity without an IETF Last Call
   and IETF consensus that the rejection is appropriate for identified
   reasons consistent with those discussed in this document.  If a
   registration request is denied for any reason, that reason must be
   stated explicitly and the decision may be appealed under the
   procedures specified in [RFC2026] or its successor(s).  Of course,
   nothing in this document prevents an applicant from voluntarily
   withdrawing a registration request should that be deemed appropriate.

6.  Internationalization Considerations

   This document specifies IETF procedures and does not interact with
   internationalization.

7.  IANA Considerations

   This document specifies IETF and IESG considerations in recommending
   actions to IANA.  It recommends that, when the IETF concludes that
   the protocol, extension, or option associated with a registration
   request is problematic or dangerous, the entry in the IANA registry
   should be annotated to identify the concern and, when appropriate,
   point to documentation or other materials that will better explain
   the concern or alternatives that might be less problematic.  While
   this document specifies no particular registry actions for IANA, IANA
   should be prepared for requests from the IETF to annotate registry
   entries in that way.

8.  Security considerations

   This document specifies IETF procedures.  It should have no direct
   impact on Internet security.  It does, however, firmly advocate the
   principle that it is preferable for options or extensions that could
   pose security or operational risks to be throughly documented and
   carefully identified in preference to hiding them and hoping that
   they will disappear.




Klensin, et al.         Expires December 29, 2005               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft            Registration Policies                June 2005


9.  Acknowledgements

   Comments were received on discussion leading to this document, or on
   a preliminary draft, from  Bob Braden, Dave Crocker, Spencer Dawkins,
   Ned Freed, John Loughney, and others that contributed to text in this
   document and are greatly appreciated.

10.  References

10.1  Normative References

   [RFC2026]  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision
              3", BCP 9, RFC 2026, October 1996.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels'", RFC 2119, March 1997.

10.2  Informative References

   [RFC2048]  Freed, N., Klensin, J., and J. Postel, "Multipurpose
              Internet Mail Extensions (MIME) Part Four: Registration
              Procedures", BCP 13, RFC 2048, November 1996.

   [RFC2434]  Narten, T. and H. Alvestrand, "Guidelines for Writing an
              IANA Considerations Section in RFCs", BCP 26, RFC 2434,
              October 1998.

   [RFC2780]  Bradner, S. and V. Paxson, "IANA Allocation Guidelines For
              Values In the Internet Protocol and Related Headers",
              BCP 37, RFC 2780, March 2000.

   [RFC2939]  Droms, R., "Procedures and IANA Guidelines for Definition
              of New DHCP Options and Message Types", BCP 43, RFC 2939,
              September 2000.

   [RFC3171]  Albanna, Z., Almeroth, K., Meyer, D., and M. Schipper,
              "IANA Guidelines for IPv4 Multicast Address Assignments",
              BCP 51, RFC 3171, August 2001.

   [RFC3228]  Fenner, B., "IANA Considerations for IPv4 Internet Group
              Management Protocol (IGMP)", BCP 57, RFC 3228,
              February 2002.

   [RFC3383]  Zeilenga, K., "Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA)
              Considerations for the Lightweight Directory Access
              Protocol (LDAP)", BCP 64, RFC 3383, September 2002.

   [RFC3438]  Townsley, W., "Layer Two Tunneling Protocol (L2TP)



Klensin, et al.         Expires December 29, 2005               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft            Registration Policies                June 2005


              Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA) Considerations
              Update", BCP 68, RFC 3438, December 2002.

   [RFC3474]  Lin, Z. and D. Pendarakis, "Documentation of IANA
              assignments for Generalized MultiProtocol Label Switching
              (GMPLS) Resource Reservation Protocol - Traffic
              Engineering (RSVP-TE) Usage and Extensions for
              Automatically Switched Optical Network (ASON)", RFC 3474,
              March 2003.

   [RFC3475]  Aboul-Magd, O., "Documentation of IANA assignments for
              Constraint-Based LSP setup using LDP (CR-LDP) Extensions
              for Automatic Switched Optical Network (ASON)", RFC 3475,
              March 2003.

   [RFC3476]  Rajagopalan, B., "Documentation of IANA Assignments for
              Label Distribution Protocol (LDP), Resource ReSerVation
              Protocol (RSVP), and Resource ReSerVation Protocol-Traffic
              Engineering (RSVP-TE) Extensions for Optical UNI
              Signaling", RFC 3476, March 2003.

   [RFC3575]  Aboba, B., "IANA Considerations for RADIUS (Remote
              Authentication Dial In User Service)", RFC 3575,
              July 2003.

   [RFC3737]  Wijnen, B. and A. Bierman, "IANA Guidelines for the
              Registry of Remote Monitoring (RMON) MIB modules",
              RFC 3737, April 2004.

   [RFC3818]  Schryver, V., "IANA Considerations for the Point-to-Point
              Protocol (PPP)", BCP 88, RFC 3818, June 2004.

   [RFC3968]  Camarillo, G., "The Internet Assigned Number Authority
              (IANA) Header Field Parameter Registry for the Session
              Initiation Protocol (SIP)", BCP 98, RFC 3968,
              December 2004.

   [RFC3969]  Camarillo, G., "The Internet Assigned Number Authority
              (IANA) Uniform Resource Identifier (URI) Parameter
              Registry for the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)",
              BCP 99, RFC 3969, December 2004.










Klensin, et al.         Expires December 29, 2005              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft            Registration Policies                June 2005


Authors' Addresses

   John C Klensin
   1770 Massachusetts Ave, #322
   Cambridge, MA  02140
   USA

   Phone: +1 617 491 5735
   Email: john-ietf@jck.com


   Vinton G. Cerf
   MCI
   22001 Loudoun County Parkway, F2-4115
   Ashburn, VA  20147
   USA

   Phone: +1 703 886 1690
   Email: vinton.g.cerf@mci.com


   Scott Bradner
   Harvard University
   29 Oxford St
   Cambridge, MA  02138
   US

   Phone: +1 617 495 3864
   Email: sob@harvard.edu






















Klensin, et al.         Expires December 29, 2005              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft            Registration Policies                June 2005


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Klensin, et al.         Expires December 29, 2005              [Page 12]


