Internet-Draft                                            Christine Yoon
draft-yoon-dbpg-taxonomy-01                      PricewarterhouseCoopers
Expires in six months                                        Chris Apple
Track: Informational                                      DSI Consulting 	
							   Richard Burke
						      White Obsidian Inc.
							   Chris Harding
							   The OpenGroup

                                                              June 2003


         A Taxonomy of Directories Best Practice Topics and Concepts
           Filename: draft-yoon-dbpg-taxonomy-01.txt


Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.  Internet-Drafts are working
   documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas,
   and its working groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

Abstract

   There are several different topics and concepts appropriate for an
   LDAP-based Directories Best Practice Guide (DBPG). This document 
   discusses these topics and concepts for interested user communities 
   to learn more about implementing them.

1. Introduction

   A typical directory environment within a user organization consists of 
   LDAP [1] directories and/or non-LDAP directories such as HR databases. 
   A directory service deployment considers various directory
   topics. This document discusses these topics and identifies a DBPG
   section for interested users to learn more about implementing each 
   topics.

   

Expires 12/31/2003                                               [Page 1]





INTERNET DRAFT                LDAP Taxonomy                     June 2002


   
2. Topics

2.1 LDAP DBPG Framework


    This section will define and describe a framework of best practices and 
    guidelines with respect to technical issues related to the deployment of 
    LDAP-based directory services within user organizations. Non-technical 
    issues will also be explored at a high level. This section will also 
    describe typical directory services environments of user organizations. 
    User organizations may be categorized depending on the following factors:

    1) locations:  some organizations may be located at a single place
		   or distributed geographically.
			    
    2) size:  some organizations may have a small number of workforce and  
 	      some have a large number of workforce.
		
    3) existing environment:  some organizations may have very complex directory 
			      environment such as many islands of directory 
   			      each having different management. Some may have 
  			      very simple environment.


2.2 Directories and Their use

    The purpose of this section is to address various directory technologies and
    a best way to use them. Examples of existing directory technologies are
    RDBMS, DNS, X.500, LDAP, Virtual directory, and Meta-directory. This section
    describes various directory technologies, defines several typical 
    operational and deployment scenarios, and profiles the applicability of 
    particular technologies or combinations thereof to those scenarios.


2.3 Glossary of Directory-Related Terms and Concepts 

    This section lists directory-related terms and concepts that are dealt by 
    the DBPG sections. 









Expires 12/31/2003                                               [Page 2]






INTERNET DRAFT                LDAP Taxonomy                     June 2002




2.4 LDAP Information Modeling Concepts: DIT Structure & Schema Design 

    The section provides best practices and guidelines in designing the DIT 
    structure and schema of an LDAP directory. Different guidelines may be 
    developed depending on the user's directory environments defined in the 
    DBPG Framework section.


2.5 Popular Schema Profiles 

    In addition to common user schema [2], various standard groups and 
    industry consortia have defined different sets of directory schema elements 
    (i.e. object classes and attributes) intended to serve the needs of various 
    vertical and horizontal applications and services. The Internet Messaging 
    standard group defines messaging-related schema elements. DMTF defines 
    schema elements for CIM. This section intends to collect and list 
    descriptions of existing schema elements defined by other standard and/or 
    industry organizations and their references.
 

2.6 Schema Registration 

    The purpose of this section is to provide best practices and guidelines to 
    develop a schema registration process, which will prevent schema collision 
    when multiple directories are merged or connected within a user 
    organization. This section also facilitates to form collaborative effort of 
    schema design for the same user organization. Furthermore, this section may
    address problems to be considered when implementing an automated
    registration service. 
 
2.7 Directory-Enabled Application Development Issues 

    In order for an application to communicate with an LDAP directory service, 
    the application needs to have access to knowledge of the directory service 
    design properties including, but not limited to its schema. This section 
    explores various issues that should be considered by application architects, 
    designers, developers, and testers and, if applicable, addressed during
    design and development of an LDAP-enabled application.







Expires 12/31/2003                                               [Page 3]





INTERNET DRAFT                LDAP Taxonomy                     June 2002




2.8 Engineering Reliable Directory Services

    Different organizations will have different notions of what constitutes 
    a "reliable" directory service. This section explores various topics 
    within problem spaces including availability, maintainability, operation, 
    performance, administration, and replicated/distributed operation. 
    This section also documents various guidelines and best practices for design 
    and analysis of directory services relative to each topic relevant to
    directory service reliability considerations. Where applicable, this section
    will also point out scenarios in which particular design considerations may
    act as competing constraints during the design of a directory service.


2.9 Directory Deployment Project Milestones: A Sample Project Plan

    The purpose of this section is to provide a sample project plan sectioning 
    the major stages and high-level tasks for deploying a directory service. 
    Guidelines for successfully accomplishing tasks and milestones in the 
    sample project plan will also be provided.


2.10 Security, Privacy, Legality, Data Management, and All Things
Political

    The general topic of security and directory services will be explored and 
    guidelines on making use of various security-related technologies and 
    techniques will be presented. Because the motivation for using certain 
    security technologies is largely driven by non-technical organizational 
    characteristics, this section will also explore various issues related 
    to privacy,legality, and data management from individual end user, 
    organization, and sociopolitical viewpoints.


2.11 Directory Integration Concepts

    This section will explore and provide guidelines for the use of various 
    types of directory integration technologies. Typically, these technologies 
    will support LDAP along with one or more non-LDAP information search 
    and retrieval technologies. Commonly used terms to refer to these 
    types of technologies include meta directories, virtual directories, 
    directory integration tool kits, directory synchronization, 
    and data synchronization tools.




Expires 12/31/2003                                               [Page 4]





INTERNET DRAFT                LDAP Taxonomy                      June 2002




3. Internationalisation Considerations

   All DBPG sections consider issues in support of internationalisation,
   which cover, but not limited to,
   - support of UTF-8 [3] or Unicode character sets [4]
   - potential difference in data privacy and security among countries 
   - data administration in multiple languages. 


4. Security Considerations

   This document describing the DBPG sections does not have an impact on the 
   security of the network infrastructure or of Internet applications. 

   It should be noted that all DBP sections are required to examine and
   understand the security implications of any practices they develop. This 
   analysis must be included in any resulting RFCs in a Security Considerations
   section. 


5. Acknowledgment

   Alexis Bor has provided his input to this document.


6. References

   Request For Comments (RFC) and Internet Draft documents are available
   from numerous mirror sites.

[1]	Mark Wahl, Tim Howes, Steve Kille, Lightweight Directory Access 
 	Protocol (v3), RFC 2251, December 1997.


[2]	Mark Wahl, A Summary of the X.500(96) User Schema for use with LDAPv3, 
	RFC 2256, December 1997.

[3]	F. Yergeau, UTF-8, a transformation format of Unicode and ISO 10646, 
	RFC 2044, October 1996.


[4]	The Unicode Consortium, "The Unicode Standard -- Worldwide Character 
	Encoding -- Version 1.0", Addison-Wesley, Volume 1, 1991, Volume 2, 1992.  
	


Expires 12/31/2003                                               [Page 5]





INTERNET DRAFT                LDAP Taxonomy                       June 2002



6. Author's List


	Christine Yoon
	PricewarterhouseCoopers LLP
	1 Carla Court
	Holmdel, NJ 07733 U.S.A.
	Voice: +1 (732)706-3559
	E-mail: christine.yoon@us.pwcglobal.com
	

	Chris Apple
	DSI Consulting, Inc.
	51 N 3rd Street, Suite 167
	Philadelphia, PA 19106 U.S.A.
	Voice: 610-585-4241
	E-mail: capple@dsi-consulting.net
	
	Richard Burke
	White Obsidian
	7 Mount Mews
	Hamton on Thames
	Great Britain 
	TW12 2SH
	Voice: +44 2082135191
	E-mail: richard.burke@white-obsidian.com

	Dr. Christopher J. Harding
     	The OpenGroup
	Apex Plaza, Forbury Road, Reading RG1 1AX, UK
	Voice: +44 118 902 3018
	E-mail: c.harding@opengroup.org 


7. Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright 2002, The Internet Society.  All Rights Reserved.
   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published and
   distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any kind,
   provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this





Expires 12/31/2003                                               [Page 6]





INTERNET DRAFT                LDAP Taxonomy                     JUne 2002




   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the  purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be followed,
   or as required to translate it into languages other than English.
   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.
   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE AUTHORS, THE INTERNET SOCIETY, AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.






























Expires 12/31/2003                                               [Page 7]






