





Internet Engineering Task Force                    Ken Carlberg
INTERNET DRAFT                                     UCL
September, 2002                                    Ran Atkinson
                                                   Extreme Networks

                     IP Telephony Requirements for
                  Emergency Telecommunication Service
                 <draft-carlberg-ets-telephony-00.txt>

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 [1].

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt The list of Internet-Draft
   Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   For potential updates to the above required-text see:
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-guidelines.txt

Abstract

   This document presents a list of requirements in support of Emergency
   Telecommunications Service (ETS) within the context of IP telephony.
   It is an extension to the general requirements presented in [3].
   Solutions to these requirements are not presented in this document.


1.  Introduction

   Effective telecommunications capabilities can be imperative to
   facilitate immediate recovery operations for serious disaster events,
   such as, hurricanes, floods, earthquakes, and terrorist attacks.
   Disasters can happen any time, any place, unexpectedly. Quick
   response for recovery operations requires immediate access to any
   public telecommunications capabilities at hand. These capabilities
   include:  conventional telephone, cellular phones, and Internet
   access via online terminals, IP telephones, and wireless PDAs.  The



Carlberg & Atkinson         Expires March, 2003                 [Page 1]





Internet Draft         ETS Telephony Requirements        September, 2002


   commercial telecommunications infrastructure is rapidly evolving to
   Internet-based technology. Therefore, the Internet community needs to
   consider how it can best support emergency management and recovery
   operations.

1.1  Problem

   Standards have been developed by other standards bodies concerning
   emergency communications.  As discussed in [2] and [3], some of these
   standards, such as T1.693 [4], define specific indicators or labels
   for emergency communications in SS7 networks.  Certain requirements
   must be defined in order to achieve peering services across hybrid
   networks (networks that communicate between IP and other types of
   networks such as that realized by the Public Switched Telephone
   Network).

2. Scope

   [2] has defined a set of general system requirements to support
   Emergency Telecommunications Service (ETS).  This document defines an
   additional set of system requirements to achieve support for ETS
   within the specific context of IP telephony.  Solutions to
   requirements are not defined.  The document does not specify protocol
   enhancements or specifications.

2.1  Out of Scope

   An item that is not in scope of this document is mandating acceptance
   and support of the requirements presented in this document.  The IETF
   does not mandate requirements or capabilities to independent networks
   that comprise the Internet.  As an example, IP Carriers might choose
   not to operate any telephony-related gateways or services.  The IETF
   cannot and does not mandate that an IP Carrier deploy either
   telephony-related gateways or telephony-related services.  There is
   an expectation that business contracts, for example Service Level
   Agreements (SLA), will be used to satisfy those following
   requirements that apply to service providers.  Absence of an SLA
   implies best effort service is provided.

   It is assumed that some carriers will choose to offer ETS services
   and that other carriers will choose not to offer ETS services.  These
   requirements do not apply to carriers that have chosen not to offer
   ETS services.

3. IP Telephony Requirements

   The requirements in this section relate only to Telephony Signalling
   (e.g. SS7, DSS1, SIP) as used in Internet-based telephony services.



Carlberg & Atkinson         Expires March, 2003                 [Page 2]





Internet Draft         ETS Telephony Requirements        September, 2002


   They are an extension to the general requirements specified in [2].
   The following requirements explicitly do not relate to IP-layer
   mechanisms, such as Differentiated Services or Integrated Services.

     1) Telephony signalling applications used with Internet-based
     telephony MUST be able to carry labels.

     2) The ability to carry labels MUST be extensible to support
     various types and numbers of labels. A single binary value will
     not be sufficient given the various labeling standards in existance
     today.

     3) Telephony signalling labels MUST have a mapping with the various
     labels/markings used in other telephony based networks.  This
     includes existing labels defined for the PSTN.  This ensures that
     a telephone call that is placed over a hybrid infrastructure
     (traditional PSTN over some portion(s) of the path, Internet
     telephony over some other portion(s) of the path) can carry the
     labels end-to-end with appropriate translation at PSTN/Internet
     boundaries.

3.1 Value Added Requirements:

     1) Alternate paths

       Experience with GETS has shown the utility of alternate paths
       to a destination to help facilitate emergency-related
       communications.  From the perspective of the Internet, this
       utility may be difficult to achieve and have a more limited
       benefit.  Hence, we present this requirement as one that is
       value added, but not to considered critical in supporting ETS.
       Unlike the PSTN, the Internet routing system maintains awareness
       of all paths to a destination.  Further the Internet is
       packet-based, rather than circuit-switched, so existing flows
       will automatically be rerouted if an initial route ceases to be
       available and an alternate route exists.

4. Security

   Only authorised users or operators SHOULD be able to create non-
   ordinary labels.  Labels SHOULD have mechanisms to provide strong
   end-to-end integrity during their transmission through the telephony
   systems.  Finally, in cases where labels are expected to be acted
   upon by operators, these operators SHOULD have the capability of
   authenticating the label on a received message or transmission in
   order to prevent theft of service and reduce risk of denial of
   service (e.g. by unauthorised users consuming any limited resources).




Carlberg & Atkinson         Expires March, 2003                 [Page 3]





Internet Draft         ETS Telephony Requirements        September, 2002


   Security is also discussed in the general requirements of [2], which
   applies to section 3 above.


5. References

   1  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3", BCP
      9, RFC 2026, October 1996.

   2  Carlberg, K., Atkinson, R., "General System Requirements for
      Emergency Telecommunications Service", Internet Draft,
      Work In Progress, September, 2002

   3  Folts, H., et. al., "User Requirements for Emergency
      Telecommunications Service", Internet Draft, Work In
      Progress, September 2002

   4  ANSI, "Signaling System No. 7(SS7): High Probability of
      Completion (HPC) Network Capability, ANSI T1.631, 1993.




   Ken Carlberg                            Ran Atkinson
   University College London               Extreme Networks
   Department of Computer Science          3585 Monroe Street
   Gower Street                            Santa Clara, CA
   London, WC1E 6BT                        95051  USA
   United Kingdom
   k.carlberg@cs.ucl.ac.uk                 rja@extremenetworks.com

Full Copyright Statement

   "Copyright (C) The Internet Society (date). All Rights Reserved.
   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of develop-
   ing Internet standards in which case the procedures for copyrights
   defined in the Internet Standards process must be followed, or as
   required to translate it into languages other than English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be



Carlberg & Atkinson         Expires March, 2003                 [Page 4]





Internet Draft         ETS Telephony Requirements        September, 2002


   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided as an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OR MER-
   CHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PRUPOSE.











































Carlberg & Atkinson         Expires March, 2003                 [Page 5]


