



DMARC Working Group                                             S. Jones
Internet-Draft                                                 DMARC.org
Obsoletes: draft-jones-arc-usage-01 (if                     J. Rae-Grant
           approved)                                              Google
Intended status: Informational                                  T. Adams
Expires: December 27, 2016                                        Paypal
                                                        K. Andersen, Ed.
                                                                LinkedIn
                                                           June 25, 2016


      Recommended Usage of the Authenticated Received Chain (ARC)
                     draft-ietf-dmarc-arc-usage-00

Abstract

   The Authentication Received Chain (ARC) provides a means to preserve
   email authentication results and verify the identity of email message
   handlers, each of which participates by inserting certain header
   fields before passing the message on.  But the specification does not
   indicate how intermediaries and receivers should interpret or utilize
   ARC.  This document will provide guidance in these areas.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 27, 2016.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2016 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of



Jones, et al.           Expires December 27, 2016               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                  ARC-USAGE                      June 2016


   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   2.  How does ARC work?  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  Guidance for Receivers/Validators . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     3.1.  What is the significance of an intact ARC chain?  . . . .   4
     3.2.  What exactly is an "intact" ARC chain?  . . . . . . . . .   4
     3.3.  What is the significance of an invalid ("broken") ARC
           chain?  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     3.4.  What does the absence of an ARC chain in a message mean?    5
     3.5.  What reasonable conclusions can you draw based upon
           seeing lots of mail with ARC chains?  . . . . . . . . . .   5
     3.6.  What if none of the intermediaries have been seen
           previously? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     3.7.  What about ARC chains where some intermediaries are known
           and others are not? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     3.8.  What should message handlers do when they detect
           malicious content in messages where ARC is present? . . .   6
     3.9.  What feedback does a sender or domain owner get about ARC
           when it is applied to their messages? . . . . . . . . . .   7
     3.10. What prevents a malicious actor from removing the ARC
           header fields,  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   4.  Guidance for Intermediaries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     4.1.  What is an Intermediary under ARC?  . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     4.2.  What are the minimum requirements for an ARC
           Intermediary? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
       4.2.1.  More specifically a participating ARC intermediary
               must do the following:  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     4.3.  Should every MTA be an ARC participant? . . . . . . . . .   8
     4.4.  What should an intermediary do in the case of an invalid
           or "broken" ARC chain?  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     4.5.  What should I do in the case where there is no ARC chain
           present in a message? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     4.6.  How could ARC affect my reputation as an intermediary?  .   9
     4.7.  What can I do to influence my reputation as an
           intermediary? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   5.  Guidance for Originators  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
     5.1.  Where can I find out more information?  . . . . . . . . .  10
     5.2.  How/where can I test interoperabililty for my
           implementation? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
     5.3.  How can ARC impact my email?  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10



Jones, et al.           Expires December 27, 2016               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                  ARC-USAGE                      June 2016


     5.4.  How can ARC impact my reputation as a message sender? . .  10
     5.5.  Can I tell intermediaries not to use ARC? . . . . . . . .  11
   6.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
     6.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
     6.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
     6.3.  URIs  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   Appendix A.  GLOSSARY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   Appendix B.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
   Appendix C.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
   Appendix D.  Comments and Feedback  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15

1.  Introduction

   [ARC] is intended to be used primarily by intermediaries, or message
   handlers - those parties who may forward or resend messages, with or
   without alterations, such that they will no longer pass the SPF,
   DKIM, and/or [RFC7489] authentication mechanisms.  In such cases ARC
   may provide the final message recipient with useful information about
   the original sender.

2.  How does ARC work?

   Consider a mailing list as an example, where the message submitter's
   domain publishes a DMARC policy other than "p=none".  The message is
   received, a prefix is added to the RFC5322.Subject header field, some
   text is appended to the message body, and the message is sent to list
   members with the original RFC5322.From address intact.  In this case
   SPF may pass because the mailing list operator uses their own domain
   in the RFC5321.MailFrom header field, but this domain will not match
   the RFC5322.From address, thus the DMARC SPF result cannot be a
   "pass."  Any DKIM signature from the message submitter's domain will
   be broken as the message body has been altered (and if included in
   the signature, the RFC5322.Subject header field).  Again, the DMARC
   DKIM result cannot be a "pass."  And if the mailing list operator
   inserted an Authentication-Results header field it was most likely
   stripped and/or replaced by the next message receiver.

   If the mailing list implemented ARC, it would record the contents of
   the Authentication-Results header field in the ARC-Authentication-
   Results header field.  It would then create an an ARC-Message-
   Signature header field, which includes a cryptographic signature of
   the message itself, and then an ARC-Seal header field, which includes
   a cryptographic signature of a few key message header fields -
   including the other ARC header fields.

   Any subsequent system participating in ARC that was not performing
   final delivery of the message within its ADMD boundaries would also



Jones, et al.           Expires December 27, 2016               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                  ARC-USAGE                      June 2016


   generate and insert ARC header fields whose signatures cover all ARC
   header fields inserted into the message by previous message handlers.
   Thus the information from any previous ARC participants, including
   the ARC-Authentication-Results header field from the mailing list
   operator, would be signed at each ADMD that handled the message.

   When the message reaches the final receiving system, the SPF and DKIM
   results will not satisfy the DMARC policy for the message author's
   domain.  However if the receiving system implements ARC then it can
   check for and validate an ARC chain and verify that the contents of
   the ARC-Authentication-Results header field were conveyed intact from
   the mailing list operator.  At that point the receiving system might
   choose to use those authentication results in the decision of whether
   or not to deliver the message, even though it failed to pass the
   usual authentication checks.

3.  Guidance for Receivers/Validators

3.1.  What is the significance of an intact ARC chain?

   An intact ARC chain conveys authentication results like SPF and DKIM
   as observed by the first ARC participant.  In cases where the message
   no longer produces passing results for DKIM, SPF, or DMARC but an
   intact ARC chain is present, the message receiver may choose to use
   the contents of the ARC-Authentication-Results header field in
   determining how to handle the message.

3.2.  What exactly is an "intact" ARC chain?

   Note that not all ADMDs will implement ARC, and receivers will see
   messages where one or more non-participating ADMDs handled a message
   before, after, or in between participating ADMDs.

   An intact ARC chain is one where the ARC header fields that are
   present can be validated, and in particular the ARC-Message-Signature
   header field from the last ARC participant can still be validated.
   This shows that, whether another ADMD handled the message after the
   last ARC participant or not, the portions of the message covered by
   that signature were not altered.  If any non-participating ADMDs
   handled the message between ARC intermediaries but did not alter the
   message in a way that invalidated the most recent ARC-Message-
   Signature present at that time, the chain would still be considered
   intact by the next ARC participant, and recorded as such in the ARC-
   Seal header field they insert.

   Message receivers may make local policy decisions about whether to
   use the contents of the ARC-Authentication-Results header field in
   cases where a message no longer passes DKIM, DMARC, and/or SPF



Jones, et al.           Expires December 27, 2016               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                  ARC-USAGE                      June 2016


   checks.  Whether an ARC chain is intact can be used to inform that
   local policy decision.

   So for example one message receiver may decide that, for messages
   with an intact ARC chain where a DMARC evaluation does not pass, but
   the ARC-Authentication-Results header field indicates a DKIM pass was
   reported that matches the domain in the RFC5322.From header field, it
   will override a DMARC "p=reject" policy.  Another message receiver
   may decide to do so for intact ARC chains where the ARC-
   Authentication-Results header field indicates an SPF pass.  A third
   message receiver may use very different criteria, according to their
   requirements, while a fourth may choose not to take ARC information
   into account at all.

3.3.  What is the significance of an invalid ("broken") ARC chain?

   An ARC chain is not considered to be valid if the signatures in the
   ARC-Seal header fields cannot be verified.  For example the remote
   server delivering the message to the local ADMD is not reflected in
   any ARC header fields, perhaps because they have not implemented ARC,
   but they modified the message such that ARC and DKIM signatures
   already in the message were invalidated.

   In such cases the ARC-Authentication-Results header field should not
   have any influence on the disposition of the message.  For example, a
   message that fails under DMARC and has an invalid ARC chain would be
   subject to that DMARC policy, which may cause it to be quarantined or
   rejected.

3.4.  What does the absence of an ARC chain in a message mean?

   The absence of an ARC chain means nothing.  ARC is intended to allow
   a participating message handler to preserve certain authentication
   results when a message is being forwarded and/or modified such that
   the final recipient can evaluate the source.  If they are absent,
   there is nothing extra that ARC requires the final recipient to do.

3.5.  What reasonable conclusions can you draw based upon seeing lots of
      mail with ARC chains?

   With sufficient history, ARC can be used to augment DMARC
   authentication policy (i.e. a message could fail DMARC, but pass ARC
   and therefore could be considered as validly authenticated as
   reported by the first ARC participant).

   If the validator does content analysis and reputation tracking, the
   ARC participants in a message can be credited or discredited for good
   or bad content.  By analyzing different ARC chains involved in "bad"



Jones, et al.           Expires December 27, 2016               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                  ARC-USAGE                      June 2016


   messages, a validator might identify malicious participating
   intermediaries.

   With a valid chain and good reputations for all ARC participants,
   receivers may choose to apply a "local policy override" to the DMARC
   policy assertion for the domain authentication evaluation, depending
   on the ARC-Authentication-Results header field value.  Normal content
   analysis should never be skipped.

3.6.  What if none of the intermediaries have been seen previously?

   This has no impact on the operation of ARC, as ARC is not a
   reputation system.  ARC conveys the results of other authentication
   mechanisms such that the participating message handlers can be
   positively identified.  Final message recipients may or may not
   choose to examine these results when messages fail other
   authentication checks.  They are more likely to override, say, a
   failing DMARC result in the presence of an intact ARC chain where the
   participating ARC message handlers have been observed to not convey
   "bad" content in the past, and the initial ARC participant indicates
   the message they received had passed authentication checks.

3.7.  What about ARC chains where some intermediaries are known and
      others are not?

   Validators may choose to build reputation models for ARC message
   handlers they have observed.  Generally speaking it is more feasible
   to accrue positive reputation to intermediaries when they
   consistently send messages that are evaluated positively in terms of
   content and ARC chains.  When messages are received with ARC chains
   that are not intact, it is very difficult identify which
   intermediaries may have manipulated the message or injected bad
   content.

3.8.  What should message handlers do when they detect malicious content
      in messages where ARC is present?

   Message handlers should do what they normally do when they detect
   malicious content in a message - hopefully that means quarantining or
   discarding the message.  ARC information should never make malicious
   content acceptable.

   In such cases it is difficult to determine where the malicious
   content may have been injected.  What ARC can do in such cases is
   verify that a given intermediary or message handler did in fact
   handle the message as indicated in the header fields.  In such cases
   a message recipient who maintains a reputation system about email
   senders may wish to incorporate this information as an additional



Jones, et al.           Expires December 27, 2016               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                  ARC-USAGE                      June 2016


   factor in the score for the intermediaries and sender in question.
   However reputation systems are very complex, and usually unique to
   those organizations operating them, and therefore beyond the scope of
   this document.

3.9.  What feedback does a sender or domain owner get about ARC when it
      is applied to their messages?

   ARC itself does not include any mechanism for feedback or reporting.
   It does however recommend that message receiving systems that use ARC
   to augment their delivery decisions, who use DMARC and decide to
   deliver a message because of ARC information, should include a
   notation to that effect in their normal DMARC reports.  These
   notations would be easily identifiable by report processors, so that
   senders and domain owners can see where ARC is being used to augment
   the deliverability of their messages.

3.10.  What prevents a malicious actor from removing the ARC header
       fields,

   altering the content, and creating a new ARC chain?

   ARC does not prevent a malicious actor from doing this.  Nor does it
   prevent a malicious actor from removing all but the first ADMD's ARC
   header fields and altering the message, eliminating intervening
   participants from the ARC chain.  Or similar variations.

   A valid ARC chain does not provide any automatic benefit.  With an
   intact ARC chain, the final message recipient may choose to use the
   contents of the ARC-Authentication-Results header field in
   determining how to handle the message.  The decision to use the ARC-
   Authentication-Results header field is dependent on evaluation of
   those ARC intermediaries.

   In the first case, the bad actor has succeeded in manipulating the
   message but they have attached a verifiable signature identifying
   themselves.  While not an ideal situation, it is something they are
   already able to do without ARC involved, but now a strong link to the
   domain responsible for the manipulation is present.

   Additionally in the second case it is possible some negative
   reputational impact might accrue to the first ARC participant left in
   place until more messages reveal the pattern of activity by the bad
   actor.  But again, a bad actor can similarly manipulate a sequence of
   RFC5322.Received header fields today without ARC, and with ARC that
   bad actor has verifiably identified themselves.





Jones, et al.           Expires December 27, 2016               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                  ARC-USAGE                      June 2016


4.  Guidance for Intermediaries

4.1.  What is an Intermediary under ARC?

   In the context of ARC, an Intermediary is typically an Administrative
   Management Domain [RFC5598] that is receiving a message, potentially
   manipulating or altering it, and then passing it on to another ADMD
   for delivery.  Common examples of Intermediaries are mailing lists,
   alumni or professional email address providers that forward messages
   such as universities or professional organizations, et cetera.

4.2.  What are the minimum requirements for an ARC Intermediary?

   A participating ARC intermediary must validate the ARC chain on a
   message it receives, if one is present.  It then attaches its own ARC
   seal and signature, including an indication if the chain failed to
   validate upon receipt.

4.2.1.  More specifically a participating ARC intermediary must do the
        following:

   1.  Validate that the ARC chain, if one is already present in the
       message, is intact and well-formed.

   2.  Validate that the most recent sender matches the last entry in
       the ARC chain (if present).

   3.  Validate that the most recent sender's DKIM signature is
       attached, and matches the reference to it in the ARC chain (if
       present).

   4.  Generate a new ARC Signature and add it to the message according
       to the ARC specification.

   5.  Generate a new ARC Seal and add it to the message according to
       the ARC specification.

4.3.  Should every MTA be an ARC participant?

   Generally speaking, ARC is designed to operate at the ADMD level.
   When a message is first received by an ADMD, the traditional
   authentication results should be captured and preserved - this could
   be the common case of creating an Authentication-Results header
   field.  But when it is determined that the message is being sent on
   outside of that ADMD, that is when the ADMD should add itself to the
   ARC chain - before sending the message outside of the ADMD.





Jones, et al.           Expires December 27, 2016               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                  ARC-USAGE                      June 2016


   Some organizations may operate multiple ADMDs, with more or less
   independence between them.  While they should make a determination
   based on their specific circumstances, it may be useful and
   appropriate to have one or both ADMDs be ARC participants.

4.4.  What should an intermediary do in the case of an invalid or
      "broken" ARC chain?

   In general terms, a participating ARC intermediary will note that an
   ARC chain was present and invalid, or broken, when it attaches its
   own ARC seal and signature.  However the fact that the ARC chain was
   invalid should have no impact on whether and how the message is
   delivered.

4.5.  What should I do in the case where there is no ARC chain present
      in a message?

   A participating ARC intermediary receiving a message with no ARC
   chain, and which will be delivered outside its ADMD, should start an
   ARC chain according to the ARC specification.  This will include
   capturing the normal email authentication results for the
   intermediary (SPF, DKIM, DMARC, etc), which will be conveyed as part
   of the ARC chain.

4.6.  How could ARC affect my reputation as an intermediary?

   Message receivers often operate reputation systems, which build a
   behavioral profile of various message handlers and intermediaries.
   The presence or absence of ARC is yet another data point that may be
   used as an input to such reputation systems.  Messages deemed to have
   good content may provide a positive signal for the intermediaries
   that handled it, while messages with bad content may provide a
   negative signal for the those intermediaries.  Intact and valid ARC
   elements may amplify or attenuate such signals, depending on the
   circumstances.

   Reputation systems are complex and usually specific to a given
   message receiver, and a meaningful discussion of such a broad topic
   is beyond the scope of this document.

4.7.  What can I do to influence my reputation as an intermediary?

   Today it is extremely simple for a malicious actor to construct a
   message that includes your identity as an intermediary, even though
   you never handled the message.  It is possible that an intermediary
   implementing ARC on all traffic it handles might receive some
   reputational benefit by making it easier to detect when their
   involvement in conveying bad traffic has been "forged."



Jones, et al.           Expires December 27, 2016               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                  ARC-USAGE                      June 2016


   As mentioned previously reputation systems are very complex and
   usually specific to a given message receiver, and a meaningful
   discussion of such a broad topic is beyond the scope of this
   document.

5.  Guidance for Originators

5.1.  Where can I find out more information?

   Please join the arc-discuss list at arc-discuss@dmarc.org
   [1][mailto:arc-discuss@dmarc.org].

5.2.  How/where can I test interoperabililty for my implementation?

   The arc-discuss list is the best place to stay in touch with work in
   progress.

5.3.  How can ARC impact my email?

   Prior to ARC, certain DMARC policies on a domain would cause messages
   using those domains in the RFC5322.From field, and which pass through
   certain kinds of intermediaries (mailing lists, forwarding services),
   to fail authentication checks at the message receiver.  As a result
   these messages might not be delivered to the intended recipient.

   ARC seeks to provide these so-called "indirect mailflows" with a
   means to preserve email authentication results as seen by
   participating intermediaries.  Message receivers may accept ARC
   results to supplement the information that DMARC provides,
   potentially deciding to deliver the message even though a DMARC check
   did not pass.

   The net result for domain owners and senders is that ARC may allow
   messages routed through participating ARC intermediaries to be
   delivered, even though those messages would not have been delivered
   in the absence of ARC.

5.4.  How can ARC impact my reputation as a message sender?

   Message receivers often operate reputation systems, which build a
   behavioral profile of various message senders (and perhaps
   intermediaries).  The presence or absence of ARC is yet another data
   point that may be used as an input to such reputation systems.
   Messages deemed to have good content may provide a positive signal
   for the sending domain and the intermediaries that handled it, while
   messages with bad content may provide a negative signal for the
   sending domain and the intermediaries that handled it.  Intact and




Jones, et al.           Expires December 27, 2016              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft                  ARC-USAGE                      June 2016


   valid ARC elements may amplify or attenuate such signals, depending
   on the circumstances.

   Reputation systems are complex and usually specific to a given
   message receiver, and a meaningful discussion of such a broad topic
   is beyond the scope of this document.

5.5.  Can I tell intermediaries not to use ARC?

   At present there is no way for a message sender to request that
   intermediaries not employ ARC.

6.  References

6.1.  Normative References

   [RFC5321]  Klensin, J., "Simple Mail Transfer Protocol", RFC 5321,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC5321, October 2008,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5321>.

   [RFC5322]  Resnick, P., Ed., "Internet Message Format", RFC 5322,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC5322, October 2008,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5322>.

   [RFC5598]  Crocker, D., "Internet Mail Architecture", RFC 5598,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC5598, July 2009,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5598>.

   [RFC7601]  Kucherawy, M., "Message Header Field for Indicating
              Message Authentication Status", RFC 7601,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC7601, August 2015,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7601>.

6.2.  Informative References

   [ARC]      Andersen, K., Rae-Grant, J., Long, B., Adams, T., and S.
              Jones, "Authenticated Received Chain (ARC) Protocol", June
              2016, <https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-ietf-dmarc-arc-
              protocol-00>.

   [DMARC-INTEROP]
              Martin, F., Lear, E., Draegen, T., Zwicky, E., and K.
              Andersen, "Interoperability Issues Between DMARC and
              Indirect Email Flows", June 2016,
              <https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-ietf-dmarc-
              interoperability-17>.





Jones, et al.           Expires December 27, 2016              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft                  ARC-USAGE                      June 2016


   [ENHANCED-STATUS]
              "IANA SMTP Enhanced Status Codes", n.d.,
              <http://www.iana.org/assignments/smtp-enhanced-status-
              codes/smtp-enhanced-status-codes.xhtml>.

   [OAR]      Chew, M. and M. Kucherawy, "Original-Authentication-
              Results Header Field", February 2012,
              <https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-kucherawy-original-
              authres-00>.

   [RFC7489]  Kucherawy, M., Ed. and E. Zwicky, Ed., "Domain-based
              Message Authentication, Reporting, and Conformance
              (DMARC)", RFC 7489, DOI 10.17487/RFC7489, March 2015,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7489>.

6.3.  URIs

   [1] mailto:arc-discuss@dmarc.org

   [2] mailto:arc-discuss@dmarc.org

Appendix A.  GLOSSARY

   ADMD  Administrative Management Domain as used in [RFC5598] and
      similar references refers to a single entity operating one or more
      computers within one or more domain names under said entity's
      control.  One example might be a small company with a single
      server, handling email for that company's domain.  Another example
      might be a large university, operating many servers that fulfill
      different roles, all handling email for several different domains
      representing parts of the university.

   ARC  ARC is an acronym: Authentication Results Chain - see also [ARC]

   ARC-Seal  An [RFC5322] message header field formed in compliance with
      the ARC specification.  It includes certain content from all prior
      ARC participants, if there are any.

   ARC-Message-Signature (also abbreviated as "AMS")  An [RFC5322]
      message header field formed in compliance with the [ARC]
      specification.  It includes certain content about the message as
      it was received and manipulated by the intermediary who inserted
      it.

   ARC-Authentication-Results (also abbreviated as "AAR")  An [RFC5322]
      message header field formed in compliance with the [ARC]
      specification.  It includes certain content about the message as
      it was received by the intermediary.



Jones, et al.           Expires December 27, 2016              [Page 12]

Internet-Draft                  ARC-USAGE                      June 2016


   Authentication Results Chain (ARC)  A system that allows a Message
      Receiver to identify Intermediaries or Message Handlers who have
      conveyed a particular message.  For more information see the
      Abstract of this document, or refer to [ARC].

   Domain Naming System Block List (DNSBL)  This is a system widely used
      in email filtering services whereby information about the past
      activity of a set of hosts or domains indicates that messages
      should not be accepted from them, or at least should be subject to
      greater scrutiny before being accepted.  Common examples would be
      SpamCop, Spamhaus.org, SORBS, etc.

   Email Service Provider (ESP)  An Email Service Provider is typically
      a vendor or partner firm that sends mail on behalf of another
      company.  They may use email addresses in Internet domains
      belonging to the client or partner firm in various [RFC5321]
      fields or [RFC5322] message header fields of the messages they
      send on their behalf.

   Intermediary  In the context of [ARC], an Intermediary is typically
      an Administrative Management Domain (per [RFC5598]) that is
      receiving a message, potentially manipulating or altering it, and
      then passing it on to another ADMD for delivery.  Also see
      [DMARC-INTEROP] for more information and discussion.  Common
      examples of Intermediaries are mailing lists, alumni or
      professional email address providers like universities or
      professional organizations, et cetera.

   Mail/Message Transfer Agent (MTA)  This refers to software that sends
      and receives email messsages across a network with other MTAs.
      Often run on dedicated servers, common examples are Exim,
      Microsoft Exchange, Postfix, and Sendmail.

   Mailflow  A group of messages that share features in common.  Typical
      examples would be all messages sent by a given Message Sender to a
      Message Receiver, related to a particular announcement, a given
      mailing list, et cetera.

   Malicious Actor  A Malicious Actor is a party, often an Intermediary,
      that will take actions that seek to exploit or defraud the
      ultimate recipient of the message, or subvert the network controls
      and infrastructure of the Message Receiver.  Typical examples
      would be a spammer who forges content or attributes of a message
      in order to evade anti-spam measures, or an entity that adds an
      attachment containing a virus to a message.

   Message Handler  A Message Handler is another name for an
      Intermediary.



Jones, et al.           Expires December 27, 2016              [Page 13]

Internet-Draft                  ARC-USAGE                      June 2016


   Message Receiver  In the transmission of an email message from one
      ADMD to another, this is the organization receiving the message on
      behalf of the intended recipient or end user.  The Message
      Receiver may do this because the intended recipient is an employee
      or member of the organization, or because the end user utilizes
      email services provided by the Message Receiver (Comcast, GMail,
      Yahoo, QQ, et cetera).

   Message Sender  In the transmission of an email message from one ADMD
      to another, this is the organization sending the message on behalf
      of the Originator or end user.

   Originator  This refers to the author of a given email message.  In
      different contexts it may refer to the end-user writing the
      message, or the ADMD providing email services to that end-user.

   Reputation  In the larger context of email hygiene - blocking spam
      and malicious messages - reputation generally refers to a wide
      variety of techniques and mechanisms whereby a message receiver
      uses the past actions of a sending host or domain to influence the
      handling of messages received from them in the future.  One of the
      classic examples would be a Spamhaus-style DNSBL, where individual
      IP addresses will be blocked from sending messages because they've
      been identified as being bad actors.  Very large message receivers
      may build and maintain their own reputation systems of this kind,
      whereas other organizations might choose to use commercial
      products or free services.

   Reputation Service Provider  A Reputation Service Provider would be a
      source of reputation information about a message sender.  In this
      context, the DNSBL services offered by Spamhaus would allow them
      to be referred to as an RPS.  Many spam and virus filtering
      vendors incorporate similar functionality into their services.

   Request For Comment (RFC)  RFCs are memoranda that "contain technical
      and organizational notes about the Internet."  Created and managed
      by the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), they are de facto
      standards for various methods of communicating or collaborating
      over the Internet.

   RFC5321 - Simple Mail Transfer Protocol  This document describes the
      protocol used to transfer email messages between Message Transfer
      Agents (MTA) over a network.  Link: [RFC5321]

   RFC5322 - Internet Message Format  This document describes the format
      of Internet email messages, including both the header fields
      within the message and various types of content within the message
      body.  Link: [RFC5322]



Jones, et al.           Expires December 27, 2016              [Page 14]

Internet-Draft                  ARC-USAGE                      June 2016


   Validator  A Message Receiver that attempts to validate the ARC chain
      in a message.

Appendix B.  References

Appendix C.  Acknowledgements

   This draft is the work of OAR-Dev Group.

   The authors thanks the entire OAR-Dev group for the ongoing help,
   innumerable diagrams and discussions from all the participants,
   especially: Alex Brotman, Brandon Long, Dave Crocker, Elizabeth
   Zwicky, Franck Martin, Greg Colburn, J.  Trent Adams, John Rae-Grant,
   Mike Hammer, Mike Jones, Steve Jones, Terry Zink, Tim Draegen.

Appendix D.  Comments and Feedback

   Please address all comments, discussions, and questions to arc-
   discuss@dmarc.org [2][mailto:arc-discuss@dmarc.org].

Authors' Addresses

   Steven Jones
   DMARC.org

   Email: smj@crash.com


   John Rae-Grant
   Google

   Email: johnrg@google.com


   J. Trent Adams
   Paypal

   Email: trent.adams@paypal.com


   Kurt Andersen (editor)
   LinkedIn
   2029 Stierlin Ct.
   Mountain View, California  94043
   USA

   Email: kurta@linkedin.com




Jones, et al.           Expires December 27, 2016              [Page 15]
