


Internet Engineering Task Force                                T. Scholl
Internet-Draft                                                      AT&T
Intended status: Standards Track                              J. Scudder
Expires: September 5, 2009                              Juniper Networks
                                                           March 4, 2009


                          BGP Advisory Message
                    draft-scholl-idr-advisory-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 5, 2009.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents in effect on the date of
   publication of this document (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info).
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.

Abstract

   The BGP routing protocol is used with external as well as internal
   neighbors to propagate route advertisements.  In the case of external



Scholl & Scudder        Expires September 5, 2009               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft            BGP Advisory Message                March 2009


   BGP sessions, there is typically a demarcation of administrative
   responsibility between the two entities.  Provisioning, maintenance
   and administrative actions are communicated via off-line methods such
   as email or telephone calls.  While these methods have been used for
   many years, it can be troublesome for an operator to correlate a BGP-
   related event in the network with a notice that was transmitted in
   email.

   This document proposes a new BGP message type, the Advisory message,
   which can be used to convey advisory information to a BGP speaker's
   peer.  A capability is used to ensure that the recipient of the
   Advisory message is capable of supporting it.


1.  Introduction

   The BGP routing protocol is used with external as well as internal
   neighbors to propagate route advertisements.  In the case of external
   BGP sessions, there is typically a demarcation of administrative
   responsibility between the two entities.  Provisioning, maintenance
   and administrative actions are communicated via off-line methods such
   as email or telephone calls.  While these methods have been used for
   many years, it can be troublesome for an operator to correlate a BGP-
   related event in the network with a notice that was transmitted in
   email.

   There are several events that require communication between the
   administrators of peering routers.  When a router is shut down for
   maintenance resulting in BGP sessions to many neighbors being reset,
   operators may be unable to correlate the event to an already notified
   maintenance action.  In addition, maintenance actions via email may
   contain outdated trouble ticket information, incorrect router names
   or incomplete time zones specified.  Another complication is that
   email based notifications are not always sent to the correct parties.
   It is common in the settlement-free peering world for the
   administrative/policy contacts to be separate from the technical/
   troubleshooting contacts.

   This draft outlines a method to provide within BGP the ability to
   transmit a text message to a BGP neighbor.  This capability can speed
   up operator reaction and resolution time by providing a direct
   correlation between a BGP event and the root cause.  This eliminates
   the possibility for an operator to be "out of the loop" to any off-
   line notifications of events.







Scholl & Scudder        Expires September 5, 2009               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft            BGP Advisory Message                March 2009


1.1.  Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].


2.  Capability

   A new BGP capability [RFC5492] called Advisory is introduced, with
   type code TBD.  This capability indicates that the router advertising
   it is capable of receiving and parsing Advisory messages.  The
   capability is of variable length.  The data portion of the capability
   lists the Advisory message subtypes which are supported.  The String
   subtype MUST be supported, which implies that the length MUST be at
   least 2 if the capability is advertised.


3.  Advisory Message

   The Advisory message is a BGP message of type TBD.  It consists of a
   BGP fixed header followed by a two-byte subtype and a data portion of
   variable length, calculated according to the Length field in the
   fixed header.  The format of the data portion is dependent on the
   subtype.  This document defines the following subtypes:

      0 - Reserved:

         MUST NOT be sent, MUST be ignored (other than optionally
         logging an error) on receipt.

      1 - String:

         A message comprised of a string of ASCII characters.  The
         string's length is given by the length of the message, there is
         no null termination.  Upon reception, the string SHOULD be
         reported to the router's administrator.  The means of reporting
         the string are implementation-specific but could include
         methods such as syslog.

   While this document mandates no particular events for which advisory
   messages should be generated, one suggested application is if a peer
   is approaching a configured prefix limit.  It is also likely that an
   implementation will want to provide a way for an arbitrary, user-
   specified string to be sent.  Implementations MUST limit the rate at
   which advisory messages are sent for any particular type of event.

   As its name implies the Advisory message is intended to be used to



Scholl & Scudder        Expires September 5, 2009               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft            BGP Advisory Message                March 2009


   advise a peer of some condition which may be of interest to that peer
   (or its administrator).  It MUST NOT be used as a replacement for the
   Notification message in fatal error situations (i.e., situations
   where the integrity of the BGP peering is violated or suspect),
   although an Advisory message MAY precede a Notification message.


4.  Error Handling

   An Advisory message MUST NOT be sent to any peer which has not
   advertised the Advisory capability indicating support for the
   relevant subtype.  If a router which has advertised the Advisory
   capability receives an Advisory message with a subtype for which it
   has not advertised support, it MUST accept and discard that message.
   It MAY locally log an error when this occurs.


5.  IANA Considerations

   IANA is requested to allocate a type code for the Advisory message
   from the BGP Message Types registry, to allocate a type code for the
   Advisory Capability from the Capability Codes registry, and to
   establish and maintain a registry for BGP Advisory message subtypes,
   to be allocated according to the First Come First Served policy
   defined in [RFC5226].


6.  Security Considerations

   No new security issues are introduced to the BGP protocol by this
   specification.


7.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC5226]  Narten, T. and H. Alvestrand, "Guidelines for Writing an
              IANA Considerations Section in RFCs", BCP 26, RFC 5226,
              May 2008.

   [RFC5492]  Scudder, J. and R. Chandra, "Capabilities Advertisement
              with BGP-4", RFC 5492, February 2009.







Scholl & Scudder        Expires September 5, 2009               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft            BGP Advisory Message                March 2009


Authors' Addresses

   Tom Scholl
   AT&T

   Email: ts3127@att.com


   John Scudder
   Juniper Networks

   Email: jgs@juniper.net







































Scholl & Scudder        Expires September 5, 2009               [Page 5]


