


    Network Working Group                                   Greg Vaudreuil
    Internet Draft                                     Lucent Technologies
    Expires in six months                                    Glenn Parsons
    Obsoletes: RFC 1911                                   Northern Telecom
                                                         November 21, 1997


                               VPIM Voice Message
                           MIME Sub-type Registration

                          <draft-ema-vpim-vmsg-02.txt>

      Status of this Memo

      This document is an Internet Draft.  Internet Drafts are working
      documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its Areas,
      and its Working Groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute
      working documents as Internet Drafts.

      Internet Drafts are valid for a maximum of six months and may be
      updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any time.  It
      is inappropriate to use Internet Drafts as reference material or to
      cite them other than as a "work in progress".

      To learn the current status of any Internet-Draft, please check the
      "1id-abstracts.txt" listing contained in the Internet-Drafts Shadow
      Directories on ftp.is.co.za (Africa), nic.nordu.net (Europe),
      munnari.oz.au (Pacific Rim), ds.internic.net (US East Coast), or
      ftp.isi.edu (US West Coast).


      Copyright Notice

      Copyright (C) The Internet Society (1997).  All Rights Reserved.


      Overview

      This document describes the registration of the MIME sub-type
      multipart/voice-message for use with the Voice Profile for Internet
      Mail (VPIM).  A full description of usage can be found in the VPIM
      v2 specification.


    Internet Draft         multipart/voice-message       November 21, 1997



      1.  Abstract

      This document describes the registration of the MIME sub-type
      multipart/voice-message for use with the Voice Profile for Internet
      Mail (VPIM).  A full description of usage can be found in the VPIM
      v2 specification [VPIM2].  This document revises an earlier sub-type
      registration in RFC 1911 [VPIM1].


      2. VPIM Scope

      The VPIM specification defines a restricted profile of the Internet
      multimedia messaging protocols for use between voice processing
      platforms.  These platforms have historically been special-purpose
      computers and often do not have the same facilities normally
      associated with a traditional Internet Email-capable computer.  As a
      result, VPIM also specifies additional functionality as it is
      needed.  The profile is intended to specify the minimum common set
      of features to allow interworking between compliant systems.


      3. Voice Message Interchange

      3.1 multipart/voice-message

      The MIME sub-type multipart/voice-message is defined to hold
      specific media contents that are interchanged in messages between
      voice messaging systems described in [VPIM2].  Essentially, the sub-
      type provides a simple wrapper that easily identifies the entire
      content as being the components of a single voice message.  The sub-
      type is identical in semantics and syntax to multipart/mixed, as
      defined in [MIME2].  As such, it may be safely interpreted as a
      multipart/mixed by systems that do not understand the sub-type (only
      the identification as a voice message would be lost).

      This mechanism allows the insertion of an explanatory preamble (e.g.
      VPIM voice message attached) for recipients who read the message
      with pre-MIME software, since the preamble will be ignored by MIME-
      compliant software.

      In addition to the MIME required boundary parameter, a version
      parameter is also required for this sub-type.  This is to
      distinguish, this refinement of the sub-type from the previous
      definition in [VPIM1].  The value of the version parameter is "2.0"
      if the content conforms to the requirements of [VPIM2].  Should
      there be further revisions of this content type, there MUST be
      backwards compatibility (i.e. systems implementing version n can
      read version 2, and systems implementing version 2 can read version
      2 contents within a version n).  The default version value (when the
      parameter is missing) is 1, indicating the content conforms to the
      requirements of [VPIM1].



    Vaudreuil, Parsons         Expires 05/21/98                   [Page 2]


    Internet Draft         multipart/voice-message       November 21, 1997


      [VPIM2] describes the restriction that only specific media types,
      applicable to voice messaging, are valid `next-level' contents of
      this sub-type (when version=2.0).  They are: audio/*, image/*,
      message/rfc822 and application/directory.  The multipart provides
      for the packaging of as many of these contents as is necessary.

      3.2 VPIM v2 Usage

      The multipart/voice-message sub-type is a primary component of the
      VPIM specification [VPIM2].  All VPIM Messages MUST contain this
      sub-type to identify the wrapping of a voice message.  The contents
      of this wrapper can vary from only one audio/32KADPCM content to a
      complex set of related and nested contents.

      Typically, if more than one audio segment is present, the first is
      the spoken name of the originator, the second is the spoken subject,
      and the third is the voice message itself.  This order, however,
      MUST NOT be assumed in any case.  Further, the order that the
      contents appear SHOULD be the order in which they are presented to
      the user.

      The spoken name segment, if available, shall contain the name of the
      message sender in the voice of the sender.  The length of the spoken
      name segment must not exceed 12 seconds.

      The spoken subject segment, if available, shall contain the subject
      of the message sender in the voice of the sender.  The length of the
      spoken subject segment must not exceed 20 seconds.

      The directory information part, if present, will contain information
      specific to the orginator of the voice message.

      Refer to the VPIM v2 Specification for details on proper usage.


      4.  IANA Registration

           To: ietf-types@iana.org
           Subject: Registration of MIME media type multipart/voice-
                    message

           MIME media type name: multipart

           MIME subtype name: voice-message

           Required parameters: boundary, version

              The use of boundary is defined in [MIME2]

              The version parameter that contains the value "2.0" if
              enclosed content conforms to [VPIM2].  The absence of this
              parameter indicates conformance to the previous version
              defined in RFC 1911 [VPIM1].


    Vaudreuil, Parsons         Expires 05/21/98                   [Page 3]


    Internet Draft         multipart/voice-message       November 21, 1997


           Optional parameters: none

           Encoding considerations: 7bit, 8bit or Binary

           Security considerations:

              This defintion introduces the enforcement of explicitly
              identifying the content as being a voice message.  In some
              environments (though likely not the majority), the loss of
              the anonymity of the content may be a security issue.

           Interoperability considerations:

              Systems developed to conform with [VPIM1] may not conform to
              this registration.  Specifically, the required version will
              likely be absent, in this case the recipient system should
              still be able to accept the message and will be able to
              handle the content.  The VPIM v1 positional identification,
              however, would likely be lost.

           Published specification:
               This document
               [VPIM2]

           Applications which use this media type: primarily voice
                                                   messaging

           Additional information:

             Magic number(s): ?
             File extension(s): .VPM
             Macintosh File Type Code(s): VPIM

           Person & email address to contact for further information:

             Glenn W. Parsons
             Glenn.Parsons@Nortel.ca

             Gregory M. Vaudreuil
             Greg.Vaudreuil@Octel.Com

           Intended usage: COMMON

           Author/Change controller:

             Glenn W. Parsons & Gregory M. Vaudreuil









    Vaudreuil, Parsons         Expires 05/21/98                   [Page 4]


    Internet Draft         multipart/voice-message       November 21, 1997


      5. Authors' Addresses

      Glenn W. Parsons
      Northern Telecom
      P.O. Box 3511, Station C
      Ottawa, ON  K1Y 4H7
      Canada
      Phone: +1-613-763-7582
      Fax: +1-613-763-4461
      Glenn.Parsons@Nortel.ca

      Gregory M. Vaudreuil
      Lucent Technologies
       Octel Messaging Division
      17080 Dallas Parkway
      Dallas, TX  75248-1905
      United States
      Phone/Fax: +1-972-733-2722
      GregV@Lucent.Com


      6. References

      [MIME2] N. Freed and N. Borenstein,  "Multipurpose Internet Mail
           Extensions (MIME) Part Two: Media Types ", RFC 2046, Innosoft,
           First Virtual, Nov 1996.

      [MIME4] N. Freed and N. Borenstein,  "Multipurpose Internet Mail
           Extensions (MIME) Part Four: Registration Procedures", RFC
           2048, Innosoft, First Virtual, Nov 1996.

      [VPIM1] Vaudreuil, Greg, "Voice Profile for Internet Mail", RFC
           1911, Feb 1996.

      [VPIM2] Greg Vaudreuil and Glenn Parsons, "Voice Profile for
           Internet Mail - version 2", Work in Progress, <draft-ema.vpim-
           07.txt> November 1997.

      7.  Full Copyright Statement

      Copyright (C) The Internet Society (1997).  All Rights Reserved.

      This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
      others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
      or assist in its implmentation may be prepared, copied, published
      and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
      kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph
      are included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
      document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
      the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
      Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
      developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
      copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
      followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
      English.

    Vaudreuil, Parsons         Expires 05/21/98                   [Page 5]


    Internet Draft         multipart/voice-message       November 21, 1997



      The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
      revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

      This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
      "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
      TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
      BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
      HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
      MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE."













































    Vaudreuil, Parsons         Expires 05/21/98                   [Page 6]
