



Domain Name System Operations                                      H. Yu
Internet-Draft                                                     Z. Li
Intended status: Informational                                   D. Gong
Expires: 24 June 2022                                            Y. Song
                                                                  Y. Liu
 Guangzhou Root Chain International Network Research Institute Co., Ltd.
                                                        21 December 2021


                       Multi Distribution master
                        draft-yu-dnsops-disdm-02

Abstract

   DM (Distribution Master) is used to transfer zone file data between
   the registry and the authoritative server.  The centralized DM system
   has the risk of a single point of failure.  The distributed DM
   architecture allows nodes to join and exit at any time to solve the
   single point of failure problem.

Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119] [RFC8174]
   when, and only when, they appear in all capitals, as shown here.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 24 June 2022.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2021 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.



Yu, et al.                Expires 24 June 2022                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                     MDM                     December 2021


   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  research status . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   3.  Multi-DM innovation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   4.  Distributed multi-DM network management system  . . . . . . .   3
   5.  Node consensus technology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   6.  Threshold signatures  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   7.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   8.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   9.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   10. References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     10.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     10.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6

1.  Introduction

   Blockchain makes up for the shortcomings of the traditional DM
   system.  The distributed feature improves the security of the system,
   the unlimited expansion feature improves the stability of the DM
   system, and the high autonomy feature brings the transparency of DNS
   data management.  At the same time, the blockchain is the nemesis of
   DDoS attacks.  Even if a certain node is attacked, other nodes can
   still operate normally without causing system breakdown.  This draft
   is dedicated to building a distributed DM system and upgrading the
   traditional centralized DM node to a DM system without a central
   node.  Using the existing blockchain technology, each node processes
   the domain file after reaching a consensus to ensure the uniformity
   and effectiveness of the domain file.

2.  research status

   In recent years, there have been few researches on DNS in foreign
   countries, and the main research is in the direction of architecture
   and innovating on the architecture.  The Russian National Nuclear
   Energy Research University proposed the main advantages and
   disadvantages of blockchain technology in the process of implementing
   a distributed DNS system, as well as the threats posed by blockchain



Yu, et al.                Expires 24 June 2022                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                     MDM                     December 2021


   . South Korea proposed a method to implement DNS using distributed
   ledger technology blockchain, and implement it using an Ethereum-
   based platform.  In addition, a qualitative analysis and performance
   comparison evaluation of the existing domain name registration and
   domain name servers are carried out, and the security evaluation of
   the proposed system is carried out to improve the security problems
   of the existing DNS . The Institute of Electrical and Electronics
   Engineers puts forward a new blockchain-based decentralized DNS data
   storage method by studying the principles and characteristics of the
   blockchain, and implements a DNS decentralized system, establishes
   multiple parallel DNS nodes and storage areas The key information of
   file parsing data . Georgia State University proposes a system that
   can replace the current top DNS system and certification authority,
   providing higher scalability, security, and robustness.  Based on
   distributed hash table, and using the domain name ownership system
   based on Bitcoin blockchain.

3.  Multi-DM innovation

   Multi-DM has the following two innovations: (1) Distributed DM system
   This project is dedicated to building a distributed DM system,
   upgrading the traditional centralized DM node to a DM system without
   a central node.  Using the existing blockchain technology, each node
   processes the domain file after reaching a consensus to ensure the
   uniformity and effectiveness of the domain file. (2) Elastic
   contraction and expansion Traditional DM is a single node, which
   leads to excessive power of this node.  If it is invaded or
   collapsed, it will paralyze the entire Internet.  The nodes in the DM
   can withdraw or join at any time to ensure that the power of each
   node is consistent and dilute the power of the original single node.

4.  Distributed multi-DM network management system

   The distributed multi-DM network management system is the core of the
   architecture, and its responsibilities are as follows; (1) Load
   initial configuration, including DM static IP list, etc.;

   (2) Use the election and heartbeat mechanism of the RAFT algorithm to
   elect the primary node, and initiate a heartbeat to other nodes
   through the primary node;

   (3) Manage the joining and exit of DM.  The joining of a new node
   requires that all nodes can recognize the node, and the exit needs to
   notify each node to delete the corresponding information and the
   information stored by itself;

   (4) Maintain the update of DM, including the change of node
   information in the system, etc.



Yu, et al.                Expires 24 June 2022                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                     MDM                     December 2021


   Each DM runs on a P2P network, where the P2P network can ensure that
   each node can communicate, that is, two DMs can communicate at
   random, and the heartbeat mechanism is integrated on the P2P network.
   There is an IP list in each DM, which stores the IP information of
   all nodes in the system, and subsequent operations on the system are
   performed on this list.  The addition of a new node means that the IP
   information of the new node is added to this list.  When the node
   exits, the information about this node in this list is deleted.  Node
   update means that the information of this node in this list is
   changed.  The DM network management platform system has two states:

   (1) Initialization state The initialization state is the process of
   establishing the network.  Each node loads a static list.  After the
   loading is completed, the IP of each node is recorded in each DM, and
   the primary node is elected.  After the primary node election is
   completed, the state ends.

   (2) Steady state After the election, it enters a stable state, and
   the primary node sends a heartbeat detection to the ordinary node to
   ensure the normal operation of each node.  The joining, exiting and
   updating of new nodes are only allowed in a stable state.  The
   joining of new nodes requires the approval of DMMC.  The sign of
   joining is that the IP of the new node is added to the IP list of
   each node.  When a node exits, it needs to completely delete its own
   information, while other nodes delete related information (identity
   verification information, IP information, etc.) of the node.

5.  Node consensus technology

   RAFT is a consensus algorithm.  The so-called consensus is that
   multiple nodes reach a consensus on something, even in the case of
   partial node failures, network delays, and network partitions.
   Consensus algorithm is the core of blockchain technology, and in
   distributed systems, consensus algorithms are more used to improve
   the fault tolerance of the system, such as replication in distributed
   storage.  The two main technical points of RAFT are problem
   decomposition and state simplification.  Problem decomposition is to
   divide the complex problem of "node consistency in replication set"
   into several sub-problems that can be independently explained,
   understood, and solved.  In RAFT, sub-problems include leader
   election, log replication, safety, and membership changes.  The state
   simplification is better understood, which is to make some
   restrictions on the algorithm, reduce the number of states that need
   to be considered, and make the algorithm clearer and less uncertain.
   PBFT provides (n-1)/3 fault tolerance on the premise of guaranteeing
   availability and safety (liveness and safety), which means that if
   there are n machines in the system, the maximum number of malicious/
   faulty nodes that the system can tolerate is (n-1)/3 pieces.  (The



Yu, et al.                Expires 24 June 2022                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                     MDM                     December 2021


   malicious node may not respond or respond with wrong information).
   The distributed DM system uses a new algorithm combining RAFT and
   PBFT to solve the problem of trust and fault tolerance between nodes.

6.  Threshold signatures

   Threshold signatures introduce HSM, which is a system that provides a
   low-cost and high-security solution for key storage.  For sensitive
   information such as keys, HSM provides logical and physical
   protection to prevent unauthorized access and intrusion.  HSM
   provides tamper evidence (tamper evidence) and tamper resistance
   (tamper evidence) in two ways to prevent tampering.  It is used in
   threshold signatures and is responsible for generating and storing
   the keys used to sign DNS zone files.  The management of HSM is
   rotated by DMMC, and two HSMs are set up to achieve high availability
   of the system.  HSM has the following functions:

   Security key generation Security key storage and management Encrypt
   sensitive information Uninstall symmetric and asymmetric encryption
   calculations of the application server

   The specific process is as follows: (1) The Primary node uses the (t,
   n) threshold signature method to generate a public key and n private
   key shares ski through HSM; (2) The Primary node distributes the
   private key share to each node, and this transmission uses a TCP
   connection to ensure the reliability of the connection; (3) After
   receiving the private key share, all nodes reply to DHSM to confirm
   that they have received the distributed private key share; (4)
   Primary node uses hash digest algorithm to generate digest for RR;
   (5) Distribute the RR summary to each node;

   Each node uses the private key share to sign, and returns the digest
   with the signature to the HSM to form a complete signature, and the
   signature file is stored in the Primary node.

7.  Security Considerations

8.  IANA Considerations

   This document does not include an IANA request.

9.  Acknowledgements

   The authors would like to acknowledge XXX for their valuable review
   and comments.

10.  References




Yu, et al.                Expires 24 June 2022                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                     MDM                     December 2021


10.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8174>.

10.2.  Informative References

   [RFC1035]  Mockapetris, P., "Domain names - implementation and
              specification", STD 13, RFC 1035, DOI 10.17487/RFC1035,
              November 1987, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc1035>.

Authors' Addresses

   Haisheng Yu
   Guangzhou Root Chain International Network Research Institute Co., Ltd.
   Xiangjiang International Technology Innovation Center, 41 Jinlong Road, Nansha District, Guangzhou
   Guangzhou
   China

   Email: hsyu@biigroup.cn


   Zhen Li
   Guangzhou Root Chain International Network Research Institute Co., Ltd.
   Xiangjiang International Technology Innovation Center, 41 Jinlong Road, Nansha District, Guangzhou
   Guangzhou
   China

   Email: zli@biigroup.com


   Daobiao Gong
   Guangzhou Root Chain International Network Research Institute Co., Ltd.
   Xiangjiang International Technology Innovation Center, 41 Jinlong Road, Nansha District, Guangzhou
   Guangzhou
   China

   Email: dbgong@biigroup.cn







Yu, et al.                Expires 24 June 2022                  [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                     MDM                     December 2021


   Yang Song
   Guangzhou Root Chain International Network Research Institute Co., Ltd.
   Xiangjiang International Technology Innovation Center, 41 Jinlong Road, Nansha District, Guangzhou
   Guangzhou
   China

   Email: ysong@biigroup.cn


   Yan Liu
   Guangzhou Root Chain International Network Research Institute Co., Ltd.
   Xiangjiang International Technology Innovation Center, 41 Jinlong Road, Nansha District, Guangzhou
   Guangzhou
   China

   Email: yliu@cfiec.net



































Yu, et al.                Expires 24 June 2022                  [Page 7]
