



Public Notary Transparency                                       S. Kent
Internet-Draft                                          BBN Technologies
Intended status: Standards Track                              R. Andrews
Expires: June 19, 2015                                          Symantec
                                                       December 16, 2014


   Syntactic and Semantic Checks for Extended Validation Certificates
          draft-kent-trans-extended-validation-cert-checks-00

Abstract

   Certificate Transparency (CT) [RFC6962-bis] is a system for publicly
   logging the existence of X.509 certificates as they are issued or
   observed.  The logging mechanism allows anyone to audit certification
   authority (CA) activity and detect the issuance of "suspect"
   certificates.  Detecting mis-issuance of certificates is a primary
   goal of CT.

   A certificate is considered to be mis-issued if it fails to meet
   syntactic and/or semantic criteria associated with the type of
   certificate being issued.  Mis-issuance can be detected by CT log
   servers, whose feedback to a CA could prompt the CA to not issue a
   suspect certificate.  (Preventing the mis-issuance of such a
   certificate is preferable to issuing it and detecting it later.)

   Compliant CT log servers could offer these checks to a CA submitting
   a pre-certificate to be logged.  These checks are intended to be used
   in an environment in which CAs optionally assert the version of the
   EV guidelines to which the submitted pre-certificate purportedly
   conforms.  Log servers would then perform the checks of supported
   [CABF-EV] versions and include the CA's assertion and the log
   server's result in its Signed Certificate Timestamp (SCT).

   Monitors can also perform checks to detect suspect certificates on
   behalf of certificate Subjects.  Checks performed by a Monitor also
   serve to double check log servers that claim to have checked a
   certificate, to identify those that are not doing the checks
   properly, e.g., because of errors, compromise, or conspiracy.  This
   provides Monitors and CT clients with additional information when
   choosing which logs to use.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.





Kent & Andrews            Expires June 19, 2015                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft   Extended Validation Certificate Checks    December 2014


   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on June 19, 2015.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2014 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Syntactic Checks  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     2.1.  EV Certificate Field Syntax Requirements  . . . . . . . .   4
     2.2.  Certificate Extension Syntax Requirements . . . . . . . .   5
     2.3.  Certificate Public Key: same as for DV certificates . . .   6
     2.4.  Certificate Signature: same as for DV certificates  . . .   6
   3.  Semantic Verification of an EV Certificate  . . . . . . . . .   6
   4.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   5.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   6.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     6.1.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     6.2.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9

1.  Introduction

   The following checks are extracted from the CA Browser Forum (CABF)
   document "Guidelines for the Issuance and Management of Extended
   Validation Certificates" version 1.5.2 [CABF-EV].  (If a new version



Kent & Andrews            Expires June 19, 2015                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft   Extended Validation Certificate Checks    December 2014


   of the CABF guidelines is created that alters any of the checks
   described below, a new CCID value MUST be assigned.)  These
   requirements are used to define what constitutes mis-issuance of a
   certificate in the context of certificate transparency (CT) for Web
   PKI certificates.  The CABF guidelines from which these checks are
   derived include many aspects of CA operation that are outside of the
   scope of CT-based detection of certificate mis-issuance, i.e., they
   impose requirements that could not be verified by a Monitor examining
   certificate logs.  Hence this document was created to provide an
   enumeration of EV certificate checks for the Web PKI CT context.

   The checks enumerated below are to be applied to any certificate
   submitted to a log with the Certificate Class ID (CCID) value of 2
   (see Section X of [CT RFC]).  Note that "root" CA certificates are
   not subject to verification against these criteria.  Each log
   maintains a list of the root CAs for which it is willing to accept
   SCT generation requests.  This implies that the log operator has
   already determined that these CAs, and their corresponding self-
   signed certificates, are acceptable.  A subordinate CA certificate
   will be checked only if it is submitted as the target of an SCT.  If
   a subordinate CA certificate appears as part of a chain submitted for
   SCT generation, but is not the last certificate (the End-Entity or EE
   certificate) in that chain, the checks enumerated below should be
   applied to the EE certificate but not the subordinate CA certificate.

   [CABF-EV] describes both syntactic and semantic requirements for
   certificate issuance.  This document deals primarily with syntactic
   checks, but also describes how semantic checks are to be performed.
   A log MAY perform the syntactic checks enumerated below if a
   certificate is submitted with a CCID value of 2.  If a log performs
   these syntactic checks, it adds the SSV value appropriate for the
   outcome of the check (see Section Z of [CT-RFC]).

   Monitors SHOULD perform both the syntactic and semantic checks
   described below for all certificates that they protect, and which are
   marked with a CCID value of 2.

2.  Syntactic Checks

   An X.509 certificate consists of a set of fields (all but two of
   which are mandatory), a set of optional extensions, a public key and
   a signature.  This section defines the syntactic requirements imposed
   on the certificate fields.  The following sections deal with
   extensions, public keys, and signatures.







Kent & Andrews            Expires June 19, 2015                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft   Extended Validation Certificate Checks    December 2014


2.1.  EV Certificate Field Syntax Requirements

   [CABF-EV] establishes syntactic requirements for EV certificates.
   Many of these requirements are the same as for DV certificates.  The
   syntactic checks for DV certificates appear in [RFC-DV].  To avoid
   possible inconsistency between that RFC and this one, when the
   syntactic check for an EV certificate is the same as for a DV
   certificate, the phrase "same as for DV certificates" is inserted.

   1.   Version number: same as for DV certificates

   2.   certificate serial number: same as for DV certificates (Note
        that this is not the Subject Registration Number attribute
        discussed below.)

   3.   signature: same as for DV certificates

   4.   issuer: same as for DV certificates

   5.   validity: The maximum validity interval is 27 months.

   6.   subject: A certificate MAY contain a NULL Subject name.  If it
        contains a non-null Subject name:

        A.  It MUST contain the organizationName attribute.  This
            requirement is derived from Section 9.2.1 of [CABF-EV].

        B.  It MAY contain a commonName attribute.  If this attribute is
            present, it MUST contain a Fully-Qualified Domain Name (not
            a wildcard name).  This requirement is derived from
            Section 9.2.3 of [CABF-EV].

        C.  It MUST contain the businessCategory attribute, and the
            value of that attribute must match one of the four allowed
            values.  This requirement is derived from Section 9.2.4 of
            [CABF-EV].

        D.  It MUST contain the jurisdictionCountryName attribute as
            specified in [CABF-EV].  This requirement is derived from
            Section 9.2.5 of [CABF-EV].  (Note that this attribute is
            NOT defined in [RFC5280].)

        E.  It MAY contain the jurisdictionLocalityName as specified in
            [CABF-EV].  This requirement is derived from Section 9.2.5
            of [CABF-EV].  (Note that this attribute is NOT defined in
            [RFC5280].)





Kent & Andrews            Expires June 19, 2015                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft   Extended Validation Certificate Checks    December 2014


        F.  It MAY contain the jurisdictionStateOrProvinceName as
            specified in [CABF-EV].  This requirement is derived from
            Section 9.2.5 of [CABF-EV].  (Note that this attribute is
            NOT defined in [RFC5280].)

        G.  It MUST contain the Subject Registration Number (also known
            as Subject:serialNumber) attribute.  This requirement is
            derived from Section 9.2.6 of [CABF-EV].

        H.  The countryName, stateOrProvinceName and localityName MUST
            be present and populated with values consistent with the
            syntax defined in [RFC5280].  This requirement is derived
            from Section 9.2.7 of [CABF-EV].

        I.  The localityName, streetAddress, and postalCode attributes
            MAY be present and if present, MUST be populated with values
            consistent with the syntax defined in [RFC5280].  This
            requirement is derived from Section 9.2.7 of [CABF-EV].

        J.  Other Subject attributes, as specified in Appendix A of
            [RFC5280], MAY appear.  These attributes MUST NOT contain
            metadata such as '.', '-', or ' ' (i.e. space) characters.
            This requirement is derived from section 9.2.8 of [CABF-EV].

   7.   subjectPublicKeyInfo: same as for DV certificates.

   8.   issuerUniqueId: same as for DV certificates.

   9.   subjectUniqueId: same as for DV certificates.

   10.  signatureAlgorithm: same as for DV certificates.

   11.  signatureValue: same as for DV certificates.

2.2.  Certificate Extension Syntax Requirements

   An X.509 v3 certificate may contain extensions.  [CABF-EV] mandates
   the presence of several extensions, and imposes requirements on their
   content.

   1.  The subjectAltName extension: same requirements as for DV
       certificates, except Wildcard FQDNs are not permitted.  This
       requirement is derived from Section 9.2.2 of [CABF-EV].

   2.  A certificate issued to a Subscriber MUST include the
       certificatePolicies extension.  It MAY or MAY NOT be marked
       CRITICAL.  It MUST contain one or more policy identifiers
       associated with an extended validation policy of the Issuer.



Kent & Andrews            Expires June 19, 2015                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft   Extended Validation Certificate Checks    December 2014


       This requirement is derived from Section 9.3.2 and 9.3.5 of
       [CABF-EV].  There are two commonly cited references for EV OIDs:
       http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Extended_Validation_Certificate and
       https://code.google.com/p/chromium/codesearch#chromium/src/net/
       cert/ev_root_ca_metadata.cc&sq=package:chromium

       A log or Monitor checking a certificate that purports to be an EV
       certificate SHOULD use these references to verify that it
       contains an appropriate policy OID.

       This extension MUST contain certificatePolicies:policyIdentifier,
       certificatePolicies:policyQualifiers:policyQualifierId (id-qt 1)
       and certificatePolicies:policyQualifiers:qualifier:cPSuri (the
       URL for the CA's CPS).  This requirement is derived from
       Section 9.7 paragraph (3) of [CABF-EV].

   3.  basicConstraints: same as for DV certificates.

   4.  The cRLDistributionPoints extension MUST be present in a CA
       certificate.  It MUST NOT be marked critical and it MUST contain
       an HTTP URL.  This extension MUST be present in a Subscriber
       certificate if the certificate does not specify an OCSP responder
       location in the authorityInformationAccess extension.

   5.  keyUsage extension: same as for DV certificates.

   6.  authorityInformationAccess extension: same as for DV certificates

   7.  extendedKeyUsage extension: same as for DV certificates.

   8.  nameConstraints extension: same as for DV certificates

   9.  Other extensions defined in [RFC5280]: same as for DV
       certificates.

2.3.  Certificate Public Key: same as for DV certificates

2.4.  Certificate Signature: same as for DV certificates

3.  Semantic Verification of an EV Certificate

   The fundamental semantic check that a Monitor MUST perform is to
   detect bogus certificates on behalf of its clients.  A client of a
   Monitor provides the Monitor with a set of certificates that have
   been issued to the client.  (Note that a client may have multiple
   certificates issued to its name, and thus there is not a one-to-one
   mapping between names and public keys.)  These certificates MUST be
   acquired in a secure fashion, not using certificate discovery



Kent & Andrews            Expires June 19, 2015                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft   Extended Validation Certificate Checks    December 2014


   protocols or relying on databases operated by a CA or RA.  Armed with
   this information, a Monitor can examine every log entry to determine
   if it contains the same Subject or subjectAltName as that of a
   client.  If a log entry matches either of these names, and if it
   contains a public key distinct from the set of keys provided by the
   Subject, this is evidence of mis-issuance.  (Note that a Monitor
   cannot rely on a log operated by a CA, to detect mis-issuance by that
   CA.)  If a Monitor identifies what appears to be a bogus certificate,
   it notifies the client.  The means by which notification is effected
   is not specified.

   [CABF-EV] imposes a number of requirements on certificate issuance
   that cannot be verified without access to reference information for
   the certificate Subject, information about the CA hierarchy, or
   information about internal procedures of the CA.  Monitors are not
   presumed to be able to perform such checks.  Examples of such checks
   appear in Sections 7, 8, 9.1, and 9.2.4 of [CABF-EV].

   Additional semantic checks SHOULD be performed by a Monitor, if it
   has access to the requisite information.  These are enumerated below.

   1.  A certificate issued to a subordinate CA that is not controlled
       by a Root CA MUST NOT contain the anyPolicy policy identifier.
       This requirement is derived from section 9.3.4 (1) of [CABF-EV].
       Verification of this requirement requires knowledge of CA
       organizational relationships and thus may not be available to all
       Monitors.

   2.  A certificate issued to a subordinate CA that is not controlled
       by the issuing CA MUST include one or more policy identifiers
       defined by the issuing CA that explicitly identify the EV
       Policies that are implemented by the Subordinate CA.  This
       requirement is derived from section 9.3.4 (1) of [CABF-EV].  If
       the extension contains any of the OIDs noted explicitly above, it
       is acceptable.  Verification of this requirement requires
       knowledge of CA organizational relationships and thus may not be
       available to all Monitors.

   3.  The Subject's Jurisdiction of Incorporation, Registration, or
       Place of Business MUST not be in any country with which the laws
       of the CA's jurisdiction prohibit doing business.  This
       suggestion is derived from Section 11.12.2 (1) (B) of [CABF-EV].

   4.  The Subject's organizationName attribute MUST contain the
       Subject's full legal organization name as listed in the official
       records of the Incorporating or Registration Agency in the
       Subject's Jurisdiction of Incorporation or Registration, although




Kent & Andrews            Expires June 19, 2015                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft   Extended Validation Certificate Checks    December 2014


       abbreviations are permitted.  This requirement is derived from
       Section 9.2.1 of [CABF-EV].

   5.  The Domain Names in the subjectAltName extension MUST be owned or
       controlled by the Subject, or MUST have been owned or controlled
       by the Subject at the time of certificate issuance.  This
       requirement is derived from Section 9.2.2 of [CABF-EV].

   6.  The Domain Name in the Subject Common Name field, if present,
       MUST be owned or controlled by the Subject, MUST have been owned
       or controlled by the Subject at the time of certificate issuance.
       This requirement is derived from Section 9.2.2 of [CABF-EV].

   7.  The Subject Jurisdiction of Incorporation or Registration Fields
       MUST not contain information that is not relevant to the level of
       the Incorporating Agency or Registration Agency.  This
       requirement is derived from Section 9.2.5 of [CABF-EV].

   8.  The Subject Physical Address of Place of Business Fields MUST
       contain the address of a physical location of the Subject's Place
       of Business.  This requirement is derived from Section 9.2.7 of
       [CABF-EV].

4.  IANA Considerations

   TBD

5.  Security Considerations

   TBD

6.  References

6.1.  Informative References

   [CABF-EV]  CA/Browser Forum, "Guidelines For The Issuance And
              Management Of Extended Validation Certificates, Version
              1.5.2", October 2014, <https://cabforum.org/wp-
              content/uploads/EV-V1_5_2Libre.pdf>.

6.2.  Normative References

   [I-D.ietf-trans-rfc6962-bis]
              Laurie, B., Langley, A., Kasper, E., and R. Stradling,
              "Certificate Transparency", draft-ietf-trans-
              rfc6962-bis-04 (work in progress), July 2014.





Kent & Andrews            Expires June 19, 2015                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft   Extended Validation Certificate Checks    December 2014


   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

Authors' Addresses

   Stephen Kent
   BBN Technologies
   10 Moulton St.
   Cambridge, MA  02138
   US

   Email: kent@bbn.com


   Rick Andrews
   Symantec
   350 Ellis Street
   Mountain View, CA  94043
   US

   Email: Rick_Andrews@symantec.com






























Kent & Andrews            Expires June 19, 2015                 [Page 9]
