
Internet Draft                                                D. Venable
Expires: June 9, 2005                                           Protegga
                                                           December 2004
 

      Cryptographic Domain Ownership Verification (CDOV) Protocol
                       draft-venable-cdov-00.txt


Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as 
   Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents
   at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as 
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at:
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at:
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).  All Rights Reserved.


IPR Disclosure Acknowledgement 

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, I certify that any applicable
   patent or other IPR claims of which I am aware have been disclosed,
   and any of which I become aware will be disclosed, in accordance with
   RFC 3668.


Abstract

   This document defines the Cryptographic Domain Ownership Verification
   (CDOV) protocol which may be used by Certificate Authorities (CA) to
   verify that a certificate belongs to the owner of the appropriate DNS
   domain name prior to signing.







Venable                    Expires June 9, 2005                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                CDOV Protocol                December 2004


Conventions used in this document 
 
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [1].     


1. Introduction
   
   Certificate Authorities (CA) have had a difficult time verifying
   identities over the years.  Some have used trusted third parties such
   as notary publics.  A few have not bothered to perform any
   verification at all, and most are somewhere in the middle.

   This protocol makes use of the whois [2] database to allow CAs to
   verify that both a public key certificate and its associated DNS 
   domain name are owned by the same individual or group.  It is 
   important to note that this protocol does not verify the identity of
   the individual requesting that the key be signed.  As such, this 
   protocol may be useful as an electronic, potentially automated 
   alternative to a notary public to be used by a CA to verify whether a
   public key certificate should be signed.


   1.1  Assumptions

     This protocol assumes that the registrars' whois servers are secure
     and that only authorized persons have access to the individual 
     records.


2. Specification

   The CDOV protocol consists of the following steps:

   o  A CA receives the initial request from a client containing the
      client's public key certificate [3] and contact information.  

   o  The CA then generates a Domain Verification Code (DVC) (see
      section 2.1) and provides it to the client over a secure medium. 

   o  The client places the DVC in a specified field within the
      domain's whois record.

   o  After a sufficient time for the records to be updated (e.g., 24
      hours), the CA performs a whois on the domain and verifies the
      DVC.  In the event that the DVC is not yet present, the CA 
      SHOULD check every 12 hours until such time that either the DVC
      is present or 48 hours have passed.
 


 
Venable                    Expires June 9, 2005                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft               CDOV Protocol                 December 2004



     o  If the DVC is still not included, or is incorrect in the 
        domain's whois record after a total of 72 hours, the CA should 
        notify the individual making the request as well as all
        contacts listed in the domain's whois record.

   o  Upon verification of the DVC, the CA signs the certificate and
      provides it to the client.  At this point the DVC may be removed
      from the domain's whois record.


   2.1 Domain Verification Code 

     A Domain Verification Code (DVC) is a cryptographic hash (see 
     section 2.1.1) of two concatenated values: a cryptographic hash of
     the public key certificate, and a cryptographic pseudo-random bit 
     sequence (see section 2.1.2) of the same length.

     This is illustrated in the following diagram.  Let PKC denote the 
     public key certificate, and let PRNG denote the cryptographic 
     pseudo-random bit sequence generator.  Let (H) denote an operation
     using a cryptographic hash function.  Let MD denote the result of
     a hashing operation, and let RS denote a pseudo-random sequence.
     Let DVC denote the Domain Verification Code.

      ----------                 ----------
      |   PKC  |                 |  PRNG  |
      ----------                 ----------
           |                         |
          (H)                        |
           |______             ______|
                 |             |
         -------------------------------
         |      MD      |      RS      |
         -------------------------------
                        |
                       (H)
                        |
                 ---------------
                |      DVC      |
                 ---------------


     2.1.1 Hash Functions

       Any iterative cryptographic hash function may be used with the 
       CDOV protocol.

       Note: Although MD5 [4] and SHA-1 [5] are still widely used as of
       this writing, given their probable lifespans it would be best to
       use an algorithm that produces, at a minimum, a 256 bit hash such
       as SHA-256 [6].  

Venable                    Expires June 9, 2005                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                CDOV Protocol                December 2004


     2.1.2 Cryptographic Pseudo-random Sequence Generation
   
       Any cryptographic pseudo-random bit sequence generator may be
       used with the CDOV protocol.
 

3. Security Considerations

   The security of the CDOV protocol relies upon four factors: the 
   security of the hash function, the security of the pseudo-random bit
   sequence generator, the security of the registrars' whois servers,
   and the integrity of the channel over which the CA provides the DVC
   to the client.


4. IANA Considerations

   This document has no actions for IANA.



































Venable                    Expires June 9, 2005                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                CDOV Protocol                December 2004


5. Normative References

   [1]    Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
          Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [2]    Harrenstien, K., Stahl, M., and E. Feinler,
          "NICNAME/WHOIS", RFC 954, October 1985.

   [3]    Housley, R., Polk, W., Ford, W., and D. Solo, "Internet 
          X.509 Public Key Infrastructure Certificate and 
          Certificate Revocation List (CRL) Profile", RFC 3280, 
          April 2002.


6. Informative References

   [4]    Rivest, R., "The MD5 Message-Digest Algorithm",
          RFC 1321, April 1992.

   [5]    National Institute of Standards and Technology.  FIPS Pub
          180-1: Secure Hash Standard.  17 April 1995.

   [6]    NIST, "Description of SHA-256, SHA-384, and SHA-512",
          http://csrc.nist.gov/encryption/shs/sha256-384-512.pdf



Author's Address

   Questions about this memo can be directed to:

   David J. Venable
   Protegga, LLC
   7600 Watson Drive
   Plano, TX 75025
   USA
 
   Phone: +1 210 232 3269
   EMail: dave.venable@protegga.com














Venable                    Expires June 9, 2005                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                CDOV Protocol                December 2004


Full Copyright Statement 
 
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).  This document is subject 
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and 
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights. 
 
   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an    
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS 
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET 
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, 
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE 
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED 
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.   

 
Intellectual Property 
    
   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to 
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in 
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights 
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has 
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information 
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be 
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 
    
   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of 
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 
    
   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at ietf-
   ipr@ietf.org. 
    
    
Acknowledgement 
 
   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the 
   Internet Society. 









Venable                    Expires June 9, 2005                 [Page 6]


