Internet Draft                                    James M. Polk
Expiration: September 2, 2001                     Cisco Systems   
File: draft-polk-sip-mlpp-mapping-01.txt            


   
   
   
   

        
                SIP Extension for MLPP
   
                     March 1, 2001 
   
     

     
Status of this Memo 
     
This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance 
with all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026. 
    
Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engi-
neering Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. 
Note that other groups may also distribute working documents 
as Internet-Drafts. 
    
Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-
Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as 
"work in progress." 
    
The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
    
The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed 
at http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 


Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", 
   "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  
   "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be 
   interpreted as described in [RFC-2119].





Polk         draft-polk-sip-mlpp-mapping-01.txt          Page 1

Internet Draft      SIP Extension for MLPP           March 2001

Abstract 
    
This document describes an extension to the Session Initiation 
Protocol [1] to allow SIP (and IP) into existing Voice Backbone
Infrastructures that require Multi-Level Precedence and Pre-
emption [2] Service throughout those networks. This document 
will also allow MLPP networks that are ISDN-based now to evolve/
migrate or be replaced by a SIP-based Voice Signaling network 
with no loss in capability of that original network. More likely
is the case that additional functionality and capabilities can 
be realized such as mobility and reduced user headaches (ex-
plained later) with SIP being MLPP enabled within a network 
infrastructure.

I believe these additional Precedence and Preemption capabili-
ties will have wider deployment benefits than named MLPP 
networks such as the US Government networks.



Table of Contents 
     
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  2 
Table of Contents. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  2 
1.0  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 
2.0  The need for this Extension vs. incorporation? . . . . . 3 
2.1  Part of a bigger effort? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 
3.0  MLPP Overview. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5 
4.0  Objective of ANSI's MLPP specification . . . . . . . . . 6 
5.0  Requisites from ANSI's MLPP Specification. . . . . . . . 7 
6.0  Defined SIP Priority request-header field. . . . . . . . 9 
7.0  Request Header-Field:MLPP-Enabled Extension  . . . . . .10 
7.1  A subset of MLPP?  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .11
8.0  Results of MLPP Extensions to SIP Priority Field . . . .11 
9.0  Unknowns needing discussion still  . . . . . . . . . . .13 
9.0  Changes from the last version  . . . . . . . . . . . . .14
10.0 IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .14
11.0 Security Considerations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .14
12.0 References. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
13.0 Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
14.0 Author Information. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16








Polk         draft-polk-sip-mlpp-mapping-01.txt          Page 2

Internet Draft      SIP Extension for MLPP           March 2001



1.0 Introduction

This document describes an extension to the Session Initiation 
Protocol [1] to allow SIP (and IP) into existing Voice Backbone
Infrastructures that require Multi-Level Precedence and Pre-
emption [2] Service throughout those networks. This document 
will also allow MLPP networks that are ISDN-based now to evolve/
migrate or be replaced by a SIP-based Voice Signaling network 
with no loss in capability of that original network. More likely
is the case that additional functionality and capabilities can 
be realized such as mobility and reduced user headaches (ex-
plained later) with SIP being MLPP enabled within a network 
infrastructure.

I believe these additional Precedence and Preemption capabili-
ties will have wider deployment benefits than named MLPP net-
works such as the US Government networks.


2.0 The need for this Extension vs. incorporation?

As much as I believe this in this capability, I also believe it 
should be necessarily a burden for all SIP developers to include.
Therefore, I believe this I-D should be a Standards Track WG 
item, but separate for the core 2543bis effort such that those
vendors that wish to develop products into this fairly limited, 
yet potentially very large segment, can merely be following 
this I-D. I believe this will also help in the IETF Standarding 
process of SIP by itself by not being included in the core 
effort mandating (I believe) 3 completely interoperable solu-
tions for every feature and specification within the SIP I-D.

An additional reason for this maintaining its name is the 
customer driven requirement and comfort-zone of MLPP itself. 
An RFP can state fairly clearly that it requires adherence 
to RFC-XXXX (SIP Ext. for MLPP) in its bidding between vendors.
This does make it quite a bit easier for that process as well.

I'm also aware of the desire to NOT include everything and the
kitchen sink in the core 2543bis effort.

SIP is, and is well put in [3], "not a PSTN replacement". And 
any Priority or Preemption without government intervention is 
not allowed (GETS [4] is the best example of this). "SIP is a 
Protocol for initiating, modifying, and terminating interactive 


Polk         draft-polk-sip-mlpp-mapping-01.txt          Page 3

Internet Draft      SIP Extension for MLPP           March 2001


sessions" from [3] as well. Which goes on to state the following 
that applies directly:

    " This process involves the discovery of users, (or more 
      generally, entities that can be communicated with, 
      including services, such as VM or translation devices) 
      wherever they may be located, so that a description of 
      the session can be delivered to the user."

Sometimes the Signaling for a session will take the same path 
the RTP stream will, most times it will not. Although each will 
likely take different paths, the specifics of the MLPP call 
set-up such as which Precedence level is chosen by the user 
needs to start with the calling or session initiating device. 

Even though SIP is intended to traverse more than a single 
network infrastructure in its creation, MLPP functionality like-
ly will not, but could on a limited basis where strict SLA's or 
similar agreements are adhered to. Creating an Extension that is 
basically intended for a single network is generally frowned 
upon, and I understand. Additionally, extensions that define a 
function's usefulness only if all devices support that extension 
is also discouraged [3]. However, one of the networks that 
requires MLPP adherence before considering IP-based anything 
voice session initiation has currently more than 800 Class 5's
operating in that network. The migration to IP will difficult 
at best for this one network that has such strict requirements, 
and that is the reason for this Extension: adherence to strict 
guidelines and capabilities in a "Standards way". I have talked 
to a customer representing parts, to all of 19 country's 
government networks that are mostly all waiting on MLPP to be 
defined in IP in this Standarding Body before moving their 
respective networks towards IP. So, the question that I pose to 
you is this I-D:


2.1 Part of a bigger effort?

Yes, this I-D is part of a larger IETF effort. I have written an 
I-D [5] that attempts to address the non-SIP requirements for  
enabling MLPP into an IP network infrastructure. What I propose 
here is just what SIP is intended to do: initiate the session 
with certain features, capabilities and descriptions in that 
session initiation. Relatively speaking, this is easier than 
getting the network to behave in a deterministically Preemptive 
mode to a customer's satisfaction. It gets more complicated with 


Polk         draft-polk-sip-mlpp-mapping-01.txt          Page 4

Internet Draft      SIP Extension for MLPP           March 2001


inclusion of 'other' services. IM could become MLPP-enabled. 
Video certainly could, but traffic engineering then becomes a 
problem due to its bandwidth requirements.

Another effort was started at the Pittsburgh meeting, IEPS [4]. 
It has been suggested that this MLPP effort is the logical pre-
cursor to the IEPS effort. Section 1.2.1 of [4] refers to another 
type of PSTN requirement, GETS (Government Emergency Telephone 
Service). MLPP could be used as a basis for that requirement 
with some user authentication enhancements.


3.0 MLPP Overview

Multi level Precedence and Preemption [2] Service Capability 
stipulates a relative priority ranking order of Call flows 
on a hop-by-hop basis through a Voice Network from their 
relative beginning Voice device to the end Voice device. 
Within the TDM world, these call flows were closed network 
circuit switched from PBX or Tandem Switch to PBX or Tandem 
Switch. Each Switch, upon initiation of a higher priority call 
flow where there were not available outbound resources or 
trunks, preempted a lesser priority call flow by seizing the 
resources of an existing external truck circuit to satisfy 
that higher Priority Call. Eliminating the previous call with-
out giving either end station a choice or chance to continue 
the call flow of the overridden call. Typically, an audible 
tone [defined in 2] occurred on the inbound caller's phone 
receiving the Preempting call flow.

By contrast, in a Packetized Voice Network, there will likely 
not be fixed or pre-configured outbound circuits waiting for 
higher priority call flows to occur on a per-MLPP-enabled IP 
Internetworking device basis. This presents a more challenging 
problem of preemption in a less statically configured Network 
Topology. 

SIP per [1] created a "Header-Field:Priority" as a non-mandatory 
field within the signaling set-up (section 6.0 shows this). The 
2543bis I-D [7] added a single Priority Header-Field that is and 
for less than normal traffic. Although this creates 5 distinct 
Priority levels, it does not satisfy the MLPP semantics require-
ments of 5 levels with normal traffic (called 'Routine' by [2]) 
at the lowest Priority or Precedence level, escalating to the 
highest Priority or Precedence level (called ' Flash Override' in 
[2]). All this is explained in more detail on the next page in 
section 4.0.

Polk         draft-polk-sip-mlpp-mapping-01.txt          Page 5

Internet Draft      SIP Extension for MLPP           March 2001




4.0 Objective of ANSI's MLPP Specification


The MLPP concept was created so that there was a real-time 
method of prioritizing voice communications. It was created 
back before electronic switching in the U.S. Government 
"AUTOVON" network. It is designed so that normal telephone 
traffic would not cause problems in the event of a crisis. 

Here is an example using Military Rank as a conceptual com-
parison:


    The lowest level, ROUTINE, would be used for all normal call 
    traffic. If a Company commander needed to reach his platoon 
    leaders, he/she would use the PRIORITY precedence level. If 
    a crisis arose, normal traffic would be preempted by command 
    traffic. The lower level command traffic would use the PRI-
    ORITY and potentially the IMMEDIATE precedence levels. The 
    field grade traffic (brigade, battalion, and division) would 
    use the IMMEDIATE, and in some cases FLASH precedence levels. 
    Communications within the Corps and Theater commanders would 
    use FLASH. The President, the Joint Chiefs, and some select 
    theater commanders (e.g. CICNORAD, or CICSAC) would use the 
    FLASH OVERRIDE precedence. This guaranteed (in theory) that 
    the most important commands (the President forbidding nuclear 
    launch) would get through even over all other traffic.


This pre-grading of relative importance to a session is how an 
authorized user can assign the appropriate priority to traffic 
based on that user's Profile (e.g. within what they are auth- 
orized to assign a session to). Someone who was authorized to 
use IMMEDIATE precedence would normally use ROUTINE unless there 
was a legitimate reason to escalate the precedence to a higher 
level.










Polk         draft-polk-sip-mlpp-mapping-01.txt          Page 6

Internet Draft      SIP Extension for MLPP           March 2001


5.0 Requisites from ANSI's MLPP Specification

ANSI T.619-1992 states the 5 levels of Precedence (or Priority) 
for MLPP networks as the following:

     bits  Name
     ----  ----
     0000  "Flash Override" (0)
     0001  "Flash" (1)
     0010  "Immediate" (2)
     0011  "Priority" (3)
     0100  "Routine" (4)


     0101 to
     1111  "Spare"


There are actually 16 values/levels possible within this spec, 
but any additional levels will have a Preemption functionality 
below, or less than, "Routine". The intent is that "Flash 
Override" is always the highest level capable within a MLPP-
compliant network.

In any case, a call session of any given Precedence level or 
value can preempt any Precedence level of a lesser level or 
value. If these values are equal, then other mechanisms, if 
any, can react according to their individual capabilities 
(e.g. Call waiting).

Preemption can take one of two forms. First, the called party 
may be busy with a lower Precedence call which must be pre-
empted in favor of completing the incoming higher Precedence 
call from the calling party. Second, the network resources 
somewhere in between the calling and called party may be satur-
ated with some combination of call sessions of lower Precedence 
requested by the calling party and other traffic (data). If the 
data traffic is of some lower priority level (perhaps a lower 
level of DSCP value), it should receive less priority in order 
to allow this higher priority call session to seize outbound 
resources. If there is still not enough available outbound 
interface resources, then one or more of the lower Precedence 
calls shall be preempted to complete the higher Precedence call. 

There are three characteristics of preemption:



Polk         draft-polk-sip-mlpp-mapping-01.txt          Page 7

Internet Draft      SIP Extension for MLPP           March 2001


a)     Any party whose connection was preempted (whether that
       resource was reused or not) shall receive a distinctive
       audible notification. An addition notification can be 
       provided via some visual indication if possible or 
       desirable;

b)     Any called party of an active call that is being pre-
       empted by a higher Precedence call shall be required to 
       acknowledge the preemption before being connected to 
       the new calling party, and 

c)     When there are no idle resources, preemption of the 
       lowest of these lower level Precedence resources shall 
       occur;


Any call session can be preempted anytime after the Precedence 
value has been established for a call and call clearing has 
begun. Here coordination with a Bandwidth aware mechanism such as 
RSVP will be needed, making sure that the Preempting call is
assigned that bandwidth freed up from the call clearing action.

If there is a user or SIP device that is configured (somehow 
compliant with the parameters within that Administrative Domain 
(AD), and outside the scope of this document) to disable the 
ability to be preempted, that user or SIP phone device will 
not experience preemption of calls by higher precedence calls, 
if the cause of preemption would be due to called party busy 
condition (e.g. call waiting is enacted here). However, the 
user may still experience preemption of calls due to a lack 
of network resources other than the user's own access resources 
[2].

Precedence calls that are not responded to by the called party 
(e.g. the called party chooses to hang up their phone without 
taking the call) may have their phone speaker initialized for 
that inbound Precedence call in order to complete the call; 
sometimes regardless if this called party wants the Precedence 
call [2]. Section 8.0 of this I-D discusses the potential rele-
vance of this feature. An alternative to this approach could 
be to have an 'alternate called party' signaled (e.g. that 
person's administrator). This mechanism would be a per Domain 
decision, and not mandatory for SIP-MLPP interworking compliance.

An MLPP call session should automatically be set up with the 



Polk         draft-polk-sip-mlpp-mapping-01.txt          Page 8

Internet Draft      SIP Extension for MLPP           March 2001


lowest precedence level by default until the user chooses a
level up to 'their' maximum authorized within that Domain.
Controlling whether users always chose the lowest level, or the 
Appropriate level, is an administrative decision, and outside of 
the scope of this document.


6.0 Defined SIP Priority request-header field

SIP [1] defines the Priority request-header field and its 
possible non-mandatory values in section "6.25 Priority" as 
the following (exact text from page 40 of [1]):

    "    Priority       = "Priority" ":" priority-value
         priority-value = "emergency" | "urgent" | "normal"
                                      | "non-urgent"

   It is RECOMMENDED that the value of "emergency" only be 
   used when life, limb or property are in imminent danger.

       Examples:

        Subject: A tornado is heading our way!
        Priority: emergency

        Subject: Weekend plans
        Priority: non-urgent

   These are the values of [8], with the addition of 
   "emergency".   "


In the 2543bis draft [7], this has changed to include a 5th 
Priority value "other priority" (section 6.31 of [7]), but 
doesn't change the semantics of this section otherwise; meaning 
"emergency" is still the recommendation for highest Priority, 
but only in the case of an *emergency* (pun partially intended). 
The next level with less Priority is "urgent", which is followed 
by the Priority value that might as well be the default Priority 
value of most SIP messages, because this is the value for "normal" 
traffic - where most voice sessions will take place. Whatever the 
"non-urgent" value is supposed to provide other than less than 
"normal", it doesn't match the MLPP model at this end of the 
spectrum as well as not having multiple "emergency" levels similar 
to MLPP ("Flash" and "Flash Override").


Polk         draft-polk-sip-mlpp-mapping-01.txt          Page 9

Internet Draft      SIP Extension for MLPP           March 2001



Even if "non-urgent" were mapped to everyday session traffic, 
the Priority model of [3&7] won't match enough, and a separate 
Header-Field is necessary


Both [3 & 7] state this Header-Field is not necessary, it fact it 
Has been mentioned at numerous meetings that this header-Field 
isn't even used, so why all the fuss about MLPP.


7.0 Request Header-Field:MLPP-Enabled Extension

The MLPP-Enabled request-header field indicates the relative Pri-
ority of the session initiation as perceived by the client.


  MLPP-Enabled        = "MLPP-Enabled" ":" MLPP-priority-value

  MLPP-priority-value = "Flash Override" | "Flash" 
                      | "immediate" | "Priority" | "Routine"


The semantics are a repeat of the Military example from section 
3.0:

    The lowest level, ROUTINE, would be used for all normal call 
    traffic. If a Company commander needed to reach his platoon 
    leaders, he/she would use the PRIORITY precedence level. If 
    a crisis arose, normal traffic would be preempted by command 
    traffic. The lower level command traffic would use the PRI-
    ORITY and potentially the IMMEDIATE precedence levels. The 
    field grade traffic (brigade, battalion, and division) would 
    use the IMMEDIATE, and in some cases FLASH precedence levels. 
    Communications within the Corps and Theater commanders would 
    use FLASH. The President, the Joint Chiefs, and some select 
    theater commanders (e.g. CICNORAD, or CICSAC) would use the 
    FLASH OVERRIDE precedence. This guaranteed (in theory) that 
    the most important commands (the President forbidding nuclear 
    launch) would get through even over all other traffic.

This pre-grading of relative importance to a session is how an 
authorized user can assign the appropriate priority to traffic 






Polk         draft-polk-sip-mlpp-mapping-01.txt          Page 10

Internet Draft      SIP Extension for MLPP           March 2001


based on that user's Profile (e.g. within what they are auth- 
orized to assign a session to). Someone who was authorized to 
use IMMEDIATE precedence would normally use ROUTINE unless there 
was a legitimate reason to escalate the precedence to a higher 
level.

7.1 A subset of MLPP?

A subset of MLPP can also be implemented not having all 5 levels
of Precedence, and still be quite useful in infrastructures 
desiring the explicit benefits of the semantics stated above, yet 
don't implement all 5 levels from a case of need. 

Examples can easily be seen in Hospitals under emergency situa-
tions like power outages or "Code Blues" where a patient's heart 
has stopped and the IP infrastructure requires an explicit mecha-
nism in place to ensure Prioritized traffic reaches its destina-
tions in the time expected. 

Another example is where this relative Prioritization of certain 
types of traffic (here SIP initiated) are constantly provided 
the higher levels regardless of the state of the network con-
gestion levels at any time. Financial Institutions where stock 
trading occurs and can't "get a busy signal".



8.0 Results of MLPP-Enabled Extension to SIP

The following are recommendations or requirements for a SIP 
Signaling Environment or Domain enabled with MLPP, or a 
subset of MLPP, for the purposes of creating a Network where 
Voice Sessions (at first) have the need for Precedence 
classification within a Domain's control. 

This is the purpose of this request for Extension to the SIP 
Protocol, and the reason I believe this should be a separate 
effort, not tied to the main SIP effort. I realize this isn't to 
be implemented everywhere (too tight or focused a specification) 
and desire the vendors and customers to look at this specifi-
cation separately for implementation purposed both in products to 
be built, and features to be incorporated:

    * SIP end-device MUST include the Request Header-Field 
      "MLPP-Enabled:" in all session signaling, regardless of 
      the session's intent or destination;


Polk         draft-polk-sip-mlpp-mapping-01.txt          Page 11

Internet Draft      SIP Extension for MLPP           March 2001


    * Header-Field " MLPP-Enabled:" MUST be default set to 
      'Routine' unless the calling party specifies an author-
      ized Higher Value for all call sessions;

    * User must be authorized to access higher Priority values 
      for any Higher Precedence session initiations (method of 
      authorization is outside the scope of this document) in 
      order to utilize those higher levels;

    * MUST allow Administrator to make it mandatory for any SIP 
      receiving device to be MLPP-enabled (goal to have any 
      non-MLPP device not able to engage in any call session - 
      in a MLPP environment, this capability should be required 
      of all devices by that Domain's Administrator)

      * Otherwise call isn't established with the following op-
        tional (rough language) results:

        * Automated attendant stating to caller "remote device 
          not MLPP-enabled... call cannot be completed" - call 
          gets either fast-busy or new tone indicating bad 
          remote device called;

        * Automated attendant stating caller "remote device not 
          MLPP-enabled... do you wish to proceed with non-pri-
          oritized call anyway"

        * Simply a fast busy

    * SIP-based Gateways within MLPP-enabled Domain MUST have 
      direct mapping of ISDN Signaling according to [2 and 9], 
      else they should merely create the SIP Header with the 
      request Header-Field MLPP-Enabled, while entering a Pre-
      dence value of "Routine" for that session;

    * It is believed COPS should be utilized for mid-session
      path rejections due to congestion (of what [2] calls 
      "call clearing", when a Higher Precedence Call session 
      is requesting resources, but that mechanism is currently 
      outside of the scope of this document, but might be more 
      detailed in a future version of this I-D;







Polk         draft-polk-sip-mlpp-mapping-01.txt          Page 12

Internet Draft      SIP Extension for MLPP           March 2001


9.0 Unknowns needing discussion still

There are many unknowns still regarding the migration of the 
original ANSI requirements in [2] into a SIP implementation here. 
Discussion would be greatly encouraged on at least these issues 
listed below to determine from the original requirements for 
having something like MLPP, how much of those requirements need 
to evolve for today's (and the future's) capabilities in 
networking. Here is a brief list of a few of them:

    o   Conferencing - if a caller is on the conference bridge, 
                       for example, and a call clear event occurs 
                       (meaning they are the recipient of the 
                       inbound higher priority call) does every-
                       one need to hear the audible tone?

                       If a caller is on a conference bridge, and 
                       they are preempted by a network resource
                       bottleneck that causes their respective 
                       leg to terminate, does everyone hear the 
                       audible tone

                       Should there be some provision for 
                       announcing to the conference 'who' has 
                       been terminated from the call (where 
                       possible by some other mechanism)?

   o    Version ID -   Currently [7] defines as mandatory the 
                       SIP version number or value be included 
                       (section 4.3.1 of [7] to be specific). I 
                       don't know yet how to identify this cap-
                       ability of MLPP in the SIP headers. I 
                       don't know in a 'letter' should be added 
                       to the SIP/2.0? I'm at a loss right now on 
                       how to solve this and am looking for 
                       suggestions. 

   o    Speaker -      The part of the ANSI spec [2] which states 
                       that if the called party who is still in a 
                       session has to acknowledge the higher pri-
                       ority in-bound session and answer it, else 
                       have their respective device's speaker 
                       turned on (in the case of that user merely 
                       hanging up or terminating the session to 
                       avoid answering or acknowledgement of this 



Polk         draft-polk-sip-mlpp-mapping-01.txt          Page 13

Internet Draft      SIP Extension for MLPP           March 2001


                       new session). This feature might not be 
                       desired further, but there should dis-
                       cussion from those that have experience 
                       with MLPP to see if this is the case.


9.0 Changes since the Last Version

The following is a list of the noticeable changes to this effort 
from the -00 version of this I-D:

o   Changed the name and scope of this draft to "SIP Extension 
    for MLPP" requesting that a separate Request Header-Field:
    MLPP-Enabled be created in this draft on a Standards Track 
    apart from the main SIP effort due it limited focus, yet 
    usefulness within certain markets

o   Hinted at the potential synergies with both IEPS and GETS 
    efforts

o   Suggested the use of a sub-set of the MLPP effort outside the 
    strict environments that still require all of MLPP's features 
    like Hospitals and Financial Institutions

o   Added section 9.0 "Unknowns" to this version to attempt to 
    bring out the known differences in the why in which Voice
    networks operated 'then' verses now and in the near future;


10.0 IANA Considerations

This author doesn't believe there are any within this document.

11.0 Security Considerations

It can be argued that Authentication and Authorization of Call
Sessions will not require any security mechanisms until Pri-
ority, Precedence and Preemption are enabled within a network 
Domain. Once any or each of these are implemented within a 
Domain Network, Security considerations could become signifi-
cantly more important to that Domain. 

In an MLPP-enabled Domain, unauthorized setting of any Higher 
Priority session should have a great impact on other traffic 
unless there is no congestion occurring at any point within the 



Polk         draft-polk-sip-mlpp-mapping-01.txt          Page 14

Internet Draft      SIP Extension for MLPP           March 2001


network, at any time. This author believes Security and Encryp-
tion will become very important within Packetized Voice Communi-
cations in the near future.

Since [2] mandates that each MLPP be defined and (relatively)
closed in nature, boundary controls can and should be possible.


12.0 References:

[1] M. Handley, H. Schulzrinne, E. Schooler, J. Rosenberg "SIP: 
Session Initiation Protocol" RFC 2543, March 1999

[2] ANSI specification ANSI T1.619-1992.

[3] J. Rosenberg, H. Schulzrinne "draft-ietf-sip-guidelines-01" 
IETF Internet Draft, November 2001 

[4] K. Carlberg, "draft-carlberg-ieps-framework-00", Internet 
Draft, November 2000

[5] James M. Polk, IETF Internet Draft "draft-polk-mlpp-over-ip",
March 2001

[6] Braden, R., Ed., Zhang, L., Estrin, D., Herzog, S., and 
S. Jamin, "Resource ReSerVation Protocol (RSVP) -- Version 1 
Functional Specification", RFC 2205, September 1997. (section 
3.5 and Appendix B)

[7] M. Handley, H. Schulzrinne, E. Schooler, J. Rosenberg 
"draft-ietf-sip-rfc2543bis-02" IETF Internet Draft, November 24, 
2000

[8] Palme, J., "Common Internet message headers", RFC 2076, 
February 1997.

[9] ANSI specification ANSI T1.619A-1994.



11.0 Acknowledgments

I'd like to thank Scott Bradner for his advice on this effort 
and all of this MLPP efforts direction within the IETF up to 
this point.



Polk         draft-polk-sip-mlpp-mapping-01.txt          Page 15

Internet Draft      SIP Extension for MLPP           March 2001


12.0 Author Information

James M. Polk
Cisco Systems
18581 N. Dallas Parkway, Suite 100
Dallas, TX 75287
jmpolk@cisco.com


"Copyright (C) The Internet Society (date). All Rights
Reserved.

This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished
to others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise 
explain it or assist in its implementation may be prepared, 
copied, published and distributed, in whole or in part, without 
restriction of any kind, provided that the above copyright 
notice and this paragraph are included on all such copies and 
derivative works.  However, this document itself may not be 
modified in any way, such as by removing the copyright notice 
or references to the Internet Society or other Internet organi-
zations, except as needed for the purpose of developing Internet 
standards in which case the procedures for copyrights defined 
in the Internet Standards process must be followed, or as 
required to translate it into languages other than English.

The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not
be revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

This document and the information contained herein is provided 
on an "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET 
ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR 
IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE 
USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR 
ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A 
PARTICULAR PURPOSE."




The Expiration date for this Internet Draft is:

September 2, 2001




Polk         draft-polk-sip-mlpp-mapping-01.txt          Page 16
