


Network Working Group                                       S. Whitehead
Internet-Draft                                 Verizon Laboratories Inc.
Intended status: Informational                              M. Montpetit
Expires: August 25, 2008                                        Motorola
                                                               X. Marjou
                                                          France Telecom
                                                              S. Ganesan
                                                                Motorola
                                                       February 22, 2008


              Media Playback Control Protocol Requirements
           draft-whitehead-mmusic-sip-for-streaming-media-03

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 25, 2008.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

Abstract

   The media playback control functionality controls the delivery of
   streaming media by the means of commands like pause, fast forward,
   fast rewind, slow forward, slow rewind.  This document presents some



Whitehead, et al.        Expires August 25, 2008                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft     media playback control requirements     February 2008


   of the requirements for a media control protocol that does not
   contain any session setup semantics in it.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   3.  Use Case Scenarios  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     3.1.  Characteristics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     3.2.  Use Case Descriptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     3.3.  Server Control of Streaming Session . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
     3.4.  Private/Firewalled video content  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
     3.5.  VOD services that requires resource or QOS-guarantees . . . 6
     3.6.  Intelligent selection of media encoding . . . . . . . . . . 6
   4.  Requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   5.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   6.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   7.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   8.  Informative references  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements  . . . . . . . . . . 9





























Whitehead, et al.        Expires August 25, 2008                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft     media playback control requirements     February 2008


1.  Introduction

   This document defines the requirements for a media control protocol
   distinct from the session control protocol for Content on demand
   media streams.

   Historically Content on Demand(COD) or Video on Demand (VOD) stream
   delivery has been controlled by RTSP as both the session set up
   protocol as well as the media control protocol.  RTSP [1] and its
   successor [2] define semantics for both session setup as well as
   media control, viz commands like pause, Rewind etc.

   Similarly SIP has been the protocol of choice for end to end session
   establishment and rendezvous [3] .  These functionalities in the
   context of conversational services has been the main raison d'etre
   and forte of SIP.

   There exist environments, circumstances and use cases where it is
   desirable to use SIP for session establishment and rendezvous, while
   retaining RTSP's capabilities for media and play back control.  Such
   circumstances are increasing in number given that user agents with
   wide ranging capabilities are become much more common in deployments.
   Good Integration with existing RTSP deployments is also desirable
   under these conditions.

   Section 3 describes some use cases that motivate additional work
   around a media control protocol for Content on Demand.

   Section 4 lays out the requirements for a media control protocol,
   ideally some form of lightweight RTSP without its session
   establishment semantics, that can be used with a session
   establishment and rendezvous protocol.


2.  Terminology

   In this document, the following key words are used with the
   interpretations as follows.

   MUST -   The use of this phrase means that it is an absolute
      requirement.

   SHOULD -   The use of this phrase implies that while this is a
      requirement, there may be exigent circumstances when this
      requirement may be waived; however, the circumstances of the
      waiver must be thoroughly understood, and carefully weighed before
      choosing a different course.




Whitehead, et al.        Expires August 25, 2008                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft     media playback control requirements     February 2008


   MAY -   The use of this phrase deems that this item is truly
      optional.  A given implementation may choose to include this item
      due to market place and implementation constraints, while another
      may completely ignore it.



3.  Use Case Scenarios

   The scope of scenarios for this document includes applications with
   the following characteristics: content-on-demand, streaming media,
   unicast-media streams, live or recorded content, ubiquitous access
   (any-device, any-access).

   While of interest, non-streaming media applications, such as
   downloaded media services, are outside the scope of this document.

3.1.  Characteristics

   For the purposes of this document, the term 'controlled streaming
   media application' represents a class of applications with the
   following characteristics:

   o  Multiple servers that can be a source of content but showing up as
      a single muxed stream at the client.
   o  One or more clients can receive the content.
   o  The media stream(s) needs to be delivered isochronously, in the
      most common case: the client intends to begin rendering the media
      before delivery is complete.
   o  Less common but equally valid, the server does not have resources
      to buffer content until the client is ready to receive it, e.g., a
      live feed.
   o  A session exists between source (e.g. server or peer) and
      destination (e.g. client or peer).
   o  The session is established, managed, and terminated through the
      use of a signaling protocol, in which control messages are
      exchanged (either directly or indirectly) between the source and
      the destination referred to as 'session signaling'.
   o  The application supports media stream control.  The client(s), or
      a proxy element acting on behalf of the client(s), has the ability
      to manipulate the media stream (or other aspect of the
      application) via signaling.  This is referred to as media control
      signaling (or application signaling ).

3.2.  Use Case Descriptions

   As IP-based broadband data services have continued to develop and
   expand, opportunities for streaming media applications have also



Whitehead, et al.        Expires August 25, 2008                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft     media playback control requirements     February 2008


   proliferated and expanded beyond the traditional framework.  This
   section describes several streaming media application use case
   scenarios.  These scenarios illustrate the variety of conditions and
   environments in which streaming media applications need to operate.

   Use cases are used with the purpose of clarifying the 'streaming
   media application' and to explore the application space.  The
   objectives are to:

   o  Clarify the frame / scope the discussion.
   o  Illustrate some of usage scenarios.
   o  Identify some of the key attributes that characterize these use
      cases.

3.3.  Server Control of Streaming Session

   During a streaming session, the operator may want to redirect or move
   pending sessions in order to for e.g., upgrade the server.
   Therefore, the server will initiate a session redirect.  Another use
   case of Server control operation is when the server decides to
   initiate a session to the user, based on user preconfigured-settings
   (e.g. reminders).  Further, sessions that are indefinitely paused by
   the client need to be terminated and server resources reclaimed at
   the operators discretion.  This would also be true for sessions where
   the client may have become unresponsive.

3.4.  Private/Firewalled video content

   In this use case, the user, while not on his home network, wants to
   access content that is stored on his personal or home network, e.g.,
   a pre-recorded show on a PVR device, or a monitoring camera at his or
   her home location that is capable of providing a live feed as well as
   record it locally as a PVR asset.

   In the case of a live monitoring camera in a home network, the user
   wishes to transition from watching a live stream of the feed to being
   able to move backwards and forwards using media control commands on
   the stored content of the monitoring device.  This translates
   logically to transitioning from watching live TV programming to Time
   shifted TV or PVR type of viewing.  Being able to do it in the
   context of the same session is desirable.

   In the case of a home network based PVR, it is more than likely that
   the home gateway is not set up to be an inbound device for various
   session setup requests to enable the external client to traverse the
   protocol unaware IP NAT device commonly found at the edge of home
   networks.




Whitehead, et al.        Expires August 25, 2008                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft     media playback control requirements     February 2008


   In both these cases, the video server is behind a firewall.  In the
   first case, the transition from one mode (live feed) to another
   (COD), would entail multiple messages for staying within a session.
   Also, the client being exterior to the firewall, needs to establish a
   TCP connection from "out" to "in".  RTSP as in stands currently does
   not deal with these adequately.  A rendezvous capable protocol like
   SIP could provide this in addition to client identity and location.

3.5.  VOD services that requires resource or QOS-guarantees

   Consider a Video on Demand (stored video) service provided as a
   unicast session to an end user device from a server.  The user
   requests a VOD movie.  If the operator uses a network proxy to
   request and guarentee QoS for the delivery of the movie from the
   server to the client, currently RTSP does not provide the means of
   guarenteeing that all subsequent messages that form part of the RTSP
   session will go through the network proxy that manages the QoS.  In
   this particular use case, an end to end session setup and management
   protocol would be helpful.

3.6.  Intelligent selection of media encoding

   A user orders content to be delivered to its current device the
   content could exist in different format (e.g. standard definition or
   high definition) or encoding (MPEG2 or MPEG4 for example).  Media
   negotiations may need to be determined based on network transport
   capabilities.  This is based on knowledge of access-network type.


4.  Requirements

   This section outlines the key requirements that need to be satisfied
   in order to have a media control protocol acting as a control stream
   within a multimedia session.

   REQ-1  The media control protocol must support commands such as play,
          pause, rewind, forward, fast rewind, fast forward, slow
          rewind, and slow forward.

   REQ-2  It must be possible to negotiate the media control control
          protocol of a media stream.

   REQ-3  If the media control protocol does not apply to all media
          streams of a given session, it must be possible to indicate
          the specific media streams that are under the scope of the
          trick-play control protocol.





Whitehead, et al.        Expires August 25, 2008                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft     media playback control requirements     February 2008


   REQ-4  The media control protocol must allow for asynchronous media
          event notifications (e.g.: end-of-stream)".

   REQ-5  The protocol SHOULD work over TCP.

   REQ-6  [[Any other?]].


5.  Security Considerations

   T.B.D.


6.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no actions for IANA.


7.  Acknowledgements

   T.B.D.


8.  Informative references

   [1]  Schulzrinne, H., Rao, A., and R. Lanphier, "Real Time Streaming
        Protocol (RTSP)", RFC 2326, April 1998.

   [2]  Schulzrinne, H., Rao, A., Lanphier, R., Westerlund, M., and M.
        Stiemerling, "Real Time Streaming Protocol 2.0 (RTSP)",
        draft-ietf-mmusic-rfc2326bis-16 (work in progress),
        November 2007.

   [3]  Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston, A.,
        Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley, M., and E. Schooler, "SIP:
        Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261, June 2002.

   [4]  Shanmugham, S., Monaco, P., and B. Eberman, "A Media Resource
        Control Protocol (MRCP) Developed by Cisco, Nuance, and
        Speechworks", RFC 4463, April 2006.

   [5]  Camarillo, G., Ott, J., and K. Drage, "The Binary Floor Control
        Protocol (BFCP)", RFC 4582, November 2006.








Whitehead, et al.        Expires August 25, 2008                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft     media playback control requirements     February 2008


Authors' Addresses

   Steven Whitehead
   Verizon Laboratories Inc.
   40 Sylvan Road
   Waltham, MA  02451
   USA

   Email: steven.d.whitehead@verizon.com


   Marie-Jose Montpetit
   Motorola
   900 Chelmsford Street
   Lowell, MA  01851
   USA

   Email: mmontpetit@motorola.com


   Xavier Marjou
   France Telecom
   Rue Pierre Marzin
   Lannion, Brittany  22307
   France

   Email: xavier.marjou@orange-ftgroup.com


   Sam Ganesan
   Motorola
   80 Central Street
   Boxborough, MA  01719
   US

   Email: sam.ganesan@motorola.com
   URI:














Whitehead, et al.        Expires August 25, 2008                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft     media playback control requirements     February 2008


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Whitehead, et al.        Expires August 25, 2008                [Page 9]


