


Network Working Group                                         Pars Mutaf
Internet-Draft                                         All play, no work
Expires: September 15, 2008                               March 14, 2008



          IKEv2 extensions for combating SPIT on mobile hosts
                       draft-mutaf-spikev2-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 15, 2008.

Abstract

   This document describes IKEv2 extensions for combating SPIT on mobile
   hosts.


1.  Introduction

   "Voice over IP systems, like e-mail and other Internet applications,
   are susceptible to abuse by malicious parties who initiate
   unsolicited and unwanted communications called SPIT (SPam over
   Internet Telephony).  Telemarketers, prank callers, and other
   telephone system abusers are likely to target VoIP systems
   increasingly, particularly if VoIP tends to supplant conventional



Mutaf                  Expires September 15, 2008               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                   Spikev2                      March 2008


   telephony." -- from Wikipedia entry on VoIP spam, March 2008.

   [RFC5039] provides a detailed analysis of the SPIT risk, reviews the
   existing approaches for e-mail spam and provides guidelines for
   combating SPIT.

   SPIT is likely to be very annoying on cell phones which are carried
   in one's pocket.  They will interrupt the user for useless and
   annoying short messages and incoming calls.  This document describes
   solutions that are well adapted to cell phones.


2.  Solutions

   This section describes two solutions: weak and strong.  The described
   solutions are extensions to the Internet Key Exchange (IKEv2)
   protocol [RFC4306].

2.1.  Weak

   A solution to SPIT is to require an IPsec SA (Security Association)
   before a correspondent opens a session with a target SIP URI.  If
   later the correspondent turns bad and sends SPIT, the target cell
   phone can remove the SA.

   To prevent an attacker from repeatedly establishing SAs with the
   target host and sending SPIT, the initiator can be requested to solve
   a hard challenge.  IKEv2 supports cookies which can be used to
   prevent an attacker from spoofing IP addresses.  When fighting
   against SPIT, one has an important advantage: the sender, if
   legitimate, is necessarily a human.  Consequently, Turing tests known
   as CAPTCHA can be used [CAPTCHA].  The IKEv2 responder can return a
   CAPTCHA to check if IKEv2 is initiated by a human.  Difficult
   CAPTCHAs can also be used to challenge a malicious human.  If the
   initiator user does not return the correct solution to the CAPTCHA,
   IKEv2 will not proceed normally and an SA will not be established.
   Additional defenses include adaptively increasing the difficulty of
   the CAPTCHA, and temporarily blacklisting the attacker's IP address.

   If the SPIT has commercial purposes, the attacker is unlikely to
   continuously send the same advertisement to the same target user.  A
   commercial attacker would rather target a large number of hosts and
   send the same advertisement to each of them.  The above defense can
   defeat commercial attacks, since the attacker will need to solve a
   large number challenges coming from each target host.  A September
   2006 Slashdot article on CAPTCHA reports how "data entry specialists"
   solve captchas for $0.60 per hour for 50 hours a week SLASHDOT
   [SLASHDOT].  The popularity of CAPTCHAs does not seem to be affected,



Mutaf                  Expires September 15, 2008               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                   Spikev2                      March 2008


   however.  Popular web sites, e.g.  Google and Yahoo! still employ
   this defense to protect their resources.

2.2.  Strong

   This approach extends the above defense with strong identities and
   target user's approval.  The target user may want to receive incoming
   sessions or short messages from known people only.  Or, the initiator
   user may be unknown but the target user may have an idea who (s)he
   is.  A security association may be established with unknown users as
   well, however in any case the target user requires a certified
   identity of the initiator.

   Along with a CAPTCHA (as described above), the target host sends a
   human name certificate request.  The initiator returns the required
   certificate along with a solution to the CAPTCHA challenge.  If the
   CAPTCHA solution is correct, the target host displays the initiator's
   human name and asks for permission to create an SA:

               "Michael Knight wants to connect.
                      Accept? [YES/NO]"

   If accepted by the target user, IKEv2 will proceed and an IPsec SA
   can be established with the target cell phone.  Regarding the
   validity of the initiator's certificate, there are two possible
   approaches:

            a) If the certificate is invalid, stop IKEv2.
               Else continue.
            b) If the certificate is invalid, notify the
               target user and wait for user decision.
               If OK, continue. Else stop IKEv2.

   The advantage of (a) is that attackers cannot make bogus requests
   disturbing the target user with messages asking for user permission.
   On the other hand, valid certificates may not be always available.
   Some users may choose (b) notifying the target user and wait for user
   decision.  In this case, however, an attacker can send continuous
   bogus requests forcing the target host frequently display the above
   message, annoying the target user.  This attack can be defeated by
   requesting the initiator user to solve a CAPTCHA before his request
   can be displayed at the target host's screen.  The difficulty of the
   CAPTCHA can be adaptively tuned by the target host.

   An important point to note here is that by solving a CAPTCHA, the
   attacker will not obtain anything.  The target user can always reject
   the connection attempt, if the initiator is unknown, or a known
   person is being impersonated.  This is an important difference from



Mutaf                  Expires September 15, 2008               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                   Spikev2                      March 2008


   the weak defense (above) where an attacker can send SPIT by solving a
   CAPTCHA.


3.  IKEv2 extentions

   In its current form IKEv2 does not support CAPTCHA challenges, nor
   asking responder user's permission to proceed.  TBD.


4.  IANA Considerations

   This document makes no request of IANA.

   Note to RFC Editor: this section may be removed on publication as an
   RFC.


5.  Security Considerations

   TBD.


6.  Conclusion

   This document decribed IKEv2 (Internet Key Exchange version 2),
   extensions for combating SPIT (SPam over Internet Telephony).

   In the traditional model of operation, an attacker does not need to
   solve a challenge nor a CAPTCHA to send SPIT to a victim.  With the
   weak defense described in Section 2.1, the attacker needs to solve a
   CAPTCHA before sending SPIT.  For each SPIT to reach the target user,
   the attacker needs to solve a different CAPTCHA.  The CAPTCHA can be
   made very hard to solve.  Unlike the attacker, a legitimate user will
   be asked to solve a CAPTCHA only once.  This defense (although weak)
   puts the legitimate users in a much more advantageous position than
   malicious ones.

   With the strong defense described in Section 2.2, the attacker needs
   to solve a CAPTCHA, and even after returning the right anwser the
   attacker is not certain that the SPIT reached the target user.  The
   target user may reject the request because (s)he has no idea the
   sender is.  Moreover, if the attacker's certificate is valid
   (otherwise SPIT cannot be sent) the attacker's identity will be
   revealed and black listed by the target phone.






Mutaf                  Expires September 15, 2008               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                   Spikev2                      March 2008


7.  Acknowledgements

   TBD.


8.  References

   [CAPTCHA]  Ahn, L., Blum, M., and J. Langford, "Telling Humans and
              Computers Apart Automatically", In Communications of the
              ACM, February 2004.

   [RFC4306]  Kaufman, C., "Internet Key Exchange (IKEv2) Protocol", RFC
              4306, December 2005.

   [RFC5039]  Rozenberg, J. and C. Jennings, "Session Initiation
              Protocol (SIP) and SPAM", RFC 5039, January 2008.

   [SLASHDOT]
              http://it.slashdot.org/article.pl?sid=06/09/06/1217240,
              "Will Solve Captcha for Money?", September 2006.


Author's Address

   Pars Mutaf
   All play, no work

   Email: pars.mutaf@gmail.com























Mutaf                  Expires September 15, 2008               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                   Spikev2                      March 2008


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.











Mutaf                  Expires September 15, 2008               [Page 6]

