

PCE Working Group                                  J.L. Le Roux (Editor) 
Internet Draft                                            France Telecom 
Category: Informational                  
Expires: January 2006                    
                                         
                                                                         
                                                                         
                                                               July 2005 
 
 
        Requirements for Path Computation Element (PCE) Discovery 
 
               draft-ietf-pce-discovery-reqs-00.txt 
 
 
Status of this Memo 
 
   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any 
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware 
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes 
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79. 
    
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026. Internet-Drafts are working 
   documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas, 
   and its working groups. Note that other groups may also distribute 
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt. 
    
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
 
    
Abstract 
    
   This document presents a set of requirements for a Path Computation 
   Element (PCE) discovery mechanism that would allow a Path Computation 
   Client (PCC) to discover dynamically and automatically a set of PCEs 
   along with their capabilities. It is intended that solutions that 
   specify procedures and protocol extensions for such PCE discovery 
   satisfy these requirements.  
 
 
 
 
Le Roux et al.                                                  [Page 1] 
  
Internet Draft   draft-ietf-pce-discovery-reqs-00.txt        June 2005 


Conventions used in this document 
 
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119. 
 
Table of Contents 
    
   1.      Contributors................................................2 
   2.      Terminology.................................................3 
   3.      Introduction................................................3 
   4.      Problem Statement and Requirements overview.................4 
   4.1.    Problem Statement...........................................4 
   4.2.    Requirements overview.......................................5 
   5.      Example of application scenario.............................6 
   6.      Detailed Requirements.......................................7 
   6.1.    PCE Information to be disclosed.............................7 
   6.1.1.  Discovery of PCE Location...................................7 
   6.1.2.  Discovery of PCE computation scopes and domain(s) under 
             control...................................................7 
   6.1.3.  Discovery of PCE Capabilities...............................8 
   6.1.4.  Discovery of Alternate PCEs.................................9 
   6.2.    Scope of PCE Discovery......................................9 
   6.3.    PCE Information Synchronization.............................9 
   6.4.    Detecting PCE Liveliness...................................10 
   6.5.    Discovery of PCE capacity and congestion...................10 
   6.6.    Extensibility..............................................10 
   6.7.    Scalability................................................10 
   6.8.    PCE Selection..............................................10 
   7.      Security Considerations....................................11 
   8.      Acknowledgments............................................11 
   9.      References.................................................11 
   10.     Authors' Addresses:........................................12 
   11.     Intellectual Property Statement............................13 
    
    
1. Contributors 
    
   The following are the authors that contributed to the present 
   document: 
 
   Jean-Louis Le Roux (France Telecom)  
   Paul Mabey (Qwest Communications) 
   Eiji Oki (NTT) 
   Richard Rabbat (Fujitsu) 
   Ting Wo Chung (Bell Canada) 
   Raymond Zhang (BT Infonet) 
    
    
    
    
 
 
Le Roux et al.                                                [Page 2] 
  
Internet Draft   draft-ietf-pce-discovery-reqs-00.txt        June 2005 


2. Terminology 
 
   Terminology used in this document  
    
      LSR: Label Switch Router 
    
      TE-LSP: Traffic Engineered Label Switched Path 
 
      PCE: Path Computation Element: an entity (component, application,  
      or network node) that is capable of computing a network path or  
      route based on a network graph, and applying computational  
      constraints. 
 
      PCC: Path Computation Client: any client application requesting a  
      path computation to be performed by a Path Computation Element.  
        
      IGP Area: OSPF Area or ISIS level/area 
    
      ABR: IGP Area Border Router (OSPF ABR or ISIS L1L2 router)  
       
      Intra-area TE LSP: A TE LSP whose path does not cross IGP area  
      boundaries.  
       
      Inter-area TE LSP: A TE LSP whose path transits through 
      two or more IGP areas. 
        
      Inter-AS MPLS TE LSP: A TE LSP whose path transits     
      through two or more ASes or sub-ASes (BGP confederations).  
    
      Domain: any collection of network elements within a common sphere    
      of address management or path computational responsibility.   
      Examples of domains include IGP areas and Autonomous Systems.  
 
3. Introduction 
 
   The PCE Architecture [PCE-ARCH] defines a Path Computation Element 
   (PCE) as an entity capable of computing TE-LSPs paths satisfying a 
   set of constraints. The PCE function can be located on a router/LSR 
   (composite PCE) or on a network server (external PCE).  
   A PCE serves TE-LSP path computation requests sent by Path 
   Computation Clients (PCC).  
   A Path Computation Client (PCC) is a client application requesting a  
   path computation to be performed by a PCE. This can be, for instance, 
   an LSR requesting a path for a TE-LSP for which it is the head-end, 
   or a PCE requesting a path computation of another PCE (inter-PCE 
   communication). The communication between a PCC and a PCE requires a 
   client-server protocol whose requirements are listed in [PCE-COM-
   REQ].  
 
   There are several motivations for the adoption of a PCE-based 
   architecture to perform a TE-LSP path computation. They are listed in 
   [PCE-ARCH]. This includes applications such as CPU intensive path 
 
Le Roux et al.                                                [Page 3] 
  
Internet Draft   draft-ietf-pce-discovery-reqs-00.txt        June 2005 


   computation, inter-domain path computation and backup path 
   computation. 
 
   The PCE architecture requires, of course, that a PCC be aware of the 
   location and capabilities of one or more PCEs in its domain, and also 
   potentially of some relevant PCEs in other domains (in the context of 
   inter-domain path computation).  
 
   In that context it would be highly desirable to define a mechanism 
   for automatic and dynamic PCE discovery, which would allow PCCs to 
   automatically discover a set of PCEs along with their capabilities, 
   and to dynamically detect new PCEs or any modification of the PCE 
   capabilities. This includes the discovery by a PCC of a set of one or 
   more PCEs in its domain, and potentially in some other domains. The 
   latter is a desirable function in the case of inter-domain path 
   computation for example.  
 
   This document lists a set of functional requirements for such an 
   automatic and dynamic PCE discovery mechanism. Section 3 points out 
   the problem statement. Section 4 illustrates an application scenario. 
   Finally section 5 addresses detailed requirements. 
    
   It is intended that solutions that specify procedures and protocol 
   extensions for such PCE discovery satisfy these requirements. There 
   is no intent either to specify solution specific requirements or to 
   make any assumption on the protocol(s) that could be used for the 
   discovery. 
    
   Note that requirements listed in this document apply equally to MPLS-
   TE and GMPLS-capable PCEs. 
    
   It is also important to note that the notion of a PCC encompasses a 
   PCE acting as PCC when requesting a TE-LSP path computation of 
   another PCE (inter-PCE communication). Thus this document does not 
   make the distinction between PCE discovery by PCCs and PCE discovery 
   by PCEs. 
 
4. Problem Statement and Requirements overview 
    
4.1. Problem Statement 
 
   A routing domain may in practice be comprised of multiple PCEs: 
        -The path computation load may be balanced among a set of PCEs  
         to improve scalability;    
        -For the purpose of redundancy, primary and backup PCEs may be  
         used; 
        -PCEs may have distinct path computation capabilities (multi- 
         constrained path computation, backup path computation...);  
        -In an inter-domain context there can be several PCEs with  
         distinct path computation scopes (intra-area, inter-area,  
         inter-AS, inter-layer), each PCE being responsible for path  
         computation in one or more domains within its scope. 
 
Le Roux et al.                                                [Page 4] 
  
Internet Draft   draft-ietf-pce-discovery-reqs-00.txt        June 2005 


    
   As an example, in a multi-area network made of one backbone area and 
   N peripheral areas, and where inter-area MPLS-TE path computation 
   relies on multiple-PCE path computation with ABRs acting as PCEs, the 
   backbone area would comprise at least N PCEs. In existing multi-area 
   networks, N can be quite large (e.g. beyond fifty). 
     
   In order to allow for efficient PCE selection by PCCs and efficient 
   load balancing of requests, a PCC has to know the location of PCEs in 
   its domain, along with their capabilities, and also potentially of 
   some relevant PCEs in other domains (for inter-domain path 
   computation purpose). 
   Such PCE information could be learnt through manual configuration, on 
   each PCC, of the set of PCEs along with their capabilities and 
   scope(s). Such manual configuration approach may be sufficient, and 
   even desired in some particular situations, but it obviously faces 
   several limitations: 
        -This may imply a substantial configuration overhead (see the  
         above example with N PCEs); 
        -This would not allow a PCC to dynamically detect that a new  
         PCE is available, that an existing PCE is no longer available,  
         or that there is a change in the PCE's capabilities. 
         
   Furthermore, as with any manual configuration approach, this may lead 
   to undesirable configuration errors. 
    
   Hence, an automated PCE discovery mechanism allowing a PCC to 
   dynamically discover a set of PCEs and their capabilities is highly 
   desirable. 
    
4.2. Requirements overview 
     
   A PCE discovery mechanism that satisfies the requirements set forth 
   in this document MUST allow a PCC to automatically discover the 
   location of one or more PCEs in its domain and also, potentially, of 
   PCEs in other domains, of interest for inter-domain path computation 
   purpose.  
    
   A PCE discovery mechanism MUST allow discovering the path computation 
   scope(s) of a PCE. It MUST also allow a PCC to discover the set of 
   one or more domains under the path computation responsibility of a 
   PCE.  
    
   A PCE discovery mechanism MUST allow PCCs to dynamically discover 
   that a new PCE has appeared or that there is a change in PCE 
   information.  
    
   It MUST also allow PCCs to dynamically discover that a PCE is no 
   longer available.  
    
   A PCE discovery mechanism SHOULD also allow PCCs to learn about a set    
   of PCE path computation capabilities. 
 
Le Roux et al.                                                [Page 5] 
  
Internet Draft   draft-ietf-pce-discovery-reqs-00.txt        June 2005 


 
 
5. Example of application scenario 
    
   <----------------AS1-------------------->           <----AS2---                    
    Area 1           Area 0        Area 2 
  R1---------R3-----R5-------R6-----------R9----------R11----R13      
  |          |               |             |           | 
  |          |               |             |           | 
  R2---------R4-----R7-------R8-----------R10---------R12----R14               
 
      S1                                            
 
   Figure 1. 
    
   Figure 1 above illustrates a network with several PCEs: 
   -The ABR R3 is a composite PCE that can take part in inter area path 
   computation. It can compute paths in area 1 and area 0. 
   -The ABR R6 is a composite PCE that can take part in inter-area path 
   computation. It can compute paths in area 0 and area2 
   -The ASBR R9 is a composite PCE that can take part in inter-AS path 
   computation, responsible for path computation in AS1 towards AS2. 
   -The ASBR R12 is a composite PCE that can take part in inter-AS path 
   computation, responsible for path computation in AS2 towards AS1. 
   -The server S1 is an external PCE that can be used to compute diverse 
   paths and backup paths in area 1. 
    
   The PCE discovery mechanism will allow: 
   -each LSR in area 1 and 0 to dynamically discover R3, as a PCE for 
   inter-area path computation as well as its path computation domains: 
   area1 and area0. 
   -each LSR in area 0 and 2 to dynamically discover R6, as a PCE for 
   inter-area path computation, as well as its path computation domains: 
   area2 and area0. 
   -each LSR in AS1 and some PCEs in AS2 to dynamically discover R9 as a 
   PCE for inter-AS path computation as well as its path computation 
   domain: AS1 
   -each LSR in area 1 to dynamically discover S1, as a PCE for diverse 
   path computation and backup path computation in area1.  
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
 

 
Le Roux et al.                                                [Page 6] 
  
Internet Draft   draft-ietf-pce-discovery-reqs-00.txt        June 2005 


6. Detailed Requirements 
 
6.1. PCE Information to be disclosed 
 
   The PCE discovery mechanism MUST disclose some PCE information that 
   will allow PCCs to select appropriate PCEs.  
   This section details the kind of information that has to be 
   disclosed. 
      
6.1.1. Discovery of PCE Location 
    
   The PCE discovery mechanism MUST allow discovering, for a given PCE, 
   the IPv4 and/or IPv6 address to be used to reach the PCE. This 
   address will typically be a loop-back address that is always 
   reachable, if there is any connectivity to the PCE. 
   This address will be used by PCCs to communicate with a PCE, thanks 
   to a PCC-PCE communication protocol. 
    
6.1.2. Discovery of PCE computation scopes and domain(s) under control 
    
   Inter-domain path computation is a key application of the PCE 
   architecture.  This can rely on a multiple-PCE path computation, 
   where PCEs in each domain compute a part of the end-to-end path and 
   collaborate with each other to find the end-to-end-path. This can 
   also rely on a single-PCE path computation where a PCE has visibility 
   inside multiple domains and can compute an inter-domain path. 
    
   Hence the PCE discovery mechanism MUST allow discovering the path 
   computation scope of a PCE, i.e. if a PCE can be used to compute or 
   to take part in the computation of intra-area, inter-area or inter-AS 
   TE-LSP. Note that these path computation scopes are not mutually 
   exclusive. 
    
   Also the PCE discovery mechanism MUST allow discovering the set of 
   one or more domains under the path computation responsibility of a 
   PCE, i.e. where a PCE has visibility and can compute TE-LSP paths. 
   These domains can be identified using a domain identifier: For 
   instance, an IGP area can be identified by the Area ID (OSPF or 
   ISIS), and an AS can be identified by the AS number.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Le Roux et al.                                                [Page 7] 
  
Internet Draft   draft-ietf-pce-discovery-reqs-00.txt        June 2005 


6.1.3. Discovery of PCE Capabilities 
    
   In the case where there are several PCEs with distinct capabilities, 
   available, a PCC has to select one or more appropriate PCEs.  
    
   For that purpose the PCE discovery mechanism SHOULD allow the 
   discovery of some PCE capabilities.  
   For the sake of illustration this could include for instance some 
   path computation related capabilities: 
        -The capability to compute MPLS-TE and/or GMPLS paths; 
        -The type of link and path constraints supported: e.g.  
         bandwidth, affinities, delay; 
        -The objective functions supported: e.g. shortest constrained  
         path, shortest bounded delay path; 
        -The capability to compute multiple paths in a synchronized  
         manner: e.g. diverse path computation, load balancing  
         computation; 
        -Some GMPLS specific capabilities: e.g. the supported interface  
         switching capabilities, the capability to compute multi-layer  
         paths. 
   And this could also include some general capabilities: 
        -The capability to handle request prioritization; 
        -The capability to authenticate PCCs and to be authenticated. 
    
   Such information regarding PCE capabilities could then be used by a 
   PCC to select an appropriate PCE from a list of candidate PCEs. 
 
   Note that the description of general and path computation specific 
   PCE capabilities is out of the scope of this document. It is expected 
   that this will be described in a separate document. 
    
   It is paramount that dynamic capability discovery MUST NOT generate  
   an excessive amount of information and SHOULD be limited to a small  
   set of generic capabilities.  
   If required, the exhaustive discovery of detailed capabilities could 
   be ensured by means of the PCC-PCE communication protocol. 
   Actually a tradeoff should be found between capability discovery by 
   the PCE discovery mechanism and by the PCC-PCE communication 
   protocol. One of the objectives of the PCE discovery mechanism is to 
   help PCCs to select appropriate PCEs and limit the likelihood of PCC-
   PCE communication rejections that may occur in case a PCE cannot 
   support a given capability.  
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    

 
Le Roux et al.                                                [Page 8] 
  
Internet Draft   draft-ietf-pce-discovery-reqs-00.txt        June 2005 


6.1.4. Discovery of Alternate PCEs 
    
   In the case of a PCE failure, a PCC has to select another PCE, if one 
   is available. It could be useful in various situations, to indicate a 
   set of one or more alternate PCEs that can be selected in case a 
   given PCE fails.  
   Hence the PCE Discovery mechanism SHOULD allow the advertising, for a 
   given PCE of the location of one or more assigned alternate PCEs. 
 
6.2. Scope of PCE Discovery  
 
   The PCE Discovery mechanism MUST allow the control of the scope of 
   the PCE information discovery (IGP Area, AS, set of AS) on a per PCE 
   basis. In other words it MUST allow to control to which PCC or group 
   of PCCs the information related to a PCE may be disclosed. 
    
   The choice for the discovery scope of a given PCE MUST include the 
   followings: 
 
        -All PCCs in a single IGP area 
    
        -All PCCs in a set of adjacent IGP areas 
    
        -All PCCs in a single AS 
    
        -All PCCs in a set of ASes 
 
        -A set of one or more PCCs in a set of one or more ASes 
 
   Particularly this also implies that the PCE Discovery mechanism MUST 
   allow for the discovery of PCE information across IGP areas and 
   across AS boundaries. 
    
   Note that it MUST be possible to deactivate PCE discovery on a per 
   PCE basis. 
 
6.3. PCE Information Synchronization 
 
   The PCE discovery mechanism MUST allow a PCC to detect any change in 
   the information related to a PCE (e.g. capability modifications). 
    
   In addition it MUST be possible to dynamically detect new PCEs. 
    
   The PCE Discovery Mechanism SHOULD allow such detection under 60 
   seconds. 
    
   Note that PCE capabilities are expected to be fairly stable and not 
   to change frequently.  
    
    
 

 
Le Roux et al.                                                [Page 9] 
  
Internet Draft   draft-ietf-pce-discovery-reqs-00.txt        June 2005 


6.4. Detecting PCE Liveliness  
 
   The PCE discovery mechanism MUST allow a PCC to detect when a PCE is 
   no longer alive. This allows a PCC to rapidly switch to another PCE 
   (for instance a predefined alternate PCE), and thus minimizes path 
   computation service disruption. 
    
   The PCE discovery mechanism SHOULD allow such PCE liveliness 
   detection under 60 seconds. 
    
6.5. Discovery of PCE capacity and congestion 
    
   PCE WG feedback is requested on the following items: 
        -Is there a need for the discovery of PCE capacity in terms of  
         computation power? This static parameter could be used to  
         ensure weighted load balancing of requests in case PCEs do not  
         have the same capacity. 
        -Would it be useful that a PCE report its status as "congested"  
         in case it is too busy? PCCs may then use this dynamic  
         information to prefer a different PCE.  
 
6.6. Extensibility 
    
   The PCE discovery mechanism MUST be flexible and extensible so as to 
   easily allow for the addition of some additional PCE information that 
   could be defined in the future. 
 
6.7. Scalability 
 
   The PCE discovery mechanism MUST be designed to scale well with an 
   increase of any of the following parameters: 
        -Number of PCCs; 
        -Number of PCEs; 
        -Number of IGP Areas in the discovery scope; 
        -Number of ASs in the discovery scope. 
    
   Particularly, in case routing protocols (IGP, BGP) are extended to 
   support PCE discovery, the extensions MUST NOT cause a degradation in 
   routing protocol performance. The same applies to a signaling 
   solution that could serve for this communication. 
 
6.8. PCE Selection 
 
   A PCC may have to select among a set of candidate PCEs that have the 
   same capabilities. A specific PCE selection procedure SHOULD be 
   defined in order to ensure consistent behaviour when doing load 
   balancing and avoid that all PCCs send the requests to only one PCE. 
   The precise requirements and mechanisms for this function are out of 
   the scope of this document. It is expected that this requirement will 
   be covered in another document.  
    
    
 
Le Roux et al.                                               [Page 10] 
  
Internet Draft   draft-ietf-pce-discovery-reqs-00.txt        June 2005 


 
7. Security Considerations 
    
   PCE discovery and particularly inter-AS PCE discovery may raise new 
   security issues. PCE discovery procedures or protocol extensions MUST 
   deliver the operational security objectives where required. The 
   overall security objectives of confidentiality, integrity and 
   availability may take on varying level of importance. These 
   objectives MAY be met by other established means and protocols. 
    
   The PCE discovery mechanism MUST be able to restrict the scope of 
   discovery to a set of authorized PCCs. The identity of any PCE MUST 
   only be learnt by authorized PCCs. It MUST be possible to encrypt 
   discovery information.  
    
   Note that a threat analysis of the proposed procedures and/or 
   protocol extensions SHOULD address masquerade, eavesdropping, 
   unauthorized access, loss or corruption of information (includes 
   replay attacks), repudiation, forgery and denial of service attacks. 
 
8. Acknowledgments 
 
   We would like to thank Benoit Fondeviole, Thomas Morin, Emile 
   Stephan, Jean-Philippe Vasseur, Dean Cheng and Mohamed Boucadair for 
   their useful comments and suggestions. 
 
9. References 
    
   [RFC2119] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate 
   Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997. 
    
   [RFC3667] Bradner, S., "IETF Rights in Contributions", BCP 78, RFC 
   3667, February 2004. 
 
   [RFC3668] Bradner, S., "Intellectual Property Rights in IETF 
   Technology", BCP 79, RFC 3668, February 2004. 
 
 
   [PCE-ARCH] Farrel, A., Vasseur, J.P., Ash, J., "Path Computation 
   Element (PCE) Architecture", draft-ietf-pce-architecture-00.txt, work 
   in progress. 
    
   [PCE-COM-REQ] Ash, J., Le Roux, J.L., " PCE Communication Protocol 
   Generic Requirements", draft-ietf-pce-comm-protocol-gen-reqs-00.txt, 
   work in progress.  
    
    
    
    
 


 
Le Roux et al.                                               [Page 11] 
  
Internet Draft   draft-ietf-pce-discovery-reqs-00.txt        June 2005 


10. Authors' Addresses:  
  
   Jean-Louis Le Roux  
   France Telecom  
   2, avenue Pierre-Marzin  
   22307 Lannion Cedex  
   FRANCE 
   Email: jeanlouis.leroux@francetelecom.com 
  
   Paul Mabey 
   Qwest Communications 
   950 17th Street, 
   Denver, CO 80202,  
   USA 
   Email: pmabey@qwest.com 
  
   Eiji Oki 
   NTT 
   Midori-cho 3-9-11 
   Musashino-shi, Tokyo 180-8585,  
   JAPAN 
   Email: oki.eiji@lab.ntt.co.jp 
 
   Richard Rabbat 
   Fujitsu Laboratories of America 
   1240 East Arques Ave, MS 345 
   Sunnyvale, CA 94085 
   USA 
   Email: richard@us.fujitsu.com 
    
   Ting Wo Chung 
   Bell Canada 
   181 Bay Street, Suite 350 
   Toronto, Ontario, M5J 2T3 
   CANADA,  
   Email: ting_wo.chung@bell.ca 
 
   Raymond Zhang 
   BT Infonet 
   2160 E. Grand Ave. 
   El Segundo, CA 90025 
   USA 
   Email: raymond_zhang@infonet.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Le Roux et al.                                               [Page 12] 
  
Internet Draft   draft-ietf-pce-discovery-reqs-00.txt        June 2005 


 
11. Intellectual Property Statement 
 
   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to 
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in 
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights 
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has 
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information 
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be 
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 
    
   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of 
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 
    
   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at  
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org. 
    
   Disclaimer of Validity 
    
   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an 
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS 
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET 
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, 
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE 
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED 
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
    
   Copyright Statement 
    
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).  This document is subject 
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and 
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights. 
 
 
 









 
Le Roux et al.                                               [Page 13] 
  