



Internet Research Task Force                             D. Harkins, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                            Aruba Networks
Intended status: Informational                             June 18, 2015
Expires: December 20, 2015


                         Dragonfly Key Exchange
                      draft-irtf-cfrg-dragonfly-08

Abstract

   This document specifies a key exchange using discrete logarithm
   cryptography that is authenticated using a password or passphrase.
   It is resistant to active attack, passive attack, and off-line
   dictionary attack.  This document is a product of the Crypto Forum
   Research Group (CFRG).

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 20, 2015.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2015 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.



Harkins                 Expires December 20, 2015               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                  Dragonfly                      June 2015


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
     1.1.  Requirements Language . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
     1.2.  Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
       1.2.1.  Notations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
       1.2.2.  Resistance to Dictionary Attack . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   2.  Discrete Logarithm Cryptography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     2.1.  Elliptic Curve Cryptography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     2.2.  Finite Field Cryptography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   3.  The Dragonfly Key Exchange  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     3.1.  Assumptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     3.2.  Derivation of the Password Element  . . . . . . . . . . .   8
       3.2.1.  Hunting and Pecking with ECC Groups . . . . . . . . .  10
       3.2.2.  Hunting and Pecking with MODP Groups  . . . . . . . .  12
     3.3.  The Commit Exchange . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
     3.4.  The Confirm Exchange  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
   4.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
   5.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
   6.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
   7.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
     7.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
     7.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17

1.  Introduction

   Passwords and passphrases are the predominant way of doing
   authentication in the Internet today.  Many protocols that use
   passwords and passphrases for authentication exchange password-
   derived data as a proof-of-knowledge of the password (for example,
   [RFC5996], and [RFC5433]).  This opens the exchange up to an off-line
   dictionary attack where the attacker gleans enough knowledge from
   either an active or passive attack on the protocol to run through a
   pool of potential passwords and compute verifiers until it is able to
   match the password-derived data.

   This protocol employs discrete logarithm cryptography to perform an
   efficient exchange in a way that performs mutual authentication using
   a password but is resistant to an off-line dictionary attack.
   Consensus of the CFRG for this document was rough.

1.1.  Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].




Harkins                 Expires December 20, 2015               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                  Dragonfly                      June 2015


1.2.  Definitions

1.2.1.  Notations

   The following notations are used in this memo

   password
       A shared, secret and potentially low-entropy word, phrase, code
       or key used as a credential to mutually authenticate the peers.
       It is not restricted to characters in a human language.

   a | b
       denotes concatenation of bit string "a" with bit string "b".

   len(a)
       indicates the length in bits of the bit string "a".

   lsb(a)
       returns the least-significant bit of the bit string "a".

   lgr(a,b)
       takes "a" and a prime, "b" and returns the legendre symbol (a/b).

   min(a,b)
       returns the lexicographical minimum of strings "a" and "b", or
       zero (0) if "a" equals "b".

   max(a,b)
       returns the lexicographical maximum of strings "a" and "b", or
       zero (0) if "a" equals "b".

   The convention for this memo to represent an element in a finite
   cyclic group is to use an upper-case letter or acronym, while a
   scalar is indicated with a lower-case letter or acronym.  An element
   that represents a point on an elliptic curve has an implied composite
   nature-- i.e. it has both an x- and y-coordinate.

1.2.2.  Resistance to Dictionary Attack

   Resistance to dictionary attack means that any advantage an adversary
   can gain must be directly related to the number of interactions she
   makes with an honest protocol participant and not through
   computation.  The adversary will not be able to obtain any
   information about the password except whether a single guess from a
   protocol run is correct or incorrect.






Harkins                 Expires December 20, 2015               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                  Dragonfly                      June 2015


2.  Discrete Logarithm Cryptography

   Dragonfly uses discrete logarithm cryptography to achieve
   authentication and key agreement (see [SP800-56A]).  Each party to
   the exchange derives ephemeral keys with respect to a particular set
   of domain parameters (referred to here as a "group").  A group can be
   based on Finite Field Cryptography (FFC) or Elliptic Curve
   Cryptography (ECC).

   Three operations are defined for both types of groups:

   o  "scalar operation"-- takes a scalar and an element in the group to
      produce another element-- Z = scalar-op(x, Y).

   o  "element operation"-- takes two elements in the group to produce a
      third-- Z = element-op(X, Y).

   o  "inverse operation"-- takes an element and returns another element
      such that the element operation on the two produces the identity
      element of the group-- Y = inverse(X).

2.1.  Elliptic Curve Cryptography

   Domain parameters for the ECC groups used by Dragonfly are:

   o  A prime, p, determining a prime field GF(p).  The cryptographic
      group will be a subgroup of the full elliptic curve group that
      consists of points on an elliptic curve -- elements from GF(p)
      that satisfy the curve's equation -- together with the "point at
      infinity" that serves as the identity element.  The group
      operation for ECC groups is addition of points on the elliptic
      curve.

   o  Elements a and b from GF(p) that define the curve's equation.  The
      point (x, y) in GF(p) x GF(p) is on the elliptic curve if and only
      if (y^2 - x^3 - a*x - b) mod p equals zero (0).

   o  A point, G, on the elliptic curve, which serves as a generator for
      the ECC group.  G is chosen such that its order, with respect to
      elliptic curve addition, is a sufficiently large prime.

   o  A prime, q, which is the order of G, and thus is also the size of
      the cryptographic subgroup that is generated by G.

   An (x,y) pair is a valid ECC element if: 1) the x- and y-coordinates
   are both greater than zero (0) and less than the prime defining the
   underlying field; and, 2) the x- and y-coordinates satisfy the
   equation for the curve and produce a valid point on the curve that is



Harkins                 Expires December 20, 2015               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                  Dragonfly                      June 2015


   not the point at infinity.  If either one of those conditions do not
   hold the (x,y) pair is not a valid element.

   The scalar operation is addition of a point on the curve with itself
   a number of times.  The point Y is multiplied x-times to produce
   another point Z:

       Z = scalar-op(x, Y) = x*Y

   The element operation is addition of two points on the curve.  Points
   X and Y are summed to produce another point Z:

       Z = element-op(X, Y) = X + Y

   The inverse function is defined such that the sum of an element and
   its inverse is "0", the point-at-infinity of an elliptic curve group:

      R + inverse(R) = "0"

   Elliptic curve groups require a mapping function, q = F(Q), to
   convert a group element to an integer.  The mapping function used in
   this memo returns the x-coordinate of the point it is passed.

   scalar-op(x, Y) can be viewed as x iterations of element-op() by
   defining:

      Y = scalar-op(1, Y)

      Y = scalar-op(x, Y) = element-op(Y, scalar-op(x-1, Y)), for x > 1

   A definition of how to add two points on an elliptic curve (i.e.
   element-op(X, Y)) can be found in [RFC6090].

   Note: There is another elliptic curve domain parameter, a co-factor,
   h, that is defined by the requirement that the size of the full
   elliptic curve group (including "0") be the product of h and q.
   Elliptic curve groups used with Dragonfly authentication MUST have a
   co-factor of one (1).

2.2.  Finite Field Cryptography

   Domain parameters for the FFC groups used in Dragonfly are:

   o  A prime, p, determining a prime field GF(p), the integers modulo
      p.  The FFC group will be a subgroup of GF(p)*, the multiplicative
      group of non-zero elements in GF(p).  The group operation for FFC
      groups is multiplication modulo p.




Harkins                 Expires December 20, 2015               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                  Dragonfly                      June 2015


   o  An element, G, in GF(p)* which serves as a generator for the FFC
      group.  G is chosen such that its multiplicative order is a
      sufficiently large prime divisor of ((p-1)/2).

   o  A prime, q, which is the multiplicative order of G, and thus also
      the size of the cryptographic subgroup of GF(p)* that is generated
      by G.

   A number is a valid element in an FFC group if: 1) it is between one
   (1) and one (1) less than the the prime, p, exclusive (i.e. 1 <
   element < p-1); and, 2) if modular exponentiation of the element by
   the group order, q, equals one (1).  If either one of those
   conditions do not hold the number is not a valid element.

   The scalar operation is exponentiation of a generator modulo a prime.
   An element Y is taken to the x-th power modulo the prime returning
   another element, Z:

       Z = scalar-op(x, Y) = Y^x mod p

   The element operation is modular multiplication.  Two elements, X and
   Y, are multiplied modulo the prime returning another element, Z:

       Z = element-op(X, Y) = (X * Y) mod p

   The inverse function for a MODP group is defined such that the
   product of an element and its inverse modulo the group prime equals
   one (1).  In other words,

      (R * inverse(R)) mod p = 1

3.  The Dragonfly Key Exchange

   There are two parties to the Dragonfly exchange named, for
   convenience and by convention, Alice and Bob. The two parties have a
   shared password that was established in an out-of-band mechanism and
   they both agree to use a particular domain parameter set (either ECC
   or FFC).  In the Dragonfly exchange both Alice and Bob share an
   identical view of the shared password-- i.e. it is not "augmented",
   where one side holds a password and the other side holds a non-
   invertable verifier.  This allows Dragonfly to be used in traditional
   client-server protocols and also in peer-to-peer applications in
   which there are not fixed roles and either party may initiate the
   exchange (and both parties may implement it simultaneously).

   Prior to beginning the Dragonfly exchange, the two peers MUST derive
   a secret element in the chosen domain parameter set.  Two "hunting-
   and-pecking" techniques to determine a secret element, one for ECC



Harkins                 Expires December 20, 2015               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                  Dragonfly                      June 2015


   and one for FFC, are described in Section 3.2 but any secure,
   determinstic method that is agreed up on can be used.  For instance,
   the technique described in [hash2ec] can be used for ECC groups.

   The Dragonfly exchange consists of two message exchanges, a "Commit
   Exchange" in which both sides commit to a single guess of the
   password, and a "Confirm Exchange" in which both sides confirm
   knowledge of the password.  A side effect of running the Dragonfly
   exchange is an authenticated, shared, and secret key whose
   cryptographic strength is set by the agreed-upon group.

   Dragonfly uses a random function, H(), a mapping function, F(), and a
   key derivation function, KDF().

3.1.  Assumptions

   In order to avoid attacks on the Dragonfly protocol some basic
   assumptions are made:

   1.  Function H is a "random oracle" (see [RANDOR]) that maps a binary
       string of indeterminate length onto a fixed binary string that is
       x bits in length.

          H: {0,1}^* --> {0,1}^x

   2.  Function F is a mapping function that takes an element in a group
       and returns an integer.  For ECC groups function F() returns the
       x-coordinate of the element (which is a point on the elliptic
       curve), for FFC groups function F() is the identity function
       (since all elements in an FFC group are already integers less
       than the prime):

          ECC: x = F(P), where P=(x,y)

          FFC: x = F(x)

   3.  Function KDF is a key derivation function (see, for instance,
       [SP800-108]) that takes a key to stretch, k, a label to bind to
       the key, label, and an indication of the desired output, n:

          stretch = KDF-n(k, label)

       so that len(stretch) equals n.

   4.  The discrete logarithm problem for the chosen group is hard.
       That is, given G, P, and Y = G^x mod p, it is computationally
       infeasible to determine x.  Similarly, for an ECC group given the




Harkins                 Expires December 20, 2015               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                  Dragonfly                      June 2015


       curve definition, a generator G, and Y = x * G, it is
       computationally infeasible to determine x.

   5.  There exists a pool of passwords from which the password shared
       by the two peers is drawn.  This pool can consist of words from a
       dictionary, for example.  Each password in this pool has an equal
       probability of being the shared password.  All potential
       attackers have access to this pool of passwords.

   6.  The peers have the ability to produce quality random numbers.

3.2.  Derivation of the Password Element

   Prior to beginning the exchange of information, the peers MUST derive
   a secret element, called the Password Element (PE), in the group
   defined by the chosen domain parameter set.  From the point-of-view
   of an attacker who does not know the password, PE will be a random
   element in the negotiated group.  Two examples are described here for
   completeness but any method of deterministically mapping a secret
   string into an element in a selected group can be used, for instance
   the technique in [hash2ec] for ECC groups.  If a different technique
   than the ones described here is used, the secret string SHOULD
   include the identities of the peers.

   To fix PE, both peers MUST have a common view of the password.  If
   there is any password processing necessary, for example to support
   internationalization, the processed password is then used as the
   shared credential.  If either side wants to store a hashed version of
   the password-- hashing the password with random data called a
   "salt"-- it will be necessary to convey the salt to the other side
   prior to commensing the exchange and the hashed password is then used
   as the shared credential.

   Note: only one party would be able to maintain a salted password and
   this would require that the Dragonfly key exchange be used in a
   protocol that has strict roles for client (that always initiates) and
   server (that always responds).  Due to the symmetric nature of
   Dragonfly salting passwords does not prevent an impersonation attack
   after compromise of a database of salted passwords.

   The determinstic process to select the PE begins with choosing a
   secret seed and then performing a group-specific hunting-and-pecking
   technique-- one for FFC groups and another for ECC groups.

   To thwart side channel attacks which attempt to determine the number
   of iterations of the "hunting-and-pecking" loop are used to find PE
   for a given password, a security parameter, k, is used that ensures
   that at least k iterations are always performed.  The probability



Harkins                 Expires December 20, 2015               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                  Dragonfly                      June 2015


   that one requires more than "n" iterations of the "hunting-and-
   pecking" loop to find an ECC PE is roughly (q/2p)^n and to find an
   FFC PE is roughly (q/p)^n, both of which rapidly approach zero (0) as
   "n" increases.  The security parameter, k, SHOULD be set sufficiently
   large such that the probability that finding PE would take more than
   k iterations is sufficiently small (see Section 6).

   First, an 8-bit counter is set to one (1) and a secret base is
   computed using the negotiated one-way function with the identities of
   the two participants, Alice and Bob, the secret password and the
   counter:

      base = H(max(Alice,Bob) | min(Alice,Bob) | password | counter)

   The identities are passed to the max() and min() functions to provide
   the necessary ordering of the inputs to H() while still allowing for
   a peer-to-peer exchange where both Alice and Bob each view themselves
   as the "initiator" of the exchange.

   The base is then stretched using the technique from section B.5.1 of
   [FIPS186-4].  The key derivation function, KDF, is used to produce a
   bitstream whose length is equal to the length of the prime from the
   group's domain parameter set plus the constant sixty-four (64) to
   derive a temporary value, and the temporary value is moularly reduced
   to produce a seed:

      n = len(p) + 64

      temp = KDF-n(base, "Dragonfly Hunting and Pecking")

      seed = (temp mod (p - 1)) + 1

   The string bound to the derived temporary value is for illustrative
   purposes only.  Implementations of the Dragonfly key exchange SHOULD
   use a usage specific label with the KDF.

   Note: the base is stretched to 64 more bits than are needed so that
   the bias from the modular reduction is not so apparent.

   The seed is then passed to the group-specific hunting and pecking
   technique.

   If the protocol performing the Dragonfly exchange has the ability to
   exchange random nonces those SHOULD be added to the computation of
   base to ensure that each run of the protocol produces a different PE.






Harkins                 Expires December 20, 2015               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                  Dragonfly                      June 2015


3.2.1.  Hunting and Pecking with ECC Groups

   The ECC specific hunting and pecking technique entails looping until
   a valid point on the elliptic curve has been found.  The seed is used
   as an x-coordinate with the equation of the curve to check whether
   x^3 + a*x + b is a quadratic residue modulo p.  If it is not, then
   the counter is incremented, a new base and new seed are generated and
   the hunting and pecking continues.  If it is a quadratic residue
   modulo p, then the x-coordinate is assigned the value of seed and the
   current base is stored.  When the hunting-and-pecking loop
   terminates, the x-coordinate is used with the equation of the curve
   to solve for a y-coordinate.  An ambiguity exists since two values
   for the y-coordinate would be valid and the low-order bit of the
   stored base is used to unambiguously determine the correct
   y-coordinate.  The resulting (x,y) pair becomes the Password Element,
   PE.

   Algorithmically, the process looks like this:

     found = 0
     counter = 1
     n = len(p) + 64
     do {
       base = H(max(Alice,Bob) | min(Alice,Bob) | password | counter)
       temp = KDF-n(base, "Dragonfly Hunting And Pecking")
       seed = (temp mod (p - 1)) + 1
       if ( (seed^3 + a*seed + b) is a quadratic residue mod p)
       then
         if ( found == 0 )
         then
           x = seed
           save = base
           found = 1
         fi
       fi
       counter = counter + 1
     } while ((found == 0) || (counter <= k))
     y = sqrt(x^3 + ax + b)
     if ( lsb(y) == lsb(save) )
     then
       PE = (x,y)
     else
       PE = (x,p-y)
     fi

                    Figure 1: Fixing PE for ECC Groups





Harkins                 Expires December 20, 2015              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft                  Dragonfly                      June 2015


   Checking whether a value is a quadradic residue modulo a prime can
   leak information about that value in a side-channel attack.
   Therefore, it is RECOMMENDED that the technique used to determine if
   the value is a quadratic residue modulo p blind the value with a
   random number so that the blinded value can take on all numbers
   between 1 and p-1 with equal probability while not changing its
   quadratic residuosity.  Determining the quadratic residue in a
   fashion that resists leakage of information is handled by flipping a
   coin and multiplying the blinded value by either a random quadratic
   residue or a random quadratic nonresidue and checking whether the
   multiplied value is a quadradic residue or a quadradic nonresidue
   modulo p, respectively.  The random residue and nonresidue can be
   calculated prior to hunting-and-pecking by calculating the legendre
   symbol on random values until they are found:

   do {
     qr = random() mod p
   } while ( lgr(qr, p) != 1)

   do {
     qnr = random() mod p
   } while ( lgr(qnr, p) != -1)

   Algorithmically, the masking technique to find out whether a value is
   a quadratic residue or not looks like this:

   is_quadratic_residue (val, p) {
       r = (random() mod (p - 1)) + 1
       num = (val * r * r) mod p
       if ( lsb(r) == 1 )
          num = (num * qr) mod p
          if ( lgr(num, p) == 1)
          then
             return TRUE
          fi
       else
          num = (num * qnr) mod p
          if ( lgr(num, p) == -1)
          then
             return TRUE
          fi
       fi
       return FALSE
   }







Harkins                 Expires December 20, 2015              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft                  Dragonfly                      June 2015


3.2.2.  Hunting and Pecking with MODP Groups

   The MODP specific hunting and pecking technique entails finding a
   random element which, when used as a generator, will create a group
   with the same order as the group created by the generator from the
   domain parameter set.  The secret generator is found by
   exponentiating the seed to the value ((p-1)/q), where p is the prime
   and q is the order from the domain parameter set.  If that value is
   greater than one (1) it becomes PE, otherwise the counter is
   incremented, a new base and seed are generated, and the hunting and
   pecking continues.

   Algorithmically, the process looks like this:

      found = 0
      counter = 1
      n = len(p) + 64
      do {
        base = H(max(Alice,Bob) | min(Alice,Bob) | password | counter)
        temp = KDF-n(seed, "Dragonfly Hunting And Pecking")
        seed = (temp mod (p - 1)) + 1
        temp = seed ^ ((p-1)/q) mod p
        if (temp > 1)
        then
          if (not found)
            PE = temp
            found = 1
          fi
        fi
        counter = counter + 1
      } while ((found == 0) || (counter <= k))

                    Figure 2: Fixing PE for MODP Groups

3.3.  The Commit Exchange

   In the Commit Exchange both sides commit to a single guess of the
   password.  The peers generate a scalar and an element, exchange them
   with each other, and process the other's scalar and element to
   generate a common and shared secret.

   First each peer generates two random numbers, private and mask.
   These two secrets, the Password Element, and the order from the
   selected domain parameter set are then used to construct the scalar
   and element:

      scalar = (private + mask) modulo q




Harkins                 Expires December 20, 2015              [Page 12]

Internet-Draft                  Dragonfly                      June 2015


      Element = inverse(scalar-op(mask, PE))

   If the scalar is less than two (2), the private and mask MUST be
   thrown away and new values generated.  Once a valid scalar and
   Element are generated, the mask is no longer needed and MUST be
   irretrievably destroyed.

   The peers exchange their scalar and Element and check the peer's
   scalar and Element, deemed peer-scalar and Peer-Element.  If the peer
   has sent an identical scalar and Element-- i.e.  if scalar equals
   peer-scalar and Element equals Peer-Element-- it is sign of a
   reflection attack and the exchange MUST be aborted.  If the values
   differ, peer-scalar and Peer-Element must be validated.  For the
   peer-scalar to be valid, it MUST be between 1 and q exclusive.
   Validation of the Peer-Element depends on the type of cryptosystem--
   validation of an (x,y) pair as an ECC element is specified in
   Section 2.1 and validation of a number as an FFC element is specified
   in Section 2.2.  If either the peer-scalar or Peer-Element fail
   validation then the exchange MUST be terminated and authentication
   fails.  If both the peer-scalar and Peer-Element are valid, they are
   used with the Password Element to derive a shared secret, ss:

         ss = F(scalar-op(private,
                          element-op(peer-Element,
                                     scalar-op(peer-scalar, PE))))

   To enforce key separation and crypto hygiene, the shared secret is
   stretched into two subkeys, a key confirmation key, kck, and a master
   key, mk.  Each of the subkeys SHOULD be at least the length of the
   prime used in the selected group.

      kck | mk = KDF-n(ss, "Dragonfly Key Derivation")

   where n = len(p)*2.

3.4.  The Confirm Exchange

   In the Confirm Exchange both sides confirm that they derived the same
   secret, and therefore, are in possession of the same password.

   The Commit Exchange consists of an exchange of data that is the
   output of the random function, H(), the key confirmation key, and the
   two scalars and two elements exchanged in the Commit Exchange.  The
   order of the scalars and elements are, scalars before elements, and
   sender's value before recipient's value.  So from each peer's
   perspective, it would generate:





Harkins                 Expires December 20, 2015              [Page 13]

Internet-Draft                  Dragonfly                      June 2015


             confirm = H(kck | scalar | peer-scalar |
                         Element | Peer-Element | <sender-id>)

   Where <sender-id> is the identity of the sender of the confirm
   message.  This identity SHALL be that contributed by the sender of
   the confim message in generation of the base in Section 3.2.

   The two peers exchange these confirmations and verify the correctness
   of the other peer's confirmation that they receive.  If the other
   peer's confirmation is valid, authentication succeeds; if the other
   peer's confirmation is not valid, authentication fails.

   If authentication fails, all ephemeral state created as part of the
   particular run of the Dragonfly exchange MUST be irretrievabley
   destroyed.  If authentication does not fail, mk can be exported as an
   authenticated and secret key that can be used by another protocol,
   for instance IPsec, to protect other data.

4.  Acknowledgements

   The author would like to thank Kevin Igoe and David McGrew, chairmen
   of the Crypto Forum Research Group (CFRG) for agreeing to accept this
   memo as a CFRG work item.  Additional thanks go to Scott Fluhrer and
   Hideyuki Suzuki for discovering attacks against earlier versions of
   this key exchange and suggesting fixes to address them.  Lily Chen
   provided helpful discussions on hashing into an elliptic curve.  Rich
   Davis suggested the validation steps used on received elements to
   prevent a small sub-group attack.  Dylan Clarke and Feng Hao
   discovered a dictionary attack against Dragonfly if those checks are
   not made and a group with a small sub-group is used.

   The blinding scheme to prevent side-channel attacks when determining
   whether a value is a quadratic residue modulo a prime was suggested
   by Scott Fluhrer.  Kevin Igoe suggested addition of the security
   parameter k to hide the amount of time taken hunting-and-pecking for
   the password element.

5.  IANA Considerations

   This memo includes no request to IANA.

6.  Security Considerations

   The Dragonfly exchange requires both participants to have an
   identical representation of the password.  Salting of the password
   merely generates a new credential-- the salted password-- which must
   be identically represented on both sides.  If an adversary is able to
   gain access to the database of salted passwords, she would be able to



Harkins                 Expires December 20, 2015              [Page 14]

Internet-Draft                  Dragonfly                      June 2015


   impersonate one side to the other, even if she was unable to
   determine the underlying, unsalted, password.

   Resistance to dictionary attack means that an adversary must launch
   an active attack to make a single guess at the password.  If the size
   of the dictionary from which the password was extracted was "d", and
   each password in the dictionary has an equal probability of being
   chosen, then the probability of success after a single guess is 1/d.
   After "x" guesses, and removal of failed guesses from the pool of
   possible passwords, the probability becomes 1/(d-x).  As "x" grows,
   so does the probability of success.  Therefore, it is possible for an
   adversary to determine the password through repeated brute-force,
   active, guessing attacks.  Users of the Dragonfly key exchange SHOULD
   ensure that the size of the pool from which the password was drawn,
   "d", is sufficiently large to make this attack preventable.
   Implementations of Dragonfly SHOULD support countermeasures to deal
   with this attack-- for instance, by refusing authentication attempts
   for a certain amount of time, after the number of failed
   authentication attempts reaches a certain threshold.  No such
   threshold or amount of time is recommended in this memo.

   Due to the problems with using groups that contain a small sub-group,
   it is RECOMMENDED that implementations of Dragonfly not allow for the
   specification of a group's complete domain parameter to be sent in-
   line but instead use a common repository and to pass an identifier to
   a domain parameter set whose strength has been rigourously proven and
   that does not have small sub-groups.  If a group's complete domain
   parameter set is passed in-line, it SHOULD NOT be used with Dragonfly
   unless it directly matches a known good group.

   It is RECOMMENDED that an implementation set the security parameter,
   k, to a value of at least forty (40) which will put the probability
   that more than forty iterations are needed in the order of one in one
   trillion (1:1,000,000,000,000).

   The technique used to obtain the Password Element in Section 3.2.1
   addresses side-channel attacks in a manner deemed controversial by
   some reviewers in the CFRG.  An alternate method, such as the one
   defined in [hash2ec], can be used to alleviate concerns.  Also, while
   this key exchange protocol has received cryptanalysis (see
   [clarkhao]), it does does not have a security proof that accompanies
   it.

7.  References







Harkins                 Expires December 20, 2015              [Page 15]

Internet-Draft                  Dragonfly                      June 2015


7.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

7.2.  Informative References

   [FIPS186-4]
              National Institute of Standards and Technology, "Digital
              Signature Standard (DSS)", Federal Information Processing
              Standards Publication 186-4,
              <http://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/FIPS/
              NIST.FIPS.186-4.pdf>.

   [RANDOR]   Bellare, M. and P. Rogaway, "Random Oracles are Practical:
              A Paradigm for Designing Efficient Protocols", Proceedings
              of the 1st ACM Conference on Computer and Communication
              Security, ACM Press, 1993,
              <http://www.cs.ucsd.edu/~mihir/papers/ro.pdf>.

   [RFC5433]  Clancy, T. and H. Tschofenig, "Extensible Authentication
              Protocol - Generalized Pre-Shared Key (EAP-GPSK) Method",
              RFC 5433, February 2009.

   [RFC5996]  Kaufman, C., Hoffman, P., Nir, Y., and P. Eronen,
              "Internet Key Exchange Protocol Version 2 (IKEv2)", RFC
              5996, September 2010.

   [RFC6090]  McGrew, D., Igoe, K., and M. Salter, "Fundamental Elliptic
              Curve Cryptography Algorithms", RFC 6090, February 2011.

   [SP800-108]
              Chen, L., "Recommendations for Key Derivation Using
              Pseudorandom Functions", NIST Special Publication 800-108,
              April 2008.

   [SP800-56A]
              Barker, E., Johnson, D., and M. Smid, "Recommendations for
              Pair-Wise Key Establishment Schemes Using Discrete
              Logarithm Cryptography", NIST Special Publication 800-56A,
              March 2007.

   [clarkhao]
              Clarke, D. and F. Hao, "Cryptanalysis of the Dragonfly Key
              Exchange Protocol", 2013,
              <http://eprint.iacr.org/2013/058.pdf>.





Harkins                 Expires December 20, 2015              [Page 16]

Internet-Draft                  Dragonfly                      June 2015


   [hash2ec]  Coron, J-B. and T. Icart, "An indifferentiable hash
              function into elliptic curves", Cryptology ePrint Archive
              Report 2009/340, 2009.

Author's Address

   Dan Harkins (editor)
   Aruba Networks
   1322 Crossman Avenue
   Sunnyvale, CA  94089-1113
   United States of America

   Email: dharkins@arubanetworks.com






































Harkins                 Expires December 20, 2015              [Page 17]
