	
	
	
INTERNET-DRAFT                                                  J. Smith
Network Working Group                   IBM T. J. Watson Research Center
Expires: May 20, 2002                                  November 20, 2001                                  

                        
                       A URN Namespace for MPEG 
                      draft-smith-urn-mpeg-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft expires on May 20, 2002.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2001).  All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   This document describes a Uniform Resource Name (URN) namespace for
   the Motion Picture Experts Group (MPEG) for naming persistent 
   resources as part of the MPEG standards.  Example resources include 
   technical documents and specifications, eXtensible Markup Language 
   (XML) Schemas, classification schemes, XML Document Type Definitions 
   (DTDs), namespaces, style sheets, media assets, and other types of 
   resources produced or managed by MPEG. 




Smith                 Expires: May 20, 2002                      [Page 1]
 
















INTERNET-DRAFT      A URN Namespace for MPEG              November 2001


1. Introduction

   MPEG is a working group of the International Organization for 
   Standardization (ISO) and International Engineering Consortium (IEC)
   in charge of the development of standards for coded representation 
   of digital audio and video.  MPEG has produced MPEG-1, the standard 
   on which such products as Video CD and MP3 are based, MPEG-2, the 
   standard on which such products as Digital Television set top boxes 
   and DVD are based, MPEG-4, the standard for multimedia for the fixed
   and mobile web, and MPEG-7 "Multimedia Content Description Interface,"
   the standard for description and search of audio and visual content. 
   Work on MPEG-21 "Multimedia Framework" is currently underway.

   MPEG would like to assign unique, permanent, location-independent 
   names based on URNs for some resources it produces or manages.

   This namespace specification is for a formal namespace.

2. Specification Template

   Namespace ID:

      "mpeg" requested.

   Registration Information:

      Version: 1
      Date: 2001-11-20 

   Declared registrant of the namespace:

	Name:		John R. Smith
	Title: 		Chair, MPEG MDS Subgroup
	Affiliation: 	IBM T. J. Watson Research Center
	Address:	      30 Saw Mill River Road
			      Hawthorne, NY 10532 USA
	Phone: 		+1 (914) 784-7320
	Email:		jrsmith@watson.ibm.com

   




Smith                 Expires: May 20, 2002                      [Page 2]
 

















INTERNET-DRAFT      A URN Namespace for MPEG              November 2001

    Declaration of structure:

      URNs assigned by MPEG will have the following hierarchical 
      structure based on the organizational structure of the MPEG
      standards:

		urn:mpeg:{standard name}:{assigned US-ASCII string}

      where "{standard name}" is a US-ASCII string that conforms to 
      URN Syntax requirements ([RFC2141]) and corresponds to the
      name of an MPEG standard (such as "mpeg1", "mpeg2", "mpeg4",
      "mpeg7", "mpeg21", and 

      "{assigned US-ASCII string}" is a US-ASCII string that conforms
      to URN Syntax requirements ([RFC2141]).

      The individual URNs shall be assigned by MPEG through the process 
      of development of MPEG standards.

   Relevant ancillary documentation:

      None

   Identifier uniqueness considerations:

      MPEG shall establish unique identifiers as appropriate.

      Uniqueness is guaranteed as long as the assigned string is never
      reassigned for a given standard name and that the standard name
      is never reassigned.

   Identifier persistence considerations:

      MPEG is committed to maintaining the accessibility and
      persistence of all resources that are officially assigned URNs
      by the organization.

      Persistence of identifiers is dependent upon suitable delegation
      of resolution at the level of "standard name"s, and persistence
      of standard name assignment.

   Process of identifier assignment:

      Assignment is limited to the owner and those authorities that are
      specifically designated by the owner.  MPEG may designate portions
      of its namespace for assignment by other parties.


 Smith                 Expires: May 20, 2002                      [Page 3]
 














INTERNET-DRAFT       A URN Namespace for MPEG              November 2001



   Process of identifier resolution:

      The owner will develop and maintain "URN catalogs" that map all
      assigned URNs to Uniform Resource Locators (URLs) specifically to 
      enable Web-based resolution of named resources.  In the future an
      interactive online resolution system may be developed to automate
      this process.

      The owner will authorize additional resolution services as
      appropriate.

   Rules for Lexical Equivalence:

      The "standard name" is case-insensitive.  Thus, the portion of the
      URN:

          urn:mpeg:{standard name}:

      is case-insensitive for matches.  The remainder of the identifier
      must be considered case-sensitive.

   Conformance with URN Syntax:

      No special considerations.

   Validation mechanism:

      None specified.  The owner will develop and maintain URN catalogs.
      The presence of a URN in a catalog indicates that it is valid.

   Scope:

      Global

3. Examples

   The following examples are not guaranteed to be real.  They are
   presented for pedagogical reasons only.

         urn:mpeg:mpeg7:schema:2001
         urn:mpeg:mpeg7:cs:VideoDomainCS:2001
         urn:mpeg:mpeg7:cs:GenreCS:2001
         urn:mpeg:mpeg7:cs:ContentCS:2001



Smith                 Expires: May 20, 2002                      [Page 4]
 














INTERNET-DRAFT       A URN Namespace for MPEG              November 2001


4. Security Considerations

   There are no additional security considerations other than those
   normally associated with the use and resolution of URNs in general.

References

   [RFC2141] Moats, R., "URN Syntax", RFC 2141, May 1997


Author Address

   John R. Smith
   IBM T. J. Watson Research Center
   30 Saw Mill River Road
   Hawthorne, NY 10532 USA
   Phone: 1 (914) 784-7320
   EMail: jrsmith@watson.ibm.com


     


















Smith                 Expires: May 20, 2002                      [Page 5]
 






















INTERNET-DRAFT       A URN Namespace for MPEG              November 2001

Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2001).  All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Acknowledgement

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.

Expiration date: May 20, 2002






Smith                 Expires: May 20, 2002                      [Page 6]
