



Network Working Group                                         P. Calhoun
Internet-Draft                                                 B. O'Hara
Expires: December 2, 2005                            Cisco Systems, Inc.
                                                             M. Williams
                                                             Nokia, Inc.
                                                                S. Hares
                                              Nexthop Technologies, Inc.
                                                            May 31, 2005


                         LWAPP Self Evaluation
            draft-calhoun-capwap-lwapp-objectives-comparison-00

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 2, 2005.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).

Abstract

   The IETF's CAPWAP working group has requested that all candidate
   protocols submitted must provide a document which evaluates how each





Calhoun, et al.         Expires December 2, 2005                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft            LWAPP Self Evaluation                 May 2005


   protocol meets the objectives.  This document describes in detail how
   the LWAPP protocol meets the CAPWAP objectives.

Table of Contents

   1.   Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     1.1  Conventions used in this document  . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   2.   Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     2.1  Mandatory Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
       2.1.1  Logical Groups . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
       2.1.2  Support for Traffic Separation . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
       2.1.3  Wireless Terminal Transparency . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
       2.1.4  Configuration Consistency  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
       2.1.5  Firmware Trigger . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
       2.1.6  Monitoring and Exchange of System-wide Resource
              State  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
       2.1.7  Resource Control Objective . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
       2.1.8  CAPWAP Protocol Security . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
       2.1.9  System-wide Security . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
       2.1.10   IEEE 802.11i Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
       2.1.11   Interoperability Objective . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
       2.1.12   Protocol Specifications  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
       2.1.13   Vendor Independence  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
       2.1.14   Vendor Flexibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
     2.2  Desirable Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17
       2.2.1  Multiple Authentication Mechanisms . . . . . . . . . .  17
       2.2.2  Support for Future Wireless Technologies . . . . . . .  17
       2.2.3  Support for New IEEE Requirements  . . . . . . . . . .  18
       2.2.4  Interconnection Objective  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
       2.2.5  Access Control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  20
     2.3  Rejected Objectives  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  20
       2.3.1  Support for Non-CAPWAP WTPs  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  20
       2.3.2  Technical Specifications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  20
     2.4  Operator Requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  21
       2.4.1  AP Fast Handoff  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  21
   3.   Compliance Table . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  22
   4.   Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  23
   5.   IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  24
   6.   Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  25
   7.   IPR Statement  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  26
   8.   References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  27
     8.1  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  27
     8.2  Informational References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  28
        Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  28
        Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . .  29






Calhoun, et al.         Expires December 2, 2005                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft            LWAPP Self Evaluation                 May 2005


1.  Introduction

   The CAPWAP working group has identified a set of objectives [2] that
   must be met for a protocol to be considered for standardization.  The
   LWAPP protocol has been submitted to CAPWAP for consideration.

   The authors of the LWAPP specification [4] feel that the working
   group should consider two important facts about LWAPP.  The protocol
   has been available as a personal contribution for well over 18
   months, during which time many comments have been received and
   accepted.  As a consequence, the authors believe that although the
   LWAPP specification is not complete, we believe that using it as a
   starting point by the Working Group would allow for much faster
   progress.  Second, products that support the LWAPP protocol have been
   available for nearly 24 months, and therefore has significant
   operational experience in very large networks.

   The authors of the LWAPP specification feel that providing a strong
   security solution to the CAPWAP list is of the utmost importance, and
   as a consequence recently requested a third party security review
   [7].  The result of the security review was that the pre-shared key
   mode was cryptographically secure.  However, although the review did
   find that the certificate based approach was practically secure, it
   did provide a couple of recommendations in order to also make it
   cryptographic secure.  It is important to note that the review did
   clearly state that the vulnerabilities found would not compromise the
   data, but only opened the possiblity for DoS attacks on the
   cryptographic algorithms themselves.

   The authors of the LWAPP specification are in the process of making
   the recommended changes to the draft.  There are a couple of areas in
   this evaluation draft where these changes are most relevant.  In
   these sections we have specifically stated where we are making
   changes to the LWAPP protocol, and as a consequence did not state
   that the protocol was in complete compliance with the requirement.

   This document describes how the LWAPP protocol complies to the
   objectives.

1.1  Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [1].







Calhoun, et al.         Expires December 2, 2005                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft            LWAPP Self Evaluation                 May 2005


2.  Objectives

   LWAPP is a generic protocol defining how Wireless Termination Points
   communicate with Access Controllers.  Wireless Termination Points and
   Access Controllers may communicate either by means of Layer 2
   protocols or by means of a Layer 3 routed IP network.

2.1  Mandatory Objectives

   This section contains all of the objectives that have been considered
   as being mandatory in order for a protocol to be considered.

2.1.1  Logical Groups

   WLAN deployment trends require the CAPWAP protocol to be capable of
   controlling and managing physical WTPs in terms of logical groups.

   This is being interpreted as stating that a protocol must allow for
   the WTP to provide service for multiple SSIDs (or WLANs), each with a
   distinct BSSID.

2.1.1.1  Protocol Evaluation

   The LWAPP protocol was designed to allow individual WTPs to support
   multiple BSSID/SSIDs, which allows for logical groups.  From the AC's
   perspective, a logical group is created through the creation of a
   WLAN.  A WLAN is a logical wireless network that is identified
   through the SSID and is advertised through the Beacon and Probe
   Response.  Each WLAN can have a separate security policy, and has a
   unique BSSID, enabling the 802.11 stations to identify every WLAN as
   a separate network.

   In order to create a WLAN, the LWAPP protocol defines a primitive
   called the IEEE 802.11 Add WLAN (section 11.5.1.1 of the LWAPP
   specification), which is used by the AC to create an SSID on the WTP.
   In the WLAN creation process, the AC selects an unused WLAN
   Identifier, which is used to refer to the WLAN in future commands.
   An AC could use the same WLAN Identifier to refer to a single WLAN on
   all of its WTPs, ensuring a consistent interface across all WTPs.

   When user data is sent from the AC to the WTP, the BSSID field in the
   802.11 header is used to identify the logical network which the
   packet is to be sent through.  The same is true for packets received
   by the WTP from a station, where the BSSID would be used by the AC to
   recognize which logical network the packet was received on.  It is
   expected that the AC and the WTP perform policing to ensure that a
   station only send packets on the correct BSSID.




Calhoun, et al.         Expires December 2, 2005                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft            LWAPP Self Evaluation                 May 2005


   Furthermore, the 802.11 binding LWAPP section defines the WLANS field
   of the LWAPP header (in section 11.2.1 of the LWAPP specification).
   In this section, the specification states that data packets sent from
   the AC to the WTP include the WLAN Identifier that was used during
   the creation of the WLAN.

2.1.1.2  Compliance

   The LWAPP protocol satisfies this CAPWAP objective.

2.1.2  Support for Traffic Separation

   In order to maintain the separation of control and data traffic, the
   CAPWAP protocol is required to define control messages such that they
   do not involve piggybacking or other combination with data traffic.

   Our personal interpretation of this objective is that there are two
   separate requirements.  First, the data and control component of the
   protocol must be uniquely identified.  Second, the protocol should
   allow for the control and data traffic to terminate on separate
   infrastructure devices, meaning that an AC may be split into two
   separate devices, one that handles the control and one that handles
   data.

2.1.2.1  Protocol Evaluation

   The LWAPP header, described in section 3.1 of the LWAPP
   specification, defines the 'C' bit, which when set indicates that the
   LWAPP frame contains a control frame.  When the bit is cleared, the
   payload contains an LWAPP data frame.

   During the join phase, the AC may optionally include the WTP Manager
   Data IP Address (in section 6.2.5 of the LWAPP Specification), which
   is used to inform the WTP of the IP address to which it is to forward
   the LWAPP data frames.

2.1.2.2  Compliance

   The LWAPP protocol satisfies this CAPWAP objective.

2.1.3  Wireless Terminal Transparency

   Wireless terminals should not be required to recognize or be aware of
   the CAPWAP protocol.

   Our interpretation is that the introduction of the protocol, and
   therefore the new architecture, MUST be transparent to the 802.11
   stations.



Calhoun, et al.         Expires December 2, 2005                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft            LWAPP Self Evaluation                 May 2005


2.1.3.1  Protocol Evaluation

   The LWAPP protocol was designed specifically to allow for centralized
   control and management of WTPs without any impact on the stations.
   Once a WTP has joined an AC, the latter will push down 802.11 and
   antenna configuration to the WTP, allowing it to provide service.

   Section 11.1 of the LWAPP specification defines the distribution of
   802.11 functions, ensuring that all of the functions currently
   provided by an autonomous access point is preserved.

   Lastly, the proof is in the pudding.  There are hundreds of thousands
   of LWAPP enabled WTPs, and tens of thousands of LWAPP enabled ACs,
   deployed in the field today, and these have been proven to work
   seamlessly with all 802.11 stations on the market.  Furthermore,
   LWAPP AC and WTPs have been certified by the WiFi Alliance as being
   interoperable for 802.11b, 802.11a, 802.11g, WPA and WPA2 [9].
   Certification testing performed by the WiFi Alliance is focused
   primarily on protocol compliance and interoperability between 802.11
   stations and infrastructure (APs).

2.1.3.2  Compliance

   The LWAPP protocol satisfies this CAPWAP objective.

2.1.4  Configuration Consistency

   The CAPWAP protocol must allow for regular exchanges of state
   information between WTPs and WLAN controller.  Examples of state
   information include WTP processing load and memory utilization.

   Our interpretation of this requirements is that there are two
   separate underlying requirements.  First, there must be a mechanism
   by which the AC can propagate configuration information to the WTP,
   ensuring an AC is capable of easily maintaining the consistent
   configuration of every WTP associated with it.  Second, there is a
   requirement stating that the WTP MUST periodically send utilization
   information to the AC, allowing the latter to make real-time
   configuration decisions to optimize the WLANs performance.

2.1.4.1  Protocol Evaluation

   The LWAPP protocol state machine defines the "configure" state, which
   is used during the initial binding WTP-AC phase, which allows for
   configuration exchange.  During this period, the WTP sends its
   current configuration overrides to the AC.  A configuration override
   is a parameter that is non-default.  One example is that in the LWAPP
   protocol the default antenna configuration is internal omni antenna.



Calhoun, et al.         Expires December 2, 2005                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft            LWAPP Self Evaluation                 May 2005


   However, a WTP that either has no internal antennas, or has been
   explicitely configured by the AC to use external antennas, would send
   its antenna configuration during the configure phase, allowing the AC
   to become aware of the WTP's current configuration.

   Once the WTP has provided its configuration to the AC, the AC sends
   down its own configuration.  This allows the WTP to inherit the
   configuration and policies on the AC.

   An LWAPP AC maintains a copy of each active WTP's configuration.
   There is no versioning or other means to identify configuration
   changes.  If a WTP becomes inactive, the AC MAY delete the
   configuration associated with it.  If a WTP were to fail, and connect
   to a new AC, it would provide its overriden configuration parameters,
   allowing the new AC to be aware of the WTP's configuraion.

   Once the LWAPP protocol enters the Run state, the WTPs begin to
   provide service.  However, it is quite common for administrators to
   require that configuration changes be made while the network is
   operational.  Therefore, the Configuration Update Request is sent by
   the AC to the WTP in order to make these changes at run-time.

   The LWAPP protocol defines various commands that allow a WTP to
   inform the AC of real-time events.  Including:

   Decryption Errors: When encryption is performed in the WTP, there is
      a configurable timer sent to the WTP requesting a periodic
      decryption error report.  When sent by the WTP, the decryption
      error report includes the MAC address(es) of the offending
      stations.

   Duplicate IP Address: Given that WTPs are commonly installed in hard
      to reach places, it is necessary to know when the WTP detects
      network related errors without access to a console.  Therefore,
      the LWAPP protocol defines a primitive that allows the WTP to
      report when it detects another host that has a duplicate IP
      address.

   Statistics: During the configuration phase, the AC transmits the
      statistics interval period, which is used by the WTP to send
      statistics reports to the AC.  The LWAPP protocol defines an
      802.11 binding specific statistics report message (see section
      11.4.2.1 in the LWAPP specification), which is used to communicate
      load information to the AC.  It is important to note that since
      all valid 802.11 data frames are tunneled to the AC, the AC may
      also calculate load statistics.  New wireless technologies wishing
      to make use of LWAPP will need to define a technology binding
      statistics report format.



Calhoun, et al.         Expires December 2, 2005                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft            LWAPP Self Evaluation                 May 2005


   802.11 MIC Countermeasures: The 802.11i specification [6] describes
      countermeasures that must be taken when a MIC error is detected.
      This event is sent by the WTP to the AC when such an event occurs,
      allowing the AC to take appropriate action (e.g., disabling the
      WLAN for a period of 60 seconds).

   Radio Fail Indication: As previously mentioned, since the WTP is not
      within easy physical access, assuming that observing LEDs to
      ensure the health of the WTP is not sufficient.  Therefore, when a
      WTP detects a radio error, it issues a radio fail indication
      error.

   WTP Failure: A WTP failure may require the AC to take some specific
      action, which is not defined in the LWAPP specification.  However,
      the LWAPP protocol does define the Echo Request command, which is
      used to detect network failures.

   Should the working group define additional information elements they
   feel would be useful to send from the WTP to the AC, the LWAPP
   protocol defines extensible mechanisms to issue event related
   information.

2.1.4.2  Compliance

   The LWAPP protocol satisfies this CAPWAP objective.

2.1.5  Firmware Trigger

   The CAPWAP protocol must support a trigger for delivery of firmware
   updates.

2.1.5.1  Protocol Evaluation

   The LWAPP state machine states that during the join phase, the AC and
   WTP exchange version numbers, including the hardware type and
   configuration.  This information is used by the WTP to detect whether
   a firmware upgrade is required.

   Note that the LWAPP protocol also defines the actual primitives
   required to download the firmware to the WTP.  It is not clear
   whether the working group has decided whether this function of the
   protocol is in or out of scope, but the authors feel that being able
   to piggyback off the security association already established with
   the AC provides for secure firmware download, minimizing
   vulneratibilities and possible confusion or errors that could occur
   by attempting to integrate multiple protocols within a single state
   machine in a secure fashion.




Calhoun, et al.         Expires December 2, 2005                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft            LWAPP Self Evaluation                 May 2005


2.1.5.2  Compliance

   The LWAPP protocol satisfies this CAPWAP objective.

2.1.6  Monitoring and Exchange of System-wide Resource State

   The CAPWAP protocol must allow for the exchange of statistics,
   congestion and other WLAN state information.

2.1.6.1  Protocol Evaluation

   The objective describes two separate set of segments; switched and
   wireless.

   On the switched segment, the LWAPP protocol provides a rich set of
   message elements to allow for the WTP and AC to exchange information,
   including, but not limited to, the WTP's firmware version and number
   of radios (see WTP Descriptor in section 5.1.2), radio failures (see
   IEEE 802.11 WTP Radio Fail Alarm Indication in section 11.5.3.2) and
   duplicate IP Address detection (see Duplicate IP Address in section
   8.5.2).  The WTP also has the ability to provide the reboot
   statistics, and the reason for a previous failure (see WTP Reboot
   Statistics in section 7.1.7).

   On the wireless side, the WTP will sent statistics to the AC based on
   the AC's policy, which is dictated through the Statistics Timer (see
   section 7.1.5).

   There are various tools available in the LWAPP protocol to allow for
   either the AC to request information from the WTP, or for the WTP to
   send unsolicited statistics (of various form) to the AC.  The authors
   feel that if the working group has identified additional information
   they would like the AC to gain access to, we believe this can be done
   within the confines of the protocol.

2.1.6.2  Compliance

   The LWAPP protocol satisfies this CAPWAP objective.

2.1.7  Resource Control Objective

   The CAPWAP protocol must maintain IEEE 802.11e QoS mappings across
   the switching and wireless medium segments.

   Author comment: There are several requirements defined in the
   Resource Control Objective such as the ability to provide quality of
   service based on the 802.11e standard, as well as allow for the use
   of 802.11k or 802.11v.  The objective also mentions 802.11u, which



Calhoun, et al.         Expires December 2, 2005                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft            LWAPP Self Evaluation                 May 2005


   deals with inter-technology roaming, and since the authors do not
   understand how 802.11u relates to resource control, this specific
   standard will not be mentioned in this section.

2.1.7.1  Protocol Evaluation

   The LWAPP protocol defines the IEEE 802.11 WTP Quality of Service
   message element in section 11.6.14, which is used by the AC to push
   global 802.11e policies to the WTPs, ensuring that they are providing
   consistent service to the stations.  This message element contains
   policies for the WTP for every access class defined in the 802.11e
   specification.  It contains the CwMin, CwMax and AIFS fields which
   dictate how the individual transmit queues are to behave.  The data
   structure also includes a CBR fields, which when present, dictates
   the amount of air time the access class is allowed to have, per
   beacon period (in %).  The message element also specifies whether
   data packets are to be tagged, and if so, the tagging method, in
   terms of 802.1P or DSCP.  When tagging is to be performed, there is a
   separate 802.1P and/or DSCP value for every access class.  Note that
   although one could conceive there being a single QoS policy for a
   given network, there are no restrictions on having an AC sending a
   separate configuration to a given WTP.

   When the AC creates a WLAN on the WTP, through the IEEE 802.11 Add
   WLAN command, defined in section 11.5.1.1, the AC may set a default
   policy for all users assigned to the WLAN.  In this case, the AC may
   include the WMM [8] and 802.11e Information Elements that are to be
   included in the Beacon and Probe Requests, as well as the default QoS
   value.  The default value is to be used in determining the access
   class queue to use for all packets for the given user, unless a
   specific override was received when the user's context was created on
   the WTP.

   When an AC pushes a mobile's policy to the WTP, through the Add
   Mobile command, which is defined in section 11.4.1.1, it can specify
   the QoS policy for the station.  For instance, the AC specifies
   whether the station supports either the WMM or the 802.11e protocol.
   The Add Mobile command also allows the AC to dictate how the user's
   data packets are to be treated from a QoS perspective.  For instance,
   if the AC determines that a given station is to be provided either
   WMM or 802.11e service, it would set the appropriate bits, and ensure
   that the 802.11e UP field is set accordingly within the encapsulated
   802.11 data packet to the user.  The quality of service field is to
   be used by the WTP on any packets sent over the air for which no UP
   information is available (default value for non QoS marked packets).

   The QoS Profile defined in section 11.4.1.3 of the LWAPP
   specification is included in an Add Mobile command and is used by the



Calhoun, et al.         Expires December 2, 2005               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft            LWAPP Self Evaluation                 May 2005


   AC to set the upper limit for incoming WMM or 802.11e packets from a
   given user.  The 802.1P precedence value is to be considered to be
   the maximum value allowed by the station.  The WTP is expected to
   perform policing of incoming data from the station, and remark any
   packets as it deems necessary.

   The IEEE 802.11 Update Mobile QoS message element may be sent at any
   time by the AC to the WTP in order to modify the quality of service
   properties associated with the station.  The 802.1P and DSCP fields
   have two purposes.  For WMM or 802.11e stations, this value is
   intended to be the maximum value that can be set for a given station.
   However, for non-WMM or non-802.11e stations, these values are
   intended to be the default value for all packets received from the
   station.  Although not related to QoS per-se, if the VLAN identifier
   field in the message element is intended to represents the VLAN on
   which the station is to be assigned when the LWAPP protocol is used
   in the local MAC mode.

   In terms of support of 802.11e (or 802.11k), the WTP is expected to
   forward any received Action frames received on behalf of the station.
   This allows the AC to set the QoS policy for the user, including
   admission control.  For 802.11k, the various Radio Management
   messages would be exchanged transparently through the WTP.
   Unfortunately, the 802.11u task group is still to early in its
   infancy to determine what functionality it will provide, but should
   standard management frames be used, the LWAPP protocol could tunnel
   them transparently through the WTP.

2.1.7.2  Compliance

   The LWAPP protocol satisfies this CAPWAP objective.

2.1.8  CAPWAP Protocol Security

   The CAPWAP protocol must support mutual authentication of WTPs and
   the centralized controller.  It must also ensure that information
   exchanges between them are secured.

   Our interpretation of this objective is that it states that some
   cryptographic exchange must be defined in the specification in order
   to protect the contents of the control protocol.  Further, this
   requires state that mutual authentication is required.  The
   requirement states the key exchange protocol must be designed in such
   a way where once a security association has been established, there
   is no possible compromises.  Lastly, while the requirements do not
   specifically state how the WTP and the AC are to authenticate each
   other, it does state that the protocol should allow for either
   symmetric or asymmetric cryptography.



Calhoun, et al.         Expires December 2, 2005               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft            LWAPP Self Evaluation                 May 2005


2.1.8.1  Protocol Evaluation

   The LWAPP protocol defines two different types of method by which a
   session key is distributed from the AC to the WTP.  The assumptions
   used in the creation of the security protocol used by LWAPP can be
   found in section 10.1 of the LWAPP specification.  The first method
   is based on asymmetric cryptography and relies on the presence of
   X.509 certificates on both the AC and the WTP, and is defined in
   section 10.3.1 of the LWAPP specification.  The second method is
   symmetric in nature and relies on pre-shared keys, which must be
   configured apriori on both the AC and the WTP, and is described in
   section 10.3.2.

   There is a difference in the LWAPP state machine when either the
   X.509 certificate mode is used vs. the pre-shared key mode.  When the
   pre-shared key mode is used, there is explicit key confirmation phase
   that is provided through the use of the Join-Ack/Join-Confirm
   messages.  As recommended by the security review, the state machine
   will be modified such that the X.509 mode makes use of this new key
   confirmation phase.

   There is a distinct difference in the key distribution protocol used
   by either the X.509 certificate mode vs. the pre-shared key mode.  In
   the X.509 mode, the session keys are created randomly by the AC,
   while the pre-shared key mode the session keys are mutually derived.
   As a result of the security evaluation performed on the LWAPP
   protocol, the X.509 certificate mode will be modified to make use of
   the mutually derived session key method.

   Once session keys have been exchanged between the WTP and the AC, the
   LWAPP protocol defines how the control frames are to be encrypted in
   section 10.2.  The encryption algorithm used is AES-CCM, and this
   section also discussed how the initialization vectors are derived.

   The LWAPP state machine defines a rekey mechanism, which allows for
   the session keys to be refreshed over time, minimizing the amount of
   data that is encrypted with the same session key.

   The Security Considerations section of the LWAPP protocol suggest
   that the AC provide some form of authorization when a WTP attempts to
   connect.  This would disallow for unauthorized WTPs to connect.
   Further, when the certificate based approach is used, the AC should
   validate the identity of the WTP within the certificate itself.

2.1.8.2  Compliance

   The LWAPP protocol partially satisfies this CAPWAP objective.




Calhoun, et al.         Expires December 2, 2005               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft            LWAPP Self Evaluation                 May 2005


2.1.9  System-wide Security

   The design of the CAPWAP protocol should not allow for any
   compromises to the WLAN system by external entities.

2.1.9.1  Protocol Evaluation

   An Access Controller and Wireless Termination Point that support the
   LWAPP protocol are no more vulnerable than any off the shelf access
   point, meaning that the LWAPP protocol itself does not in any way add
   to the compromise of the system.  As previously mentioned, the
   control protocol is secured through a key exchange that is protected
   either through a pre-shared key or via an X.509 certificate.

   There is one specific issue that is mentioned in the objectives
   draft, which states that PMK sharing shall not be permitted.  It is
   important to note that the PMK is held at the AC, whether or not the
   PMK is shared across multiple WTPs is implementation specific and
   completely outside the scope of the LWAPP protocol.  It is assumed
   that LWAPP enabled ACs comply with the 802.11i protocol, which has
   strict guidelines on key usage.

   One advantage of the centralized policy enforcement architecture that
   is inherited from the LWAPP protocol is the fact that the AC is
   capable of detecting and correlating attacks across multiple WTPs,
   and allow the administrator to take some action.  However, these
   types of actions are not specified in the LWAPP protocol.

   If rogue clients attempt to send improperly encrypted frames, either
   through an SSID that mandates a static WEP key, or by creating a MIC
   attack, the AC will be notified of the failure, including the
   offending station's MAC address, as well as the WTP on which the
   attack was detected.  This could allow the system to take action,
   such as countermeasures in the case of a MIC attack.

   Although not specified in the LWAPP protocol specification, it is
   assumed that AC manufacturers build proper defenses into their
   implementation to detect and report malicious behavior, such as
   excessive failed authentication attampts or associations, etc.  Note
   that these types of protections are required in any good 802.11 AP
   implementation, regardless of whether the infrastructure is of the
   autonomous form, or uses a hierarchical architecture.

   The LWAPP protocol as currently specified does not provide enough
   text to guide the implementor into making the proper decisions in how
   to deal with hand-offs when 802.11i is used.  As the LWAPP security
   review recommends, the LWAPP protocol will include new text to make
   it clear that sending a Delete-Mobile to a station's old AP, as well



Calhoun, et al.         Expires December 2, 2005               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft            LWAPP Self Evaluation                 May 2005


   as redirecting the user's traffic through the new AP, through the use
   of the Add-Mobile, MUST only occur once the user has either
   successfully authenticated and key exchange was completed, or in the
   event that an 802.11i key cache entry exist, only a successful key
   exchange is necessary.

   The LWAPP protocol does not currently include any text to restrict
   the use of WEP over the air, but such text could be added should the
   working group deems it necessary.

2.1.9.2  Compliance

   The LWAPP protocol partially satisfies this CAPWAP objective.

2.1.10  IEEE 802.11i Considerations

   The CAPWAP protocol must determine the exact structure of the
   centralized WLAN architecture in which authentication needs to be
   supported, i.e. the location of major authentication components.

   This may be achieved during WTP initialization where major
   capabilities are distinguished.

   The protocol must allow for the exchange of key information when
   authenticator and encryption roles are located in distinct entities.

2.1.10.1  Protocol Evaluation

   The LWAPP protocol is capable of supporting both local and split MAC
   approaches, but the current specification only defines the division
   of labor for the split MAC mode.  In section 11.1, which defines
   where the functions reside in the split MAC mode, it specifies that
   the 802.1X authenticator resides in the Access Controller.  As a
   consequence, a station's PMK is only maintained in the AC.

   During the LWAPP join phase, which creates the binding between the
   WTP and the AC, the WTP specifies its encryption capabilities,
   through the WTP Descriptor message element (described in section
   5.1.2).  This message element allows the WTP to specify whether it is
   capable of providing encryption capabilities, and if so, which
   algorithms are supported.  Ultimately, it is the AC's policy that
   dictates where encryption will be provided, through the encrypt
   policy field of the Add Mobile message element.

   When a WLAN has been configured for 802.1X authentication, once a
   station has associated, the AC would send down an Add Mobile message
   element that specifies that the policy requires that only 802.1X
   frames are to be permitted.  Optionally, the AC may specify a session



Calhoun, et al.         Expires December 2, 2005               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft            LWAPP Self Evaluation                 May 2005


   key should the EAP frames require encryption.  The WTP then simply
   forwards all 802.1X frames either to the station or the AC (depending
   upon the direction of the frame).  The WTP does not participate in
   the 802.1X authentication exchange.

   Once the 802.11i process is completed, and the AC has computed the
   PTK, if the AC's policy states that encryption is to be performed on
   the WTP, it would issue a new Add Mobile message element, but this
   time without the 802.1X only bit set, and the PTK in the session key
   field and the encrypt policy field set to an appropriate value.  If
   the AC's policy states that encryption is to be performed at the AC,
   then it would ommit the session key, and set the encrypt policy field
   to "Clear Text".

   For Local MAC WTPs, the encryption would have to occur in the WTP
   since in this mode of operation, the WTP bridges user data frames
   locally.

2.1.10.2  Compliance

   The LWAPP protocol satisfies this CAPWAP objective.

2.1.11  Interoperability Objective

   The CAPWAP protocol must include sufficient capabilities negotiations
   to distinguish between major types of WTPs.

2.1.11.1  Protocol Evaluation

   The LWAPP protocol is capable of supporting both local and split MAC
   approaches, but the current specification only defines the division
   of labor for the split MAC mode.  The justification behind stating
   that the protocol is capable of supporting local MAC is the fact that
   LWAPP products are available today that run in local MAC mode.  The
   co-authors did not want to add the necessary text required to support
   local MAC without significant review, and unfortunately time did not
   permit us to do so.

   The method by which a WTP advertises its mode of operation is through
   the WTP Mode and Type message element, which may be found in section
   11.6.12.  When set to zero, the mode of operation is Split MAC, while
   when set to two it is Local MAC.

   In order to fully support the Local MAC mode, the LWAPP specification
   will need to include the necessary text in section 11.1.2, which
   simply specifies the division of labor across the WTP and the AC.





Calhoun, et al.         Expires December 2, 2005               [Page 15]

Internet-Draft            LWAPP Self Evaluation                 May 2005


2.1.11.2  Compliance

   The LWAPP protocol partially satisfies this CAPWAP objective.

2.1.12  Protocol Specifications

   Any WTP or AC vendor or any person can implement the CAPWAP protocol
   from the specification itself and by that it is required that all
   such implementations do interoperate.

2.1.12.1  Protocol Evaluation

   The LWAPP protocol is a fully specified protocol that is capable of
   ensuring that any WTP or AC vendor can gain guaranteed
   interoperability.  Note that the authors realize that some changes
   will be required during the standardization phase, and that some of
   these changes will increase the level of interoperability by
   addressing areas that may be underspecified.  However, the LWAPP
   protocol has been publicly available for well over 18 months, and has
   undergone many external recommendations that help interoperability.

2.1.12.2  Compliance

   The LWAPP protocol satisfies this CAPWAP objective.

2.1.13  Vendor Independence

   A WTP vendor can make modifications to hardware without any AC vendor
   involvement.

2.1.13.1  Protocol Evaluation

   Because the LWAPP protocol is fully specified, it is assumed that the
   WTP vendors will do the actual implementation of the protocol on
   their hardware, providing them with the ability to make any necessary
   changes as they see fit without the involvement of a third party AC
   vendor.

2.1.13.2  Compliance

   The LWAPP protocol satisfies this CAPWAP objective.

2.1.14  Vendor Flexibility

   WTP vendors must not be bound to a specific MAC.






Calhoun, et al.         Expires December 2, 2005               [Page 16]

Internet-Draft            LWAPP Self Evaluation                 May 2005


2.1.14.1  Protocol Evaluation

   The authors of the LWAPP protocol have had discussions with the most
   popular MAC vendors to ensure that the assumptions behind the split
   MAC approach would work on any chipset, and have yet to find a vendor
   that could not support LWAPP.

   Since the LWAPP protocol is fully specified, and the fact that the
   assumption behind having a specification that any WTP vendor may
   implement without the aid of any AC vendors, allows for innovation by
   these third party WTP vendors without requiring that they disclose
   any confidential information about their chip.

2.1.14.2  Compliance

   The LWAPP protocol satisfies this CAPWAP objective.

2.2  Desirable Objectives

2.2.1  Multiple Authentication Mechanisms

   The CAPWAP protocol must support different authentication mechanisms
   in addition to IEEE 802.11i.

2.2.1.1  Protocol Evaluation

   The LWAPP protocol allows for multiple SSIDs be to created on a WTP,
   and for every one of these WLANs, a separate security policy may
   exist.  For instance, the Encryption Policy field of the IEEE 802.11
   Add WLAN message element, described in section 11.5.1.1, defines
   static and Dynamic WEP encryption, as well as TKIP and AES.  Further,
   the Encryption Policy may be set to Clear Text, which would be used
   in the case where a captive portal were to be used.

2.2.1.2  Compliance

   The LWAPP protocol satisfies this CAPWAP objective.

2.2.2  Support for Future Wireless Technologies

   CAPWAP protocol messages must be designed to be extensible for
   specific layer 2 wireless technologies.  It should not be limited to
   the transport of elements relating to IEEE 802.11.

2.2.2.1  Protocol Evaluation

   Section 2.1 of the LWAPP specification describes the process that
   must be followed in order to define a wireless technology binding for



Calhoun, et al.         Expires December 2, 2005               [Page 17]

Internet-Draft            LWAPP Self Evaluation                 May 2005


   LWAPP.  Further, section 11 defines the IEEE 802.11 binding.  While
   no other technology bindings have been defined yet, the authors feel
   very confident that this can be done with relative ease.

   One of the reasons why it is felt that the LWAPP protocol is
   sufficiently flexible is the fact that the protocol simply states
   that all "access related" wireless control frames (e.g., Association
   Request for 802.11) are tunneled to the AC.  While this does impose
   the requirement that the AC must understand the individual wireless
   technologies, the authors would argue that this would be required
   regardless in order for the AC to be able to provide additional
   services, such as centralized authentication and key distribution,
   quality of service access control, etc.

   One alternative to the LWAPP approach would be to attempt to map
   individual information elements found within a wireless protocol
   frame to a generic protocol data set, and hide the underlying
   technology from the AC.  However, every wireless technology have
   objects that are very specific and unique, and cannot be easily
   mapped to a generic information element.  Some of these information
   elements could also be items that the AC would need to have access to
   in order to make policy decisions.  The authors of the LWAPP
   specification therefore feel that simply tunneling the wireless
   technology frames to the AC allows for the most flexibility and
   extensibility.

2.2.2.2  Compliance

   The LWAPP protocol satisfies this CAPWAP objective.

2.2.3  Support for New IEEE Requirements

   The CAPWAP protocol must be openly designed to support new IEEE
   extensions.

2.2.3.1  Protocol Evaluation

   The LWAPP protocol was designed to be able to accomodate new IEEE
   extensions defined, and the authors of the specification have been
   involved in the 802.11 IEEE process for as many as 14 years.
   Therefore, we feel that there is significant expertise in the group
   to be justify our statement.

   One example of extensibility is support for 802.11k.  Given that the
   management frames are tunneled from the WTP to the AC, in order for
   the AC to support 802.11k, all that is needed is for the WTP to
   forward the related action frames.  The AC may initiate an 802.11k
   radio measurement simply by sending a tunneled 802.11 management



Calhoun, et al.         Expires December 2, 2005               [Page 18]

Internet-Draft            LWAPP Self Evaluation                 May 2005


   frame to the appropriate station, through its WTP.

   Another example of extensibility is the ability to support other
   wireless technologies.  This requirement was addressed in section
   Section 2.2.2.

   That said, the CAPWAP WG and the authors cannot predict all of the
   future work that will be done by the IEEE.  So it is possible that
   some future extensions will require some additional IETF CAPWAP
   standardization work.  It is therefore necessary to make sure that
   the WG puts in place a set of guidelines for IANA numbering
   assignment and a process for protocol extensibility.  The authors
   expect to create an extensive IANA considerations section to the
   LWAPP spec if it is selected as the basis for the working group.

2.2.3.2  Compliance

   The LWAPP protocol satisfies this CAPWAP objective.

2.2.4  Interconnection Objective

   The CAPWAP protocol must not be constrained to specific underlying
   transport mechanisms.

2.2.4.1  Protocol Evaluation

   The LWAPP protocol was designed to be able to be transported over any
   link layer.  The current specification defines the use of either
   Ethernet or UDP/IP as transports.  Much of the dependences on
   transport capabilities have been removed by including support for
   these within the LWAPP protocol itself (for instance fragmentation/
   reassembly).  As a consequence, it is felt that the protocol is
   sufficiently flexible to handle a variety of underlying transports,
   with the understanding that certain guidelines would have to be
   specified for new transports.

   The authors of the LWAPP protocol realize that the current
   specification does not have enough flexibility to accomodate IPv6,
   and are currently working on a new revision that will include support
   for both IPv4 and IPv6.  The number of areas where this is
   problematic is very small, since it is mostly concentrated in the
   areas where IP addresses are included as part of protocol payloads.
   This will be included in the next version of the LWAPP specification.

2.2.4.2  Compliance

   The LWAPP protocol partially satisfies this CAPWAP objective.




Calhoun, et al.         Expires December 2, 2005               [Page 19]

Internet-Draft            LWAPP Self Evaluation                 May 2005


2.2.5  Access Control

   The CAPWAP protocol must be capable of exchanging information
   required for access control of WTPs and wireless terminals.

2.2.5.1  Protocol Evaluation

   Given the LWAPP protocol requires that the 802.11 MAC management
   frames be tunneled to the AC, the AC has complete control over the
   behavior of the network, and can implement certain strategies such as
   load balancing.  Further, as previously described since 802.11e
   simply builds on top of management frames, these would be sent to the
   AC, which would then have the ability to perform admission control,
   etc.

   The security considerations section of the LWAPP specification states
   that an AC SHOULD perform authorization of WTPs prior to allowing
   them to join.  This function is outside the scope of the LWAPP
   protocol, and could be performed through a function such as RADIUS or
   LDAP.  However, the authors recognize that authorization of WTPs is
   necessary in order to eliminate the possibility of grey market APs
   from connecting to the CAPWAP infrastructure.

2.2.5.2  Compliance

   The LWAPP protocol satisfies this CAPWAP objective.

2.3  Rejected Objectives

2.3.1  Support for Non-CAPWAP WTPs

   The CAPWAP protocol should be capable of recognizing legacy WTPs and
   existing network management systems.

2.3.1.1  Protocol Evaluation

   As mentioned in the objectives document, whether an AC is capable of
   supporting non-CAPWAP WTPs is an implementation issue, and is not
   required as part of a candidate protocol.

2.3.1.2  Compliance

   The LWAPP protocol satisfies this CAPWAP objective.

2.3.2  Technical Specifications

   WTP vendors should not have to share technical specifications for
   hardware and software to AC vendors in order for interoperability to



Calhoun, et al.         Expires December 2, 2005               [Page 20]

Internet-Draft            LWAPP Self Evaluation                 May 2005


   be achieved.

2.3.2.1  Protocol Evaluation

   Although the working group opted to reject this objective, the
   authors of the LWAPP specification wish to re-inforce that they
   believe that any specification adopted by the working group must be
   sufficiently specified to ensure that any third party WTP is capable
   of providing 802.11 access to stations in an interoperable manner.

2.3.2.2  Compliance

   The LWAPP protocol satisfies this CAPWAP objective.

2.4  Operator Requirements

2.4.1  AP Fast Handoff

   CAPWAP protocol operations must not impede or obstruct the efficacy
   of AP fast handoff procedures.

2.4.1.1  Protocol Evaluation

   The authors of the LWAPP specification believe that the protocol as
   specified is capable of handling fast AP handoffs.  The fact that the
   WTP only needs to tunnel any management frames, as opposed to perform
   some packet manipulation significantly increases the ability for the
   WTPs to handle low latency handoffs, especially in the face of
   network load.

   Further, the centralization of the 802.1X function allows for an
   authenticator to have quick access to information which will could
   crucial for new initiatives such as the 802.11r fast roaming group.

   Using the terminology defined by 802.11r, whereby a handoff starts as
   of the last packet on the old AP to the first packet on the new AP.
   Existing LWAPP products shipping in the field are capable of
   performing this function in less than 30 ms.

2.4.1.2  Compliance

   The LWAPP protocol satisfies this CAPWAP objective.









Calhoun, et al.         Expires December 2, 2005               [Page 21]

Internet-Draft            LWAPP Self Evaluation                 May 2005


3.  Compliance Table

                                        Compliance
                                          Rating

   Logical Groups                           S
   Support for Traffic Separation           S
   Wireless Terminal Transparency           S
   Configuration Consistency                S
   Firmware Trigger                         S
   Monitoring and Exchange of
        System-wide Resource State          S
   Resource Control Objective               S
   CAPWAP Protocol Security                 P (1)
   System-wide Security                     P (1)
   IEEE 802.11i Considerations              S
   Interoperability Objective               P
   Protocol Specifications                  S
   Vendor Independence                      S
   Vendor Flexibility                       S
   Multiple Authentication Mechanisms       S
   Support for Future Wireless
        Technologies                        S
   Support for New IEEE Requirements        S
   Interconnection Objective                P
   Access Control                           S
   Support for Non-CAPWAP WTPs              S
   Technical Specifications                 S
   AP Fast Handoff                          S

   (1) The LWAPP protocol security review found that while the protocol
   is in itself technically secure, it is not cryptographically secure.
   The review also provided some recommendations, which the authors plan
   to introduce in the next version of the protocol.  As a consequence,
   the authors feel that in the spirit of intellectual honesty the
   protocol is only partially in compliance with the requirements.















Calhoun, et al.         Expires December 2, 2005               [Page 22]

Internet-Draft            LWAPP Self Evaluation                 May 2005


4.  Security Considerations

   This document simply lists how the LWAPP protocol conforms to the
   requirements listed in the CAPWAP objectives document.  The LWAPP
   specification has an extensive security considerations section which
   applies to the protocol itself.  There is nothing specific about this
   document that introduces new security considerations.












































Calhoun, et al.         Expires December 2, 2005               [Page 23]

Internet-Draft            LWAPP Self Evaluation                 May 2005


5.  IANA Considerations

   This document requires no action by IANA.
















































Calhoun, et al.         Expires December 2, 2005               [Page 24]

Internet-Draft            LWAPP Self Evaluation                 May 2005


6.  Acknowledgements

   The authors would like to thanks Russ Housley and Charles Clancy for
   their assistance in provide a security review of the LWAPP
   specification.














































Calhoun, et al.         Expires December 2, 2005               [Page 25]

Internet-Draft            LWAPP Self Evaluation                 May 2005


7.  IPR Statement

   The IETF has been notified of intellectual property rights claimed in
   regard to some or all of the specification contained in this
   document.  For more information consult the online list of claimed
   rights.

   Please refer to http://www.ietf.org/ietf/IPR for more information.











































Calhoun, et al.         Expires December 2, 2005               [Page 26]

Internet-Draft            LWAPP Self Evaluation                 May 2005


8.  References

8.1  Normative References

   [1]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
        Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [2]  Govindan, S., "Objectives for Control and Provisioning of
        Wireless Access Points (CAPWAP)",
        draft-ietf-capwap-objectives-02 (work in progress), April 2005.

   [3]  Yang, L., Zerfos, P., and E. Sadot, "Architecture Taxonomy for
        Control and Provisioning of Wireless Access  Points(CAPWAP)",
        draft-ietf-capwap-arch-06 (work in progress), November 2004.

   [4]  Calhoun, P., "Light Weight Access Point Protocol (LWAPP)",
        draft-ohara-capwap-lwapp-02 (work in progress), April 2005.

   [5]  "Information technology - Telecommunications and information
        exchange between systems - Local and metropolitan area networks
        - Specific requirements - Part 11: Wireless LAN Medium Access
        Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) specifications",
        IEEE Standard 802.11, 1999,
        <http://standards.ieee.org/getieee802/download/802.11-1999.pdf>.

   [6]  "Information technology - Telecommunications and information
        exchange between systems - Local and metropolitan area networks
        - Specific requirements - Part 11: Wireless LAN Medium Access
        Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) specifications Amendment
        6: Medium Access Control (MAC) Security Enhancements",
        IEEE Standard 802.11i, July 2004,
        <http://standards.ieee.org/getieee802/download/
        802.11i-2004.pdf>.

   [7]  Clancy, C., "Security Review of the Light Weight Access Point
        Protocol", May 2005,
        <http://www.cs.umd.edu/~clancy/docs/lwapp-review.pdf>.

   [8]  "Wi-Fi Certified for WMM - Support for Multimedia Applications
        with Quality of Service in WiFi Networks", September 2004,
        <http://www.weca.net/opensection/pdf/WMM_QoS_whitepaper.pdf>.

   [9]  "Wi-Fi Protected Access (WPA)", March 2005, <http://
        www.wi-fi.org/OpenSection/pdf/
        Wi-Fi_Protected_Access_Overview.pdf>.






Calhoun, et al.         Expires December 2, 2005               [Page 27]

Internet-Draft            LWAPP Self Evaluation                 May 2005


8.2  Informational References


Authors' Addresses

   Pat R. Calhoun
   Cisco Systems, Inc.
   170 West Tasman Drive
   San Jose, CA  95134

   Phone: +1 408-853-xxxx
   Email: pcalhoun@cisco.com


   Bob O'Hara
   Cisco Systems, Inc.
   170 West Tasman Drive
   San Jose, CA  95134

   Phone: +1 408-853-xxxx
   Email: bob.ohara@cisco.com


   Michael Glenn Williams
   Nokia, Inc.
   313 Fairchild Drive
   Mountain View, CA  94043

   Phone: +1 650-714-7758
   Email: Michael.G.Williams@Nokia.com


   Sue Hares
   Nexthop Technologies, Inc.
   825 Victors Way, Suite 100
   Ann Arbor, MI  48108

   Phone: +1 734 222 1610
   Email: shares@nexthop.com












Calhoun, et al.         Expires December 2, 2005               [Page 28]

Internet-Draft            LWAPP Self Evaluation                 May 2005


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Calhoun, et al.         Expires December 2, 2005               [Page 29]


