


ENUM -- Telephone Number Mapping                            A. Mayrhofer
Working Group                                                    enum.at
Internet-Draft                                                D. Lindner
Expires: February 20, 2006                                           SIL
                                                         August 19, 2005


                IANA Registration for Enumservice vCard
                     draft-mayrhofer-enum-vcard-00

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on February 20, 2006.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).

Abstract

   This memo registers the Enumservice "vCard" using the URI schemes
   "http" and "https" according to the IANA Enumservice registration
   process described in RFC3671.  This Enumservice is to be used to
   refer from an ENUM domain name to the vCard of the entity using the
   corresponding E.164 number.

   Clients may use information gathered from those vCards before, during



Mayrhofer & Lindner     Expires February 20, 2006               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft              vCard Enumservice                August 2005


   or after inbound or outbound communication takes place.  For example,
   a callee might be presented with the name and association of the
   caller before he picks up the call.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3

   2.  ENUM Service Registration - vCard  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3

   3.  Example  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3

   4.  Security  & Privacy Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     4.1   The Record Itself  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     4.2   The Resource Identified  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4

   5.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5

   6.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5

       Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5

       Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . .  7




























Mayrhofer & Lindner     Expires February 20, 2006               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft              vCard Enumservice                August 2005


1.  Introduction

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [4].

   ENUM [1] uses the Domain Name System (DNS) [2] for mapping E.164
   numbers [7] to Uniform Resource Identifiers (URIs) [3].  E.164
   numbers are converted to ENUM domain names through means described
   further in RFC3761 [1].

   "vCard" [8] is a transport independent data format for exchange of
   personal data.  For the purpose of this document, the term "vCard"
   refers to a specific instance of this data format - an "electronic
   business card". vCards are exchanged via several protocols, usually
   they are distributed as electronic mail attachments or as standalone
   documents via web servers.  Most popular personal information manager
   applications are capable of reading and writing vCards.

   The Enumservice described in this document refers from an ENUM domain
   to a vCard using the URI schemes "http" [6] and "https" [5].  The
   resource identified MUST be a valid vCard.

2.  ENUM Service Registration - vCard

   Enumservice Name: "vCard"

   Enumservice Type: "vcard"

   Enumservice Subtypes: N/A

   URI Schemes: "http", "https"

   Functional Specification:
      This Enumservice indicates that the resource identified is a
      vCard.

   Security Considerations: see Section 4

   Intended Usage: COMMON

   Authors: David Lindner, Alexander Mayrhofer (see 'Authors' section
   for contact details)

3.  Example

   An example ENUM entry referencing to a vCard could look like:




Mayrhofer & Lindner     Expires February 20, 2006               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft              vCard Enumservice                August 2005


      $ORIGIN 4.3.6.1.4.6.5.0.5.1.3.4.e164.arpa.
      @  IN NAPTR 100 10 "u" "E2U+vcard"
      "!^.*$!http://www.enum.at/vcard-axelm.vcf!" .

4.  Security  & Privacy Considerations

4.1  The Record Itself

   Since ENUM uses DNS - a publicly available database - any information
   contained in records provisioned in ENUM domains must be considered
   public as well.  Even after revoking the DNS entry and removing the
   refered resource, copies of the information could still be available.

   Information published in ENUM records could reveal associations
   between E.164 numbers and their owners - especially if records
   contain personal identifiers or domain names for which ownership
   information can easily be obtained.

   However, it is important to note that the ENUM record itself does not
   need to contain any personal information.  It just points to a
   location where access to personal information could be granted.

   ENUM records pointing to third party resources can easily be
   provisioned on purpose by the ENUM domain owner - so any assumption
   about the association between a number and an entity could therefore
   be completely bogus unless some kind of identity verification is in
   place.  This verification is out of scope for this memo.

4.2  The Resource Identified

   Users SHOULD carefully consider information they provide in the
   resource identified by the ENUM record.  Considerations SHOULD
   include serving information only to entities of the user's choice
   and/or limiting the comprehension of the information provided based
   on the requesting entity.

   On the other hand, most of the information which a vCard would
   typically contain is already available via more "traditional" sources
   like white pages and online directories.  Therefore, publishing a
   vCard on the internet and associating it to a phone number does not
   increase the amount of available information at all if the
   information was already public before.

   If access restrictions are deployed, Standard HTTP mechanisms MUST be
   used to enforce those restrictions.  HTTPS SHOULD be preferred if the
   deployed mechanisms are prone to eavesdropping and replay attacks.





Mayrhofer & Lindner     Expires February 20, 2006               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft              vCard Enumservice                August 2005


5.  IANA Considerations

   This memo requests registration of the "vCard" Enumservice without
   any subtypes according to the definitions in this document and
   RFC3761 [1].

6.  References

   [1]  Faltstrom, P. and M. Mealling, "The E.164 to Uniform Resource
        Identifiers (URI) Dynamic Delegation Discovery System (DDDS)
        Application (ENUM)", RFC 3761, April 2004.

   [2]  Mockapetris, P., "Domain names - Implementation and
        Specification", STD 13, RFC 1035, November 1987.

   [3]  Berners-Lee, T., Fielding, R., and L. Masinter, "Uniform
        Resource Identifiers (URI): Generic Syntax", RFC 2396,
        August 1998.

   [4]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
        Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [5]  Rescorla, E., "HTTP Over TLS", RFC 2818, May 2000.

   [6]  Fielding, R., Gettys, J., Mogul, J., Frystyk, H., Masinter, L.,
        Leach, P., and T. Berners-Lee, "Hypertext Transfer Protocol --
        HTTP/1.1", RFC 2616, June 1999.

   [7]  ITU-T, "The international public telecommunication numbering
        plan", Recommendation E.164, May 1997.

   [8]  Internet Mail Consortium, "Personal Data Interchange - vCard and
        vCalendar", September 1996.


Authors' Addresses

   Alexander Mayrhofer
   enum.at GmbH
   Karlsplatz 1/9
   Wien  A-1010
   Austria

   Phone: +43 1 5056416 34
   Email: alexander.mayrhofer@enum.at
   URI:   http://www.enum.at/





Mayrhofer & Lindner     Expires February 20, 2006               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft              vCard Enumservice                August 2005


   David Lindner
   Silver Voice over Internet Protocol GmbH
   Lorenz-Mandl-Gasse 33/1
   A-1160 Wien
   Austria

   Phone: +43 1 4933256
   Email: d.lindner@sil.at
   URI:   http://www.sil.at/










































Mayrhofer & Lindner     Expires February 20, 2006               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft              vCard Enumservice                August 2005


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Mayrhofer & Lindner     Expires February 20, 2006               [Page 7]

