DNA Working Group                                         Yong-Geun Hong
INTERNET DRAFT                                             Jung-Soo Park
Expires: April 2005                                       Hyoung-Jun Kim
                                                                    ETRI
                                                            October 2004


        Considerations for DNA Schemes with Multiple Interfaces
                        and Layer 2 Technologies
                     <draft-hong-dna-if-l2-00.txt>


Status of this Memo


     By submitting this Internet-Draft, I certify that any applicable
     patent or other IPR claims of which I am aware have been disclosed,
     and any of which I become aware will be disclosed, in accordance
     with RFC 3668.


     Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
     Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
     other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
     Drafts.


     Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
     months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other docu-
     ments at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as
     reference material or to cite them other than as "work in pro-
     gress."


     The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
     http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.


     The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
     http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.


     This Internet-Draft will expire on April 2005.



Abstract


     In this document we consider and analyze various environments for
     applying Detecting Network Attachment (DNA) schemes. Although DNA
     schemes are typically run for each interface and a host separately
     checks for link changes on each interface when the host has
     multiple interfaces, DNA schemes in the host must be considered to
     check the multiple interfaces at the same time for a seamless
     service. In addition, DNA schemes in the host must be capable of
     managing together each DNA scheme on each interface. Current DNA
     schemes only rely on "Break before Make" L2 technology such as
     802.11. But now and in future, there will be other "Make before
     break" L2 technologies such as CDMA. In these L2 technologies, DNA
     schemes must be operated differently in order to make use of their
     characteristics.





Hong, Park, Kim            Expires April 2005                   [Page 1]


INTERNET-DRAFT      DNA with Consideraing IF and L2         October 2004



Table of Contents:


     1. Introduction................................................2
     2. Terminology.................................................3
     3. Various cases with Interfaces and Layer 2 Technology........3
     3.1 Case : Single Interface with Break before Make.............4
     3.2 Case : Single Interface with Make before Break.............4
     3.3 Case : Multiple Interfaces with Break before Make..........4
     3.4 Case : Multiple Interfaces with Make before Break..........5
     4. Security Considerations.....................................5
     5. Acknowledgments.............................................5
     6. References..................................................6
     Author's Addresses.............................................6




1. Introduction


     In fixed wire networks, when communication failure happens, it is
     expected that there are physical or link-layer errors. Change of
     the link-layer seldom happens. But in wireless and mobile networks,
     communication failures are caused by many reasons. Not only
     physical errors, but also the out of range of Access Point coverage
     and movement between networks (links) are important factors for
     communication failures.


     Detecting Network Attachment (DNA) is proposed for solving the
     above problem, for movement between networks (links). To do this,
     DNA schemes detect the identity of the currently attached link to
     ascertain the validity of the existing IP configuration [3].


     DNA schemes are typically run for each interface and a host
     separately checks for link changes on each interface when the host
     has multiple interfaces [3].


     In future ubiquitous networks, many services and various
     technologies are expected to be inter-worked and harmonized for a
     better and seamless service. Wired and wireless technologies are
     expected to be coupled and it is the same for different wireless
     technologies. As various wireless technologies are introduced, a
     host having multiple interfaces has appeared. The multiple
     interfaces may be the same technology or a different technology
     such as WLAN/CDMA, WLAN/GPRS. In this multiple interface host, DNA
     schemes must be considered to check the multiple interfaces at the
     same time for a seamless service and to manage together each DNA
     scheme on each interface.


     Current link-layer technologies which DNA schemes are operated on
     are 802.3 Ethernet or 802.11 wireless LAN technologies. The
     characteristics of these link-layer technologies are that a new
     link-layer connection is made only after an old link-layer
     connection is torn down. Also in these link-layer technologies, a





Hong, Park, Kim            Expires April 2005                   [Page 2]


INTERNET-DRAFT      DNA with Consideraing IF and L2         October 2004



     host does not have any information about a new link until a new
     link-layer connection is established. The only way to recognize
     information about the new link is to receive link information (e.g.
     Router Advertisement message) only after a new link-layer
     connection is made [1,2].


     Because other link-layer technologies such as CDMA have the ability
     to make a new link-layer connection before an old link-layer
     connection is torn down, a host may know new link information
     before a new link-layer connection is established [7]. In these
     link-layer technologies, current DNA schemes may not be the proper
     solution to handle link change. It needs other features of DNA
     schemes to support this characteristic.


     This document identifies various cases for applying DNA schemes. We
     consider and analyze various environments according to whether
     multiple interfaces are supported and the characteristics of link-
     layer technologies.




2. Terminology


     This document identifies various cases for applying DNA schemes. We
     consider and analyze various environments according to whether
     multiple interfaces are supported and the characteristics of link-
     layer technologies. Following are two typical characteristics of L2
     technologies :


         Break before Make
           The characteristic of link-layer technology where a new link-
           layer connection can be made only after an old link-layer
           connection is disconnected. In this link-layer technology,
           new link information can be acquired only after a new link-
           layer connection is made, that is only after an old link-
           layer connection is torn down.


         Make before Break
           The characteristic of link-layer technology where a new link-
           layer connection can be made before an old link-layer
           connection is disconnected. In this link-layer technology,
           new link information can be acquired before a new link-layer
           connection is made, that is before an old link-layer
           connection is torn down.



3. Various cases with Interfaces and Layer 2 Technology


     In this section, we classify cases for applying DNA schemes whether
     a host has a single interface or multiple interfaces and whether
     link-layer technology are Break before Make or Make before Break.






Hong, Park, Kim            Expires April 2005                   [Page 3]


INTERNET-DRAFT      DNA with Consideraing IF and L2         October 2004



3.1 Case : Single Interface with Break before Make


     It is the typical case where we are currently using a 802.11
     wireless LAN. In this case, a new link-layer connection is
     established to a new access point only after an old link-layer
     connection is disconnected. Two different link-layer connections
     cannot be established simultaneously.


     In this case, link information can be acquired only after a new
     link-layer connection is established. Only after a new link-layer
     connection is made, a host can collect the appropriate information
     and detects the identity of its currently attached link to
     ascertain the validity of its IP configuration [3].


     In this case, the focus of DNA schemes is that how can a host
     receive link information in a fast and effective method. To do
     this, until now, there are many proposed mechanisms. [4,5,6]



3.2 Case : Single Interface with Make before Break


     We think that we are not familiar with this case. But in CDMA[7], a
     mobile station can access two or more different base stations
     simultaneously. In this case, a host can make a new link-layer
     connection before an old link-layer connection is torn down.


     In this case, a host can acquire new link information through a new
     link-layer connection before an old link-layer connection is torn
     down. A difference from the above case (Section 3.1) is that a host
     can acquire link information over a new link-layer connection while
     keeping an old existing link-layer connection.


     In this case, the focus of DNA schemes may be different from the
     above case. We think that DNA schemes should have the ability to
     handle this difference.



3.3 Case : Multiple Interfaces with Break before Make


     As various wireless technologies are introduced, a host has a
     chance to have multiple interfaces. Link-layer technologies of each
     multiple interface may be the same (e.g. all of them are 802.11) or
     different (e.g. one of them is 802.11 and one of them is CDMA /
     GPRS)


     If each link-layer technology of each interface is the same and
     each interface is in the same link, this scenario may not be very
     much different with case 3.1. Because each interface is in the same
     link, link information on each interface may be the same. In this
     scenario, multiple interfaces do not have any effect on detecting
     any link changes.






Hong, Park, Kim            Expires April 2005                   [Page 4]


INTERNET-DRAFT      DNA with Consideraing IF and L2         October 2004



     But, if each link-layer technology of each interface is the same
     and each interface is in a different link (although this scenario
     may not be common), a host must have the ability to manage each
     interface and its link information on each interface. In this
     scenario, when a host detects a link-layer change, it can use other
     link information to support a seamless service, or the host can
     follow general DNA schemes on the interface where a link-layer
     change happens.


     If each link-layer technology of each interface is different,
     situations may be different from the above two scenarios. If each
     interface is in the same link, one link-layer change on one
     interface does not mean the link changes. The reason is that each
     interface has different characteristics for its link-layer
     technology (e.g. the service coverage area of each access point may
     be different). Also each interface is in different links, one
     link-layer change on one interface does not mean the link changes.
     In these scenarios, a host must have the ability to manage each
     interface and tis link information. There may be other
     considerations to make use of these scenarios.



3.4 Case : Multiple Interfaces with Make before Break


     If a host has multiple interfaces and each link-layer connection is
     operated on the make before break method, DNA schemes may be
     operated differently. Because a new link-layer connection can be
     made before an old link-layer connection is disconnected and a host
     has multiple interfaces, it can keep link information on another
     interface in spite of a link-layer change of one interface.


     In this case, we think that the scenario where each link-layer
     technology of each interface is different may not exist. To support
     the make before break method on multiple interfaces, each link-
     layer technology must be the same.



4. Security Considerations


     This document discusses considerations for applying DNA schemes on
     various environments. The associated security issues will be
     identified as further work goes on.




5. Acknowledgements


     We would like to express our sincere appreciation to Do-Wan Kim,
     Tony Bonanno for their valuable comments in improving this draft.








Hong, Park, Kim            Expires April 2005                   [Page 5]


INTERNET-DRAFT      DNA with Consideraing IF and L2         October 2004



6. References



       Normative


       [1]  Narten, T., Nordmark, E. and W. Simpson, "Neighbor Discovery
            for IP Version 6 (IPv6)", RFC 2461, December 1998.


       [2]  Thomson, S. and T. Narten, "IPv6 Stateless Address
            Autoconfiguration", RFC 2462, December 1998.


       Informative


       [3]  Choi, J. and G. Daley, "Detecting Network Attachment in IPv6
            Goals", draft-ietf-dna-goals-02.txt (work in progress),
            September 2004.


       [4]  Choi, J. and D. Shin, "Fast Router Discovery with RA Caching
            in AP", draft-jinchoi-mobileip-frd-00 (work in progress),
            February 2003.


       [5]  Kempf, J., Khalil, M. and B. Pentland, "IPv6 Fast Router
            Advertisement", draft-mkhalil-ipv6-fastra-02 (work in
            progress), October 2002.


       [6]  Daley, G., Pentland, B. and E. Nordmark, "Deterministic Fast
            Router Advertisement Options", draft-daley-dna-det-fastra-00
            (work in progress), July 2004.


       [7]  TIA/EIA/IS-2000 Series, "CDMA 2000 Series, Release A (2000)"



Authors' Addresses


       Yong-Geun Hong
       ETRI PEC
       161 Gajeong-Dong, Yuseong-Gu, Daejeon 305-350, Korea
       Phone: +82 42 860 6557
       Email: yghong@pec.etri.re.kr


       Jung-Soo Park
       ETRI PEC
       161 Gajeong-Dong, Yuseong-Gu, Daejeon 305-350, Korea
       Phone: +82 42 860 6514
       Email: jspark@pec.etri.re.kr


       Hyoung-Jun Kim
       ETRI PEC
       161 Gajeong-Dong, Yuseong-Gu, Daejeon 305-350, Korea
       Phone: +82 42 860 6576
       Email: khj@etri.re.kr






Hong, Park, Kim            Expires April 2005                   [Page 6]


INTERNET-DRAFT      DNA with Consideraing IF and L2         October 2004



Intellectual Property Statement


     The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
     Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed
     to pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described
     in this document or the extent to which any license under such
     rights might or might not be available; nor does it represent that
     it has made any independent effort to identify any such rights.
     Information on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC
     documents can be found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.


     Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
     assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
     attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use
     of such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
     specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository
     at http://www.ietf.org/ipr.


     The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
     copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
     rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
     this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
     ietf-ipr@ietf.org.



Disclaimer of Validity


     This document and the information contained herein are provided on
     an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE
     REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND
     THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES,
     EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT
     THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR
     ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
     PARTICULAR PURPOSE.



Copyright Statement


     Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).  This document is
     subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP
     78, and except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their
     rights.



Acknowledgment


     Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
     Internet Society.







Hong, Park, Kim            Expires April 2005                   [Page 7] 