


Network Working Group                                          T. Hansen
Internet-Draft                                         AT&T Laboratories
Intended status: Best Current Practice                        D. Crocker
Expires: October 31, 2012                    Brandenburg InternetWorking
                                                                May 2012

                     Non-Normative Synonyms in RFCs
                  draft-hansen-nonkeywords-non2119-02

Abstract

   Specifications in RFCs contain normative keywords, as defined in RFC
   2119, to signify requirements, permission or prohibitions.  These
   include MUST, SHOULD and MAY, which are commonly recorded in all
   CAPITALS (but need not be). The words are sometimes also intended
   with non-normative meaning; this different usage can be confusing.
   Happily there are adequate alternatives for non-normative meanings.
   For such situations, this document provides some alternatives to the
   normative vocabulary of RFC 2119.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on October 31, 2012.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2012 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (http://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Simplified BSD License text
   as described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Simplified BSD License.

1.  A List of Synonyms

Hansen & Crocker        Expires October 31, 2012                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft              RFC Non-Keywords                    May 2012


   To indicate a degree of requirement, permission or prohibition for an
   aspect of a specification, words such as MUST, SHOULD and MAY are
   defined as normative vocabulary in the formal aspects of the RFC
   series.[RFC2119].  However it is also natural to use them non-
   normatively, in a narrative fashion.  Even when this is permitted,
   such as RFCs that do not invoke the conventions of RFC 2119, non-
   normative use of these words is often confusing; their normative
   meaning is too deeply ingrained in the culture of the RFC series.

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].

   Fortunately, there are other words readily available, in lieu of the
   RFC 2119 words.  These alternatives, or their equivalents, SHOULD be
   used instead of their normatively-encumbered vocabulary.

      

      MUST, REQUIRED, SHALL: The words "needs to" and "necessary" SHOULD
         be used to connote that something is essential.

      SHOULD, RECOMMENDED: The words "ought", "encouraged" and "suggest
         strongly" SHOULD be used to connote that something is strongly
         urged.

      MAY, OPTIONAL: The words "can" and "might" SHOULD be used to
         indicate the possibility or capability of performing an action.
         The words "is allowed to" or "is permitted to" SHOULD be used
         to indicate permission to perform an action.

      NOT: The word "not" can be freely used with any of the above
         suggestions and will not be taken to have any separate RFC 2119
         connotation.  The word only takes on a special meaning when it
         is combined with one of the RFC 2119 normative words.  For
         example, "ought not" is non-normative, while "should not" and
         "SHOULD NOT" are normative in the RFC 2119 sense.

   RFCs that cite RFC2119 vocabulary usage MUST NOT employ the listed,
   normative vocabulary for non-normative meaning.  RFCs that do not
   cite RFC2119 SHOULD NOT employ that vocabulary.

   Note that the above list of synonyms is not meant to be exhaustive;
   other non-RFC2119-normative words MAY also be used at the author's
   discretion.

   Authors who follow these guidelines MAY incorporate a declaration at
   the beginning of their document, but note that this is not required.

   This document can be discussed on the ietf@ietf.org mailing list.

2.  Acknowledgements


Hansen & Crocker        Expires October 31, 2012                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft              RFC Non-Keywords                    May 2012


   Ran Atkinson

3.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no IANA considerations.

4.  Security Considerations

   The 2119 terms are frequently used to specify behavior with security
   implications.  The effects on security of changing something from a
   "MUST" to a "needs to", or vice versa, can be very subtle, as one has
   normative meaning and the other does not.  Document authors need to
   take the time to consider the effects of using non-normative verbiage
   as specified in this document instead of the normative verbiage from
   2119.

5.  References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

Authors' Addresses

   Tony Hansen
   AT&T Laboratories
   200 Laurel Ave South
   Middletown, NJ 07748
   USA
   
   Phone: +1.732.420.8934
   Email: tony+nonkeywords@maillennium.att.com


   D. Crocker
   Brandenburg InternetWorking
   675 Spruce Dr.
   Sunnyvale,
   USA
   
   Phone: +1.408.246.8253
   Email: dcrocker@bbiw.net
   URI:   http://bbiw.net











Hansen & Crocker        Expires October 31, 2012                [Page 3]
