Internet Engineering Task Force                              Sally Floyd
INTERNET-DRAFT                                                    Editor
Intended status: Informational                              30 July 2007
Expires: January 2008


      Metrics for the Evaluation of Congestion Control Mechanisms
                     draft-irtf-tmrg-metrics-10.txt


Status of this Memo

    By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
    applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
    have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
    aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

    Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
    Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
    other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
    Drafts.

    Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
    months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents
    at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as
    reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

    The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
    http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

    The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
    http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

    This Internet-Draft will expire on January 2008.

Copyright Notice

    Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

Abstract

    This document discusses the metrics to be considered in an
    evaluation of new or modified congestion control mechanisms for the
    Internet.  These include metrics for the evaluation of new transport
    protocols, of proposed modifications to TCP, of application-level



Floyd                                                           [Page 1]

INTERNET-DRAFT                TMRG, METRICS                    July 2007


    congestion control, and of Active Queue Management (AQM) mechanisms
    in the router.  This document is the first in a series of documents
    aimed at improving the models that we use in the evaluation of
    transport protocols.

    This document is a product of the Transport Modeling Research Group
    (TRMG), and has received detailed feedback from many members of the
    Research Group (RG).  As the document tries to make clear, there is
    not necessarily a consensus within the research community (or the
    IETF community, the vendor community, the operations community, or
    any other community) about the metrics that congestion control
    mechanisms should be designed to optimize, in terms of tradeoffs
    between throughput and delay, fairness between competing flows, and
    the like.  However, we believe that there is a clear consensus that
    congestion control mechanisms should be evaluated in terms of
    tradeoffs between a range of metrics, rather than in terms of
    optimizing for a single metric.


































Floyd                                                           [Page 2]

INTERNET-DRAFT                TMRG, METRICS                    July 2007


                             Table of Contents

    1. Introduction. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
    2. Metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
       2.1. Throughput, Delay, and Loss Rates. . . . . . . . . . . .   8
          2.1.1. Throughput. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
          2.1.2. Delay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
          2.1.3. Packet Loss Rates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
       2.2. Response Times and Minimizing Oscillations . . . . . . .  10
          2.2.1. Response to Changes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
          2.2.2. Minimizing Oscillations . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
       2.3. Fairness and Convergence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
          2.3.1. Metrics for fairness between flows. . . . . . . . .  13
          2.3.2. Metrics for fairness between flows with
          different resource requirements. . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
          2.3.3. Comments on fairness. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
       2.4. Robustness for Challenging Environments. . . . . . . . .  16
       2.5. Robustness to Failures and to Misbehaving
       Users . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17
       2.6. Deployability. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17
       2.7. Metrics for Specific Types of Transport. . . . . . . . .  18
       2.8. User-Based Metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  18
    3. Metrics in the IP Performance Metrics (IPPM) Working
    Group. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  18
    4. Comments on Methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  18
    5. Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
    6. IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
    7. Acknowledgements. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
    Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
    Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  24
    Full Copyright Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  24
    Intellectual Property. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  24



















Floyd                                                           [Page 3]

INTERNET-DRAFT                TMRG, METRICS                    July 2007


    TO BE DELETED BY THE RFC EDITOR UPON PUBLICATION:

    Changes from draft-irtf-tmrg-metrics-09.txt:

    * Copied a paragraph from the Abstract to the Introduction, and
      updated references.  From feedback from Tony Li in the IRSG
      review.

    Changes from draft-irtf-tmrg-metrics-08.txt:

    * General feedback from Michael Welzl, adding explanations
      to some of the fairness discussions.

    Changes from draft-irtf-tmrg-metrics-07.txt:

    * General feedback from Mark Allman.

    * Feedback and contributions from Lachlan Andrew about fairness.

    Changes from draft-irtf-tmrg-metrics-06.txt:

    * Added a paragraph about tradeoffs between
      fairness and throughput.

    * Minor editing changes.

    Changes from draft-irtf-tmrg-metrics-05.txt:

    * Added a sentence about drop synchronization.
      Feedback from David Ros.

    * Added a citation to fairness draft by Briscoe.

    Changes from draft-irtf-tmrg-metrics-04.txt:

    * Added text to the abstract.

    Changes from draft-irtf-tmrg-metrics-03.txt:

    * Added a paragraph about sudden changes due to mobility
      and the heterogeneity of wireless access types.
      Suggestion from Andras Veres.

    * Add covariance as one of the metrics for oscillations.
      Suggestion from Saverio Mascolo, original text
      contribution from Injong Rhee.

    Changes from draft-irtf-tmrg-metrics-02.txt:



Floyd                                                           [Page 4]

INTERNET-DRAFT                TMRG, METRICS                    July 2007


    * Added a few sentences to the Abstract about the
      status of the document.

    Changes from draft-irtf-tmrg-metrics-01.txt:

    * Added a discussion about the metrics in IPPM.

    Changes from draft-irtf-tmrg-metrics-01c.txt:

    * Added to the discussion of network-based, flow-based,
      and user-based metrics, based on email from Dado Colussi,
      Sean Moore, Damon Wischik, Dah Ming Chiu, and others.

    * Changed "packet drop rate" to "packet loss rate".
      Suggestion from Nelson Fonseca.

    * Added a discussion of the Colussi et al. paper on a new
      definition of fairness.

    * Added a discussion of the Chiu and Tan paper on redefining
      fairness for inelastic traffic.

    Changes from draft-irtf-tmrg-metrics-01b.txt:

    * Added a discussion of goodput vs. throughput.
      Suggestion from Nelson Fonseca.

    Changes from draft-irtf-tmrg-metrics-01a.txt:

    * Added to the discussion of packet drop rate metrics.
      Suggestions from Janardhan Iyengar, Sean Moore,
      Armando Caro, and Nelson Fonseca.

    * Added a sentence about throughput used as a metric for
      transfer times for very short flows.
      Response to email from Sean Moore.

    Changes from draft-irtf-tmrg-metrics-00.txt:

    * Added a list of relevant congestion control mechanisms to
      the abstract.  Suggestion from Sean Moore.

    * Added to the Introduction. Suggestion from Dado Colussi.

    * Added a sentence about jitter to the discussion of minimizing
      oscillations.  Suggestion from Wesley Eddy.

    * Added a note about convergence between existing flows after



Floyd                                                           [Page 5]

INTERNET-DRAFT                TMRG, METRICS                    July 2007


      a change in bandwidth.  Suggestion from Wesley Eddy.

    * Added to the section on deployability.  Suggestion from
      Wesley Eddy.

    Changes from draft-floyd-transport-metrics-00.txt:

    * Added metrics for:
      - robustness in challenging environments,
      - deployability,
      - robustness to failures and to misbehaving users

    * Added a discussion of fairness and packet size.


1.  Introduction

    As a step towards improving our methodologies for evaluating
    congestion control mechanisms, in this document we discuss some of
    the metrics to be considered.  We also consider the relationship
    between metrics, e.g., the well-known tradeoff between throughput
    and delay.  This document doesn't attempt to specify every metric
    that a study might consider; for example, there are domain-specific
    metrics that researchers might consider that are over and above the
    metrics laid out in this document.

    We consider metrics for aggregate traffic (taking into account the
    effect of flows on competing traffic in the network) as well as the
    heterogeneous goals of different applications or transport protocols
    (e.g., of high throughput for bulk data transfer, and of low delay
    for interactive voice or video).  Different transport protocols or
    AQM mechanisms might have goals of optimizing different sets of
    metrics, with one transport protocol optimized for per-flow
    throughput and another optimized for robustness over wireless links,
    and with different degrees of attention to fairness with competing
    traffic.  We hope this document will be used as a step in evaluating
    proposed congestion control mechanisms for a wide range of metrics,
    for example, noting that Mechanism X is good at optimizing Metric A,
    but pays the price with poor performance for Metric B.  The goal
    would be to have a broad view of both the strengths and weaknesses
    of newly-proposed congestion control mechanisms.

    Subsequent documents are planned to present sets of simulation and
    testbed scenarios for the evaluation of transport protocols and of
    congestion control mechanisms, based on the best current practice of
    the research community.  These are not intended to be complete or
    final benchmark test suites, but simply to be one step of many to be
    used by researchers in evaluating congestion control mechanisms.



Floyd                                               Section 1.  [Page 6]

INTERNET-DRAFT                TMRG, METRICS                    July 2007


    Subsequent documents are also planned on the methodologies in using
    these sets of scenarios.

    This document is a product of the Transport Modeling Research Group
    (TRMG), and has received detailed feedback from many members of the
    Research Group (RG).  As the document tries to make clear, there is
    not necessarily a consensus within the research community (or the
    IETF community, the vendor community, the operations community, or
    any other community) about the metrics that congestion control
    mechanisms should be designed to optimize, in terms of tradeoffs
    between throughput and delay, fairness between competing flows, and
    the like.  However, we believe that there is a clear consensus that
    congestion control mechanisms should be evaluated in terms of
    tradeoffs between a range of metrics, rather than in terms of
    optimizing for a single metric.

2.  Metrics

    The metrics that we discuss are the following:

    o  Throughput;

    o  Delay;

    o  Packet loss rates;

    o  Response to sudden changes or to transient events;

    o  Minimizing oscillations in throughput or in delay;

    o  Fairness and convergence times;

    o  Robustness for challenging environments;

    o  Robustness to failures and to misbehaving users;

    o  Deployability;

    o  Metrics for specific types of transport;

    o  User-based metrics.

    We consider each of these below.  Many of the metrics have network-
    based, flow-based, and user-based interpretations.  For example,
    network-based metrics can consider aggregate bandwidth and aggregate
    drop rates, flow-based metrics can consider end-to-end transfer
    times for file transfers or end-to-end delay and packet drop rates
    for interactive traffic, and user-based metrics can consider user



Floyd                                               Section 2.  [Page 7]

INTERNET-DRAFT                TMRG, METRICS                    July 2007


    wait time or user satisfaction with the multimedia experience.  Our
    main goal in this document is to explain the set of metrics that can
    be relevant, and not to legislate on the most appropriate
    methodology for using each general metric.

    For some of the metrics, such as fairness, there is not a clear
    agreement in the network community about the desired goals.  In
    these cases, the document attempts to present the range of
    approaches.

2.1.  Throughput, Delay, and Loss Rates

    Because of the clear tradeoffs between throughput, delay, and loss
    rates, it can be useful to consider these three metrics together.
    The tradeoffs are most clear in terms of queue management at the
    router; is the queue configured to maximize aggregate throughput, to
    minimize delay and loss rates, or some compromise between the two?
    An alternative would be to consider a separate metric such as power,
    defined in this context as throughput over delay, that combines
    throughput and delay.  However, we do not propose in this document a
    clear target in terms of the tradeoffs between throughput and delay;
    we are simply proposing that the evaluation of transport protocols
    include an exploration of the competing metrics.

    Using flow-based metrics instead of router-based metrics, the
    relationship between per-flow throughput, delay, and loss rates can
    often be given by the transport protocol itself.  For example, in
    TCP, the sending rate s in packets per second is given as

       s = 1.2/(RTT*sqrt(p)),

    for the round-trip time RTT and loss rate p [FF99].

2.1.1.  Throughput

    Throughput can be measured as a router-based metric of aggregate
    link utilization, as a flow-based metric of per-connection transfer
    times, and as user-based metrics of utility functions or user wait
    times.  It is a clear goal of most congestion control mechanisms to
    maximize throughput, subject to application demand and to the
    constraints of the other metrics.

    Throughput is sometimes distinguished from goodput, where throughput
    is the link utilization or flow rate in bytes per second, and
    goodput, also measured in bytes per second, is the subset of
    throughput consisting of useful traffic.  That is, `goodput'
    excludes duplicate packets, packets that will be dropped downstream,
    packet fragments or ATM cells that are dropped at the receiver



Floyd                                           Section 2.1.1.  [Page 8]

INTERNET-DRAFT                TMRG, METRICS                    July 2007


    because they can't be re-assembled into complete packets, and the
    like.

    We note that maximizing throughput is of concern in a wide range of
    environments, from highly-congested networks to under-utilized ones,
    and from long-lived flows to very short ones.  As an example,
    throughput has been used as one of the metrics for evaluating Quick-
    Start, a proposal to allow flows to start-up faster than slow-start,
    where throughput has been evaluated in terms of the transfer times
    for connections with a range of transfer sizes [RFC4782] [SAF06].

    In some contexts, it might be sufficient to consider the aggregate
    throughput or the mean per-flow throughput, while in other contexts
    it might be necessary to consider the distribution of per-flow
    throughput.  Some researchers evaluate transport protocols in terms
    of maximizing the aggregate user utility, where a user's utility is
    generally defined as a function of the user's throughput [KMT98].

    Individual applications can have application-specific needs in terms
    of throughput.  For example, real-time video traffic can have highly
    variable bandwidth demands;  VoIP traffic is sensitive to the amount
    of bandwidth received immediately after idle periods.  Thus, user
    metrics for throughput can be more complex than simply the per-
    connection transfer time.

2.1.2.  Delay

    Like throughput, delay can be measured as a router-based metric of
    queueing delay over time, or as a flow-based metric in terms of per-
    packet transfer times.  For reliable transfer, the per-packet
    transfer time seen by the application includes the possible delay of
    retransmitting a lost packet.

    Users of bulk data transfer applications might care about per-packet
    transfer times only in so far as they affect the per-connection
    transfer time.  On the other end of the spectrum, for users of
    streaming media, per-packet delay can be a significant concern.
    Note that in some cases the average delay might not capture the
    metric of interest to the users; for example, some users might care
    about the worst-case delay, or about the tail of the delay
    distribution.

2.1.3.  Packet Loss Rates

    Packet loss rates can be measured as a network-based or as a flow-
    based metric.

    When evaluating the effect of packet losses or ECN marks (Explicit



Floyd                                           Section 2.1.3.  [Page 9]

INTERNET-DRAFT                TMRG, METRICS                    July 2007


    Congestion Notification) [RFC3168] on the performance of a
    congestion control mechanism for an individual flow, researchers
    often use both the packet loss/mark rate for that connection, and
    the congestion event rate (also called the loss event rate), where a
    congestion event or loss event consists of one or more lost or
    marked packets in one round-trip time [RFC3448].

    Some users might care about the packet loss rate only in so far as
    it affects per-connection transfer times, while other users might
    care about packet loss rates directly.  RFC 3611, RTP Control
    Protocol Extended Reports, describes a VoIP performance-reporting
    standard called RTCP XR, which includes a set of burst metrics.  In
    RFC 3611, a burst is defined as the maximal sequence starting and
    ending with a lost packet, and not including a sequence of Gmin or
    more packets that are not lost [RFC3611].  The burst metrics in RFC
    3611 consist of the burst density (the fraction of packets in
    bursts), gap density (the fraction of packets in the gaps between
    bursts), burst duration (the mean duration of bursts in seconds),
    and gap duration (the mean duration of gaps in seconds).  RFC 3357
    derives metrics for "loss distance" and "loss period", along with
    statistics that capture loss patterns experienced by packet streams
    on the Internet [RFC3357].

    In some cases it is useful to distinguish between packets dropped at
    routers due to congestion, and packets lost in the network due to
    corruption.

    One network-related reason to avoid high steady-state packet loss
    rates is to avoid congestion collapse in environments containing
    paths with multiple congested links.  In such environments, high
    packet loss rates could result in congested links wasting scarce
    bandwidth by carrying packets that will only be dropped downstream,
    before being delivered to the receiver [RFC2914].  We also note that
    in some cases the retransmit rate can be high, and the goodput
    correspondingly low, even with a low packet drop rate [AEO03].

2.2.  Response Times and Minimizing Oscillations

    In this section we consider response times and oscillations
    together, as there are well-known tradeoffs between improving
    response times and minimizing oscillations.  In addition, the
    scenarios that illustrate the dangers of poor response times are
    often quite different from the scenarios that illustrate the dangers
    of unnecessary oscillations.







Floyd                                            Section 2.2.  [Page 10]

INTERNET-DRAFT                TMRG, METRICS                    July 2007


2.2.1.  Response to Changes

    One of the key concerns in the design of congestion control
    mechanisms has been the response times to sudden congestion in the
    network.  On the one hand, congestion control mechanisms should
    respond reasonably promptly to sudden congestion from routing or
    bandwidth changes, or from a burst of competing traffic.  At the
    same time, congestion control mechanisms should not respond too
    severely to transient changes, e.g., to a sudden increase in delay
    that will dissipate in less than the connection's round-trip time.

    Congestion control mechanisms also have to contend with sudden
    changes in the bandwidth-delay product due to mobility.  Such
    bandwith-delay product changes are expected to become more frequent
    and to have greater impact than path changes today.  As a result of
    both mobility and of the heterogeneity of wireless access types
    (802.11b,a,g, WIMAX, WCDMA, HS-WCDMA, E-GPRS, Bluetooth, etc.), both
    the bandwidth and the round-trip delay can change suddenly,
    sometimes by several orders of magnitude.

    Evaluating the response to sudden or transient changes can be of
    particular concern for slowly-responding congestion control
    mechanisms such as equation-based congestion control [RFC3448], and
    for AIMD (Additive Increase Multiplicative Decrease) or related
    mechanisms using parameters that make them more slowly-responding
    that TCP [BB01] [BBFS01].

    In addition to the responsiveness and smoothness of aggregate
    traffic, one can consider the tradeoffs between responsiveness,
    smoothness, and aggressiveness for an individual connection [FHP00]
    [YKL01].  In this case smoothness can be defined by the largest
    reduction in the sending rate in one round-trip time, in a
    deterministic environment with a packet drop exactly every 1/p
    packets.  The responsiveness is defined as the number of round-trip
    times of sustained congestion required for the sender to halve the
    sending rate, and the aggressiveness is defined as the maximum
    increase in the sending rate in one round-trip time, in packets per
    second, in the absence of congestion.  This aggressiveness can be a
    function of the mode of the transport protocol; for TCP, the
    aggressiveness of slow-start is quite different from the
    aggressiveness of congestion avoidance mode.


2.2.2.  Minimizing Oscillations

    One goal is that of stability, in terms of minimizing oscillations
    of queueing delay or of throughput.  In practice, stability is
    frequently associated with rate fluctuations or variance.  Rate



Floyd                                          Section 2.2.2.  [Page 11]

INTERNET-DRAFT                TMRG, METRICS                    July 2007


    variations can result in fluctuations in router queue size and
    therefore of queue overflows.  These queue overflows can cause loss
    synchronizations across co-existing flows and periodic under-
    utilization of link capacity, both of which are considered to be
    general signs of network instability. Thus, measuring the rate
    variations of flows is often used to measure the stability of
    transport protocols.  To measure rate variations, [JWL04], [RX05],
    and [FHPW00] use the coefficient of variation (CoV) of per-flow
    transmission rates and [WCL05] suggests the use of standard
    deviations of per-flow rates.  Since rate variations are a function
    of time scales, it makes sense to measure these rate variations over
    various time scales.

    Measuring per-flow rate variations, however, is only one aspect of
    transport protocol stability.  A realistic experiment setting always
    involves multiple flows of the transport protocol being observed,
    along with a significant amount of cross traffic, with rates varying
    over time, on both the forward and reverse paths. As a congestion
    control protocol must adapt its rate to the varying rates of
    competing traffic, just measuring the per-flow statistics of a
    subset of the traffic could be misleading because it measures the
    rate fluctuations due in part to the adaptation to competing traffic
    on the path.  Thus, per-flow statistics are most meaningful if they
    are accompanied by the statistics measured at the network level.  As
    a complementary metric to the per-flow statistics, [HKLRX06] uses
    measurements of the rate variations of the aggregate flows observed
    in bottleneck routers over various time scales.

    Minimizing oscillations in queueing delay or throughput has related
    per-flow metrics of minimizing jitter in round-trip times and loss
    rates.

    An orthogonal goal for some congestion control mechanisms, e.g., for
    equation-based congestion control, is to minimize the oscillations
    in the sending rate for an individual connection, given an
    environment with a fixed, steady-state packet drop rate.  (As is
    well known, TCP congestion control is characterized by a pronounced
    oscillation in the sending rate, with the sender halving the sending
    rate in response to congestion.)  One metric for the level of
    oscillations is the smoothness metric given in Section 2.2.1 above.

    As discussed in [FK07], the synchronization of loss events can also
    affect convergence times, throughput, and delay.








Floyd                                          Section 2.2.2.  [Page 12]

INTERNET-DRAFT                TMRG, METRICS                    July 2007


2.3.  Fairness and Convergence

    Another set of metrics is that of fairness and convergence times.
    Fairness can be considered between flows of the same protocol, and
    between flows using different protocols (e.g., TCP-friendliness,
    referring to fairness between TCP and a new transport protocol).
    Fairness can also be considered between sessions, between users, or
    between other entities.

    There are a number of different fairness measures.  These include
    max-min fairness [HG86], proportional fairness [KMT98] [K01], the
    fairness index proposed in [JCH84], and the product measure, a
    variant of network power [BJ81].


2.3.1.  Metrics for fairness between flows

    This section discusses fairness metrics that consider the fairness
    between flows, but that don't take into account different
    characteristics of flows (e.g., the number of links in the path, or
    the round-trip time).

    Jain's fairness index: The fairness index in [JCH84] is

       (( sum_i x_i )^2) / (n * sum_i ( (x_i)^2 )),

    where there are n users.  This fairness index ranges from 0 to 1,
    and is maximum when all users receive the same allocation.  This
    index is k/n when k users equally share the resource, and the other
    n-k users receive zero allocation.

    The product measure: The product measure

       product_i x_i ,

    the product of the throughput of the individual connections, is also
    used as a measure of fairness.  For our purposes, let x_i be the
    throughput for the i-th connection.  (In other contexts x_i is taken
    as the power of the i-th connection, and the product measure is
    referred to as network power.)  The product measure is particularly
    sensitive to segregation; the product measure is zero if any
    connection receives zero throughput.  In [MS91] it is shown that for
    a network with many connections and one shared gateway, the product
    measure is maximized when all connections receive the same
    throughput.

    Epsilon-fairness: A rate allocation is defined as epsilon-fair if




Floyd                                          Section 2.3.1.  [Page 13]

INTERNET-DRAFT                TMRG, METRICS                    July 2007


       (min_i x_i) / (max_i x_i) >= 1 - epsilon.

    where x_i is the resource allocation to the i-th flow or user.
    Epsilon-fairness measures the worst-case ratio between any two
    throughput rates [ZKL04].  Epsilon-fairness is related to max-min
    fairness, defined later in this document.


2.3.2.  Metrics for fairness between flows with different resource
requirements

    This section discusses metrics for fairness between flows with
    different resource requirements, that is, with different utility
    functions, round-trip times, or numbers of links on the path.  Many
    of these metrics can be described as solutions to utility
    maximization problems [K01]; the total utility quantifies both the
    fairness and the throughput.

    Max-min fairness: In order to satisfy the max-min fairness criteria,
    the smallest throughput rate must be as large as possible. Given
    this condition, the next-smallest throughput rate must be as large
    as possible, and so on.  Thus, the max-min fairness gives absolute
    priority to the smallest flows.  (Max-min fairness can be explained
    by the progressive filling algorithm, where all flow rates start at
    zero, and the rates all grow at the same pace.  Each flow rate stops
    growing only when one or more links on the path reaches link
    capacity.)

    Proportional fairness: In contrast, a feasible allocation x is
    defined as proportionally fair if for any other feasible allocation
    x*, the aggregate of proportional changes is zero or negative:

       sum_i ( (x*_i - x_i)/x_i ) <= 0.

    "This criterion favours smaller flows, but less emphatically than
    max-min fairness" [K01].  (Using the language of utility functions,
    proportional fairness can be achieved by using logarithmic utility
    functions, and maximizing the sum of the per-flow utility functions;
    see [F98] for a fuller explanation.)

    Minimum potential delay fairness: Minimum potential delay fairness
    has been shown to model TCP [KS03], and is a compromise between max-
    min fairness and proportional fairness.  An allocation x is defined
    as having minimum potential delay fairness if

       sum_i (1/x_i)

    is smaller than for any other feasible allocation.  That is, it



Floyd                                          Section 2.3.2.  [Page 14]

INTERNET-DRAFT                TMRG, METRICS                    July 2007


    would minimize the average download time if each flow was an equal-
    sized file.

    In [CRM05], Colussi et al. propose a new definition of TCP fairness,
    that "a set of TCP fair flows do not cause more congestion than a
    set of TCP flows would cause", where congestion is defined in terms
    of queueing delay, queueing delay variation, the congestion event
    rate [e.g., loss event rate], and the packet loss rate.

    Chiu and Tan in [CT06] argue for redefining the notion of fairness
    when studying traffic controls for inelastic traffic, proposing that
    inelastic flows adopt other traffic controls such as admission
    control.

    Briscoe in [B07] argues that flow-rate fairness should not be a
    desired goal, and that instead "a realistic fairness mechanism must
    share out the `cost' of each users actions on others".


2.3.3.  Comments on fairness

    Tradeoffs between fairness and throughput: The fairness measures in
    the section above generally measure both fairness and throughput,
    giving different weights to each.  Potential tradeoffs between
    fairness and throughput are also discussed by Tang et al. in
    [TWL06], for a framework where max-min fairness is defined as the
    most fair.  In particular, [TWL06] shows that in some topologies
    throughput is proportional to fairness, while in other topologies
    throughput is inversely proportional to fairness.

    Fairness and the number of congested links: Some of these fairness
    metrics are discussed in more detail in [F91].  We note that there
    is not a clear consensus for the fairness goals, in particular for
    fairness between flows that traverse different numbers of congested
    links [F91].  Utility maximization provides one framework for
    describing this tradeoff in fairness.

    Fairness and round-trip times: One goal cited in a number of new
    transport protocols has been that of fairness between flows with
    different round-trip times [KHR02] [XHR04]. We note that there is
    not a consensus in the networking community about the desirability
    of this goal, or about the implications and interactions between
    this goal and other metrics [FJ92] (Section 3.3).  One common
    argument against the goal of fairness between flows with different
    round-trip times has been that flows with long round-trip times
    consume more resources; this aspect is covered by the previous
    paragraph.  Researchers have also noted the difference between the
    RTT-unfairness of standard TCP, and the greater RTT-unfairness of



Floyd                                          Section 2.3.3.  [Page 15]

INTERNET-DRAFT                TMRG, METRICS                    July 2007


    some proposed modifications to TCP [LLS05].

    Fairness and packet size: One fairness issue is that of the relative
    fairness for flows with different packet sizes.  Many file transfer
    applications will use the maximum packet size possible;  in
    contrast, low-bandwidth VoIP flows are likely to send small packets,
    sending a new packet every 10 to 40 ms., to limit delay.  Should a
    small-packet VoIP connection receive the same sending rate in
    *bytes* per second as a large-packet TCP connection in the same
    environment, or should it receive the same sending rate in *packets*
    per second?  This fairness issue has been discussed in more detail
    in [RFC3714], with [RFC4828] also describing the ways that packet
    size can effect the packet drop rate experienced by a flow.

    Convergence times: Convergence times concern the time for
    convergence to fairness between an existing flow and a newly-
    starting one, and are a special concern for environments with high-
    bandwidth long-delay flows.  Convergence times also concern the time
    for convergence to fairness after a sudden change such as a change
    in the network path, the competing cross-traffic, or the
    characteristics of a wireless link.  As with fairness, convergence
    times can matter both between flows of the same protocol, and
    between flows using different protocols [SLFK03].   One metric used
    for convergence times is the delta-fair convergence time, defined as
    the time taken for two flows with the same round-trip time to go
    from shares of 100/101-th and 1/101-th of the link bandwidth, to
    having close to fair sharing with shares of (1+delta)/2 and
    (1-delta)/2 of the link bandwidth [BBFS01].  A similar metric for
    convergence times measures the convergence time as the number of
    round-trip times for two flows to reach epsilon-fairness, when
    starting from a maximally-unfair state [ZKL04].


2.4.  Robustness for Challenging Environments

    While congestion control mechanisms are generally evaluated first
    over environments with static routing in a network of two-way point-
    to-point links, some environments bring up more challenging problems
    (e.g., corrupted packets, reordering, variable bandwidth, mobility)
    as well as new metrics to be considered (e.g., energy consumption).

    Robustness for challenging environments: Robustness needs to be
    explored for paths with reordering, corruption, variable bandwidth,
    asymmetric routing, router configuration changes, mobility, and the
    like [GF04].  In general, the Internet architecture has valued
    robustness over efficiency, e.g., when there are tradeoffs between
    robustness and the throughput, delay, and fairness metrics described
    above.



Floyd                                            Section 2.4.  [Page 16]

INTERNET-DRAFT                TMRG, METRICS                    July 2007


    Energy consumption: In mobile environments the energy consumption
    for the mobile end-node can be a key metric that is affected by the
    transport protocol [TM02].

    Goodput: For wireless networks, goodput can be a useful metric,
    where goodput can be defined as the useful data delivered to users
    as a fraction of the amount of data transmitted on the network.
    High goodput indicates an efficient use of the radio spectrum and
    lower interference with other users.


2.5.  Robustness to Failures and to Misbehaving Users

    One goal is for congestion control mechanisms to be robust to
    misbehaving users, such as receivers that `lie' to data senders
    about the congestion experienced along the path or otherwise attempt
    to bypass the congestion control mechanisms of the sender [SCWA99].
    Another goal is for congestion control mechanisms to be as robust as
    possible to failures, such as failures of routers in using explicit
    feedback to end-nodes or failures of end-nodes to follow the
    prescribed protocols.

2.6.  Deployability

    One metric for congestion control mechanisms is their deployability
    in the current Internet.  Metrics related to deployability include
    the ease of failure diagnosis, and the overhead in terms of packet
    header size or added complexity at end-nodes or routers.

    One key aspect of deployability concerns the range of deployment
    needed for a new congestion control mechanism.  Consider the
    following possible deployment requirements:

    * Only at the sender (e.g., NewReno in TCP [RFC3782]);
    * Only at the receiver (e.g., delayed acknowledgements in TCP);
    * Both the sender and receiver (e.g., SACK TCP [RFC2018]);
    * At a single router (e.g., RED [FJ93]);
    * All of the routers along the end-to-end path;
    * Both end nodes and all routers along the path (e.g., XCP [KHR02]).


    Another deployability issue concerns the complexity of the code.
    How complex is the code required to implement the mechanism in
    software?  Is floating point math required?  How much new state must
    be kept to implement the new mechanism, and who holds that state,
    the routers or the end-nodes?  We note that we don't suggest these
    questions as ways to reduce the deployability metric to a single
    number; we suggest them as issues that could be considered in



Floyd                                            Section 2.6.  [Page 17]

INTERNET-DRAFT                TMRG, METRICS                    July 2007


    evaluating the deployability of a proposed congestion control
    mechanism.

2.7.  Metrics for Specific Types of Transport

    In some cases modified metrics are needed for evaluating transport
    protocols intended for QoS-enabled environments or for below-best-
    effort traffic [VKD02] [KK03].

2.8.  User-Based Metrics

    An alternate approach that has been proposed for the evaluation of
    congestion control mechanisms would be to evaluate in terms of user
    metrics such as user satisfaction, or in terms of application-
    specific utility functions.  Such an approach would require the
    definition of a range of user metrics or of application-specific
    utility functions for the range of applications under consideration
    (e.g., FTP, HTTP, VoIP).

3.  Metrics in the IP Performance Metrics (IPPM) Working Group

    The IPPM Working Group [IPPM] was established to define performance
    metrics to be used by network operators, end users, or independent
    testing groups.  The metrics include metrics for connectivity
    [RFC2678], delay and loss [RFC2679] [RFC2680] [RFC2681], delay
    variation [RFC3393], loss patterns [RFC3357], packet reordering
    [RFC4737], bulk transfer capacity [RFC3148], and link capacity
    [CI07].  The IPPM documents give concrete, well-defined metrics,
    along with a methodology for measuring the metric.  The metrics
    discussed in this document have a different purpose from the IPPM
    metrics; in this document we are discussing metrics as used in
    analysis, simulations, and experiments for the evaluation of
    congestion control mechanisms.  Further, we are discussing these
    metrics in a general sense, rather than looking for specific
    concrete definitions for each metric.  However, there are many cases
    where the metric definitions from IPPM could be useful, for specific
    issues of how to measure these metrics in simulations or in
    testbeds, and for providing common definitions for talking about
    these metrics.

4.  Comments on Methodology

    The types of scenarios that are used to test specific metrics, and
    the range of parameters that it is useful to consider, will be
    discussed in separate documents, e.g., along with specific scenarios
    for use in evaluating congestion control mechanisms.





Floyd                                              Section 4.  [Page 18]

INTERNET-DRAFT                TMRG, METRICS                    July 2007


    We note that it can be important to evaluate metrics over a wide
    range of environments, with a range of link bandwidths, congestion
    levels, and levels of statistical multiplexing.  It is also
    important to evaluate congestion control mechanisms in a range of
    scenarios, including typical ranges of connection sizes and round-
    trip times [FK02]. It is also useful to compare metrics for new or
    modified transport protocols with those of the current standards for
    TCP.

    As an example from the literature on evaluating transport protocols,
    Li et al. in "Experimental Evaluation of TCP Protocols for High-
    Speed Networks" [LLS05] focus on the performance of TCP in high-
    speed networks, and consider metrics for aggregate throughput, loss
    rates, fairness (including fairness between flows with different
    round-trip times), response times (including convergence times), and
    incremental deployment.  More general references on methodology
    include [J91]. Papers that discuss the range of metrics for
    evaluating congestion control include [MTZ04].

5.  Security Considerations

    There are no security considerations in this document.

6.  IANA Considerations

    There are no IANA considerations in this document.

7.  Acknowledgements

    Thanks to Lachlan Andrew, Mark Allman, Armando Caro, Dah Ming Chiu,
    Eric Coe, Dado Colussi, Wesley Eddy, Nelson Fonseca, Janardhan
    Iyengar, Doug Leith, Tony Li, Saverio Mascolo, Sean Moore, Injong
    Rhee, David Ros, Andras Veres, Michael Welzl, and Damon Wischik, and
    members of the Transport Modeling Research Group for feedback and
    contributions.

Informative References

    [AEO03] M. Allman, W. Eddy, and S. Ostermann, Estimating Loss Rates
        With TCP, ACM Performance Evaluation Review, 31(3), December
        2003.

    [BB01] D. Bansal and H. Balakrishnan, Binomial Congestion Control
        Algorithms, IEEE Infocom, April 2001.

    [BBFS01] D. Bansal, H. Balakrishnan, S. Floyd, and S. Shenker,
        Dynamic Behavior of Slowly-Responsive Congestion Control
        Algorithms, SIGCOMM 2001.



Floyd                                                          [Page 19]

INTERNET-DRAFT                TMRG, METRICS                    July 2007


    [BJ81] K. Bharath-Kumar and J. Jeffrey, A New Approach to
        Performance-Oriented Flow Control, IEEE Transactions on
        Communications, Vol.29 N.4, April 1981.

    [B07] B. Briscoe, Flow Rate Fairness: Dismantling a Religion,
        internet-draft draft-briscoe-tsvarea-fair-02.txt, work-in-
        progress, July 2007.

    [CI07] P. Chimento and J. Ishac, Defining Network Capacity,
        internet-draft draft-ietf-ippm-bw-capacity-05, work-in-progress,
        May 2007.

    [CRM05] D. Colussi, A New Approach to TCP-Fairness, Report
        C-2005-49, University of Helsinki, Finland, 2005.

    [CT06] D. Chiu and A. Tam, Redefining Fairness in the Study of TCP-
        friendly Traffic Controls, Technical Report, 2006.

    [F91] S. Floyd, Connections with Multiple Congested Gateways in
        Packet-Switched Networks Part 1: One-way Traffic, Computer
        Communication Review, Vol.21 No.5, October 1991, p. 30-47.

    [F98] F. Kelly, A. Maulloo, and D. Tan, Rate Control in
        Communication Networks: Shadow Prices, Proportional Fairness and
        Stability, Journal of the Operational Research Society 49
        (1998), 237-252.

    [FF99] Floyd, S., and Fall, K., "Promoting the Use of End-to-End
        Congestion Control in the Internet", IEEE/ACM Transactions on
        Networking, August 1999.

    [FHP00] S. Floyd, M. Handley, and J. Padhye, A Comparison of
        Equation-Based and AIMD Congestion Control, May 2000.   URL
        "http://www.icir.org/tfrc/".

    [FHPW00] S. Floyd, M. Handley, J. Padhye, and J. Widmer, Equation-
        Based Congestion Control for Unicast Applications, SIGCOMM 2000,
        August 2000.

    [FJ92] S. Floyd and V. Jacobson, On Traffic Phase Effects in Packet-
        Switched Gateways, Internetworking: Research and Experience, V.3
        N.3, September 1992, p.115-156.

    [FJ93] S. Floyd and V. Jacobson, Random Early Detection gateways for
        Congestion Avoidance, IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking, V.1
        N.4, August 1993,





Floyd                                                          [Page 20]

INTERNET-DRAFT                TMRG, METRICS                    July 2007


    [FK02] S. Floyd and E. Kohler, Internet Research Needs Better
        Models, Hotnets-I. October 2002.

    [FK07] S. Floyd and E. Kohler, Tools for the Evaluation of
        Simulation and Testbed Scenarios, internet-draft draft-irtf-
        tmrg-tools-04.txt, July 2007.

    [GF04] A. Gurtov and S. Floyd, Modeling Wireless Links for Transport
        Protocols, ACM CCR, 34(2):85-96, April 2004.

    [HKLRX06] S. Ha, Y. Kim, L. Le, I. Rhee, and L. Xu, A Step Toward
        Realistic Evaluation of High-speed TCP Protocols, technical
        report, North Carolina State University, January 2006.

    [HG86] E. Hahne and R. Gallager, Round Robin Scheduling for Fair
        Flow Control in Data Communications Networks, IEEE International
        Conference on Communications, June 1986.

    [IPPM] IP Performance Metrics (IPPM) Working Group, URL
        "http://www.ietf.org/html.charters/ippm-charter.html".

    [J91] R. Jain, The Art of Computer Systems Performance Analysis:
        Techniques for Experimental Design, Measurement, Simulation, and
        Modeling, John Wiley & Sons, 1991.

    [JCH84] R. Jain, D.M. Chiu, and W. Hawe, A Quantitative Measure of
        Fairness and Discrimination for Resource Allocation in Shared
        Systems, DEC TR-301, Littleton, MA: Digital Equipment
        Corporation, 1984.

    [JWL04] C. Jin, D. Wei, and S. Low, FAST TCP: Motivation,
        Architecture, Algorithms, Performance, IEEE INFOCOM, March 2004.

    [K01] F. Kelly, Mathematical Modelling of the Internet, "Mathematics
        Unlimited - 2001 and Beyond" (Editors B. Engquist and W.
        Schmid), Springer-Verlag, Berlin, pp. 685-702, 2001.

    [KHR02] D. Katabi, M. Handley, and C. Rohrs, Congestion Control for
        High Bandwidth-Delay Product Networks, ACM Sigcomm, 2002.

    [KK03] A. Kuzmanovic and E. W. Knightly, TCP-LP: A Distributed
        Algorithm for Low Priority Data Transfer, IEEE INFOCOM 2003,
        April 2003.

    [KMT98] F. Kelly, A. Maulloo and D. Tan, Rate Control in
        Communication Networks: Shadow Prices, Proportional Fairness and
        Stability.  Journal of the Operational Research Society 49, pp.
        237-252, 1998.



Floyd                                                          [Page 21]

INTERNET-DRAFT                TMRG, METRICS                    July 2007


    [KS03] S. Kunniyur and R. Srikant, End-to-end Congestion Control
        Schemes: Utility Functions, Random Losses and ECN Marks,
        IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking, 11(5):689-702, October
        2003.

    [LLS05] Y-T. Li, D. Leith, and R. Shorten, Experimental Evaluation
        of TCP Protocols for High-Speed Networks, Hamilton Institute,
        2005.  URL "http://www.hamilton.ie/net/eval/results-HI2005.pdf".

    [MS91] D. Mitra and J. Seery, Dynamic Adaptive Windows for High
        Speed Data Networks with Multiple Paths and Propagation Delays,
        INFOCOM '91, pp 39-48.

    [MTZ04] L. Mamatas, V. Tsaoussidis, and C. Zhang, Approaches to
        Congestion Control in Packet Networks, 2004.

    [RFC2018] TCP Selective Acknowledgement Options.  M. Mathis, J.
        Mahdavi, D. Floyd, and A. Romanow.  RFC 2018, Proposed Standard,
        April 1996.

    [RFC2680] Almes, G., Kalidindi, S., and M. Zekauskas, "A One-way
        Packet Loss Metric for IPPM", RFC 2680, September 1999.

    [RFC2678] Mahdavi, J. and V. Paxson, "IPPM Metrics for Measuring
        Connectivity", RFC 2678, September 1999.

    [RFC2679] Almes, G.,  Kalidindi, S.  and M. Zekauskas, "A One-way
        Delay Metric for IPPM", RFC 2679, September 1999.

    [RFC2681] Almes, G., Kalidindi, S., Zekauskas, M., "A Round-Trip
        Delay Metric for IPPM". RFC 2681, STD 1, September 1999.

    [RFC2914] S. Floyd, Congestion Control Principles, RFC 2914,
        September 2000.

    [RFC3148] Mathis, M. and M. Allman, "A Framework for Defining
        Empirical Bulk Transfer Capacity Metrics", RFC 3148, July 2001.

    [RFC3168] K.K. Ramakrishnan, S. Floyd, and D. Black, The Addition of
        Explicit Congestion Notification (ECN) to IP, RFC 3168,
        September 2001.

    [RFC3357] R. Koodli and R. Ravikanth, One-way Loss Pattern Sample
        Metrics, RFC 3357, Informational, August 2002.

    [RFC3393] Demichelis, C. and P. Chimento, "IP Packet Delay Variation
        Metric for IP Performance Metrics (IPPM)", RFC 3393, November
        2002.



Floyd                                                          [Page 22]

INTERNET-DRAFT                TMRG, METRICS                    July 2007


    [RFC3448] M. Handley, S. Floyd, J. Padhye, and J. Widmer, TCP
        Friendly Rate Control (TFRC): Protocol Specification, RFC 3448,
        Proposed Standard, January 2003.

    [RFC3611] T. Friedman, R. Caceres, and A. Clark, RTP Control
        Protocol Extended Reports (RTCP XR), RFC 3611, November 2003.

    [RFC3714] S. Floyd and J. Kempf, IAB Concerns Regarding Congestion
        Control for Voice Traffic in the Internet, RFC 3714, March 2004.

    [RFC3782] S. Floyd, T. Henderson, and A. Gurtov, The NewReno
        Modification to TCP's Fast Recovery Algorithm, RFC 3782,
        Proposed Standard, April 2004.

    [RFC4737] A. Morton, L. Ciavattone, G. Ramachandran, S. Shalunov, J.
        Perser, Packet Reordering Metrics, RFC 4737, November 2006.

    [RFC4782] S. Floyd, M. Allman, A. Jain, and P. Sarolahti, Quick-
        Start for TCP and IP, RFC 4782, Experimental, January 2007.

    [RFC4828] S. Floyd and E. Kohler, TCP Friendly Rate Control (TFRC):
        the Small-Packet (SP) Variant, RFC 4828, April 2007.

    [RX05] I. Rhee and L. Xu, CUBIC: A New TCP-Friendly High-Speed TCP
        Variant, PFLDnet 2005.

    [SAF06] P. Sarolahti, M. Allman, and S. Floyd, Determining an
        Appropriate Sending Rate Over an Underutilized Network Path,
        Computer Networks, September 2006.

    [SLFK03] R.N. Shorten, D.J. Leith, J. Foy, and R. Kilduff, Analysis
        and Design of Congestion Control in Synchronised Communication
        Networks. Proc. 12th Yale Workshop on Adaptive & Learning
        Systems, May 2003.

    [SCWA99] S. Savage, N. Cardwell, D. Wetherall, and T. Anderson, TCP
        Congestion Control with a Misbehaving Receiver, ACM Computer
        Communications Review, October 1999.

    [TM02] V. Tsaoussidis and I. Matta, Open Issues of TCP for Mobile
        Computing, Journal of Wireless Communications and Mobile
        Computing: Special Issue on Reliable Transport Protocols for
        Mobile Computing, February 2002.

    [TWL06] A. Tang, J. Wang and S. H. Low.  Counter-Intuitive
        Throughput Behaviors in Networks Under End-to-End Control,
        IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking, 14(2):355-368, April 2006.




Floyd                                                          [Page 23]

INTERNET-DRAFT                TMRG, METRICS                    July 2007


    [WCL05] D. X. Wei, P. Cao and S. H. Low, Time for a TCP Benchmark
        Suite?, Technical Report, Caltech CS, Stanford EAS, Caltech,
        2005.

    [VKD02] A. Venkataramani, R. Kokku, and M. Dahlin, TCP Nice: A
        Mechanism for Background Transfers, Fifth USENIX Symposium on
        Operating System Design and Implementation (OSDI), 2002.

    [XHR04] L. Xu, K. Harfoush, and I. Rhee, Binary Increase Congestion
        Control for Fast, Long Distance Networks, Infocom 2004.

    [YKL01] Y. Yang, M. Kim, and S. Lam, Transient Behaviors of TCP-
        friendly Congestion Control Protocols, Infocom 2001.

    [ZKL04] Y. Zhang, S.-R. Kang, and D. Loguinov, Delayed Stability and
        Performance of Distributed Congestion Control, ACM SIGCOMM,
        August 2004.

Authors' Addresses

    Sally Floyd <floyd at icir.org>
    ICSI Center for Internet Research
    1947 Center Street, Suite 600
    Berkeley, CA 94704
    USA


Full Copyright Statement

    Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

    This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
    contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
    retain all their rights.

    This document and the information contained herein are provided on
    an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE
    REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE
    IETF TRUST AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL
    WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY
    WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE
    ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS
    FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Intellectual Property

    The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
    Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed



Floyd                                                          [Page 24]

INTERNET-DRAFT                TMRG, METRICS                    July 2007


    to pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described
    in this document or the extent to which any license under such
    rights might or might not be available; nor does it represent that
    it has made any independent effort to identify any such rights.
    Information on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC
    documents can be found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

    Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
    assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
    attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use
    of such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
    specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository
    at http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

    The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
    copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
    rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
    this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at ietf-
    ipr@ietf.org.
































Floyd                                                          [Page 25]
