CCAMP Working Group                                         J.L. Le Roux 
                                                          France Telecom 
Internet Draft                                               D. Brungard 
                                                                    AT&T 
                                                                  E. Oki 
                                                                     NTT 
                                                        D. Papadimitriou 
                                                                 Alcatel 
                                                             K. Shiomoto 
                                                                     NTT 
                                                            M. Vigoureux 
                                                                 Alcatel 
Category: Informational                                                  
Expires: July 2005                                         February 2005 
 
 
   Evaluation of existing GMPLS Protocols against Multi Region Networks 
 
               draft-leroux-ccamp-gmpls-mrn-eval-00.txt 
 
 
Status of this Memo 
 
   By submitting this Internet-Draft, I certify that any applicable 
   patent or other IPR claims of which I am aware have been disclosed, 
   and any of which I become aware will be disclosed, in accordance with 
   RFC 3668. 
 
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026. Internet-Drafts are working 
   documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas, 
   and its working groups. Note that other groups may also distribute 
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt. 
    
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Le Roux et al.                                                  [Page 1] 
  
Internet Draft  draft-leroux-ccamp-gmpls-mrn-eval-00.txt   February 2005 


    
Abstract 
    
   This document provides an evaluation of Generalized Multi-Protocol 
   Label Switching (GMPLS) protocols and mechanisms against the 
   requirements for Multi Region Networks (MRN).   
   In addition, this document identifies areas where additional 
   protocol extensions or procedures are needed to satisfy the 
   requirements of Multi Region Networks, and provides guidelines for 
   potential extensions. 
 
Conventions used in this document 
 
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119. 
 
Table of Contents 
    
   1.      Introduction................................................3 
   2.      MRN Requirements overview...................................3 
   3.      Analysis....................................................4 
   3.1.    Support for Virtual Network Topology Reconfiguration........4 
   3.1.1.  Control of Forwarding Adjacencies (FA) setup/release........4 
   3.1.2.  Virtual FAs.................................................5 
   3.1.3.  Traffic Disruption minimization during FA release...........6 
   3.1.4.  Path computation stability..................................6 
   3.2.    Support for FA LSP attributes inheritance...................7 
   3.3.    Support for Triggered signaling.............................7 
   3.4.    Support for Multi-region signaling..........................7 
   3.5.    FA connectivity verification................................8 
   3.6.    Advertisement of Internal Adaptation Capabilities...........8 
   4.      Evaluation Conclusion.......................................9 
   5.      Intellectual Property Statement.............................9 
   5.1.    IPR Disclosure Acknowledgement.............................10 
   6.      Acknowledgment.............................................10 
   7.      References.................................................10 
   8.      Authors' Addresses:........................................11 
    
 
    
    
    
    
    
 
 
 
 
 


 
Le Roux, et al.                                               [Page 2] 
  
Internet Draft  draft-leroux-ccamp-gmpls-mrn-eval-00.txt   February 2005 


1. Introduction 
 
   Generalized Multi-Protocol Label Switching (GMPLS) extends MPLS to 
   handle multiple switching technologies: packet switching, layer-two 
   switching, TDM switching, wavelength switching and fiber switching 
   (see [GMPLS-ARCH]). 
    
   A Multi Region Network (MRN) is defined as a network consisting of 
   elements based on different switching technologies controlled by a 
   unified GMPLS control plane (see [MRN-REQ]). 
   [MRN-REQ] defines a framework for GMPLS-based multi region networks 
   and lists a set of functional requirements. 
 
   The objectives of this document are to evaluate existing GMPLS 
   protocols ([GMPLS-RTG], [GMPLS-SIG]) and mechanisms against the 
   requirements for MRN [MRN-REQ], and to identify several areas where 
   additional protocol extensions and modifications are required to meet 
   these requirements.  
    
   Section 2 provides an overview of MRN requirements. 
   Section 3 evaluates for each of these requirements, if current GMPLS 
   protocols and mechanisms allow addressing the requirements. When the 
   requirements are not met, the document identifies if the required 
   mechanisms could rely on GMPLS protocols and procedure extensions or 
   rather rely on other means.  
 
 
2. MRN Requirements overview 
 
   [MRN-REQ] lists a set of functional requirements for Multi Region 
   Networks (MRN). These requirements are summarized below: 
    
        -Support of robust Virtual Network Topology reconfiguration.     
         This implies: 
                -Optimal control of Forwarding Adjacencies (FA) setup   
                 and release; 
                -Support for virtual FAs; 
                -Traffic Disruption minimization during FA release (e.g.    
                 network reconfiguration events); 
                -Path computation stability 
    
        -Support for FA LSP attributes inheritance; 
    
        -Support for Triggered Signaling; 
         
        -Support for Multi-region signaling; 
 
        -FA data plane connectivity verification; 
    
        -Advertisement of the adaptation capabilities and resources; 
    
 
 
Le Roux, et al.                                               [Page 3] 
  
Internet Draft  draft-leroux-ccamp-gmpls-mrn-eval-00.txt   February 2005 


 
 
3. Analysis 
    
3.1. Support for Virtual Network Topology Reconfiguration 
 
   A set of lower-region FAs provides a Virtual Network Topology (VNT) 
   to the upper-region. 
    
   By reconfiguring the virtual network topology (FA-LSP setup/release) 
   according to traffic demands between source and destination node 
   pairs of a region, network performance factors such as maximum link 
   utilization and residual capacity of the network can be optimized.  
    
   Such optimal VNT reconfiguration implies several mechanisms that are 
   analyzed in the following sections. 
          
3.1.1. Control of Forwarding Adjacencies (FA) setup/release 
         
   In a multi-region network, FAs in a region are created, modified, 
   released periodically according to the change of traffic demands of 
   the upper region. 
    
   This implies a TE mechanism that takes into account the demands 
   matrix, and potentially the current VNT in order to compute a new 
   VNT.  
    
   Several building blocks are required to support such TE mechanism: 
        -Discovery of TE topology and available resources; 
        -Collection of traffic demands of the upper region; 
        -VNT engine, ensuring VNT computation and reconfiguration    
         according to upper region traffic demands and TE topology (and  
         potentially old VNT); 
        -FA setup/release; 
    
   GMPLS routing protocols support TE topology discovery and  
   GMPLS signaling protocols allow setting up/releasing FAs. 
    
   The VNT engine responsible for VNT computation and reconfiguration is 
   out of the scope of GMPLS protocols. It may be achieved directly on 
   region border LSRs, or by use of one or more Path Computation 
   Elements (PCE) (see [PCE-ARCH]).  
    
   The set of traffic demands from the upper region is required to 
   recompute and re-optimize the VNT. Actually the VNT engine must have 
   knowledge of the aggregated bandwidth reserved by lower region LSPs 
   between all border region LSRs, that is, the reserved bandwidth 
   within FAs.  
   Existing GMPLS routing allows for the collection of traffic demands 
   from the upper region.  


 
Le Roux, et al.                                               [Page 4] 
  
Internet Draft  draft-leroux-ccamp-gmpls-mrn-eval-00.txt   February 2005 


   It can be deduced from FA TE-link advertisements. Indeed the 
   bandwidth reserved by lower region LSPs within an FA is equal to 
   maximum reservable bandwidth minus unreserved bandwidth.  
   Collection of traffic demands of an upper region may actually be 
   achieved in several ways depending on the location of VNT engines: 
        -If a VNT engine is distributed on border region LSRs, then the 
   collection of traffic demands relies on existing GMPLS routing. Each 
   LSR has knowledge of all FA-LSPs within the region. 
        -If a VNT engine is located on an external PCE, then the 
   collection of traffic demands may be achieved using existing GMPLS 
   routing, if the PCE relies on GMPLS routing to discover TE link 
   information, or another mechanism out of the scope of GMPLS protocols 
   may be used (e.g. SNMP or PCC-PCE communication protocol). 
    
 
3.1.2. Virtual FAs 
         
   A virtual FA is an FA which has not been provisioned (data plane 
   resources have not yet been committed but only pre-allocated at the 
   control plane level). The corresponding FA-LSP is setup at the 
   control plane level, but cross connections are not activated at the 
   data plane level.  
   If an upper-region LSP that makes use of a virtual FA is setup, the 
   underlying FA-LSP is immediately signaled and fully provisioned. 
    
   This has two main advantages: 
    
        - flexibility: allows a region to route an LSP using TE link  
          without taking into account the actual corresponding FA-LSP    
          status in the lower region in terms of provisioning.  
           
        - stability: allows stability of TE-links in a region, while     
           avoiding wastage of bandwidth in the lower region, as data   
           plane connections are not established. 
    
    
   Virtual FAs are setup/deleted/modified dynamically, according to the 
   change of the (forecast) traffic demand, operator∆s policies for 
   capacity utilization, and the available resources in the lower 
   region. 
 
   Virtual FAs require two building blocks: 
        -A TE mechanism for dynamic modification of virtual FA topology 
        -A signaling mechanism for the dynamic setup and deletion of   
         virtual FAs 
         
   The TE mechanism responsible for dynamic modification of virtual FAs 
   is out of the scope of GMPLS protocols.  
    
         
         
         
 
Le Roux, et al.                                               [Page 5] 
  
Internet Draft  draft-leroux-ccamp-gmpls-mrn-eval-00.txt   February 2005 


   Current GMPLS signaling protocol does not support the setup and 
   deletion of virtual FAs. The major issue relates to the specification 
   of a mechanism allowing for allocating the resources at the control 
   plane level without performing any resource allocation at the data 
   plane level. So GMPLS signaling procedures must be adapted to allow 
   for the provisioning and related operations on virtual FAs. 
                 
   Advertisement of virtual FA is identical to the rules currently 
   defined for fully provisioned FAs.  
    
 
3.1.3. Traffic Disruption minimization during FA release 
         
   When reconfiguring the virtual network topology according to the 
   traffic demand change or maintenance actions, the disruption of an 
   upper-region LSP must be minimized. 
   This requires local procedures on border region LSRs that are out of 
   the scope of GMPLS protocols. 
    
   Before deleting a given FA-LSP, all nested LSPs have to be rerouted 
   and removed from the FA-LSP. This is to avoid traffic disruption. 
   The mechanisms required here are similar to those required for 
   graceful deletion of a TE-Link. A Graceful TE-link deletion mechanism 
   allows for the deletion of a TE-link without disrupting traffic of 
   TE-LSPs that where using the TE-link. 
   GMPLS protocols do not provide for explicit indication to trigger 
   such operation. 
    
   Hence, GMPLS routing and/or signaling extensions are required 
   to support graceful deletion of TE-links.  This may rely, for 
   instance, on new signaling Error code to notify head-end LSRs that a 
   TE-link along the path of a TE-LSP is going to disappear, and also on 
   new routing attributes (if limited to a single IGP area), such as 
   defined in [GR-SHUT]. 
    
 
3.1.4. Path computation stability 
         
   The path computation stability of an upper-region may be impaired if 
   the Virtual Network Topology frequently changes. In this context 
   robustness of the Virtual Network topology is defined as the 
   capability to smooth changes that may occur and avoid their 
   subsequent propagation. 
    
   Guaranteeing VNT stability is out of the scope of GMPLS protocols and 
   relies entirely on the capability of TE algorithms to minimize 
   routing perturbations. This requires that the TE algorithm takes into 
   account the old VNT when computing a new VNT, and tries to minimize 
   the perturbation. 
         
         
         
 
Le Roux, et al.                                               [Page 6] 
  
Internet Draft  draft-leroux-ccamp-gmpls-mrn-eval-00.txt   February 2005 


         
          
3.2. Support for FA LSP attributes inheritance 
 
   When FA TE-link parameters are inherited from FA-LSP parameters, 
   specific inheritance rules are applied.  
    
   This relies on local procedures and policies and is out of the scope 
   of GMPLS protocols.  
   This requires that both head and tail-ends of the FA-LSP are driven 
   by same policies. 
 
    
3.3. Support for Triggered signaling. 
 
   When a LSP crosses the boundary from an upper to a lower region, it 
   may be nested in or stitched to a lower-region LSP. If such an LSP 
   does not exist the LSP may be established dynamically. Such a 
   mechanism is referred to as "Triggered signaling".  
   Triggered signaling requires the following building blocks: 
        -The identification of region boundaries. 
        -A path computation engine capable of computing a path     
         containing multiple regions. 
        -A mechanism for nested signaling. 
    
   The identification of region boundaries is supported by GMPLS routing 
   protocols. Region boundaries are identified by the interface 
   switching capability descriptor attached to the TE-link (see [HIER] 
   and [GMPLS-RTG]). 
    
   The capability to compute a path containing multiple regions is a 
   local implementation issue and is out of the scope of GMPLS protocols. 
    
   A mechanism for nested signaling is defined in [HIER]. 
    
   Hence, GMPLS protocols already meet this requirement.  
    
    
3.4. Support for Multi-region signaling 
    
   Applying the triggered signaling procedure discussed above, in a MRN 
   environment may lead to setup one-hop FA-LSPs between each node. 
   Therefore, considering that the path computation is able to take into 
   account richness of information with regard to the SC available on 
   given nodes belonging to the path, it is consistent to provide enough 
   signaling information to indicate the SC to be used and on over which 
   link.   
        
   Limited extension to existing GMPLS signaling procedures is required 
   for this purpose as it only mandates indication of the SCs to be 
   included or excluded before initiating the LSP provisioning procedure. 
   This enhancement would solve the ambiguous choice of SC that are 
 
Le Roux, et al.                                               [Page 7] 
  
Internet Draft  draft-leroux-ccamp-gmpls-mrn-eval-00.txt   February 2005 


   potentially used along a given path (particularly in case of ERO 
   expansion) and would give the possibility to optimize resource usage 
   on a multi-region basis. 
    
 
3.5. FA connectivity verification 
 
   Once fully provisioned, FA liveliness may be achieved by verifying 
   its data plane connectivity. 
   FA connectivity verification relies on technology specific mechanisms 
   (e.g. for SDH, G.707, G.783, for MPLS, BFD, etc.) as for any other 
   LSP. Hence this requirement is out of the scope of GMPLS protocols. 
    
 
3.6. Advertisement of Internal Adaptation Capabilities 
 
   In the MRN context, nodes supporting more than one switching 
   capability per interface are called Hybrid nodes. Hybrid nodes 
   contain at least two distinct switching elements that are 
   interconnected by internal links, used to facilitate adaptation 
   between distinct switching capabilities.  
   These internal links have finite capacities and must be taken into 
   account when computing the path of a multi-region TE-LSP.  
   The advertisement of the internal adapatation capability to terminate 
   LSPs is required as it provides critical information when performing 
   multi-region path computation. 
 
   The advertisement of the internal adaptation capability, using 
   existing GMPLS routing, would require dividing a hybrid node, in the 
   routing plane, in several logical nodes, and advertising internal 
   adaptation capabilities as TE-links between logical nodes. Of course 
   such approach must be avoided as it leads to the introduction of 
   internal node states. 
    
   Hence, GMPLS routing must be extended to meet this requirement. This 
   could rely on the advertisement of the internal adaptation 
   capabilities as a new TE link attribute (that would complement the 
   Interface Switching Capability Descriptor TE attribute).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Le Roux, et al.                                               [Page 8] 
  
Internet Draft  draft-leroux-ccamp-gmpls-mrn-eval-00.txt   February 2005 


4. Evaluation Conclusion 
 
   Most of MRN requirements will rely on mechanisms and procedures that 
   are out of the scope of the GMPLS protocols, and thus do not require 
   any GMPLS protocol extensions. They will rely on local procedures and 
   policies, and on specific TE mechanisms and algorithms. 
    
   As regards Virtual Network Topology (VNT) computation and 
   reconfiguration, specific TE mechanisms that could, for instance, 
   rely on PCE based mechanisms and protocols have to be defined, but 
   these mechanisms are out of the scope of GMPLS protocols 
    
   Four needs for extensions of GMPLS protocols and procedures have been 
   identified: 
    
        - GMPLS signaling extension for the setup/deletion of    
          the virtual FAs (as well as exact trigger for its actual  
          provisioning); 
    
        - GMPLS signaling extension for constraint multi-region  
          signaling; 
    
        - GMPLS routing and signaling extension for graceful TE link  
          deletion; 
    
        - GMPLS routing extension for the advertisement of the  
          internal adaptation capability of hybrid nodes. 
    
 
5. Intellectual Property Statement 
    
   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to 
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in 
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights 
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has 
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights. Information 
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be 
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 
    
   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of 
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 
    
   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF at ietf- 
   ipr@ietf.org..  
 
Le Roux, et al.                                               [Page 9] 
  
Internet Draft  draft-leroux-ccamp-gmpls-mrn-eval-00.txt   February 2005 


 
5.1. IPR Disclosure Acknowledgement 
       
   By submitting this Internet-Draft, I certify that any applicable 
   patent or other IPR claims of which I am aware have been disclosed, 
   and any of which I become aware will be disclosed, in accordance with 
   RFC 3668. 
    
6. Acknowledgment 
 
   We would like to thank Julien Meuric for its useful comments. 
    
    
7. References 
 
   Informative References 
 
   [GMPLS-ARCH] Mannie, E., et. al. "Generalized Multi-Protocol Label 
   Switching Architecture", RFC 3945, October 2004 
    
   [GMPLS-RTG] Kompella, K., Ed. and Y. Rekhter, Ed., "Routing 
   Extensions in Support of Generalized Multi-Protocol Label Switching", 
   draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-routing-09.txt, work in Progress. 
 
   [GMPLS-SIG] Berger, L., et. al. "Generalized Multi-Protocol Label 
   Switching (GMPLS) Signaling Functional Description", RFC 3471, 
   January 2003. 
    
   [MRN-REQ] Shiomoto, K., Papadimitriou, D., Le Roux, J.L., Vigoureux, 
   M., Brungard, D., "Requirements for GMPLS-based multi-region and 
   multi-layer networks", draft-shiomoto-ccamp-gmpls-mrn-reqs-00.txtwork 
   in progess.  
 
   [PCE-ARCH] Farrel, A., Vasseur, J.P., Ash, J., "Path Computation 
   Element (PCE) Architecture", draft-ash-pce-architecture-00.txt, work 
   in progress. 
    
   [GTEP] Oki, E., et. al., "Generalized Traffic Engineering Protocol", 
   draft-oki-pce-gtep-01.txt, work in progress 
    
   [HIER] K. Kompella and Y. Rekhter, "LSP hierarchy with generalized 
   MPLS TE," <draft-ietf-mpls-lsp-hierarchy-08.txt> Sept. 2002. 
 
   [GR-SHUT] Ali, Z., Zamfir, A., "Graceful Shutdown in MPLS Traffic 
   Engineering Network", draft-ali-ccamp-mpls-graceful-shutdown-00.txt, 
   work in progress.  
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
Le Roux, et al.                                              [Page 10] 
  
Internet Draft  draft-leroux-ccamp-gmpls-mrn-eval-00.txt   February 2005 


8. Authors' Addresses:  
  
   Jean-Louis Le Roux  
   France Telecom  
   2, avenue Pierre-Marzin  
   22307 Lannion Cedex, France 
   Email: jeanlouis.leroux@francetelecom.com 
    
   Deborah Brungard 
   AT&T 
   Rm. D1-3C22 - 200 S. Laurel Ave. 
   Middletown, NJ, 07748 USA 
   E-mail: dbrungard@att.com 
    
   Eiji Oki 
   NTT 
   3-9-11 Midori-Cho 
   Musashino, Tokyo 180-8585, Japan 
   Email: oki.eiji@lab.ntt.co.jp 
    
   Dimitri Papadimitriou 
   Alcatel 
   Francis Wellensplein 1, 
   B-2018 Antwerpen, Belgium 
   Email: dimitri.papdimitriou@alcatel.be 
    
   Kohei Shiomoto 
   NTT 
   3-9-11 Midori-Cho 
   Musashino, Tokyo 180-8585, Japan 
   Email: shiomoto.kohei@lab.ntt.co.jp 
    
   Martin Vigoureux 
   Alcatel 
   Route de Nozay, 
   91461 Marcoussis Cedex, France 
   Email: martin.vigoureux@alcatel.fr 
 
 
Full Copyright Statement 
 
Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).  This document is subject to 
the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and except as 
set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights. 
    
This document and the information contained herein are provided on an   
"AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS OR 
IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET 
ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, 
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE 
INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED 
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
 
Le Roux, et al.                                              [Page 11] 
