Internet Engineering Task Force                              P. Crowley 
Internet Draft                                    Washington University 
Intended status: Informational                             July 7, 2008 
Expires: January 1, 2009 
                                    
 
                                      
             On the Relative Importance of P2P Peer Selection 
                   draft-crowley-alto-importance-01.txt 


Status of this Memo 

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that       
   any applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is       
   aware have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she       
   becomes aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of       
   BCP 79. 

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html 

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 1, 2009. 

Copyright Notice 

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008). 

Abstract 

   This Internet-draft discusses the relative importance of path 
   selection in peer-to-peer (P2P) applications in light of the recent 
   discussions highlighting the conflict between the use of P2P 
   applications and the costs borne by network infrastructure operators.  

 
 
 
Crowley                Expires January 1, 2009                 [Page 1] 

Internet-Draft  Relative Importance of Path Selection         July 2008 
    

Conventions used in this document 

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [1]. 

Table of Contents 

    
   1. Introduction...................................................2 
   2. Context & Importance...........................................2 
      2.1. Technical Strengths.......................................3 
   3. Problems with P2P Applications.................................4 
   4. Proposed Solutions.............................................5 
   5. Problems Solved via Standardization............................6 
   6. What is Needed.................................................6 
   7. Security Considerations........................................7 
   8. IANA Considerations............................................7 
   9. Conclusions....................................................7 
   10. Acknowledgments...............................................7 
   11. Informative References........................................7 
   Author's Addresses................................................8 
   Intellectual Property Statement...................................8 
   Disclaimer of Validity............................................8 
    
1. Introduction 

   The purpose of this document is to juxtapose peer-to-peer (P2P) 
   application context, importance, and problems with solutions offered 
   by standardization. In particular, the goal is to explore whether the 
   current challenges created by P2P applications can be effectively 
   solved, or at least ameliorated, through standardization efforts. 

2. Context & Importance 

   P2P file-sharing is a significant consumer Internet traffic source. A 
   recent report from Cisco Systems [1,2] indicates that in 2007 P2P 
   applications accounted for 51% of global consumer Internet traffic.  
   While there are non-file-sharing P2P applications, file sharing is 
   the dominant source of bandwidth consumption. P2P-based streaming 
   video is significant in some parts of the world, but that is not 
   counted among the P2P numbers in the Cisco report. We can conclude, 
   therefore, that P2P file-sharing is an important application for 
   users and infrastructure owners.  

   However, it is also reasonable to assume that the majority of the 
   bandwidth consumed by P2P applications is devoted to the distribution 
 
 
Crowley                Expires January 1, 2009                 [Page 2] 

Internet-Draft  Relative Importance of Path Selection         July 2008 
    

   of video files.  While some may assume that the popularity of P2P 
   applications is content-independent, it is reasonable to suppose that 
   the popularity of P2P applications, the least when measured by 
   bandwidth consumed, is due entirely to the popularity of sharing 
   video files. Anecdotally, it seems that this file-sharing is mostly 
   illegal; whether this is blatant theft or a form of civil 
   disobedience is a topic left for another time.  More to the point, 
   the Cisco study also reports that non-P2P video traffic has 
   experienced, and will continue to experience, an even greater rate of 
   growth than P2P applications.  Indeed, despite accounting for 51% of 
   global Internet traffic, P2P traffic shrank year-on-year as a total 
   percentage while non-P2P video grew. 

   Before discussing the technical strengths and problems with P2P 
   applications, we note that this is an unwieldy conversation because 
   many topics are customarily grouped together, while specific problems 
   and solutions typically apply only to a single topic. Topics that are 
   usually aggregated included: 

   o  BitTorrent and the characteristics that distinguish it from other 
      P2P clients and protocols. 

   o  File Sharing as opposed to other applications on peer-to-peer 
      platforms, such as video-on-demand, voice and instant messaging. 

   o  P2P versus client-server service architectures. 

   In this Internet-draft, we will focus the discussion on the use of 
   P2P applications for file-sharing, because this usage dominates both 
   the importance and the popularity of P2P systems in the world today. 

2.1. Technical Strengths 

   P2P systems, and in particular BitTorrent, are in most ways 
   remarkably efficient technologies. 

   BitTorrent effectively eliminates costs associated with distributing 
   large digital files. Individuals with consumer DSL connections can be 
   global-scale publishers of multi-gigabyte files. It is for this 
   reason that people around the world can rip and share extremely large 
   video files at very little cost. 

   P2P systems deploy and evolve at the rate of change of end-user 
   habits. There is very low friction resisting development and 
   deployment. There are no encumbrances from service or infrastructure 
   providers to slow things down. 

 
 
Crowley                Expires January 1, 2009                 [Page 3] 

Internet-Draft  Relative Importance of Path Selection         July 2008 
    

   Perhaps most remarkably, file distribution with BitTorrent scales 
   automatically with available resources, because it does not require 
   manual intervention to utilize capacity increases. 

3. Problems with P2P Applications 

   The problems caused by P2P applications can be categorized according 
   to the party experiencing the problem. 

   Home users, those who install and use P2P clients on their own 
   computers, experience at least two kinds of problems.  First, P2P 
   file-sharing applications interfere with latency sensitive 
   applications, such as voice over IP (VOIP), because they tend to fill 
   all available buffers between a computer and the end of its access 
   link. As recently pointed out by S. Shalunov at the IETF P2P 
   infrastructure workshop in May 2008, mass-market consumer access 
   points and switches feature small amounts of buffer space that 
   BitTorrent tends to fill, increasing ping times and jitter for 
   latency sensitive applications. Second, P2P applications can easily 
   exhaust bandwidth caps associated with broadband connections. 

   For ISPs and network infrastructure operators, P2P applications 
   present at least three problems: large bandwidth usage, usage that 
   scales with available capacity, and steady, long-lived connections 
   rather than bursty ones.  

   Since files shared on P2P networks tend to be large, the aggregate 
   bandwidth used is also large. 

   As mentioned above, a P2P application such as BitTorrent 
   automatically scales to take advantage of the available network 
   resources.  This creates a tremendous problem for increasing 
   capacity: if rising P2P traffic has inspired an accelerated capacity 
   increase and that P2P traffic can automatically scale to take 
   advantage of any added capacity, then it is difficult to make 
   rational, cost-effective capacity investment plans. 

   Long-lived, non-bursty traffic is troublesome because it runs afoul 
   of the assumptions that govern the oversubscription rates used to 
   price broadband connections. 

   It can be seen that the problem is in fact due to the conjunction of 
   these three. For example, FTP is also steady, large, and long-lasting 
   but very few use it so it causes no large problem. 

   It is worth asking whether these are technical problems or business 
   model problems. Certainly, a technical decision could be taken to 
 
 
Crowley                Expires January 1, 2009                 [Page 4] 

Internet-Draft  Relative Importance of Path Selection         July 2008 
    

   remove buffering from access points and switches, although this would 
   not apply to the installed base of tens of millions of devices. 
   However, the other problems are at least equally dependent on 
   business model or social factors, rather than on solely technical 
   questions. 

4. Proposed Solutions 

   A high-level notion of ISP cost is the problem most discussed in 
   popular media and research literature. Many proposals for P2P peer-
   localization, content caching, and hybrid server-peer architectures 
   have been proposed. Additionally, commercial offerings include 
   devices that can measure P2P traffic and apply traffic shaping 
   policies. 

   ALTO is particularly concerned with the mechanisms used to select 
   peers, which in turn can achieve localization or effective caching. 
   Examples of these mechanisms are nicely surveyed in the ALTO abstract 
   presented at the IETF P2P infrastructure workshop in May 2008, where 
   two major approaches are summarized: end-to-end measurement and 
   application-to-network layer cooperation. 

   In general, however, these peer selection ideas are only useful in 
   contexts where peers are abundant and many options of equivalent 
   quality exist. Whenever peers must be chosen based on the rare 
   content they can provide, peer selection mechanisms will not apply. 

   Of course, it is natural to assume that a disproportionately large 
   amount of P2P file sharing bandwidth can be accounted for by a 
   relatively small number of distinct files.  That is, a subset of 
   popular videos will likely account for the majority of traffic at any 
   given time. 

   However, as other legal online video options proliferate, it is 
   possible that P2P file-sharing will cease to be the primary video 
   distribution platform. In recent years, the number of ad-supported 
   and subscription-based online video services has flourished. 
   Continued developments along this path-along with the possibility 
   that the public-at-large may eventually lose its appetite for illegal 
   file sharing-may significantly alter P2P dynamics. 

   And more to the point, as video continues to dominate global Internet 
   traffic, the Internet will experience dramatic increases in the 
   number of high-bandwidth, non-bursty, long-lived connections. P2P 
   applications are singled out as the problematic ones today, but in 
   the near future there will be many more video-oriented applications 
   that will cause similar problems. 
 
 
Crowley                Expires January 1, 2009                 [Page 5] 

Internet-Draft  Relative Importance of Path Selection         July 2008 
    

5. Problems Solved via Standardization 

   What Problems do Standards Solve? 

   In general, standards have two effects. They avoid the problems 
   associated with a single solution provider, such as monopoly pricing 
   power and technical frailty, by encouraging commoditization of the 
   object of standardization. They also avoid the problems associated 
   with the reinvention and fragmentation of common solutions, such as: 
   safety (i.e., standards can reduce the likelihood of errors and 
   mistakes), interoperability, and quality. 

6. What is Needed 

   There is no shortage of feasible technical solutions to the problems 
   raised by P2P applications, but the effectiveness of a given solution 
   will be determined by business models and end-user willingness to 
   adopt them. 

   Examples of connectivity business models include the following. 

   o  Fixed prices with bandwidth caps. 

   o  Pay-per-bit. 

   o  Traffic categories, with per-category pricing models. 

   The current user vocabulary defines as categories phone, video, and 
   data. This is obvious and clear to consumer customers of telephone 
   and cable companies. P2P traffic characteristics cause a problem for 
   existing data pricing models. Some have suggested that data pricing 
   models require further elaboration, with finer subdivisions. For 
   example, one can imagine web/e-mail/data, P2P, gaming, voice, and 
   video all be as coming subcategories within a data plan, each with 
   their own pricing model.  Might users understand and accept such a 
   pricing model?  Would such a model make sense for broadband 
   providers? 

   This line of thinking leads one to ask: Is the Internet a utility, an 
   infrastructure, or a service platform? 

   If it is a utility, then we can consider the pricing model for 
   electricity, in which users are charged for each kilowatt-hour used, 
   without regard for how the units are used (but perhaps with regard to 
   when they are used). 


 
 
Crowley                Expires January 1, 2009                 [Page 6] 

Internet-Draft  Relative Importance of Path Selection         July 2008 
    

   If it is an infrastructure, then we can consider the pricing model 
   for interstate highways.  Such a model is very different from 
   today's, since this type of infrastructure does not produce profit 
   directly, but enables profitable uses. 

   If the Internet is a service platform, such as mobile phones and 
   mobile phone networks, then one can imagine pricing models that 
   separate out distinct uses, such as with mobile voice, data, and SMS 
   pricing models. In such a model, not all bits carry the same price. 

    

7. Security Considerations 

   Security risks tend to increase with complexity.  Any proposal that 
   increases the complexity of infrastructure or its interfaces, such as 
   those that aim to provide access to direct or indirect topology 
   information, invites the risk of complicating security.  More 
   specifically, if a service provider publishes information that is 
   meant to both improve end-user performance and reduce service 
   provider cost, there will always be the opportunity for subversion, 
   or perhaps the more insidious suspicion that the service provider is 
   paying greater attention to its costs than to the performance 
   provided.  An effective antidote for this situation is independent 
   verification. 

8. IANA Considerations 

9. Conclusions 

   In conclusion, because standardization seems ill-positioned to 
   address the most pressing problems with P2P systems, it is likely 
   premature for the IETF to pursue any strong activities in 
   standardization. There may be other reasons to pursue 
   standardization, but there does not appear to be a strong, objective 
   case for doing so for the sake of improving P2P file-sharing. 

10. Acknowledgments 

   This document was prepared using 2-Word-v2.0.template.dot. 

11. Informative References 

   [1]   Cisco Systems, "Cisco Visual Networking Index-Forecast and 
         Methodology, 2007-2012", White Paper, http://www.cisco.com, 
         June 2008. 

 
 
Crowley                Expires January 1, 2009                 [Page 7] 

Internet-Draft  Relative Importance of Path Selection         July 2008 
    

   [2]   Cisco Systems, "Approaching the Zettabyte Era", White Paper, 
         http://www.cisco.com, June 2008. 

Author's Addresses 

   Patrick Crowley 
   Washington University 
   Dept. of CSE/Campus Box 1045 
   One Brookings Drive 
   St. Louis, MO 63130 
   USA  
       
   Email: pcrowley@wustl.edu 
   URL: http://www.arl.wustl.edu/~pcrowley 
    

Intellectual Property Statement 

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to 
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in 
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights 
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has 
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information 
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be 
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of 
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at 
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org. 

Disclaimer of Validity 

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an 
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS 
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND 
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS 
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF 
 
 
Crowley                Expires January 1, 2009                 [Page 8] 

Internet-Draft  Relative Importance of Path Selection         July 2008 
    

   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED 
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 

Copyright Statement 

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008). 

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions 
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors 
   retain all their rights. 

Acknowledgment 

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the 
   Internet Society. 

    






























 
 
Crowley                Expires January 1, 2009                 [Page 9] 

