
GSMP Working Group Internet Draft                    Jun Kyun Choi(ICU)
Document: draft-ietf-gsmp-optical-spec-00.txt         Min Ho Kang(ICU) 
Expiration Date: April 2003                          Jung Yul Choi(ICU)
                                                    Gyu Myoung Lee(ICU)
                                                          Joo Uk Um(KT)
                                                           October 2002
                        
                        
    General Switch Management Protocol (GSMP) v3 for Optical Support 
                        
                        
Status of this Memo 
                        
  This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
  all provisions of Section 10 of RFC-2026.  
                       
  Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
  Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other 
  groups MAY also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.  
                       
  Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
  and MAY be updated, replaced, or obsolete by other documents at any 
  time. It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts as reference 
  material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."  
                        
  The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
  http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt  
                       
  The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
  http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
                        
                        
Abstract 
                       
  This document describes the GSMPv3 for the support of optical switching. 
  GSMP controller SHOULD control optical label switches and manage optical 
  resources on them. This document describes the extended functions of 
  GSMP for optical switching and explains operational mechanisms to                                          
  implement them. It SHOULD be referred with [1] for the complete 
  implementation.  
                        
                        
Conventions 
                        
  The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
  "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
  document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119. 
                        
                        
Table of Contents 


Choi at el    Expires - April 2003                            [Page  1] 

              GSMPv3 for Optical Support                  October 2002             
              
  1. Introduction.....................................................3 
  2. Common Definition and Procedures for Optical Support.............3 
  2.1 Labels..........................................................3 
  2.1.1 Label for Wavelength and Fiber................................3 
  2.1.2 Label for Waveband............................................4 
  2.1.3 Label for optical burst ......................................4 
  2.1.4 Label Range...................................................4 
  2.2 Protection and Restoration Capability in GSMP...................4 
  2.2.1 Dedicated and shared recovery mechanisms......................5 
  2.2.2 Revertible and Non-revertible mode............................5 
  2.3 GSMP support for optical switching systems......................6 
  2.3.1 Capability of GSMP for optical burst switching................6 
  3. Connection Management Messages...................................7 
  3.1 General Message Definitions.....................................7 
  3.2 Add Branch Message..............................................7 
  3.3 Move Output Branch Message......................................7 
  3.4 Move Input Branch Message.......................................7 
  4. Reservation Management Messages..................................7 
  5. State and Statistics Messages....................................8 
  5.1 Statistics Messages.............................................8 
  6. Configuration Messages...........................................8 
  6.1 Switch Configuration Message....................................9 
  6.2 Port Configuration Message......................................9 
  6.3 Service Configuration Message...................................9 
  7. Event Messages...................................................9 
  8. Failure Response Codes...........................................10
  9. Security Consideratons...........................................10 
  References..........................................................10 
  Acknowledgement.....................................................11 
  Author's Addresses..................................................11 
  Full Copyright Statement............................................13                        
                 
                                     
                      
1. Introduction 
                        
  This document describes the extended functions and requirements of 
  GSMPv3 for the support of optical switching. GSMPv3 is an asymmetric 
  protocol to control and manage the label switch. The label switches 
  that are used for optical switching are all optical cross-connects 
  (optical-optical-optical), transparent optical cross connects 
  (optical-electrical-optical, frame independent).  
                        
  In order for GSMP to operate between the controller and optical 
  switched and cross connects, optical labels, services for optical 
  switching, and resource abstractions MUST be defined and added to 
 
  
Choi at el    Expires - April 2003                            [Page 2] 

             GSMPv3 for Optical Support                  October 2002 
             
  GSMP, since the basic optical resources which are used in connection 
  setup are different with them of the legacy networks.  
                        
  One of the main roles of GSMP is to support restoration capabilities 
  of optical switches and the connection. By extending the management 
  messages of GSMP, this function MUST be implemented.  
                          
  For the complete implementation this document MUST be referred with 
  [1].  
                        
                        
2. Common Definitions and Procedures for Optical Support. 
                      
  Common definitions and procedures which are not mentioned in this 
  document follow [1].  
                      
2.1 Labels 
                        
  Labels are the basic identifier for a connection. In order to setup 
  connections in optical switch, new labels MUST be defined. The newly 
  defined labels identify the entities that are to be switched in the 
  optical switches. GMPLS defines packet switching capable, TDM 
  switching capable, lambdas switching capable, fiber switching capable 
  interfaces, and it introduces the needs of generalized labels to 
  support them [3][4]. So far, GMPLS does not defined the labels to be 
  used for optical switching (label formats and encoding schemes), but 
  GSMP MUST support the all types of label that to be defined in GMPLS. 
  The following lists are the labels to be supported in the optical 
  switching [2][3][4].      
                        
     - a single fiber in a bundle 
     - a single waveband within a fiber 
     - a single wavelength within a waveband (or a fiber) 
     - an optical burst within a wavelength  
                        
2.1.1 Labels for Wavelength and Fiber  
                        
  The label indicates a fiber or a wavelength to be used for a 
  connection establishment in optical switching. Value of the label 
  only has significance between two neighbors, and the receiver MAY                                                           
  need to convert the received value into a value that has local 
  significance.  
                        
2.1.2 Labels for Waveband  
                        
  A Waveband is a set of contiguous wavelengths which can be switched 
  together to a new waveband [3][4]. It MAY be desirable for an optical 
  cross connect to optically switch multiple wavelengths as a unit 
  since it MAY reduce the distortion on the individual wavelengths and 
  MAY allow tighter separation of the individual wavelengths. The 
  Waveband Label is defined to support such a waveband switching. The 
  waveband label can be encoded in three parts; waveband ID, start 
  label, and end label. The start label and the end label represent the 
  
  
Choi at el    Expires - April 2003                            [Page 3] 

             GSMPv3 for Optical Support                  October 2002 
             
  lowest value wavelength and the highest value wavelengths.  
                        
2.1.3 Labels for optical burst           
                        
  The label for optical burst represents the label for switching optical
  burst data in time domain in a wavelength. However, this label is not 
  defined yet.  
                        
2.1.4 Label Range 
                        
  The basic label range to be used in each port is specified by the 
  Port Configuration or All Port Configuration message. The Label Range 
  message allows the range of labels supported by a specified port to 
  be changed. The controller MUST allocate the label range with 
  consideration of optical characteristics when assigning the labels 
  for a connection because the connection is established per optical 
  burst, wavelength, waveband, and fiber in optical domain. Since the 
  basic label range varies in switches and the labels for the 
  connections can be different due to the optical characteristics, GSMP 
  does not treat them. However, the following lists SHOULD be 
  considered and the available label ranges can be applied in the Label 
  Range message.  
                        
     - When allocating a label for a wavelength, the label SHOULD be 
     allocated for it with consideration of wavelength continuity. For 
     satisfying the requirement of wavelength continuity in a 
     connection, the label SHOULD be allocated to maintain the same 
     wavelength for it. The controller MUST manage the available labels 
     and support the constraint.  
                        
     - The labels to be used for waveband switching MUST be contiguous, 
     because the waveband switching is possible only in the set of 
     contiguous wavelengths. The decision mechanism for the available 
     label range is out of scope of GSMPv3.  
                        
2.2 Protection and Restoration Capability in GSMP 
                        
  The GSMP controller MUST support the protection and restoration 
  capabilities because the optical switch delivers several Gbps data 
  traffic in a single wavelength. To achieve fast protection and    
  restoration, the optical switch is capable of taking an action 
  independent of the GSMP controller, then it informs the controller 
  after completing the restoration [2]. This differs from the master-
  slave relationship in GSMP. Therefore, the GSMP port configuration 
  command MUST be extended to allow autonomous protection mechanism. 
  The current GSMP connection management also MUST be extended to 
  support this function.  
                        
2.2.1 Dedicated and shared recovery mechanisms 
                        
  In the dedicated protection, both working and backup path deliver the 
  traffic simultaneously from an ingress node to an egress node. The 
  
  
Choi at el    Expires - April 2003                            [Page 4] 

             GSMPv3 for Optical Support                  October 2002
             
  egress node of the path selects one of them as a working path 
  according to the received signal status from the previous node. Since 
  the backup path also delivers the traffic it MUST be established by 
  using the Add Branch message. When any link in the working path fails, 
  the egress node switches over from the failed working path to the 
  backup path without noticing the GSMP controller automatically.  
                        
  After completing the recovery of the failed path, the switch reports 
  the fact of configuring a new connection to the controller. When the 
  failed original path is repaired the controller determines how to 
  deal with the path according to the revertible or nonrevertible mode. 
  In the revertible mode, the currently used backup path is changed to 
  the repaired original path by using the Move Input Branch message 
  which includes the new port and label of which values are used for 
  the original connection. In the nonrevertible mode, the controller 
  deletes the repaired original working path by using the Delete Branch 
  message, or uses it as a new backup path for the currently used 
  backup path by using the Add Branch message.  
                        
  In 1:N shared protection, N working paths share the one backup path. 
  In a different way of the dedicated protection, the shared path does 
  not deliver any traffic since the controller does not know which 
  working paths will use it. The controller uses the Reservation 
  message to reserve a connection for the backup path. When a link 
  fails among the N working paths, the controller issues the Add Branch 
  message to restore the traffic through the failed working path into 
  the new backup path 
                        
2.2.2 Revertible and Non-revertible mode  
                        
  In the revertible mode, when the failed working path is repaired, the 
  controller restores the currently used backup path to the original 
  working path. The GSMP controller MUST keep the information for the 
  working path. The controller issues the Move Input/Output Branch 
  messages with the new port and label of which values are that of the 
  working path to restore it. After restoring, the backup path is 
  deleted by using the Delete message or continuously used as a backup 
  purpose.                    
                                                      
  In non-revertible mode, the working path is not restored from the 
  currently used backup path even though it is repaired. The original 
  working path can be used as a new backup path by using the Add Branch 
  message (1+1 dedicated protection), or the Reservation message (1:N 
  shared protection)  
                        
2.3 GSMP support for optical switching systems  
                        
  GSMP SHOULD control and manage the optical cross-connect systems as 
  label switches. The optical cross-connect (OXC) is a space division 
  switch that can switch an optical data stream on an input port to an 
  output port.  
                
                
Choi at el    Expires - April 2003                            [Page 5] 

             GSMPv3 for Optical Support                  October 2002 
                     
  The OXC system can be consist of switching fabric, 
  multiplexer/demultiplexer, wavelength converter, and optical-
  electrical/electrical-optical converter. Multiple wavelengths are 
  multiplexed or demultiplexed into a fiber. Multiple fibers belongs to 
  a fiber bundle. A wavelength, a waveband, and a fiber can be used to 
  establish a connection in an optical switch. They SHOULD be 
  recognized at a port in the OXC since they are connection entities. 
  When the OXC has optical-electrical conversion at the input port and 
  electrical-optical conversion at the output port it is called as 
  opaque OXC. Or, when it processes optical data stream all optically 
  it is called as transparent OXC. Wavelength converter SHOULD be used 
  to resolve output port contention when two different connections try 
  to be established in a same output port. Since the wavelength 
  converter can work only within a limited operating range, the limited 
  numbers of wavelengths are used at the output port. It limits the 
  available wavelengths at the output port.  
                        
  In order to control and manage the OXC systems, GSMP SHOULD be 
  located as a subset of functions for it and MUST know the current 
  switch, port and service configuration information. GSMP controller 
  SHOULD identify the connection entities at the OXC and match them 
  with the optical labels.          
                        
2.3.1 Capability of GSMP for optical burst switching  
                        
  GSMPv3 SHOULD also support data burst switching as a new connection 
  entity in optical domain. As described in [9],[10], connection setup 
  for optical burst includes reserving time on the transport medium for 
  the client.  
                        
  This time is characterized by two parameters: a start time and the 
  duration of data burst. These values MAY define a fast one-way 
  reservation. Upon a request for setup of a burst connection, the GSMP 
  controller MUST perform appropriate Connection Admission Control for 
  the time and duration specified. If the connection is allowed, it 
  MUST signal these parameters to the burst switching device to reserve 
  the exact bandwidth required [9],[10]. The burst switch MUST perform 
  the switching operation autonomously, using the synchronization 
  methods prescribed for the burst network it is operating in.                     
                 
                                        
                        
3. Connection Management Messages 
                        
3.1 General Message Definitions 
                        
  Connection management messages, which are used for establishing, 
  releasing, modifying, and verifying connections across the switch by 
  the controller, can operate in the optical domain, as the same 
  mechanisms. However, it is not possible to process each packet in 
  optical domain so that such a traffic parameter can not be used to 
  specify the connection. Connection management messages also SHOULD 
  support the OXC restoration capabilities.                
               
                
Choi at el    Expires - April 2003                            [Page 6] 

             GSMPv3 for Optical Support                  October 2002       
             
3.2 Add Branch Message 
                        
  The Add Branch message is used to setup a connection. Especially, it 
  MUST support restoration capabilities in the optical domain.  For 1+1 
  dedicated protection, it is required to make an additional connection 
  as a backup path to protect an original connection against failure. 
  Additional fields are not required in the Add Branch message to 
  support the restoration capabilities since the two connections are 
  used for data traffic and an egress node selects one between them so 
  that they functions same. However, the controller SHOULD know the 
  whole statues of the switch.    
                        
3.3 Move Output Branch Message 
                        
  The Move Output Branch message is used to change the current output 
  port label to the new output port label for re-establishing the 
  existing connection. It can be used to support restoration 
  capabilities. Since to re-establish output port of a switch at an 
  ingress node is to change a start point of the current connection, it 
  can be used for 1:1 protection or 1:N shared protection where an 
  ingress node begins a connection. Upon a fault occurring, in order to 
  setup a new backup path instead of the failed working path, the new 
  port in upstream node SHOULD be connected to the current connection 
  by using this message. Because, the ingress node also takes 
  responsibility for recovery, as well as the egress node.     
                        
3.4 Move Input Branch Message 
                        
  The Move Input Branch message is used to change the current input 
  port label to the new input port label for re-establishing the 
  existing connection. It is also used to support restoration 
  capabilities. It is used for the revertible mode that is to move back 
  to the original connection from a backup connection after a recovery 
  completed. The new port/label in this message uses that of the 
  original connection.  
                        
                        
4. Reservation Management Messages                                                          
                        
  The Reservation Management message that reserves resources for a 
  connection before establishing a connection SHOULD reserve optical 
  resources, such as data burst, wavelengths, a set of wavelengths for 
  waveband switching, and fibers. In order to use the reservation 
  management messages, optical resources which the OXC supports SHOULD 
  be defined. It can be used to support restoration capabilities for 
  reserving backup connections. Especially, 1:N shared protection 
  scheme reserves a spare connection which is reserved for N working 
  connections so that this MUST use the reservation request messages 
  for reserving a backup connection. The reserved connection identified 
  by the reservation ID SHOULD be informed to N working connections. In 
  the reservation request message, the input label and output label of 
  the reserving branch SHOULD be assigned. After a fault occurs, the 
  
  
Choi at el    Expires  April 2003                            [Page 7] 

             GSMPv3 for Optical Support                  October 2002 
  
  recovery procedure to make a backup connection just follows the 
  ordinary connection setup procedure in [1].  
                        
                        
5. State and Statistics Messages 
                        
  The State and Statistics messages can be used to monitor the 
  statistics related to ports and connection for optical transmission. 
  It allows the controller to request the state and statistics of the 
  switch.   
                        
5.1 Statistics Messages 
                        
  The statistics messages are used to query the performance statistics 
  related to ports and connections for optical transmission. Since the 
  current statistics messages in [1] report the statistics related to 
  traffic states per cells, or frames, the new fields SHOULD be added 
  into the message for querying the optical support. The Port 
  Statistics message requests the statistics for the ports of the 
  switch. The Connection Statistics message allows the controller to 
  report the performances and statistics of the connection itself. The 
  statistics elements to monitor in the OXC are following.   
                        
     - signal degradation 
     - loss of signal 
                        
  As a result of performance analysis through the statistics messages, 
  the new connection can be requested when the controller finds the 
  much degraded performance on the connection. Therefore, the 
  statistics message to detect a fault SHOULD be defined, but the fault 
  detection mechanism is out of scope of this document.   
                        
                        
6. Configuration Messages 
                        
  The configuration messages allow the controller to discover the 
  capabilities of optical switch. Switch configuration, port                                                    
  configuration, and service configuration messages are defined for 
  these functions.  
                        
6.1 Switch Configuration Message 
                        
  Since an optical switch MAY be able to provide connection services at 
  multiple transport layers, and not all switches are expected to 
  support the same transport layers, the switch will need to notify the 
  controller of the specific layers it can support. Therefore, the 
  switch configuration message MUST be extended to provide a list of 
  the transport layers for which an optical switch can perform 
  switching. The following lists are the possible switching layers. 
                    
                    
Choi at el    Expires - April 2003                            [Page 8] 

             GSMPv3 for Optical Support                  October 2002 
                                     
     - switching per optical burst 
     - switching per a single wavelength 
     - switching per a waveband 
     - switching per a single fiber 
     - switching per a fiber bundle 
                        
6.2 Port Configuration Message 
                        
  The port configuration message supplies the controller with the 
  configuration information related to a single port. In the OXC, the 
  new port types SHOULD be defined in GSMP. Port types MUST be added to 
  support the mix of optical signals that can operate over a single 
  fiber. Basically the port can be used per wavelength, per fiber, and 
  per fiber bundle. Moreover, the OXC can have many bays which contain 
  hundreds of shalves which have tens of thousands of port. Therefore, 
  physical bay and shelve identifiers also SHOULD be defined and 
  encoded in port configuration message. The port configuration 
  information that MAY need to be conveyed includes: 
                               
     - available wavelengths per interface 
     - bit rate per wavelength (port) 
     - type of fiber 
                        
6.3 Service Configuration Message 
                        
  The Service Configuration message requests the optical switch for the 
  configuration information of the supported services. The requested 
  services are identified in the service ID in the Add Branch message 
  or the Reservation message. The service model is defined with traffic 
  parameter, QoS parameter, and traffic control elements in [1], but 
  these parameters can not be used to specify the optical services. 
  Therefore this message SHOULD be modified to support optical services 
  with newly defined capability sets. The services supported at optical 
  switches SHOULD be defined for dealing with optical burst, wavelength, 
  waveband, and fiber connection.  
                        
                        
7. Event Messages                                                     
                     
  The Event messages allow the switch to inform the controller of 
  certain asynchronous events. The asynchronous events include mainly 
  port states indication. The indication of these asynchronous events 
  related to ports can provide a port failure to the controller and it 
  can initiate a fault recovery mechanism.  
                        
                        
8. Failure Response Codes 
                        
  This chapter describes the failure and warning states which can occur 
  in setup optical connections. The following lists are the codes that 
  SHOULD be defined and added in the Failure Response messages. These 
  codes MAY be added when the services for optical switching are 
  defined. The code numbers will be assigned in IANA. 
  
    
Choi at el    Expires - April 2003                            [Page 9] 

             GSMPv3 for Optical Support                  October 2002  
                                    
     - no available wavelength at a port 
     - no available backup link for protection 
     - waveband connection setup fails 
     - reservation for optical burst fails 
                        

9. Security Considerations
  This document does not have any security concerns. The security 
  requirements using this document are described in the referenced
  documents
            
                        
References 
                        
  [1] Doria, A, Sundell, K, Hellstrand, F, Worster, T, "General Switch 
  Management Protocol V3," RFC 3292, June 2002.   
                        
  [2] Georg Kullgren, et. al., "Requirements For Adding Optical Support 
  To GSMPv3",draft-ietf-gsmp-reqs-03.txt, Sept. 2002  
                        
  [3] Mannie, E., et. al., "Generalized Multi-Protocol Label Switching 
  (GMPLS) Architecture," draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-architecture-03.txt, 
  August 2002.  
                        
  [4] Ashwood-Smith, D., et. al., "Generalized MPLS - Signaling 
  Functional Description," Internet Draft draft-ietf-mpls-generalized-
  signaling-08.txt, April 2002. 
                        
  [5] Rajagopalan, B., et. al., _IP over Optical Networks: A Framework, 
  draft-ietf-ipo-framework-02.txt (work in progress), June 2002.  
                        
  [6] N. Chandhok, et. al., "IP over WDM Networks; A Summary Issue", 
  draft-osu-ipo-mpls-issues-00,txt, July 2000 
                        
  [7] Jin Ho Hahm, Kwang-il Lee, Mark Carson, "Control Mechanisms for 
  Traffic Engineering in Optical Networks", drafh-hahm-te-optical-
  00.txt, July 2000 
                        
  [8] Daniel Awduche, WYakov Rekhter, "Multiprotocol Lambda Switching: 
  Combining MPLS Traffic Engineering Control with Optical 
  Crossconnects", IEEE Comm. Mag., March 2001                                                          
                     
  [9] C. Qiao, M. Yoo, "Choice, and Feature and Issues in Optical Burst      
  Switching", Optical Net. Mag., vol.1, No.2, Apr.2000, pp.36-44. 
                        
  [10] OBS Ilia Baldine, George N. Rouskas, Harry G. Perros, Dan 
  Stevension, "JumpStart: A Just-in-time Signaling Architecture for WDM 
  Burst-Switching Networks", IEEE Comm. Mag., Fab. 2002. 
                        
  [11] Angela Chiu, John Strans, et. al., "Impairments And Other 
  Constraints On Optical Layer Routing", draft-ietf-ipo-impairments-
  02.txt, Feb. 2002. 
                        
  [12] Luc Ceuppens, et. al., "Performance Monitoring in Photonic 
  Networks in support of MPL(ambda)S", draft-ceuppens-mpls-optical-
  00.txt, Jung 2000. 
  
  
  Choi at el    Expires - April 2003                            [Page 10] 

              GSMPv3 for Optical Support                  October 2002 
                        
  [13] Doria, A. and K. Sundell, "General Switch Management Protocol       
  Applicability", RFC 3294, June 2002. 
                        
                        
Acknowledgement 
                        
  This work was supported in part by the Korean Science and Engineering 
  Foundation (KOSEF) through OIRC project 
                        
                        
Author's Addresses 
                        
  Jun Kyun Choi 
  Information and Communications University (ICU) 
  58-4 Hwa Ahm Dong, Yusong, Daejon  
  Korea 305-732 
  Phone: +82-42-866-6122 
  Email: jkchoi@icu.ac.kr 
                        
  Min Ho Kang 
  Information and Communications University (ICU) 
  58-4 Hwa Ahm Dong, Yusong, Daejon  
  Korea 305-732 
  Phone: +82-42-866-6136 
  Email: mhkang@icu.ac.kr 
                        
  Jung Yul Choi 
  Information and Communications University (ICU) 
  58-4 Hwa Ahm Dong, Yusong, Daejon  
  Korea 305-732 
  Phone: +82-42-866-6208 
  Email: passjay@icu.ac.kr 
                        
  Gyu Myung Lee 
  Information and Communications University (ICU) 
  58-4 Hwa Ahm Dong, Yusong, Daejon  
  Korea 305-732                            
  Phone: +82-42-866-6231 
  Email: gmlee@icu.ac.kr 
                        
  Young Wook Cha 
  Andong National University (ANU) 
  388 Song-Chon Dong, Andong, Kyungsangbuk-do 
  Korea 760-749 
  Phone: +82-54-820-5714 
  Email: ywcha@andong.ac.kr 
                        
  Jeong Yun Kim 
  Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute (ETRI) 
  161 KaJong-Dong, Yusong-Gu, Daejeon 
  
  
Choi at el    Expires - April 2003                            [Page 11] 

              GSMPv3 for Optical Support                  October 2002 
                
  Korea 305-309 
  Phone: +82-42-866-5311 
  Email: jykim@etri.re.kr 
                        
  Hormuzd Khosravi 
  Intel 
  2111 NE 25th Avenue 
  Hillsboro, OR 97124 USA 
  Phone: +1 503 264 0334 
  Email: hormuzd.m.khosravi@intel.com 
                        
  Georg Kullgren 
  Nortel Networks AB 
  S:t Eriksgatan 115 A 
  P.O. Box 6701 
  SE-113 85 Stockholm Sweden 
  Email: geku@nortelnetworks.com 
                        
  Jonathan Sadler 
  Tellabs Operations, Inc. 
  1415 West Diehl Road 
  Naperville, IL 60563 
  Phone: +1 630-798-6182 
  Email: Jonathan.Sadler@tellabs.com 
                        
  Stephen Shew 
  Nortel Networks 
  PO Box 3511 Station C 
  Ottawa, ON 
  K1Y 4H7 
  Email: sdshew@nortelnetworks.com 
                        
  Kohei Shiomoto 
  Email: Shiomoto.Kohei@lab.ntt.co.jp 
                       
  Atsushi Watanabe 
  Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corporation 
  807A 1-1 Hikari-no-oka, Yokosuka-shi 
  Kanagawa 239-0847, Japan                                                      
  Email: atsushi@exa.onlab.ntt.co.jp 
                        
  Satoru Okamoto 
  Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corporation 
  9-11 Midori-cho 3-chome, Musashino-shi 
  Tokyo 180-8585, Japan 
  Email: okamoto@exa.onlab.ntt.co.jp 
                        
  Avri Doria 
  Div. of Computer Communications 
  Lulea University of Technology 
  S-971 87 Lulea 
  Sweden 
  
  
Choi at el    Expires - April 2003                            [Page 12] 

              GSMPv3 for Optical Support                  October 2002 
                
  Phone: +1 401 663 5024 
  EMail: avri@acm.org 
                        
  Fiffi Hellstrand 
  Nortel Networks AB 
  S:t Eriksgatan 115 A 
  SE-113 85 Stockholm Sweden 
  EMail: fiffi@nortelnetworks.com 
                        
  Kenneth Sundell 
  Nortel Networks AB 
  S:t Eriksgatan 115 A 
  SE-113 85 Stockholm Sweden 
  EMail: ksundell@nortelnetworks.com 
                        
  Tom Worster 
  Phone: +1 617 247 2624 
  EMail: fsb@thefsb.org 
                        
                        
Full Copyright Statement 
                        
  Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002).  All Rights Reserved. This 
  document and translations of it MAY be copied and furnished to others, 
  and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it or 
  assist in its implementation MAY be prepared, copied, published and 
  distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any kind, 
  provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are 
  included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this 
  document itself MAY not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
  the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other   
  Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
  developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for   
  copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process MUST be   
  followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than   
  English.  
                        
  The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be 
  revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.                                                          
                       
  This document and the information contained herein is provided on an    
  "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING    
  TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING    
  BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION    
  HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF    
  MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
                      
                      
Choi at el    Expires - April 2003                            [Page 13] 

            
