

     Internet Engineering Task Force                         Gorry Fairhurst 
     Internet Draft                             University of Aberdeen, U.K. 
     Document: draft-fair-ipdvb-ar-00.txt               Marie-Jos® Montpetit 
                                                             MJMontpetit.com 
                                                                             
                                                                             
                                                       Expires December 2003 
                                                                             
                                                                             
     Category: Informational                                       June 2003 
      
      
     Address Resolution for IP datagrams over MPEG-2 networks 
      
     Status of this Memo 
      
        This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
           all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.  
         
        Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
        Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that 
        other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
        Drafts. Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of 
        six months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
        documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts 
        as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in 
        progress."  
         
        The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt  
        The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
         
         
     Abstract 
         
        This document describes mechanisms to bind IPv4/IPv6 addresses with 
        MPEG-2 Transport Streams (TS). Protocols are required to signal 
        these addresses to the link receivers and transmitters, known as 
        Address Resolution, or Neighbour Discovery. Although this is often 
        associated with Ethernet [RFC803], these processes are essential to 
        the operation of any L2 network. MPEG-2 transmission networks often 
        utilize broadcast media (e.g., satellite and cable) where the 
        mapping may take into account issues related to network operations 
        and traffic engineering. 
         
        In MPEG-2 transmission networks, an IP address must be associated 
        with a Packet ID (PID) and specific transmission multiplex. Address 
        resolution complements the higher layer resource discovery tools 
        that are used to advertise IP sessions, such as SDP, and IMG. In 
        this document the different mechanisms used for address resolution 
        are reviewed and guidelines for future developments of efficient 
        schemes are given. 

       
     Expires December 2003                                         [page 1] 
     INTERNET DRAFT Address Resolution for IP datagrams over MPEG-2 networks 
     June 2003 
      
      
     Table of Contents 
         
             >>> AuthorsÌ Note: To be completed. <<< 
         
         
         
        Document History 
         
        -00 This draft is intended as a study item for proposed future work 
        by the IETF in this area.  
         




















       
     Expires December 2003                                         [page 2] 
     INTERNET DRAFT Address Resolution for IP datagrams over MPEG-2 networks 
     June 2003 
      
      
     1. Introduction 
         
        The MPEG-2 stream is defined in the specification ISO/IEC 138181. 
        MPEG-2 provides a time-division multiplexed stream that may contains 
        audio, video and other information. Each frame, known as an MPEG-2 
        TS Packet, contains 4 bytes of header and 188 bytes of data. The 
        standard also defines the PES packet (Packetized Elementary Stream) 
        and the Section Packet or Transport Stream (TS). The PES packet can 
        carry video, audio, private data and was originally used for some 
        data streaming applications; this usage is now historical. Each 
        MPEG-2 TS Packet is associated with one Transport Stream (TS) 
        logical channel, which is identified by a 13 bit Packet ID (PID) 
        carried in the MPEG-2 TS Packet header.  
         
        The standard also defines a MPEG-2 control plane that may be used to 
        transmit control information. For example, using System Information 
        (SI) Tables (ETSI-SI, ETSI-SI1], or System Information (SI) PSI 
        Tables can be used to carry PID information about the transported 
        stream. MPEG-2 address resolution assigns IP addresses to particular 
        transmission multiplexes, and within a multiplex to a specific PID.  
        The protocol signals this mapping to the other communicating devices 
        (Gateways and Receivers).  
         
        In some address resolution schemes, this address space is sub-
        divided into logical contexts € known as Platforms or Sections. One 
        use of this sub-division is to associate a separate context with 
        each IP service provider that shares a common MPEG-2 TS (i.e., uses 
        the same PID). 
         
        MPEG-2 Receivers may optionally be assigned a Network Point of 
        Attachment (NPA) to uniquely identify the L2 node within the MPEG-2 
        transmission network. An example of an NPA is the IEEE Medium Access 
        Control (MAC) address.  Where such addresses are used, these must 
        also be signalled by the address resolution procedure. 
         
        Finally, address resolution may need to signal the format of the 
        data being transmitted.  For example, the encapsulation used 
        (together with any compression scheme that was used at the sender) 
        [ID-IPDVB-REQ]. 
         
        This document describes mechanisms to signal the TS Multiplex, the 
        PID, and (if used) the MAC address / platform ID associated with 
        each IP flow to the network layer at the sender and receiver 
        (address resolution). This could, for example, be implemented via 
        descriptors sent in MPEG-2 SI tables (using the MPEG-2 control 
        plane), via one or more new SI tables, or in-band by a protocol 
        using a data channel (e.g. similar to the IPv4 Address Resolution 
        Protocol, ARP, or IPv6 Neighbour Discovery (ND) protocol). 
         

       
     Expires December 2003                                         [page 3] 
     INTERNET DRAFT Address Resolution for IP datagrams over MPEG-2 networks 
     June 2003 
      
      
     1.1 Address Resolution Issues 
      
        The IP address resolution support should support both existing IP 
        over MPEG-2 encapsulations (e.g., MPE [ETSI-DAT, ETSI-DAT1], and 
        also any IETF encapsulation that may be defined [ID-IPDVB-REQ]. 
         
        In some case, an MPEG-2 Transmission Network may support multiple IP 
        networks.  If this is the case, it is important to recognise the 
        context (scope) within which an address is resolved, to prevent 
        packets from one addressed scope leaking into other scopes. 
         
        Examples of overlapping IP address assignments include: 
         
        (i)    Private unicast addresses (e.g. in IPv4, 10/8 prefix; 
                172.16/12 prefix; 192.168/16 prefix) should be confined to 
                one addressed area. 

        (ii)   Some multicast addresses, (e.g., the scoped multicast 
                addresses sometimes used in private networks). These are 
                only valid within an addressed area (examples for IPv4 
                include; 239/8; 224.0.0/24; 224.0.1/24). Similar cases exist 
                for some IPv6 multicast addresses. 

        (iii)  Scoped multicast addresses.  Forwarding of these addresses 
                is controlled by the scope associated with the address. 
      
        IP packets with these addresses must not be allowed to travel 
        outside their intended scope, and may cause unexpected behaviour if 
        allowed to do so. 
         
        In addition, overlapping address assignments can arise when using 
        Level 2 Network Point of Attachment (NPA) addresses [ID-IPDVB-REQ]: 
         
        (i)    The NPA address must be unique within the addressed area. 
               IEEE MAC addresses used in Ethernet LANs are globally unique. 
               If the NPA addresses are not globally unique, the same NPA 
               address may be re-used by receivers in different addressed 
               areas.  
         
        (ii)   The NPA broadcast address (all 1Ìs MAC address). Traffic with 
               this address should be confined to one addressed area.  
      
        (iii)  Other non-IP protocols may also view sets of MAC multicast 
               addresses as link-local, and may produce unexpected results 
               if distributed across several private networks! 
      
        Reception of unicast packets destined for another addressed area may 
        lead to an increase in the rate of received packets by systems 
        connected via the network. IP end hosts normally filter received 
        unicast IP packets based on their assigned IP address. Reception of 
       
     Expires December 2003                                         [page 4] 
     INTERNET DRAFT Address Resolution for IP datagrams over MPEG-2 networks 
     June 2003 
      
      
        The additional network traffic may contribute to processing load but 
        should not lead to unexpected protocol behaviour. It does however 
        introduce a potential Denial of Service (DoS) opportunity. 
         
        When the Receiver acts as an IP router, the receipt of such packet 
        may lead to unexpected protocol behaviour. This also provides a 
        security vulnerability since arbitrary packets may be passed to the 
        IP layer. 
         
         
     1.2 Multicast Support 
         
        There are specific issues concerning IPv4 and IPv6 multicast over 
        MPEG-2 Transmission Networks.  
         
        (i)    Mapping IP multicast groups to the underlying MPEG-2 TS 
               Logical Channel (PID) and the MPEG-2 TS Multiplex. 
        (ii)   Provide signalling information to allow a receiver to locate 
               an IP multicast flow within an MPEG-2 TS Multiplex. 
        (iii)  Determining group membership (e.g. utilising IGMP/MLD).  
         
        Appropriate procedures need to be specified to identify the correct 
        action when the same multicast group is available on separate TS 
        Logical Channels.  This could arise when different end hosts act as 
        senders to contribute IP packets with the same IP group destination 
        address. 
         
        Another different case arises when a receiver may potentially 
        receive more than one copy of the same packet.  In some cases, these 
        may be sent in different TS Logical Channels, or even different TS 
        Multiplexes. In this case, at the IP level, the host/router may be 
        unaware of this duplication. 
         
        The primary goal of multicast support will be efficient filtering of 
        IP-multicast packets by the receiver, and the mapping of IPv4 and 
        IPv6 multicast addresses onto the associated PID value and TS 
        Multiplex.  The design should permit a large number of active 
        multicast groups, and should minimise the processing load at the 
        receiver when filtering and forwarding IP multicast packets. For 
        example, schemes that may be easily implemented in hardware would be 
        beneficial, since these may relieve the drivers and operating 
        systems from discarding unwanted multicast traffic. 
         




       
     Expires December 2003                                         [page 5] 
     INTERNET DRAFT Address Resolution for IP datagrams over MPEG-2 networks 
     June 2003 
      
      
     2. Conventions used in this document 
         
        ACK: A cumulative TCP acknowledgment. In this document, this term 
        refers to a TCP segment (packet) that carries a cumulative 
        acknowledgement (ACK), but no data. 
         
        Adaptation Field: Option control overhead or padding associated with 
        an MPEG-2 TS Packet. Examples of overhead are: TS Logical Channel 
        encryption details and clock (PCR) information to synchronise a set 
        of TS Logical Channels. 
         
        AIT: Application Information Table specified by the Multimedia Home 
        Platform (MHP) specifications [ETSI-MHP]. This table may carry 
        IPv4/IPv6 to MPEG-2 TS address resolution information. 
         
        ATSC: Advanced Television Systems Committee [ATSC]. A set of 
        framework and associated standards for the transmission of video, 
        audio, and data, using the ISO MPEG-2 standard. 
         
        DSM-CC: Digital Storage Management Command and Control [ISO-DSMCC]. 
        A formatting defined by the ISO MPEG-2 standard, which is carried in 
        an MPEG-2 private section. 
         
        DVB: Digital Video Broadcast [ETSI-DVB]. A set of framework and 
        associated standards for the transmission of video, audio, and data, 
        using the ISO MPEG-2 standard. 
         
        DVB-RCS: Digital Video Broadcast Return Channel via Satellite. A bi-
        directional IPv4/IPv6 service employing low-cost Receivers. 
         
        ENCAPSULATOR: A network device that receives Ethernet frames or IP 
        packets, and formats these for output as a transport stream of TS 
        Packets. 
       
        FORWARD DIRECTION: The dominant direction of data transfer over a 
        network path. Data transfer in the forward direction is called 
        "forward transfer".  Packets travelling in the forward direction 
        follow the forward path through the IP network. 
         
        INT: Internet/MAC Notification Table.  A uni-directional addressing 
        resolution mechanism using SI and/or PSI Tables. 
         
        MAC: Medium Access and Control of the Ethernet IEEE 802 standard of 
        protocols (see also NPA). 
         
        MHP: Multimedia Home Platform. An integrated MPEG-2 multimedia 
        receiver, that may (in some cases) support IPv4/IPv6 services. 
         
        MMT: Multicast Mapping Table (proprietary extension to DVB-RCS). 
         

       
     Expires December 2003                                         [page 6] 
     INTERNET DRAFT Address Resolution for IP datagrams over MPEG-2 networks 
     June 2003 
      
      
     MPE: Multiprotocol Encapsulation [ETSI-DAT, ETSI-DAT1]. A scheme that 
     encapsulates Ethernet frames or IP Packets, creating a  
        DSM-CC Section. The Section will be sent in a series of TS Packets  
        over a TS Logical Channel. 
         
        MPEG-2: A set of standards specified by the Motion Picture Experts 
        Group (MPEG), and standardized by the International Standards 
        Organisation (ISO) [ISO-MPEG]. 
         
        NPA: Network Point of Attachment. Addresses primarily used for 
        station (receiver) identification within a local network (e.g. IEEE 
        MAC address). 
         
        PES: Programme Elementary Stream. A format of MPEG-2 TS packet 
        payload usually used for video or audio information in MPEG-2 [ISO-
        MPEG]. 
         
        PID: Packet Identifier. A 13-bit field carried in the header of all 
        MPEG-2 Transport Stream packets [ISO-MPEG]. This is used to identify 
        the TS Logical Channel to which it belongs. A PID of 8191 indicates 
        a null packet that must be discarded by a receiver.  
         
        REVERSE DIRECTION: The direction in which feedback control messages 
        generally flow (e.g. acknowledgments of a forward TCP transfer 
        flow). Data transfer could also happen in this direction (and it is 
        termed "reverse transfer"). 
         
        PRIVATE SECTION: A syntactic structure used for mapping all service 
        information (e.g. an SI table) into TS Packets.  A table may be 
        divided into a number of sections.  All sections of a table must be 
        carried over a single TS Logical Channel. 
         
        PSI: Programme Specific Information: In this document, the term is 
        used to describe any table used to convey information about a subset 
        of services carried in a TS Multiplex (e.g. [ISO-MPEG]). PSI tables 
        are carried in MPEG-2 private sections.   
         
        SI TABLE: Service Information Table. In this document, the term is 
        used to describe any table used to convey information about the 
        service carried in a TS Multiplex (e.g. [ISO-MPEG]). SI tables are 
        carried in MPEG-2 private sections.  
         
        STB: Set Top Box. A consumer equipment (Receiver) for reception of 
        digital TV services. 
         
        TS: Transport Stream [ISO-MPEG], a method of transmission at the 
        MPEG-2 level using TS Packets; it represents level 2 of the ISO/OSI 
        reference model. See also TS Logical Channel and TS Multiplex. 
      

       
     Expires December 2003                                         [page 7] 
     INTERNET DRAFT Address Resolution for IP datagrams over MPEG-2 networks 
     June 2003 
      
      
        TS LOGICAL CHANNEL: A channel identified at the MPEG-2 level; it 
        represents level 2 of the ISO/OSI reference model. All packets sent 
        over a channel carry the same PID value. 
         
        TS MULTIPLEX: A set of MPEG-2 TS Logical Channels sent over a single 
        common physical bearer (i.e. a link transmitting at a specified 
        symbol rate, FEC setting, and transmission frequency). 
      
        TS PACKET: A fixed-length 188B unit of data sent over an MPEG-2 
        multiplex [ISO-MPEG]; it corresponds to the cells, of e.g. ATM 
        networks, and is frequently also referred to as a TS_cell.  Each TS 
        Packet carries a 4B header, plus optional overhead including a 
        pointer to the next payload header (PUSI), and an adaptation field. 
        Each TS packet carries a PID value to associate it with a single TS 
        Logical Channel. 
         


















       
     Expires December 2003                                         [page 8] 
     INTERNET DRAFT Address Resolution for IP datagrams over MPEG-2 networks 
     June 2003 
      
      
     3. MPEG-2 Address Resolution Operation 
      
        In this section, the MPEG-2 address resolution mechanisms are 
        reviewed. In MPEG-2, the information about the set of MPEG-2 TS 
        Logical Channels carried over a TS Multiplex is usually distributed 
        via tables (service information, SI) sent using channels assigned a 
        specific (well-known) set of PIDs. This system was originally 
        designed for audio/video distribution to set-top-boxes.  The design 
        requires access to and processing of the SI table information [ETSI-
        SI, ETSI-SI1] (which is carried in MPEG-2 section format 
        [ISO_DSMCC]).  This scheme is complex, and reflects the complexity 
        of delivering and co-ordinating the various TS Logical Channels 
        associated with a multimedia TV programme. Because of its historical 
        usage, there is no direct support for IP mechanisms for 
        identification of the TS multiplex and PID in use for a particular 
        IP address. It is also important to highlight that a PID value is 
        associated with a unidirectional channel, also a result of its 
        initial usage. 
         
         
        >>> AuthorÌs Note: Input requested from ATSC, and users/vendors of 
        other non-DVB systems <<< 
         
         
     3.1 Static configuration. 
         
        The static mapping option (IP addresses or flows statically mapped 
        to PIDs) is the equivalent to signalling "out-of-band". The 
        application programmer, installing engineer, or user receives the 
        mapping via some outside means (not in the MPEG-2 TS). This is 
        useful for testing, experimental networks, small subnetworks and 
        closed domains. 
         
        A single "well-known" PID is a specialisation of this, but requires 
        all IP traffic to be placed into the specified TS logical channel. 
        Section filtering may be used to differentiate subnetworks at the 
        expense of added complexity and potential performance penalties. 
         
         
     3.2 Table-Based Address Resolution 
         
        MPEG-2 associates multimedia MPEG information with PIDs, using MPEG-
        2 Tables.  A TS multiplex may provide PID information for IP 
        services by integrating additional information into the existing 
        MPEG-2 tables, or to define additional tables specific to the IP 
        service. This has a dual advantage: 
         
             (i)    IP specific information can be obtained directly. 
         
             (ii)   The mechanism uses an already standardised mechanism. 
         
       
     Expires December 2003                                         [page 9] 
     INTERNET DRAFT Address Resolution for IP datagrams over MPEG-2 networks 
     June 2003 
      
      
        A large number of methods exist within the standards and current 
        implementations of systems for allowing a MPEG-2 receiver to 
        identify the appropriate PID and multiplex using to transmit traffic 
        to a specific IP address. Examples include: 
          
              
             (i)    IP/MAC Notification Table (INT) in the DVB Data standard 
                    [ETS_DAT]. This provides uni-directional address 
                    resolution of IPv4/IPv6 multicast addresses to MPEG-2 
                    TS. 
              
             (ii)   Application Information Table (AIT) in the Multimedia 
                    Home Platform (MHP) specifications [ETSI-MHP]. 
              
             (iii)  Multicast Mapping Table (MMT) an MPEG-2 Table employed 
                    by some DVB-RCS systems to provide uni-directional 
                    address resolution of IPv4 multicast addresses to MPEG-2 
                    TS. 
              
             (iv)    >>> AuthorÌs Note: Please send details of experience 
                    using the above schemes (and any others) to authors. <<< 
         
        The MMT and AIT are used for specific applications. The INT is more 
        general purpose, and supports both IPv4 and IPv6 and can be used in 
        combination with the other tables. It is the favoured choice of some 
        members of the DVB community for address management and is briefly 
        described below. 
         
        3.2.1 Description of the IP/MAC Notification Table (INT) and its 
        usage. 
         
        The INT provides a mechanism for carrying information about the 
        location of IP/MAC flows within DVB networks. An IP/MAC Platform 
        represents a set of IP/MAC streams and/or receiver devices. Such a 
        Platform may span several transport streams within one or multiple 
        DVB networks and represents a single IP network with a harmonized 
        address space (i.e. one without address conflicts). The IP/MAC 
        Platform concept allows for the coexistence of several non-
        harmonized IP/MAC address spaces on the same DVB network. 
              
        The INT allows "subnets" and fully specified single destination 
        addresses to make signalling bandwidth efficient and flexible as 
        required. The "subnet mask" (also for IPv6) can be given in full 
        form or in slash notation (e.g. /127), this supports IPv6 prefixes. 
              
        Multicast addresses can be given with or without source (address or 
        range), although if source address is given then only the slash 
        notation can be used for prefixes/subnets. 
              
        In addition to identification and security descriptors the following 
        descriptors are used for address binding in INT tables: 
       
     Expires December 2003                                        [page 10] 
     INTERNET DRAFT Address Resolution for IP datagrams over MPEG-2 networks 
     June 2003 
      
      
              
             (i)      target_MAC_address_descriptor: The descriptor used to 
                       describe a single or group of MAC addresses (and 
                       their mask). 
              
             (ii)     target_MAC_address_range_descriptor: May be used to 
                       setup filters. 
              
              
             (iii)    target_IP_address_descriptor:      The      descriptor 
                       describing a single or group of IPv4 unicast or 
                       multicast addresses (and their mask). 
              
             (iv)     target_IP_slash_descriptor:  Allows  definition  and 
                       announment of an IPv4 subnet. 
      
              
             (v)      target_IP_source_slash_descriptor:  Uses  source  and 
                       destination addresses to target a single or group of 
                       devices; could be used to define flows. 
              
             (vi)     IP/MAC  stream_location_descriptor:  This  descriptor 
                       directly locates the IP/MAC stream in a DVB network. 
      
      
        The following descriptors provide corresponding functions for IPv6 
        addresses: 
              
                  target_IPv6_address_descriptor 
                  target_IPv6_slash_descriptor 
                  and target_IPv6_source_slash_descriptor 
                   
        In addition, the ISP_access_mode_descriptor allows definition if the 
        access to the ISP is done via an alternative non-DVB network (hence 
        another address is necessary). 
         
        The INT provides a set of descriptors to manage addressing in a DVB 
        network. Its drawbacks are that while the IP/MAC concept is general 
        enough there is still a need to manage the addressing (and the 
        traffic) at the PID level. It currently is defined only for Multi-
        Protocol Encapsulation (MPE) and would need extension to support 
        other schemes (e.g. [IPDVB-REQ]). In addition the use of a 
        centralized management prevents the implementation of a more dynamic 
        scheme. 
         
         
     3.3 IP Address Resolution Protocol 
         
        Another possible approach is to design a query/response protocol 
        (similar to, or based on the neighbour advertisements of the IPv6 ND 
        protocol), which operates over an MPEG-2 TS Logical Channel using a 
       
     Expires December 2003                                        [page 11] 
     INTERNET DRAFT Address Resolution for IP datagrams over MPEG-2 networks 
     June 2003 
      
      
        previously agreed PID (e.g. configured, or communicated using a SI 
        table).  
         
        While the Neighbour Advertisement Protocol [RFC2461]could be used as 
        a basis for such a design for IPv6 addresses, the extensive use of 
        broadcast messages to request and transmit layer 2 addresses would 
        prove inefficient for DVB systems using a wireless physical layer.  
         
        Both ARP and ND allow unsolicited advertisements of bindings by a 
        sender that are broadcast/multicast to the network, without 
        requiring the overhead of a client request.  However, both ND and 
        ARP are currently restricted to advertising a single association per 
        message. To achieve efficient transmission and receiver processing 
        over broadcast physical layer, a method needs to be found that 
        advertises several associations in a single message (e.g., following 
        the method used in MPEG-2 Tables). 
         
        The development of IP_layer address resolution would have several 
        merits, particularly for IP-only services and two-way MPEG-2 
        transmission networks.  Not only would may release a Receiver from 
        performing MPEG-2 table processing, it would also allow much more 
        dynamic association of PIDs to traffic. Examples of dynamic 
        associations include: association/freeing of PIDs in response to 
        join or prune actions taken by multicast routing protocols, or on 
        assignment of new IP addresses using DHCP/DHCPv6.  Implementing such 
        protocols above the IP layer (e.g. using multicast IP transport, as 
        used by ND), would allow this protocol to be implemented in a 
        portable way € not dependent on specific receiver hardware/drivers 
        and would allow future integration of the functions within IP 
        routers. 
         
        The nature of an MPEG-2 transport network and the need to maintain 
        flexibility for the operator, means that a protocol would need to 
        use operator specifics for address resolution. Adding to this 
        complexity, 2-way MPEG-2 services (such as DVB-RCS) employ a pair of 
        logically separate unidirectional TS, requiring separate return and 
        forward resolution. No address resolution protocol has yet been 
        defined for MPEG-2 transmission networks.   
         
         
     4. Recommendations 
         
        >>> AuthorÌs note: Input required, please send to ip-dvb mailing 
        list <<< 
         
        >>> AuthorÌs note: Input requested from operators <<< 
         
      
      
     5. Security Considerations 
         
       
     Expires December 2003                                        [page 12] 
     INTERNET DRAFT Address Resolution for IP datagrams over MPEG-2 networks 
     June 2003 
      
      
        The normal security issues relating to the use of wire-less links 
        for transport Internet traffic should be considered.  Readers are 
        also refered to the known security issues associated with ARP 
        [RFC826] and ND. 
      
         
     6. Acknowledgments 
         
        The authors wish to thank Rod Walsh, Jun Takei, and Alexander Adolf 
        for their inputs.  





















       
     Expires December 2003                                        [page 13] 
     INTERNET DRAFT Address Resolution for IP datagrams over MPEG-2 networks 
     June 2003 
      
      
     7. References 
         
        >>> AuthorÌs note: This list may need to be pruned <<< 
         
        [ATSC] A/53, "ATSC Digital Television Standard", Advanced Television 
        Systems Committee (ATSC), Doc. A/53, 1995. 
         
        [ATSC-DAT] A/90, "ATSC Data Broadcast Standard", Advanced Television 
        Systems Committee (ATSC), Doc. A/090, 26 July 00 
         
        [ATSC-DATG] A/91, "Recommended Practice: Implementation Guidelines 
        for the ATSC Data Broadcast Standard", Advanced Television Systems 
        Committee (ATSC),Doc. A/91. 10 June 2001 
      
        [ATSC-PSIP-TC] A/65A, "Program and System Information Protocol for 
        Terrestrial Broadcast and Cable", Advanced Television Systems 
        Committee (ATSC), Doc. A/65A, 23 Dec 1997, Rev. A € 31, May 2000. 
      
        [ETSI-DAT]  EN  301  192,  "Specifications  for  Data  Broadcasting", 
        v1.3.1, European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI), May 
        2003. http://www.etsi/org/ 
         
        [ETSI-DAT1] EN 101 202, "Implementation Guide for Data", v1.2.1, 
        European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI), May 2003. 
        http://www.etsi/org/ 
      
        [ETSI-MHP] ETSI TS 101 812, "Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); 
        Multimedia Home Platform (MHP) Specification", v1.2.1, European 
        Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI), June 2002. 
        http://www.etsi/org/ 
         
        [ETSI-SI] ETSI EN 300 468: "Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); 
        Specification for Service Information (SI) in DVB systems". 
         
        [ETSI-SI1] ETSI TR 101 162: "Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); 
        Allocation of Service Information (SI) codes for DVB systems". 
         
        [ID-IPDVB-REQ] Fairhurst, G., Clausen, H.D., Collini-Nocker, B., and 
        H. Liner, "Requirements for transmission of IP datagrams over DVB 
        networks", Internet Draft, Work in Progress, IETF. 
         
        [ID-IPDVB-Enc] H. D. Clausen, B. Collini-Nocker, H. Linder, G. 
        Fairhurst, "Simple Encapsulation for transmission of IP Datagrams 
        over MPEG-2/DVB networks‚, draft-unisal-ipdvb-enc-xx.txt, Internet 
        Draft, Work in Progress, IETF. 
         
        [ISO-DSMCC] ISO/IEC IS 13818-6 "Information technology -- Generic 
        coding of moving pictures and associated audio information -- Part 
        6: Extensions for DSM-CC is a full software implementation", 
        International Standards Organisation (ISO). 
         
       
     Expires December 2003                                        [page 14] 
     INTERNET DRAFT Address Resolution for IP datagrams over MPEG-2 networks 
     June 2003 
      
      
        [RFC826] Plummer, D. "An Ethernet Address Resolution Protocol", RFC 
        826, IETF, November 1982. 
         
        [RFC1112] Deering, S.E., "Host Extensions for IP Multicasting",  
        RFC1112, (STD05), IETF. August 1989. 
         
        [RFC1122] B. Braden, ed., "Requirements for Internet Hosts  - 
        Communication Layers", RFC 1122. 
         
        [RFC2461] Narten, T., Nordmark, E., and W. Simpson, "Neighbor 
        Discovery for IP Version 6 (IPv6), RFC 2461, December 1998. 
         
        [RFC2464] Crawford. M., "Transmission of IPv6 Packets over Ethernet 
        Networks", RFC2464, IETF December 1998. 
          
        [RFC3077] Duros, E., W. Dabbous, H. Izumiyama, Y. Zhang, "A Link 
        Layer Tunneling Mechanism for Unidirectional Links", RFC3077. 
          
      
      
     8.Authors' Addresses 
         
        Godred Fairhurst 
        Department of Engineering 
        University of Aberdeen 
        Aberdeen, AB24 3UE 
        UK 
        Email: gorry@erg.abdn.ac.uk 
        Web: http://www.erg.abdn.ac.uk/users/gorry 
         
      
        Marie-Jos® Montpetit 
        168 Mystic Valley Parkway 
        Arlington, MA, USA 
        Email: marie@mjmontpetit.com 
         
         
     Full Copyright Statement 
      
        "Copyright (C) The Internet Society (date). All Rights Reserved. 
        This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
        others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it 
        or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published 
        and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any 
        kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph 
        are included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this 
        document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing 
        the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
        Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
        developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for 
        copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be 
       
     Expires December 2003                                        [page 15] 
     INTERNET DRAFT Address Resolution for IP datagrams over MPEG-2 networks 
     June 2003 
      
      
        followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than 
        English. 
         
        The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be 
        revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns. 
         
     9. IANA Considerations 
         
      
        NOT KNOWN AT THIS TIME.  





















       
     Expires December 2003                                        [page 16] 
