


ICN Research Group                                           A. Lindgren
Internet-Draft                                          F. Ben Abdesslem
Intended status: Experimental                                 B. Ahlgren
Expires: January 7, 2016                                            SICS
                                                              O. Schelen
                                          Lulea University of Technology
                                                                A. Malik
                                                                Ericsson
                                                            July 6, 2015


   Applicability and Tradeoffs of Information-Centric Networking for
                             Efficient IoT
                  draft-lindgren-icnrg-efficientiot-03

Abstract

   This document outlines the tradeoffs involved in utilizing
   Information Centric Networking (ICN) for the Internet of Things (IoT)
   scenarios.  It describes the contexts and applications where the IoT
   would benefit from ICN, and where a host-centric approach would be
   better.  The requirements imposed by the heterogeneous nature of IoT
   networks are discussed (e.g., in terms of connectivity, power
   availability, computational and storage capacity).  Design choices
   are then proposed for an IoT architecture to handle these
   requirements, while providing efficiency and scalability.  An
   objective is to not require any IoT specific changes of the ICN
   architecture per se, but we do indicate some potential modifications
   of ICN that would improve efficiency and scalability for IoT and
   other applications.

   This document mainly serves as a problem statement and will not
   present a conclusive architecture design.  It can be used as a basis
   for further discussion and to design architectures for the IoT.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference



Lindgren, et al.         Expires January 7, 2016                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft            ICN for Efficient IoT                July 2015


   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 7, 2016.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2015 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

































Lindgren, et al.         Expires January 7, 2016                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft            ICN for Efficient IoT                July 2015


Table of Contents

   1.  Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.  Advantages of using ICN for IoT  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     2.1.  Naming of Devices, Data and Services . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     2.2.  Distributed Caching  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     2.3.  Decoupling between Sender and Receiver . . . . . . . . . .  5
   3.  Design Challenges of IoT over ICN  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.1.  Naming of Devices, Data and Services . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.2.  Efficiency of Distributed Caching  . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     3.3.  Decoupling between Sender and Receiver . . . . . . . . . .  8
   4.  Proposed Design Choices for IoT over ICN . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     4.1.  Relationship to existing Internet protocols  . . . . . . .  9
     4.2.  Data naming, format and composition  . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     4.3.  Immutable atomic data objects  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     4.4.  Data naming in streams of immutable data objects . . . . . 11
     4.5.  The importance of time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     4.6.  Decoupling and roles of senders and receivers  . . . . . . 13
     4.7.  Combination of PULL/PUSH model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
     4.8.  Capability advertisements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
     4.9.  Name-based routing vs name resolution + 1-step vs
           2-step . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
     4.10. What's naming and what's searching . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
     4.11. Meta data, tagging/tracing of data . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
     4.12. Handling actuators in the ICN model  . . . . . . . . . . . 17
     4.13. Role of constrained IoT devices as ICN nodes . . . . . . . 18
   5.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
     5.1.  Retrieving trusted content from untrusted caches . . . . . 20
     5.2.  Enabling application-layer processing in untrusted
           intermediaries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
     5.3.  Energy efficiency of cryptographic mechanisms  . . . . . . 20
   6.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23


















Lindgren, et al.         Expires January 7, 2016                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft            ICN for Efficient IoT                July 2015


1.  Motivation

   Information Centric Networking (ICN) has been shown to efficiently
   meet current usage demands of computer networks, where users consume
   content from the network instead of communicating with specific
   hosts.  The applications and usage of the Internet of Things (IoT)
   often imply information centric usage patterns, where users or
   devices consume IoT generated content from the network instead of
   communicating with specific hosts or devices.

   However, while the IoT shares many characteristics with typical
   information centric applications, it differs because of the high
   heterogeneity of connected devices (including sensors and actuators),
   the very high rate of new information being generated, and the
   heterogeneity in requirements from applications regarding information
   retrieval and dynamic actuation.  Because of these differences, using
   an Information Centric Network to design an architecture of the IoT
   is often, but not always, beneficial.  Depending on the context, the
   IoT architecture may benefit from using an ICN or a host-centric
   network (HCN).  In practice, the right approach is a complex tradeoff
   that depends on the applications and usage of the IoT network.

   This document describes some advantages and inconveniences of using
   an ICN for the IoT architecture, and helps finding the right tradeoff
   between using an ICN or an HCN, depending on the context.  In this,
   we explore how to represent and model IoT on top of existing ICN
   solutions, without requiring IoT specific functionality in the ICN.
   We discuss this in terms of effectiveness, efficiency and
   scalability.  However, in some cases we do invite for discussion on
   tentative additions of functionality to ICN in order to make the
   overall IoT solution more efficient and scalable.




















Lindgren, et al.         Expires January 7, 2016                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft            ICN for Efficient IoT                July 2015


2.  Advantages of using ICN for IoT

   A key concept of ICN is the ability to name data independently from
   the current location at which it is stored, which simplifies caching
   and enables decoupling of sender and receiver.  Using ICN to design
   an architecture for IoT data potentially provides such advantages
   compared to using traditional host-centric networks.  This section
   highlights general benefits that ICN could provide to IoT networks.

2.1.  Naming of Devices, Data and Services

   The heterogeneity of both network equipment deployed and services
   offered by IoT networks leads to a large variety of data, services
   and devices.  While using a traditional host-centric architecture,
   only devices or their network interfaces are named at the network
   level, leaving to the application layer the task to name data and
   services.  In many common applications of IoT networks, data and
   services are the main goal, and specific communication between two
   devices is secondary.  The network distributes content and provides a
   service, instead of establishing a communication link between two
   devices.  In this context, data content and services can be provided
   by several devices, or group of devices, hence naming data and
   services is often more important than naming the devices.

2.2.  Distributed Caching

   While caching mechanisms are already used by other types of overlay
   networks, IoT networks can potentially benefit even more from caching
   systems, because of their resource constraints.  Wireless bandwidth
   and power supply can be limited for multiple devices sharing a
   communication channel, and for small mobile devices powered by
   batteries.  In this case, avoiding unnecessary transmissions with IoT
   devices to retrieve and distribute IoT data to multiple places is
   important, and storing such content in the network can save wireless
   bandwidth and battery power.  Moreover, as for other types of
   networks, applications for IoT networks requiring shorter delays can
   benefit from local caches to reduce delays between content request
   and delivery.

2.3.  Decoupling between Sender and Receiver

   IoT devices may be mobile and face intermittent network connectivity.
   When specific data is requested, such data can often be delivered by
   ICN without any consistent direct connectivity between devices.
   Apart from using structured caching systems as described previously,
   information can also be spread by forwarding data opportunistically.





Lindgren, et al.         Expires January 7, 2016                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft            ICN for Efficient IoT                July 2015


3.  Design Challenges of IoT over ICN

   As outlined in Section 2, there are potential benefits from using ICN
   to implement IoT communication architectures.  However, in order to
   obtain a scalable and efficient architecture there are some aspects
   of ICN that must be specifically considered in making the right
   design choices for IoT.  In fact, using an ICN may not be beneficial
   in all desired sub-functions and scenarios.  This section outlines
   some of the ICN specific challenges that must be considered and
   describes some of the trade offs that will be involved.  We will
   address these challenges in our proposed design choices later in
   Section 4.

3.1.  Naming of Devices, Data and Services

   The ICN approach of named data and services (i.e., device independent
   naming) is typically desirable when retrieving IoT data.  However,
   data centric naming may also pose challenges.

   o  Naming of devices: Naming devices is often important in an IoT
      network.  The presence of actuators requires clients to act
      specifically on a device, e.g. to switch it on or off.  Also,
      managing and monitoring the devices for administration purposes
      requires devices to have a specific name allowing to identify them
      uniquely.  There are multiple ways to achieve device naming, even
      in systems that are data centric by nature.  For example, in
      systems that are addressable or searchable based on metadata or
      sensor content, the device identifier can be included as a special
      kind of metadata or sensor reading.

   o  Size of data/service name: In information centric applications,
      the size of the data is typically larger than its name.  For the
      IoT, sensors and actuators are very common, and they can generate
      or use data as small as a short integer containing a temperature
      value, or a one-byte instruction to switch off an actuator.  The
      name of the content for each of these pieces of data has to
      uniquely identify the content.  For this reason, many existing
      naming schemes have long names that are likely to be longer than
      the actual data content for many types of IoT applications.
      Furthermore, naming schemes that have self certifying properties
      (e.g., by creating the name based on a hash of the content),
      suffer from the problem that the object can only be requested when
      the object has been created and the content is already known, thus
      requiring some form of indexing service.  While this is an
      acceptable overhead for larger data objects, it is infeasible for
      use when the object size is on the order of a few bytes.





Lindgren, et al.         Expires January 7, 2016                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft            ICN for Efficient IoT                July 2015


   o  Hash-based content name: Hash algorithms are commonly used to name
      content in order to verify that the content is the one requested.
      This is only possible in contexts where the requested object is
      already existing, and where there is a directory service to look
      up names.  This approach is suitable for systems with large data
      objects where it is important to verify the content.

   o  Metadata-based content name: Relying on metadata allows to
      generate a name for an object before it is created.  However this
      mechanism requires metadata matching semantics.

   o  Naming of services: Similarly to naming of devices or data,
      services can be referred to with a unique identifier, provided by
      a specific device or by someone assigned by a central authority as
      the service provider.  It can however also be a service provided
      by anyone meeting some certain metadata conditions.  Example of
      services include content retrieval, that takes a content name/
      description as input and returns the value of that content, and
      actuation, that takes an actuation command as input and possibly
      returns a status code afterwards.

3.2.  Efficiency of Distributed Caching

   Distributed caching is a key opportunity with ICN.  However, an IoT
   framework must be carefully designed to reap the maximum benefits of
   ICN caching.  When content popularity is heterogeneous, some content
   is often requested repeatedly.  In that case, the network can benefit
   from caching.  Another case where caching would be beneficial is when
   devices with low duty cycle are present in the network and when
   access to the cloud infrastructure is limited.

   However, using distributed caching mechanisms in the network is not
   useful when each object is only requested at most once, as a cache
   hit can only occur for the second request and later.  It may also be
   less useful to have caches distributed throughout ICN nodes in cases
   when there are overlays of distributed repositories, e.g., a cloud or
   a Content Distribution Network (CDN), from which all clients can
   retrieve the data.  Using ICN to retrieve data from such services is
   beneficial, but in case of dense occurrence of overlay CDN servers
   the additional benefit of caching in ICN nodes would be lower.
   Another example is when the name of the data has a different meaning
   depending on the context, or if the name refers to an object with
   variable content/state.  For example, when the last value for a
   sensor reading is requested, the returned data should change every
   time the sensor reading is updated.  In that case, ICN caching may
   increase the risk that cache inconsistencies result in old data being
   returned.




Lindgren, et al.         Expires January 7, 2016                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft            ICN for Efficient IoT                July 2015


3.3.  Decoupling between Sender and Receiver

   Decoupling the sender and receiver is useful mechanism offered by the
   ICN approach, especially for content retrieval with duty cycling
   devices or devices with intermittent connectivity.  However, in order
   to efficiently retrieve data it must be possible for requestors
   (receivers) to easily deduce the name of the data to request, without
   any direct contact with the responder (sender).

   Nevertheless, de-coupling is a challenge when authentication is
   needed for management and actuation, or when real-time interaction
   between devices is necessary.  Solutions for object security
   supporting decoupled authentication (e.g., similar to signing by
   proxy), and solutions for pushing data to decoupled entities must be
   explored.




































Lindgren, et al.         Expires January 7, 2016                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft            ICN for Efficient IoT                July 2015


4.  Proposed Design Choices for IoT over ICN

   This section describes some fundamental design choices and trade-offs
   to allow for effective, efficient and scalable handling of IoT data
   in an ICN network.  An objective with these choices is to facilitate
   that an ICN network can be used without requiring additions of IoT
   application specific functionality in the ICN network.  However, in
   some cases we do invite for discussion on tentative additions of
   functionality to ICN in order to make the overall IoT solution more
   efficient and scalable.

4.1.  Relationship to existing Internet protocols

   IoT devices can have a role as content generators (e.g., sensors) in
   where an ICN paradigm should be effective for data retrieval and
   dissemination.  However, IoT devices may also have roles as actuators
   in which such devices shall be accessed for control purposes.  The
   use of an ICN network may be less natural when actuation and control
   of specific devices is the key objective.  As ICN networks are likely
   to coexist with existing Internet protocols in most situation, often
   being deployed as overlay networks, we will consider that there may
   be situations where a host centric addressing is more suitable for
   IoT.  Thus, to facilitate support of IoT for both data generation and
   control/actuation, we assume that ICN routing should therefore work
   in concert with existing Internet protocols.  However, we will also
   investigate the possibility of utilizing ICN network primitives for
   actuation as well to see what the tradeoffs are, as can be seen in
   Section 4.12.

4.2.  Data naming, format and composition

   The data served by ICN may be aggregated from smaller components.
   Although IoT data components in many cases are small and simple, a
   general challenge in defining ICN applications is to decide how to
   compose (i.e. group) the data so that it can be effectively named and
   requested.  Requesting partial data inside a composition may become a
   challenge.  Indeed, if data is composed and sub components are
   requested, which are not directly namable by the requestor, finding
   such a subset will resemble a database query which may require
   processing to resolve.  The ICN network should not have to support
   such complexity.

   A design choice regarding IoT data is therefore to keep the ICN
   network free from supporting any advanced queries and instead only
   support directly addressable (i.e., named) data objects.  Any
   advanced composition (hierarchical, graph-based, hyperlink, etc.) of
   IoT data, and related searching for sub-components, would be handled
   in servers/endpoints instead of inside the ICN network.  The issue of



Lindgren, et al.         Expires January 7, 2016                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft            ICN for Efficient IoT                July 2015


   IoT data structure and searching at that higher level is for further
   study.  For effective ICN interoperability, only the structure of the
   atomically addressable data objects must be agreed and mapped to the
   underlying ICN naming scheme.  This is to avoid making new
   requirements on the ICN and to make sure that the need for
   computation is kept low in the ICN network, essentially limiting it
   to deciding whether there is a cache hit or not.  There are some
   considerations following from this design choice.  First, the size of
   the directly addressable objects could be kept fairly small to avoid
   that unwanted data is pulled over resource constrained networks and
   cached in the ICN network (resulting in better resource utilization,
   better localization of desired data, and ultimately better
   scalability).  There is however a tradeoff in that smaller data
   objects results in a larger naming overhead.  Second, this approach
   means that a flat ICN address space would be sufficient, but for
   practical reasons a hierarchical address space may add some benefits.
   In any case, there is flexibility in using different addressing
   schemes depending on what is supported by the existing ICN framework.

4.3.  Immutable atomic data objects

   The number of IoT devices as well as the amount of data produced by
   these devices may potentially be very large, and the data may be
   spread over very large ICN networks.  The potential problem of cache
   inconsistencies in an ICN network may therefore be large if we allow
   for data to be mutable objects.  To support scalability and
   horizontal distribution it is essential to define data properties
   that facilitate independency and consistency, while minimizing the
   need for dynamic global synchronization.

   A key design choice is therefore to mandate that IoT only uses
   immutable atomic data objects.  This supports large scale
   distribution by ensuring that there is no stale data in the ICN
   domain.  A cache hit is always a clean hit.  A trade-off from this is
   that dynamic data must be modeled as a stream of immutable data
   objects, potentially consuming more resources.  However, this
   challenge can be resolved by smart caching strategies where old data
   is dropped.

   There is however some practicalities to consider.  Devices, including
   IoT devices, are restarted now and then.  They might in this process
   loose their state, including what name they used for a particular
   data value.  So in practise it will be hard to implement a strong
   assumption on immutable data.  We therefore likely must be prepared
   to handle the occasional exception to this rule.






Lindgren, et al.         Expires January 7, 2016               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft            ICN for Efficient IoT                July 2015


4.4.  Data naming in streams of immutable data objects

   Many IoT devices produce new sensor readings or other data values at
   regular intervals or on demand.  With the design choice on immutable
   atomic data objects, there is a need to model the resulting stream of
   sensor readings with a stream of immutable data objects in the ICN
   domain.  The need in this situation is very similar, if not
   identical, to video streaming, where video frames or chunks are
   immutable data objects in a video stream.

   A key advantage of modelling IoT data as a stream of immutable data
   objects is that ICN caches will not contain any stale data w r t a
   given name.  However, since new data objects (with new names)
   representing different versions of a sensor reading may be emitted
   frequently, there must be a way to tell the different versions apart.

   To support immutable streamed data efficiently, while adhering to the
   expected naming schemes of ICN, we recommend that names of data
   objects include a sequence number.  When data can be named with
   sequence number, any request may or may not include such a sequence
   number.  If no number is included in the request, the nearest cache
   hit will result in a response.  If a sequence number is included in
   the request, only an exact cache match will result in a response.  A
   client that wants the "latest" reading can according to our
   previously mentioned design choice, in Section 4.2, not ask the ICN
   network such a high level query, instead it must ask for the specific
   (version of) information.  To avoid complicated searching in the ICN
   nodes, there is thus no way to explicitly ask the network for the
   "latest" reading, or any other "range" of sequence numbers.

   Should a client want the latest reading from a sensor, one method for
   this is to make a subscription for the pushed stream of data, as
   described in Section 4.7, provided that the particular ICN
   architecture supports this interaction model.  The confirmation of
   that subscription can contain the latest reading, and then obviously
   the normal stream will be received.  The reason for including the
   latest reading in the response is to immediately provide the "state"
   of sensors that generate new data infrequently.

   Another method to obtain the latest reading, or a particular reading
   in the past, from a sensor is to perform adaptive probing, for
   example by binary interval reduction.  If a requested sequence number
   does not (yet) exist, there will be a negative answer from the ICN.
   This method is preferably combined with application knowledge, for
   example, in the form of capability advertisements as described in
   Section 4.8 that enable the client to better predict the sequence
   number to request.  The client that always wants the latest value
   could also dynamically tune its requests for the next data value to



Lindgren, et al.         Expires January 7, 2016               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft            ICN for Efficient IoT                July 2015


   the frequency of the publisher in order to minimise the latency.  The
   fact that non-existing data is asked for would however potentially
   pose an overload threat to the ICN since each request of non-existing
   data could result in cache misses that ripple through all the way to
   the source, which has to respond that the data doesn't exist.  It may
   therefore be beneficial with negative caching.  Serving requests for
   non-existing data is however a generic challenge to ICN (not
   specifically to IoT) to be resolved.

   There is a third method "in between" the above two.  If requests for
   a not yet existing data object can be held for a short time until the
   data object is actually available, instead of immediately returning
   "not found", these requests act as one-time subscriptions.  Provided
   that request aggregation is being used, this mechanism would be
   efficient and latency-minimising, and at the same time would not
   require persistent subscription state.

   The support for sequence numbers depends on the particular flavor of
   ICN.  The naming scheme of CCN/NDN may here provide an advantage.  It
   is for further study whether it is possible to use ICNs that do not
   support sequence numbers as part of naming (e.g., by clever use of
   metadata, namespace, and search functionality) and what the trade-
   offs would be.

   Two issues for further study are the size of the sequence number
   space and gaps in the sequence numbers.  Must sequence number
   wraparound be handled, or is it possible to require a large enough
   sequence number space?  Wraparound means an exception to the
   assumption on immutable objects.  Gaps in the sequence number space
   might result in inefficiencies in some of the above methods, or, if
   the gaps are large, making them unfeasible.  Yet, it might not always
   be possible to guarantee that there are no gaps.

4.5.  The importance of time

   Time is almost always a very important property of IoT data, and
   especially so for data that change over time.  When modeling dynamic
   IoT data with a stream of immutable data values, it is often the case
   that a certain IoT data value is a sensor reading at a particular
   point in time, and the next value in the stream is the next reading
   in time.  Thus, dynamic data is in this case dynamic over time, with
   well defined (immutable) values for particular points in time.

   We therefore argue that it is important to find a way to represent
   these time-related streams of immutable data values in ICN.  It
   should be possible to request a data value from a certain time, and
   to infer/find the name (sequence number) of the latest, most current,
   data value.  The question is whether or not the stream sequence



Lindgren, et al.         Expires January 7, 2016               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft            ICN for Efficient IoT                July 2015


   numbers are sufficient to support time.  If not, the ICN system needs
   to be extended with explicit support for time, something we want to
   avoid.  In general, the methods outlined in the previous section are
   applicable for finding an IoT data value from a particular point in
   time, including the latest.  What is missing is the mapping between
   sequence number and time.

   One possibility could be to use sequence numbers that directly
   correspond to time, for instance, the Unix (POSIX) time in form of
   seconds since January 1st, 1970.  This would however both limit the
   time resolution to seconds, and also result in large gaps in the
   sequence numbers, something that can be problematic, as discussed in
   the previous section.

   There are several other methods for finding readings from a certain
   time, or the latest reading, for example through a high level request
   from a server/endpoint, or by using a naming scheme where the name
   can be directly inferred, e.g., if an IoT device has advertised under
   which conditions it produces data and how it is named.

   To represent absolute time so that it can be directly inferred, one
   method is that the producer of data in its capability advertisements
   (Section 4.8) provide a mapping function between sequence number and
   time.  Thereby also readings on the time axis are immutable while it
   is still possible to efficiently find the latest reading, as
   described in Section 4.4.  It should be noted that sequence numbers
   then may have gaps in order to cater for triggered non periodic data,
   etc.  Another method is to include meta data with information on
   absolute time.  Using this mapping scheme data from the current
   second can be efficiently requested (provided that clock
   synchronisation is accurate enough, which is out of scope of this
   document).

   We also note that time is also important for other applications, in
   particular for live streaming video.  Live video also produces a
   time-related stream of immutable objects, and would in the same way
   benefit from such support in the ICN service.

4.6.  Decoupling and roles of senders and receivers

   Since ICN networks essentially support a request/response model of
   interaction, we denote the receivers of information as requestors,
   and the senders of information as responders.  The ICN network in
   itself provides decoupling of requestors and responders.  It is an
   important feature of the ICN that it will allow responders (e.g., IoT
   devices) to be occasionally unreachable (e.g., due to intermittent
   connectivity, low battery level, duty cycling).  Another advantage is
   that caching in the ICN will ensure that data objects are normally



Lindgren, et al.         Expires January 7, 2016               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft            ICN for Efficient IoT                July 2015


   delivered only once from the IoT devices, independently of the number
   of immediate requestors.

   Note however, that the ICN does not (and should not) provide any
   transformation or aggregation of data.  The IoT dissemination
   architecture should therefore allow for any number of intermediate
   processing nodes.  An intermediate node will be an endpoint in the
   ICN network that can act as both requestor and responder.  Such a
   node may perform aggregation, filtering, selection, etc.  The
   instantiation of such nodes may for example form a directed (acyclic)
   graph between ultimate responders (IoT devices) and ultimate
   requestors (the final applications).  It is for further study how to
   define such an architecture.

   It is a design choice to keep the IoT dissemination and aggregation
   functionality outside of the ICN domain.  That architecture would be
   an overlay that may have intricate structure, and put the ICN usage
   in a new context, where content from ultimate requestors to ultimate
   responders may go through many IoT processing nodes that collect,
   process and re-publish data through an ICN for various purposes.

4.7.  Combination of PULL/PUSH model

   A critical decision regarding IoT data is whether to use a PULL
   model, a PUSH model, or both.  In this document, we define a PULL
   model as a system where data is only sent when explicitly requested,
   while a PUSH model indicate that data transmission is initiated by
   the source based on some trigger (either periodic, for each new
   object, or based on some condition on the generated data).  There are
   some intrinsic trade offs between these models.  The PULL model is
   for example resource efficient when there is an abundant amount of
   IoT information, potentially redundant from many devices, and the
   clients only occasionally or partially are interested in the
   information.  The PUSH model is for example efficient when there is
   real-time information and the clients are interested in all
   information from specific devices all the time.

   A design decision in the IoT domain is to support both PULL and PUSH.
   The base model should be PULL, since this is the native mode of ICN,
   meaning that requestors must always start by sending a request.  If
   the request is for some specific data, it can be resolved by
   returning the data (if it exists).  The pull model can be supported
   efficiently and scalably by an ICN network.

   A challenge with the pull model is that it may be inefficient for
   retrieving new data that occur sporadically or based on specific
   conditions.  Our proposal for an IoT framework is therefore that
   there must be support for efficiently retrieving such triggered



Lindgren, et al.         Expires January 7, 2016               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft            ICN for Efficient IoT                July 2015


   information, without having to poll for it through the ICN.  Our
   proposal is that a request can also include triggers, which means
   that data will be returned (pushed) when triggers are fulfilled,
   which may be immediately, or in the future at one or several
   occasions.  This can be used to select alarm conditions, to request
   continuous or periodic push, etc.  The trigger conditions could be
   set by the requestor, or be pre-defined by the responder.  The former
   would be more flexible but also have performance/scalability issues
   since the number of trigger conditions and consequent data generation
   would depend on a potential large number of requestors.  The latter
   is more scalable since there will be a predefined and finite number
   of trigger conditions (as defined in capability advertisements).  Our
   recommended choice, at least for the initial phase, is to go for a
   simple and scalable solution and therefore adopt the model where
   available trigger conditions are defined and advertised by the
   responder.  The ICN would be apt for supporting such capability
   advertisements, given that they are fairly static.

   With this, there is no requirement raised on ICNs supporting data
   push, but we recommend to have a discussion on whether an ICN network
   can or should provide an option to effectively support a push model
   of data.  Such support could make real-time IoT data dissemination
   more efficient and scalable as previously mentioned in Section 4.3.
   However, since we assume that the ICN works with existing IP
   protocols, such functionality can be provided without ICN, by using
   traditional unicast or multicast communication.  We finally note that
   an ICN supported push service model would make the ICN network more
   like a publish/subscribe system.

4.8.  Capability advertisements

   Capability advertisements and discovery can be used by requestors to
   discover which data is available and/or to which responders to
   connect to.  In a deployment with large numbers of responders, the
   functionality of automatic advertisement and discovery becomes a
   critical factor to support scaling.  Responders should advertise
   their methods (inputs, outputs, parameters, triggers, etc) and
   provide relevant metadata in the responses as advertised.  Such
   capability advertisements should be conservative with resources,
   which suggests that new advertisements should be posted with
   reasonably low frequency.  This implies that an ICN network can be
   used for providing capability advertisements.  The advertisements
   should be provided as a stream of immutable objects, or alternatively
   the IoT system should be tolerant to stale caches.  Should there be a
   need real-time awareness of dynamic changes, a subscription/push
   model of capability advertisements could be used as earlier described
   in Section 4.7.




Lindgren, et al.         Expires January 7, 2016               [Page 15]

Internet-Draft            ICN for Efficient IoT                July 2015


4.9.  Name-based routing vs name resolution + 1-step vs 2-step

   As described in Section 4.2, the IoT framework should be defined so
   that new functionality in the ICN is not needed.  For data that is
   frequently generated and regenerated, it makes sense to keep simple
   structures and provide directly inferable naming/addressing of data
   objects, so that requestors can directly address the data.  For more
   complex data, such as pre-processed, aggregated and structured data a
   two-step resolution model is recommended.  The IoT devices can
   provide a higher level resolution based on for example queries and
   searching, resulting in a number of concrete directly addressable ICN
   objects.  This is similar to what web servers do when they return
   URLs that requestors can use, but in this case it is named content
   that is returned.

   Consequently, the IoT framework should have no requirement that the
   ICN network itself should support 2-step addressing (although such
   2-step methods may exist in some ICNs)

4.10.  What's naming and what's searching

   As described in Section 4.2, the IoT framework should be defined so
   that no new functionality is required in the ICN for searching data
   or subcomponents of data.  The ICN network supports just naming of
   atomic data objects, while any searching is provided by the IoT
   framework, which in itself may be constituted by a highly distributed
   set of nodes that provide processing, analysis and aggregation of IoT
   data.

4.11.  Meta data, tagging/tracing of data

   IoT data may be tagged with metadata to tell where it originates
   from.  Tagging is made at the level above the ICN network and may for
   example be a list of strings.  It can be added/changed by the
   originating node (or a node that assigns the originating ID), and
   added/changed/deleted by any node that processes the data.  The tag
   can in some cases be used to trace data back to origins.  In some
   cases it makes no sense to request or transmit metadata.  For
   efficiency reasons the ICN network should have support for optional
   delivery of metadata.  This is to be conservative with scarce
   resources, for example when a wireless node requests data which is
   cached in the ICN network, it would be beneficial if the requestor
   could tell that it is desirable to not receive any metadata.  There
   should be a discussion whether there should be just one, or more than
   one, piece of optional information in ICN content to be future proof.






Lindgren, et al.         Expires January 7, 2016               [Page 16]

Internet-Draft            ICN for Efficient IoT                July 2015


4.12.  Handling actuators in the ICN model

   If actuators should be controlled using the ICN communication model,
   we need to map the functionality of the actuator to named data and/or
   the requesting of named data.  We see two main models with some
   variants as described in the following paragraphs.

   In the first model, the state of the actuator is represented by a
   stream of immutable named data objects.  The actuator periodically
   requests its new state using the name of its designated state object.
   There then has to be a producer of that state data that responds with
   the current state.  When the actuator receives the response, it sets
   that new state, invoking its actuation function.  Authentication of
   the producer of the state is important, but as this corresponds
   directly to publisher and data object authenticity that are
   fundamental in the ICN model, there are no additional requirements
   for the IoT domain.

   A variant of this first model is that a requester first requests the
   state of the actuator.  The requester supplies additional information
   with the request including the name of the new state data it will
   produce.  The actuator responds with its state, and then requests its
   new state using the name that was supplied with the additional
   information in the first request.  This variant enables low latency
   without high frequency polling.

   In the second model, the actuator invokes its actuation function as a
   side-effect of receiving a particular request.  There are several
   plausible variants.  The new state could be encoded in the name of
   the requested data in the request, or could be supplied as additional
   information with the request.  Regardless, the actuator acts on the
   new state information as a side effect, and responds with data,
   possibly its state, to the requester.  The security issues are
   potentially more difficult with this model, since in the ICN model,
   anyone could make the request.  Access control and/or requester
   authentication are therefore required.

   To reap the advantages of caching, it should be possible to cache the
   state of the actuator in both the aforementioned models.  However, we
   think that caching is not as relevant for actuation as it is for
   other IoT use cases, and can furthermore even be quite problematic.
   The first model less so, since the actuator can make sure that its
   state is arbitrarily fresh with the polling method described in
   Section 4.4.  In other words, the latency until actuation happens can
   be bounded.  The variant of the first model and the second model have
   larger issues.  With caching, it is hard for a requester to make sure
   that its request actually reaches the actuator, and thus, it is hard
   to bound the actuation latency.  Some caching directive might be



Lindgren, et al.         Expires January 7, 2016               [Page 17]

Internet-Draft            ICN for Efficient IoT                July 2015


   needed in this case for reliable functionality.

4.13.  Role of constrained IoT devices as ICN nodes

   Typical ICN nodes such as routers and gateways are deemed to be rich
   in resources like energy, processing, bandwidth and storage.  IoT
   devices, on the other hand, are quite constrained in such resources.
   It is also worth noticing that some resources are more crucial than
   others.  In most cases energy, processing and bandwidth are quite
   expensive for constrained IoT devices.  In contrast, storage has
   shown a considerably rapid decreasing trend in prices over the past
   few years.  There is reason to believe that the memory needed for IoT
   devices to act as servers of their data will not be prohibitive and
   that the data centric role of the devices may be elevated by
   information-centric networks.

   However, it is questionable whether IoT devices also should provide
   caching for data produced by other IoT devices.  In ad-hoc networks
   this may be desirable, but often there is a desire for wireless nodes
   to minimize communication by handling only data of their own concern.
   Our design decision in this regard is that we logically separate IoT
   server functionality (such as sensing and transmitting IoT data) and
   ICN functionality (such as routing and caching data generated by
   other devices).  A resource constrained device may choose to only
   implement IoT functionality and act as a server to the ICN, i.e., not
   act as intermediate ICN node.  However, since storage is getting
   cheaper, IoT devices should be able to cache their own content and,
   in essence, act as sources to ICN.























Lindgren, et al.         Expires January 7, 2016               [Page 18]

Internet-Draft            ICN for Efficient IoT                July 2015


5.  Security Considerations

   The ICN paradigm is information-centric as opposed to state-of-the-
   art host-centric internet.  Besides aspects like naming, content
   retrieval and caching this also has security implications.  ICN
   advocates the model of trust in content rather than trust in network
   hosts.  This brings in the concept of Object Security which is
   contrary to session-based security mechanisms such as TLS/DTLS
   prevalent in the current host-centric internet.

   Object Security is based on the idea of securing information objects
   unlike session-based security mechanisms which secure the
   communication channel between a pair of nodes.  This reinforces an
   inherent characteristic of ICN networks i.e. to decouple senders and
   receivers.  In the context of IoT, the Object Security model has
   several concrete advantages.  As discussed earlier in Section 2.1, in
   many IoT applications data and services are the main goal and
   specific communication between two devices is secondary.  Therefore
   it makes more sense to secure IoT objects instead of securing the
   session between communicating endpoints.

   It is important that while security mechanisms complement the ICN
   architecture in a coherent fashion, they do so without laying down
   any strict requirements or constraints.  Therefore, the decision of
   what security mechanisms are employed should be handled at a layer
   above ICN, in this case within the IoT framework.  However, the ICN
   layer should not be completely oblivious of Object Security.  At this
   point it is important to distinguish between the different aspects of
   Object Security i.e. integrity, authenticity and confidentiality.
   ICN provides data integrity through Name-Data Integrity i.e. the
   guarantee that the given data corresponds to the name with which it
   was addressed.  Typical ICN protocols provide Name-Data integrity
   using various schemes such as hash-based names and signatures.
   Signature-based schemes additionally provide data authenticity.
   Otherwise data authenticity should be provided in layers above the
   ICN layer.  Data confidentiality should also be handled above the ICN
   layer.  This facilitates flexibility and allows IoT applications more
   freedom to decide which encryption scheme suits them best (session-
   based encryption, object-based encryption or a hybrid).

   Though the idea of Object Security is very much in line with the ICN
   concept, there can still be some use cases where Object Security does
   not add much e.g. a Pub/Sub interaction where a client is expected to
   interact more or less with the same server node (a session-based
   security protocol should suffice here) or use cases where application
   layer headers should also be secured (which can be achieved by TLS/
   DTLS).  We, therefore, effectively imply that there is no need to
   modify typical ICN standards to accommodate Object Security in its



Lindgren, et al.         Expires January 7, 2016               [Page 19]

Internet-Draft            ICN for Efficient IoT                July 2015


   entirety.

   The following sub-sections discuss some security advantages of using
   ICN and Object Security in IoT applications.

5.1.  Retrieving trusted content from untrusted caches

   When functioning in an ICN network, an IoT client is expected to rely
   on the network to deliver the requested content in an optimal fashion
   without concerning itself with where the content actually lies.  This
   could potentially mean that each individual object within a stream of
   immutable objects is retrieved from a different source.  Having a
   trust relationship with each of these different sources is not
   realistic.  This gives rise to the need of retrieving trusted content
   from untrusted nodes/caches in an ICN network.  Through Name-Data
   Integrity, ICN automatically guarantees data integrity to the
   requester regardless of the source from where it is delivered.
   Additionally, Object-based signatures and encryption are ideal in
   such use cases because it relieves an IoT client application from the
   hassle of having to establish trust with each node that can
   potentially cache an IoT object.  This also means that a requesting
   client can make use of more caches in the network, hence resulting in
   better throughput and latency.

5.2.  Enabling application-layer processing in untrusted intermediaries

   Securing content at the object level provides greater granularity and
   hence more control.  An ICN data object may comprise of several
   distinct application-layer objects e.g.  XML, JSON objects.  An
   example of this is an ICN object that corresponds to all the sensor
   readings in a certain time interval where each sensor reading is a
   JSON object.  Using Object-based encryption to provide data
   confidentiality allows for the possibility to encrypt a subset of
   these application-layer objects while leaving others unencrypted and
   available for processing in untrusted intermediary nodes (e.g.
   proxies and caches).  With this approach, the IoT application has
   more control of the parts of data it wants to make public and the
   parts of data it wants to keep confidential and visible only to peers
   with the right cryptographic keys.

5.3.  Energy efficiency of cryptographic mechanisms

   Session-based security protocols rely on the exchange of several
   messages before a secure session is established between a pair of
   nodes.  Use of such protocols in constrained IoT devices can have
   serious consequences in terms of power efficiency because in most
   cases transmission and reception of messages is more costly than the
   cryptographic operations.  This is especially true for wireless



Lindgren, et al.         Expires January 7, 2016               [Page 20]

Internet-Draft            ICN for Efficient IoT                July 2015


   devices.

   The problem is amplified proportionally with the number of nodes the
   constrained device has to interact with because a secure session
   would have to be established with every node.  If the constrained
   device is acting as a consumer of data this would mean setting up
   secure sessions with every caching node that the device retrieves
   data from.  When acting as a producer of data the constrained device
   would have to setup secure sessions with all the consumers.  The
   Object Security model eliminates this problem because the content is
   readily available in a secure state in the network.  IoT devices
   producing data can secure it w.r.t. all the intended consumers and
   start transmitting it right away.






































Lindgren, et al.         Expires January 7, 2016               [Page 21]

Internet-Draft            ICN for Efficient IoT                July 2015


6.  Acknowledgements

   The work behind and the writing of this document are in part
   supported by the activity `14010 Efficient IoT Content' within EIT
   Digital (formerly EIT ICT labs).














































Lindgren, et al.         Expires January 7, 2016               [Page 22]

Internet-Draft            ICN for Efficient IoT                July 2015


Authors' Addresses

   Anders F. Lindgren
   SICS Swedish ICT
   Box 1263
   Kista  SE-164 29
   SE

   Phone: +46707177269
   Email: andersl@sics.se
   URI:   http://www.sics.se/~andersl


   Fehmi Ben Abdesslem
   SICS Swedish ICT
   Box 1263
   Kista  SE-164 29
   SE

   Phone: +46705470642
   Email: fehmi@sics.se
   URI:   http://www.sics.se/~fehmi


   Bengt Ahlgren
   SICS Swedish ICT
   Box 1263
   Kista  SE-164 29
   SE

   Phone: +46703141562
   Email: bengta@sics.se
   URI:   http://www.sics.se/people/bengt-ahlgren


   Olov Schelen
   Lulea University of Technology
   Lulea  SE-971 87
   SE

   Phone:
   Email: olov.schelen@ltu.se
   URI:








Lindgren, et al.         Expires January 7, 2016               [Page 23]

Internet-Draft            ICN for Efficient IoT                July 2015


   Adeel Mohammad Malik
   Ericsson
   Kista  SE-164 80
   SE

   Phone: +46725074492
   Email: adeel.mohammad.malik@ericsson.com
   URI:











































Lindgren, et al.         Expires January 7, 2016               [Page 24]

