


Inter-Domain Routing                                      I. van Beijnum
Internet-Draft                                            IMDEA Networks
Expires: May 7, 2009                                    November 3, 2008


                     A BGP Inter-AS Cost Attribute
                      draft-van-beijnum-idr-iac-01

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on May 7, 2009.

Abstract

   Although BGP implementations have extensive path selection
   algorithms, in practice operators have trouble performing
   satisfactory traffic engineering of incoming traffic based on BGP
   attributes that are taken into account in the path selection
   algorithm alone.  For this reason, many ASes deaggregate their
   address range(s) into smaller blocks and announce these blocks
   differently to different neighboring ASes in order to arrive at the
   desired traffic flow.  This practice contributes to the growth of the
   global routing table, which drives up capital expenditures for
   networks engaging in inter-domain routing.  This memo introduces a
   new inter-domain metric that supports finer-grained traffic
   engineering than current BGP attributes.




van Beijnum                Expires May 7, 2009                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft              BGP Inter-AS Cost              November 2008


1.  Introduction

   There is only a single BGP attribute that is carried from AS to AS
   and updated at every AS hop: the AS path.  The AS path length is
   therefore the only real inter-AS metric that BGP has.

   It's easy to see how comparing AS paths lengths is problematic in
   today's flat AS hierarchy.  Assume 10 tier-1 ISPs that can reach all
   destinations connected to the internet through peering, and assume
   that the local AS buys transit service from two tier-1 ISPs.  The
   traffic to the customers of those ISPs will normally flow through the
   respective ISP.  However, for all destinations reachable over the 8
   other tier-1s, the AS paths will have the same length over both
   transit ISPs.  This means that prepending the AS path towards one ISP
   has a very dramatic effect: as much as 80% of all traffic may
   subsequently flow over the non-prepended ISP.  A similar situation
   can occur in more complex types of connectivity.  With a finer-
   grained value that is communicated across ASes this problem would be
   reduced.

   This memo proposes such a finer-grained inter-AS metric: the inter-AS
   cost (IAC).  With this metric, it will be possible for both
   destinations of traffic and intermediate ASes to make precise
   adjustments to the metrics seen by the sources of traffic and thus
   make it possible to arrive at more favorable load sharing ratios
   between multiple links to different ASes without having to resort to
   the advertisement of more specific prefixes.

   In the past, efforts somewhat similar to this have been undertaken.
   In 1995, [I-D.antonov-bgp-metrics] proposed new per-hop BGP metrics.
   However, this proposal suffered from high complexity and a resulting
   risk of unforeseen consequences.  A year later, [I-D.chen-bgp-dpa]
   proposed a new inter-AS metric for the purpose of allowing symmetric
   routing and load sharing.  This proposal wasn't fleshed out in much
   detail.

   Neither proposal specifically addressed the issue of granularity in
   an inter-AS metric.


2.  IAC and IAClocal

   The new metric is named Inter-AS Cost (IAC).  The content of the IAC
   is a 16-bit signed value that represents the cost or distance towards
   the source of the associated prefix.  The intent of this memo is that
   BGP implementations that support the IAC compare the IAC rather than
   the AS path length as part of the path selection algorithm.  As such,
   it's necessary that the IAC is increased for every AS in the path,



van Beijnum                Expires May 7, 2009                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft              BGP Inter-AS Cost              November 2008


   even if the AS in question doesn't support the IAC.  To accomplish
   this, the IAC received over BGP is turned into IAClocal by adding 16
   * AS_path_length.  The IAClocal is then used in path selection.

   In order let operators set finer-grained preferences on paths, an AS
   may add to or subtract from the IAC attribute when receiving a path
   over eBGP or when advertising a path over eBGP.  In both cases, a
   router may subtract a maximum of 7, or add a maximum of 56.  As a
   result, the IAC gets modified by any value between -14 and 112 by any
   given AS.  This means that the IAClocal in each AS is between 2 and
   128 higher than in the previous AS, increasing the granularity of the
   value that is compared when considering the IAC by more than a factor
   120 over the situation where only the AS path length is considered.

   The choice for the numbers in question is made based on the
   assumption that there will never be more than 255 AS hops in an AS
   path (as each AS has at least one router and the IP TTL / hop limit
   field will not allow for more than 255 routers in the path) so the
   maximum will fit in a 16-bit signed integer.


3.  Load balancing

   To promote load balancing for traffic engineering purposes, the
   IAClocal may be pseudo-randomized over a small range of values.  The
   details of this process are left up to implementers.  An example
   would be the addition of a value in the range 0 - 3 that is stable
   across routers in an AS, session reconnects and reboots, but is
   otherwise random.


4.  Backward compatibility

   It would be undesirable to see a large shift in traffic flow when the
   IAC capability becomes available after a software update or when it's
   administratively enabled for the first time.  To minimize this
   problem, implementations SHOULD employ an IACscale variable, which
   can be set system-wide, but overridden through neighbor-specific or
   prefix-specific mechanisms such as route maps or policy filters.
   Conceptually, the IACscale variable takes a value between 0 and 1,
   although an approximation using integer math is acceptable. 0 means
   the behavior is identical to comparing just AS path lengths, 1 means
   the IAC is fully taken into account.  Increasing the IACscale from 0
   to 1 over time allows for the gradual introduction of the mechanism
   in existing networks.  However, the IAC is propagated without taking
   the IACscale factor into account, so downstream networks can take
   advantage of the mechanism even when an intermediate network uses an
   IACscale of 0.



van Beijnum                Expires May 7, 2009                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft              BGP Inter-AS Cost              November 2008


   The equation below shows how to calculate IAClocal:

   IAClocal = 16 * ASPathLen + IAC * IACscale

   Implementers are encouraged to set IACscale to 0 by default when the
   IAC capability becomes available on previously configured systems but
   set the IACscale to 1 by default on systems without a previous
   configuration.


5.  The IAC attribute

   The new IAC path attribute is an optional transitive attribute that
   can take two forms: over eBGP, the attribute only contains the IAC.
   When communicated through iBGP, the attribute both contains the IAC
   and the IAClocal, in that order.  Both attributes are 16-bit signed
   values encoded as two octets in network byte order.

   Generating the IAC attribute:

   The attribute is only included for prefixes if the resulting IAC
   value is different from zero.

   Updating of the IAC attribute:

   1.  When receiving a path with the IAC over eBGP: adjust IAC if
       desired, compute IAClocal.

   2.  When transmitting a path with the IAC over iBGP: add IAClocal to
       the IAC attribute.

   3.  When receiving a path with the IAC over iBGP: no action, unless
       the system is specifically configured to compute the IAClocal
       from the IAC.  The IAC is NOT updated in the latter case.

   4.  When receiving a path without the IAC over iBGP: compute
       IAClocal.

   5.  When transmitting a path over eBGP: adjust IAC if desired.  If
       there was no IAC attribute but the system is configured to adjust
       the attribute, create the attribute with a value that reflects
       the configured adjustment.  If, after adjustment, the IAC is
       zero, the IAC attribute SHOULD be removed.  Include IAC attribute
       with just the IAC value (not the IAClocal value) in eBGP updates.







van Beijnum                Expires May 7, 2009                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft              BGP Inter-AS Cost              November 2008


6.  IANA considerations

   IANA is requested to allocate a BGP optional transitive attribute
   type code.


7.  Security considerations

   When negative values outside of what's allowed by this specification
   are used in the IAC, this may allow for unexpected and/or problematic
   path selection.  However, this is a general problem with BGP and
   other routing protocols.  For instance, if a BGP implementation were
   to remove AS numbers from the AS path, similar problems would arise.

   It is highly recommended that implementers include a mechanism to
   remove the IAC attribute in incoming or outgoing BGP updates.  This
   mechanism MUST be disabled by default.


8.  References

8.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC4271]  Rekhter, Y., Li, T., and S. Hares, "A Border Gateway
              Protocol 4 (BGP-4)", RFC 4271, January 2006.

8.2.  Informational References

   [I-D.chen-bgp-dpa]
              Chen, E. and T. Bates, "Destination Preference Attribute
              for BGP", draft-ietf-idr-bgp-dpa-05 (work in progress),
              September 1996.

   [I-D.antonov-bgp-metrics]
              Antonov, V., "BGP AS Path Metrics",
              draft-ietf-idr-bgp-metrics-00 (work in progress),
              March 1995.


Appendix A.  Document and discussion information

   The latest version of this document will always be available at
   http://www.muada.com/drafts/.  Please direct questions and comments
   to the idr mailinglist or directly to the author.




van Beijnum                Expires May 7, 2009                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft              BGP Inter-AS Cost              November 2008


Author's Address

   Iljitsch van Beijnum
   IMDEA Networks
   Avda. del Mar Mediterraneo, 22
   Leganes, Madrid  28918
   Spain

   Email: iljitsch@muada.com










































van Beijnum                Expires May 7, 2009                  [Page 6]

Internet-Draft              BGP Inter-AS Cost              November 2008


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.











van Beijnum                Expires May 7, 2009                  [Page 7]


