





  INTERNET-DRAFT

  draft-merrells-ldup-model-00.txt


                                                           John Merrells
                                           Netscape Communications Corp.
                                                                 Ed Reed
                                                            Novell, Inc.
                                                       Uppili Srinivasan
                                                            Oracle, Inc.
                                                          August 5, 1998

                      LDAP Replication Architecture

     Copyright (C) The Internet Society (1998). All Rights Reserved.

  Status of this Memo

  This draft, file name draft-merrells-ldup-model-00.txt, is intended to
  be become a Proposed Standard RFC, to be published by the IETF Working
  Group LDUP, when it is formed.  Distribution of this document is
  unlimited. Comments should be sent to the LDUP Replication mailing
  list <ldup@imc.org> or to the authors.

  This document is an Internet-Draft.  Internet-Drafts are working
  documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas,
  and its working groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute
  working documents as Internet-Drafts.

  Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
  and may be updated, replaced, or made obsolete by other documents at
  any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
  material or to cite them other than as "work in progress".

  To view the entire list of current Internet-Drafts, please check the
  "1id-abstracts.txt" listing contained in the Internet-Drafts Shadow
  Directories on ftp.is.co.za (Africa), ftp.nordu.net (Northern Europe),
  ftp.nis.garr.it (Southern Europe), munnari.oz.au (Pacific Rim),
  ftp.ietf.org (US East Coast), or ftp.isi.edu (US West Coast).

  This Internet-Draft expires on 5 February 1999.








  Merrells, Reed, Srinivasan                                   [Page 1]
                         Expires  5 February 1999



  INTERNET-DRAFT      LDAP Replication Architecture     August 1, 1998


  1. Abstract

  This architectural document outlines a suite of schema and protocol
  extensions to LDAPv3 that enables the robust, reliable, server-to-
  server exchange of directory content and changes.

  The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
  "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and  "OPTIONAL" in this
  document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119]. The
  sections below reiterate these definitions and include some additional
  ones.






































  Merrells, Reed, Srinivasan                                   [Page 2]
                         Expires 5 February 1999



  INTERNET-DRAFT      LDAP Replication Architecture     August 1, 1998




  2. Table of Contents

  1. Abstract                                                      2
  2. Table of Contents                                             3
  3. Introduction                                                  4
  3.1  Scope                                                       4
  3.2  Document Objectives                                         5
  3.3  Document Non-Objectives                                     6
  3.4  Terms and Definitions                                       7
  4. Overview                                                      8
  4.1  Directory Model                                             8
  4.2  Information Model                                           8
  4.3  Policy Information                                          9
  4.4  Update Transfer Protocol                                    9
  4.5  Replication Configuration and Management                    9
  4.6  Update Vector                                               10
  4.7  Time                                                        10
  5. Directory Model                                               10
  5.1  Replica Type                                                10
  5.2  Sub-Entries                                                 11
  5.3  LDAP Change Sequence Numbers                                11
  5.4  State Storage and Representation                            12
  5.5  LDAP Update Operations                                      13
  5.6  Purging State Information                                   13
  5.7  Replication Schedule                                        14
  6. Information Model                                             14
  6.1  Entries, Semantics & Relationships                          15
  6.1.1     Root DSE Attributes                                    15
  6.1.2     Naming Context Auxiliary Object Class and Entries      15
  6.1.3     Replica Object Class and Entries                       15
  6.1.4     Replication Agreement Object Class and Entries         16
  6.1.5     Update Vector                                          16
  6.2  Unique Identifiers                                          17
  7. Policy Information                                            17
  7.1  Access Control                                              18
  7.2  Schema Knowledge                                            18
  8. Update Transfer Protocol                                      19
  8.1  Session Initiation                                          19
  8.1.1     Authentication                                         19
  8.1.2     Consumer Initiated                                     19
  8.1.3     Supplier Initiated                                     20
  8.1.4     Start Replication Request                              20
  8.1.5     Start Replication Response                             21
  8.2  Update Transfer                                             21
  8.2.1     Full Update Transfer                                   22
  8.2.2     Incremental Update Transfer                            22

  Merrells, Reed, Srinivasan                                   [Page 3]
                         Expires 5 February 1999



  INTERNET-DRAFT      LDAP Replication Architecture     August 1, 1998


  8.2.2.1     Conflict Detection and Resolution                  23
  8.3  End Replication Session                                     24
  8.3.1     Full Update End Replication Session                    24
  8.3.2     Incremental Update End Replication Session             24
  8.3.3     End Replication Request                                25
  8.3.4     End Replication Response                               25
  8.4  Integrity & Confidentiality                                 26
  9. Replication Configuration and Management                      26
  10. Time                                                         28
  11. Security Considerations                                      28
  12. Acknowledgements                                             28
  13. References                                                   29
  14. Intellectual Property Notice                                 30
  15. Copyright Notice                                             30
  16. Authors' Address                                             31
  17. Appendix A - Open Issues                                     32
  17.1 Replication Session Initiation                              32
  17.2 Lost and Found Container                                    32
  17.3 Write Conflicts                                             32
  17.4 Management and Configuration                                32
  17.5 Sparse, Fractional, and Partial Replicas                    33
  17.6 Update Transfer: Errors, Recovery, Diagnostics and Repair   33
  17.7 Update Access Control                                       33




  3. Introduction


  3.1 Scope

  This architectural document provides an outline of an LDAP based
  replication scheme. Further detailed design documents will draw
  guidance from here.

  The design proceeds from prior work in the industry, including
  concepts from the ITU-T Recommendation X.525 (1993, 1997) Directory
  Information Shadowing Protocol (DISP) [X525], experience with widely
  deployed distributed directories in network operating systems,
  electronic mail address books, and other database technologies.  The
  emphasis of the design is on:

  - Simplicity of operation,

  - Flexibility of configuration.



  Merrells, Reed, Srinivasan                                   [Page 4]
                         Expires 5 February 1999



  INTERNET-DRAFT      LDAP Replication Architecture     August 1, 1998


  - Manageability of replica operations among mixed heterogeneous
    vendor LDAP servers under common administration.

  - Security of content and configuration information when LDAP servers
    from more than one administrative authority are interconnected.

  A range of deployment scenarios are supported, including multi-master
  and single-master topologies. Replication networks may include
  transitive and redundant relationships between LDAP servers.

  The controlling framework used to define the relationships, types, and
  state of replicas of the directory content is defined. In this way the
  directory content can itself be used to monitor and control the
  replication network. The directory schema is extended to define object
  classes, auxiliary classes, and attributes that describe areas of the
  namespace which are replicated, LDAP servers which hold replicas of
  various types for the various partitions of the namespace, LDAP Access
  Points (network addresses) where such LDAP servers may be contacted,
  which namespaces are held on given LDAP servers, and the progress of
  replication operations.  Among other things, this knowledge of where
  directory content is located will provide the basis for dynamic
  generation of LDAP referrals for clients to follow. [REF]

  An update transfer protocol, which actually brings a replica up to
  date with respect to changes in directory content at another replica,
  is defined using LDAPv3 protocol extensions.  The representation of
  directory content and changes will be defined by the LDAP Replication
  Update Transfer Protocol sub-team. Incremental and full update
  transfer mechanisms are described.  Replication protocols are required
  to include initial population, change updates, and removal of
  directory content.

  Security information, including access control policy will be treated
  as directory content by the replication protocols.  Confidentiality
  and integrity of replication information is required to be provided by
  lower-level transport/session protocols such as IPSEC and/or TLS.

  The architecture will describe required and optional house-keeping
  duties for compliant systems to implement, such as garbage collection
  of deleted entries.


  3.2 Document Objectives

  The following list enumerates the objectives of this document.

  a) To define the architectural foundations for LDAP Replication, so
    that further detailed design documents may be written. For

  Merrells, Reed, Srinivasan                                   [Page 5]
                         Expires 5 February 1999



  INTERNET-DRAFT      LDAP Replication Architecture     August 1, 1998


    instance, the Information Model, Update Transfer Protocol, and
    Conflict Detection and  Resolution documents.

  b) Provide an architectural solution for each clause of the
    requirements document [LDUP Requirements].

  c) To preserve the atomicity of LDAP operations.  Updates to an entry,
    from multiple sources, will be combined such that the resultant
    entry is equivalent to a serial execution of the operations.

  d) To avoid tying the LDUP working group to the schedule of any other
    working group.

  e) Not to infringe known registered intellectual property.


  3.3 Document Non-Objectives

  This document does not address the following issues, as they are
  considered beyond the scope of the Working Group.

  The following list describes the features we are not addressing in
  this document.

  a) How LDAP becomes a distributed directory.  There are many issues
    beyond replication that should be considered. Such as, support for
    external references, algorithms for computing referrals from the
    distributed directory knowledge, etc.

  b) Specifying management protocols to create naming contexts or new
    replicas.  LDAP may be sufficient for this. The document describes
    how new replicas and naming contexts are represented, in the
    directory, as entries, attributes, and attribute values.

  c) How transactions will be replicated. However, the architecture
    should not knowingly prevent or impede them, given the Working
    Group's incomplete understanding of the issues at this time.

  d) The mapping or merging of disparate Schema definitions.

  e) Support of overlapping replicated regions.

  f) The case where separate attributes of an entry may be mastered by
    different LDAP servers. This might be termed a 'Split Primary'.
    Replica roles are defined in section 5.1.




  Merrells, Reed, Srinivasan                                   [Page 6]
                         Expires 5 February 1999



  INTERNET-DRAFT      LDAP Replication Architecture     August 1, 1998


  3.4 Terms and Definitions

  The definitions from the Replication Requirements document have been
  copied here and extended.

  For brevity, an LDAP server implementation to referred to throughout
  as 'the server'.

  The Naming Context is a subtree of entries in the Directory
  Information Tree (DIT).  There may be multiple Naming Contexts stored
  on a single server. Naming contexts are defined in section 17 of X.501

  A Replica is an instance of a replicated Naming Context.

  A Replication Relationship is established between two or more Replicas
  that are hosted on servers that cooperate to service a common area of
  the DIT.

  A Replication Agreement is defined between two parties of a
  Replication Relationship.  The properties of the agreement codify the
  Unit of Replication, the Update Transfer Protocol to be used, and the
  Replication Schedule of a Replication Session.

  A Replication Session is an LDAP session between the two servers
  identified by a replication agreement. Interactions occur between the
  two servers, resulting in the transfer of updates from the supplier
  replica to the consumer replica.

  The Initiator of a Replication Session is the initiating server.

  A Responder server responds to the replication initiation request from
  the Initiator server.

  A Supplier server is the source of the updates to be transferred.

  A Consumer server is the recipient of the update sequence.

  The Update Transfer Protocol is the means by which the Replication
  Session proceeds.  It defines the order of events, and update exchange
  mechanism between the Replication Relationship partners.

  An Entry Filter is an LDAP filter expression that describes the
  entries to be replicated.

  A Sparse Replica contains a subset of the naming context entries,
  being modified by the Entry Filter criteria associated with the
  replica.


  Merrells, Reed, Srinivasan                                   [Page 7]
                         Expires 5 February 1999



  INTERNET-DRAFT      LDAP Replication Architecture     August 1, 1998


  A Fractional Entry Specification is a list of entry attributes to be
  included, or a list of attributes to be excluded in a replica. An
  empty specification implies that all entry attributes are included.

  A Fractional Entry is an entry that contains only a subset of its
  original attributes. It has been modified by a Fractional Entry
  Specification.

  A Fractional Replica is a replica that holds Fractional Entries of its
  naming context.  Note that a Fractional Replica can also be a sparse
  replica.

  A Partial Replica is both a Sparse and Fractional Replica.



  4. Overview

  This section provides an overview of the LDAP Replication
  architecture. It is broken down into Directory Model, Information
  Model, Policy Information, Update Transfer Protocol, Replication
  Configuration and Management, Update Vector, and Time. The remainder
  of the document discusses each in detail.


  4.1 Directory Model

  The basic directory model must be extended in a number of ways.

  a) The Replication Management entries require a sub-entry object class
    to effectively hide them from end-user clients.

  b) A form of timestamp, a Change Sequence Number (CSN), must be
    recorded with every change to every entry. The change may be the
    creation of a new entry, the modification of an existing entry, or
    the deletion of an existing entry.

  c) Server implementations may need to include a CSN purging feature to
    control Directory Information Base (DIB) storage space.


  4.2 Information Model

  The Naming Context Auxiliary Class is added to container entries that
  may have separately defined replication policy. [LDUP Info]

  Immediately subordinate to a Naming Context entry are the Replica
  Subentry container entries that identify its LDAP Access Point, its

  Merrells, Reed, Srinivasan                                   [Page 8]
                         Expires 5 February 1999



  INTERNET-DRAFT      LDAP Replication Architecture     August 1, 1998


  replica type (Primary, Updateable, Read-Only), if it is sparse, the
  LDAP search filter defining which entries it holds, and if it is
  fractional, the attributes it does or does not hold.

  Immediately subordinate in the namespace to a Replica Subentry are
  Replication Agreement leaf entries which each identify another
  Replica, the scheduling policy for replication operations, including
  times when replication is to be performed, when it is not to be
  performed, or the policies governing event-driven replication
  initiation.


  4.3 Policy Information

  Administrative policy information needs to be consistently known and
  applied by all replicas of a Naming Context.  As such, the Naming
  Context Auxiliary Class provides a convenient way to define attributes
  which can communicate those policies among all replicas and users of
  the directory.


  4.4 Update Transfer Protocol

  A Replication Session occurs between a Supplier server and Consumer
  server over an LDAP connection.  The session initiator, termed the
  Initiator, could be either the Supplier or Consumer. The Initiator
  sends an LDAP extended operation to the Responder identifying the
  replication agreement being acted on. The Supplier then sends a
  sequence of updates to the Consumer.

  If the replica contents can be changed in more than one place then
  updates may conflict.  As the consumer applies changes it must detect
  and resolve these conflicts. Change Sequence Numbers on each entry and
  each change enable the consumer to maintain the correct total ordering
  of updates.

  All transfers are in one direction only.  A two way exchange requires
  two replication sessions; one session in each direction.


  4.5 Replication Configuration and Management

  The management entries described in the Information Model may be
  created, modified, and deleted by administrative clients to configure
  and manage the replication network.  The administrative operations
  performed over LDAP are discussed further in section 9.



  Merrells, Reed, Srinivasan                                   [Page 9]
                         Expires 5 February 1999



  INTERNET-DRAFT      LDAP Replication Architecture     August 1, 1998


  4.6 Update Vector

  Each Replica holds an Update Vector that records the most recent
  change it has received for each of the other Replicas of this Naming
  Context. The vector is used at the initiation of a replication session
  to determine the sequence of updates that should be transferred.


  4.7 Time

  Because Change Sequence Numbers are primarily based on timestamps,
  clock differences between servers can cause unexpected change
  ordering. The synchronization of server clocks is not required, though
  it is preferable that clocks are accurate. If timestamps are not
  accurate, and a server consistently produces timestamps which are
  significantly older than those of other servers, its updates will not
  have effect and the real world time ordering of updates will not be
  maintained.

  However, an implementation may choose to require clock
  synchronisation. The Network Time Protocol [NTP] [SNTP] offers a
  protocol means by which heterogeneous server hosts may be time
  synchronised.



  5. Directory Model

  The following sections describe changes to the basic directory model
  that are required by the replication architecture.


  5.1 Replica Type

  Each Replica is characterized with a replica type.  This may be
  Primary, Updatable, or Read-Only.  The latter two types may be further
  defined as being Sparse, Fractional, or Partial.

  The Primary Replica is a full copy of the Replica, to which all
  applications that require strong consistency should direct their LDAP
  operations. There can be only one Primary Replica within the set of
  Replicas of a given Naming Context.  It is also permissible for none
  of the Replicas to be designated the Primary.

  An Updatable Replica is a Replica that accepts all LDAP operations,
  but is not the Primary Replica.  There could be none, one, or many
  Updatable Replicas within the set of Replicas of a given Naming
  Context.

  Merrells, Reed, Srinivasan                                  [Page 10]
                         Expires 5 February 1999



  INTERNET-DRAFT      LDAP Replication Architecture     August 1, 1998


  A Read-Only Replica will accept only non-modifying LDAP operations.
  All modification operations will be referred to an updateable Replica,
  usually to its supplier.


  5.2 Sub-Entries

  Replication management entries are to be stored at the base of the
  replicated naming context.  They will be of a subentry objectclass to
  exclude them from regular searches. Entries with the objectclass
  subentry are not returned as the result of a search unless the filter
  component "(objectclass=subentry)" is included.


  5.3 LDAP Change Sequence Numbers

  Every change, caused by an LDAP update operation, is assigned a
  sequence number. The Change Sequence Number (CSN) is formed of three
  components.  In order of significance they are; the time, a replica id
  number, and a change count.

  The time component is a year-2000-safe representation of the real
  world time, with a granularity of one second.  Should LDAP update
  operations occur at different replicas, to the same data, within the
  same single second, then the replica id is used to further order the
  changes. Because LDAP update operations at a single replica may also
  occur to the same data in a single second, the 'change count'
  component of the CSN is provided to definitely order the changes.
  Each replica maintains a count of changes made against it, which is
  reset to zero at the start of each second, and is monotonically
  increasing within the second, incremented for each LDAP update
  operation applied to the replica.

  The preferred time syntax is: yyyy mm dd hh:mi:ssz # replica id #
  0xssss

  The "z" in the time stipulates that the time is expressed in GMT
  without any daylight savings time offsets permitted, and the 0xssss
  represents the hexidecimal representation of an unsigned integer.
  Implementations must support 16 bit change counts and should support
  longer ones (32, 64, 128).

  An example CSN would be " 1998081018:44:31z#1#0x000F "






  Merrells, Reed, Srinivasan                                  [Page 11]
                         Expires 5 February 1999



  INTERNET-DRAFT      LDAP Replication Architecture     August 1, 1998


  5.4 State Storage and Representation

  All changes made to an entry, and its attributes, include the CSN
  assigned at the server where the change was first made. Each of the
  LDAP update operations Add, Modify, Modify RDN (LDAP v2), Modify DN
  (LDAP v3), and Delete change their target entry in different ways, and
  record the CSN of the change differently. This state information must
  be stored for each entry to enable Conflict Detection and Resolution.

  State information is recorded at three levels within each entry.  At
  the entry level, attribute level, and attribute value level. Each is
  briefly described below.


  5.4.1 Entry Change State Storage and Representation

  When an entry is created, with the LDAP Add operation, the CSN of the
  change is added to the entry as the value of an operational attribute
  named 'createdEntryCSN', of syntax type LDAPChangeSequenceNumber.

       createdEntryCSN ::= csn

  Deleted entries are marked as deleted by the addition of the object
  class 'deletedEntry'. The attribute 'deletedEntryCSN', of syntax type
  LDAP Change Sequence Number, is added to record where and when the
  entry was deleted.  Deleted entries are not visible to LDAP clients -
  they may not be read, they don't appear in lists or search results,
  and they may not be changed once deleted.  Names of deleted entries
  are available for reuse by new entries immediately after the deleted
  entry is so marked. It may be desirable to allow deleted entries to be
  accessed and manipulated by management and data recovery applications,
  but that is outside the scope of this document.

       deletedEntryCSN ::= csn


  5.4.2 Attribute Change State Storage and Representation

  When all values of an attribute have been deleted, the attribute is
  marked as deleted and the CSN of the deletion is recorded. The deleted
  state and CSN are stored by the server, but have no representation on
  the entry, and may not be the subject of a search operation. This
  state information must be stored to enable Conflict Detection and
  Resolution to be performed.






  Merrells, Reed, Srinivasan                                  [Page 12]
                         Expires 5 February 1999



  INTERNET-DRAFT      LDAP Replication Architecture     August 1, 1998


  5.4.3 Attribute Value Change State Storage and Representation

  The Modification CSN for each value is to be set by the server when it
  accepts a modification request to the value, or when a new value with
  a later Modification CSN is received via Replication.  The modified
  value and the Modification CSN changes are required to be atomic, so
  that the value and its Modification CSN cannot be out of synch on a
  given server.  The state information is stored by the server, but it
  has no representation on the entry, and may not be the subject of a
  search operation.

  When the value of an attribute is deleted the state of its deletion
  must recorded, with the CSN of the modifying change. It must be stored
  to enable Conflict Detection and Resolution to be performed.


  5.5 LDAP Update Operations

  The server must reject LDAP client update operations with a CSN that
  is older than the state information that would be replaced if the
  operation were performed. This could occur in a replication topology
  where the difference between the clocks of updateable replicas was too
  large. Result code 72, serverClocksOutOfSync, is returned to the
  client.

  5.6 Purging State Information

  The state information stored with each entry need not be stored
  indefinitely. A server implementation may choose to periodically, or
  continuously, remove state information that is no longer required. The
  mechanism is implementation-dependent, but to ensure interoperability
  between implementations, the state information must not be purged
  until all known replicas have received and acknowledged the change
  associated with a CSN. This can be determined by constructing an
  Update Vector containing the lowest CSN for each replica from all the
  known replicas. All the CSNs stored that are lower than this Update
  Vector may be purged, because no changes with older CSNs will be
  replicated to this replica.


  5.6.1 Purging Deleted Entries, Attributes, and Attribute Values

  The following conditions must hold before an item can be deleted from
  the Directory Information Base.

  1) The LDAP delete operation has been propagated to all replication
  agreement partners.



  Merrells, Reed, Srinivasan                                  [Page 13]
                         Expires 5 February 1999



  INTERNET-DRAFT      LDAP Replication Architecture     August 1, 1998


  2) All the updates from all the other replicas with timestamps less
  than the timestamp on the deletion have been propagated to the server
  holding the deleted object (similarly for deleted attributes and
  attribute values).

  3) The clocks of the other Replicas must have advanced beyond the
  deletion CSN of the deleted entry. Otherwise, it is possible for one
  of those Replicas to generate operations with CSNs earlier than the
  deleted object.


  5.7 Replication Schedule

  There are two broad mechanisms for initiating replication sessions:
  (1) scheduled event driven and (2) change event driven.  The mechanism
  is used to schedule replication operations between two servers is
  determined by the Schedule information that is part of the Replication
  Agreement governing the Replicas on those two servers.  Because each
  Replication Agreement describes the policy for one direction of the
  relationship, it is possible that events propagate via scheduled
  events in one direction, and by change events in the other.

  Change event driven replication sessions are, by their nature,
  initiated by suppliers of change information.  The server, which the
  change is made against, schedules a replication session in response to
  the change itself, so that notification of the change is passed on to
  other Replicas.

  Scheduled event driven replication sessions can be initiated by either
  consumers or suppliers of change information.  The schedule defines a
  calendar of time periods during which Replication Sessions should be
  initiated.

  Schedule information may include both scheduled and change event
  driven mechanisms. For instance, one such policy may be to begin
  replication within 15 seconds of any change event, or every 30 minutes
  if no change events are received.



  6. Information Model

  This section describes the object classes of the entries that
  represent the replication topology. The where, when and how of Naming
  Context replication is administered through these entries. The LDUP
  Working Group will publish an Internet Draft to fully detail all these
  schema elements.  [LDUP Info]


  Merrells, Reed, Srinivasan                                  [Page 14]
                         Expires 5 February 1999



  INTERNET-DRAFT      LDAP Replication Architecture     August 1, 1998


  6.1 Entries, Semantics & Relationships


  6.1.1 Root DSE Attributes

  The Root DSE attribute 'replicaRoot', publishes the names of the
  Replicas that are held on that server.  Each value of the attribute is
  the Distinguished Name of the root entry of the Replicated Area.


  6.1.2 Naming Context Auxiliary Object Class and Entries

  Each Naming Context contains attributes which hold common
  configuration and policy information for all replicas of the Naming
  Context.

  A Naming Context Creation attribute records when and where the Naming
  Context was created.

  The Access Control Policy OID attribute defines the syntax and
  semantics of Access Control Information for entries within the Naming
  Context.

  The Naming Context is based at the entry given the auxiliary class,
  and continues down the tree until another Naming Context is
  encountered.


  6.1.3 Replica Object Class and Entries

  Each Replica is characterized by a replica type.  This may be Primary,
  Updatable, or Read-Only.  The latter two types may be further defined
  as being Sparse, Fractional, or Partial. The Replica entry will
  include an Entry Filter for a Sparse Replica, a Fractional Entry
  Specification for a Fractional Replica, and both for a Partial Replica

  There is a need to represent network addresses of servers holding
  replicas and participating in Replication Agreements.  The X.501
  Access Point syntax is not sufficient, in that it is tied specifically
  to OSI transports.  Therefore, a new syntax will be defined for LDAP
  which serves the same purpose, but uses IETF-style address
  information. [LDUP Info]

  An Update Vector (described below) describes the point to which the
  Replica has been updated, in respect to all the other Replicas of the
  Naming Context.




  Merrells, Reed, Srinivasan                                  [Page 15]
                         Expires 5 February 1999



  INTERNET-DRAFT      LDAP Replication Architecture     August 1, 1998


  The intent is to enable distributed operations in LDAP with the
  replica information stored there, but not to complete the process of
  turning LDAP into a fully distributed service.


  6.1.4 Replication Agreement Object Class and Entries

  The Replication Agreement defines:

  - The schedule for Replication Sessions initiation.

  - Which server initiates the Replication Session. Either Consumer, or
    Supplier.

  - The authentication credentials that will be presented between
    servers.

  - The network/transport security scheme that will be employed in
    order to ensure data confidentiality.

  - The replication protocols and relevant protocol parameters to be
    used for Full and Incremental updates. An OID is used to identify
    the update transfer protocol, thus allowing for future extensions
    or bilaterally agreed upon alternatives.

  Permission to participate in replication sessions will be controlled,
  at least in part, by the presence and content of replica agreements.


  6.1.5 Update Vector

  Each Replica entry includes an Update Vector to record the point to
  which the replica has been updated. The vector is a set of CSN values,
  one value for each known updateable Replica. Each CSN is the most
  recent change, made at that Replica, that has been replicated to this
  Replica. It may be the case that a CSN for a given replica is absent,
  for one of two reasons.

  - CSNs for Read-Only replicas might be absent because no changes will
    have ever been applied to that Replica, so there are no changes to
    replicate.

  - CSNs for newly created replicas may be absent because no changes to
    that replica have yet been propagated.

  An Update Vector might contain a CSN for a replica that no longer
  exists.  The replica may have been temporarily taken out of service,
  or may have been removed from the replication topology permanently. An


  Merrells, Reed, Srinivasan                                  [Page 16]
                         Expires 5 February 1999



  INTERNET-DRAFT      LDAP Replication Architecture     August 1, 1998


  implementation may choose to retire a CSN after some configurable time
  period.

  Since the Update Vector records the state to which the replica has
  been updated, a supplier server, during Replication Session
  initiation, can determine the sequence of updates that should be sent
  to the consumer.

  The Update Vector embodies knowledge of updates made at all known
  replicas ensuring that changes are not transferred to a consumer
  multiple times.  This would otherwise occur in the case where
  redundant replication agreements existed. Unnecessary transfers are
  eliminated because each replica maintains the highest CSN it has seen
  for all other replicas, not just the supplier replica.


  6.2 Unique Identifiers

  Distinguished names can change, so are therefore unreliable as
  identifiers. A Unique Identifier must therefore be assigned to each
  entry as it is created. This identifier will be stored as an
  operational attribute of the entry. The unique identifier could be
  generated by a number of algorithms, so we propose that the first
  octet be a prefix to identify its type. The prefix zero is reserved to
  signify the UUID (Universally Unique IDentifier) format, also known as
  GUID (Globally Unique IDentifier) [UUID].

  Support for alternative algorithms is provided so that future better
  unique identifier generation algorithms may be easily adopted.
  Implementations may also wish to impose some structure to their unique
  identifiers to ease implementation of Conflict Detection & Resolution.



  7. Policy Information

  Policy information governs the behavior of the server. It may be
  represented in the DIT as sub-entries, attributes, and attribute
  values.

  When replicating a naming context that is itself a subtree of another
  naming context, there may be policy information stored in its
  antecedent entries. The most common examples are prescriptive access
  control information and inherited schema definition. Implementations
  may also define other policy attributes, or sub-entries, that apply to
  a whole subtree. For a naming context to be faithfully reproduced,
  this generational information must also be replicated. In all cases


  Merrells, Reed, Srinivasan                                  [Page 17]
                         Expires 5 February 1999



  INTERNET-DRAFT      LDAP Replication Architecture     August 1, 1998


  the policy information is transmitted as if it were an element of the
  Replica root entry.

  Policy information is always replicated in the same manner as any
  other entries, attributes, and attribute values.


  7.1 Access Control

  The Access Control Models supported by a server are identified by the
  'accessControlScheme' multi-valued attribute of the Root DSE entry.
  Each model is assigned an OID so that Consumers and Suppliers can
  determine if their access control policy will be faithfully imposed
  when replicated.

  An access control policy must be consistently applied by all servers
  holding replicas of the same Naming Context.  Therefore, the Access
  Control Policy attribute is to be an operational attribute of the
  Naming Context Auxiliary Class.  Thus, any consumer of the directory,
  and any server which would replicate a Naming Context, will know that
  an Access Control Policy is defined for the Naming Context, and by
  reference to the OID value of this attribute, know what policy
  mechanism to invoke to enforce that policy.  Administrators are
  strongly cautioned against placing replicas of naming contexts on
  servers that cannot enforce the policy required by the Access Control
  Policy OID.  Servers should refuse to accept replicas with policies
  they are unable to properly interpret.


  7.2 Schema Knowledge

  Schema subentries should be subordinate to the naming contexts to
  which they apply.  Given our model, a single server may hold replicas
  of several naming contexts. It is therefore essential that schema
  should not be considered to be a server-wide policy, but rather to be
  scoped by the namespace to which it applies.

  Schema modifications replicate in the same manner as other directory
  data.  Given the strict ordering of replication events, schema
  modifications will naturally be replicated prior to entry creations
  which use them, and subsequent to data deletions which eliminate
  references to schema elements to be deleted.  servers may not
  replicate information about entries which are not defined in the
  schema.  Servers SHOULD NOT replicate modifications to existing schema
  definitions for which there are existing entries and/or attributes
  which rely on the schema element.



  Merrells, Reed, Srinivasan                                  [Page 18]
                         Expires 5 February 1999



  INTERNET-DRAFT      LDAP Replication Architecture     August 1, 1998


  Should a schema change cause an entry to be in violation of the new
  schema, it is recommended that the server preserve the entry for
  administrative repair. The server could add a known object class to
  make the entry valid and to mark the entry for maintenance.



  8. Update Transfer Protocol

  This section describes the process by which a Replication Session is
  established, how updates are transferred, and how a session is
  terminated.

  Subject to Replication Agreements, either the supplier or the consumer
  server can initiate the replication session. This document only
  defines a transfer protocol for the supplier to push changes to the
  consumer.   Other protocols could be defined to transfer changes,
  including those which pull changes from the supplier to the consumer,
  but those are left for future work.


  8.1 Session Initiation

  The Initiator starts the Replication Session by opening an LDAP
  connection to its Responder.  The Initiator binds using the
  authentication credentials provided in the Replication Agreement. The
  extended LDAP operation Start Replication is then sent by the
  Initiator to the Responder. This operation identifies which role each
  server will perform, and what type of replication is to be performed.
  One server is to be the Consumer, the other the Supplier, and the
  replication may be either Full or Incremental. If the Responder does
  not support the requested type of replication then an error is
  returned.


  8.1.1 Authentication

  The initiation of a Replication Session is to be restricted to only
  permitted clients. The identity and credentials of a connected server
  are determined via the bind operation. Access control on the
  Replication Agreement determines if the Replication Session may
  proceed. Otherwise, the insufficientAccessRights error is returned.


  8.1.2 Consumer Initiated

  The Consumer binds to the Supplier using the authentication
  credentials provided in the Replication Agreement. The Consumer sends
  the Start Replication extended request to begin the Replication

  Merrells, Reed, Srinivasan                                  [Page 19]
                         Expires 5 February 1999



  INTERNET-DRAFT      LDAP Replication Architecture     August 1, 1998


  Session. The Supplier returns a Start Replication extended response
  containing a response code. The Consumer then disconnects from the
  Supplier. If the Supplier has agreed to the replication session
  initiation, it binds to the Consumer and behaves just as if the
  Supplier initiated the replication.


  8.1.3 Supplier Initiated

  The Supplier binds to the Consumer using the authentication
  credentials provided in the Replication Agreement. The Supplier sends
  the Start Replication Request extended request to begin the
  Replication Session. The Consumer returns a Start Replication extended
  response containing a response code, and optionally its Update Vector.
  If the Consumer has agreed to the Replication Session initiation, then
  the transfer protocol begins. The Supplier uses the Consumer's Update
  Vector to determine the sequence of changes that should be sent to the
  Consumer.


  8.1.4 Start Replication Request

  A client may request this operation by transmitting an LDAP PDU
  containing an LDAP ExtendedRequest, defined as follows. [LDAPv3]

  ExtendedRequest ::= [APPLICATION 23] SEQUENCE {
          requestName [0] LDAPOID,
          requestValue [1] OCTET STRING }


  The requestName field must be set to the string
  "2.16.840.1.113730.3.5.3".

  The requestValue field will contain as a value the DER-encoding of the
  following ASN.1 data type:

  SEQUENCE {
          namingContextDN  LDAPDN,
          replicaID INTEGER (1..2^^16-1),
          protocolOID LDAPOID }


  The parameters of the Start Replication Request are:

  - The Distinguished Name of the entry at the root of the Naming
    Context.

  - The Replica Identifier of the Initiator.


  Merrells, Reed, Srinivasan                                  [Page 20]
                         Expires 5 February 1999



  INTERNET-DRAFT      LDAP Replication Architecture     August 1, 1998


  - The OID identifying the Update Transfer Protocol to be used.

  From the DN and Replica ID the Responder can determine which
  Replication Agreement is being acted on.  The Protocol OID identifies
  the Update Transfer Protocol that the Initiator wishes to use, this
  indicates whether the it is to be a Full or Incremental update.


  8.1.5 Start Replication Response

  If a server implements this extension, then when the request is made
  it will return an LDAP PDU containing an ExtendedResponse, defined as
  follows. [LDAPv3]

  ExtendedResponse ::= [APPLICATION 24] SEQUENCE {
          COMPONENTS OF LDAPResult,
          responseName [10] LDAPOID OPTIONAL,
          responseValue [11] OCTET STRING OPTIONAL }


  The responseName field must be set to the string
  "2.16.840.1.113730.3.5.4". The responseValue field, when present, will
  contain as a value the DER-encoding of the following ASN.1 data type:

  SEQUENCE {
          startReplicationResult  [0] startReplicationStatus,
          updateVector [1] SET OF OCTET STRING OPTIONAL,
  }

  startReplicationStatus ::= ENUMERATED {
       success                   (0), -- operation succeeded
       operationsError           (1), -- server internal failure
       protocolError             (2), -- protocol error
       insufficientAccessRights (50), -- refused to carry out operation
       busy                     (51),  -- already being updated
       other                    (80) }


  The startReplicationResult field indicates any error condition
  encountered in the processing of the operation. In Supplier Initiated
  Replication the Consumer Responder responds with its Update Vector.


  8.2 Update Transfer

  Each Update Transfer Protocol is identified by an OID. A conformant
  server implementation must support the two update protocols defined
  here, and may support many others. A server will advertise its

  Merrells, Reed, Srinivasan                                  [Page 21]
                         Expires 5 February 1999



  INTERNET-DRAFT      LDAP Replication Architecture     August 1, 1998


  protocols in the Root DSE multi-valued attribute
  'supportedReplicationProtocols'.

  The two mandatory to implement protocols will be defined by the LDUP
  Working Group in another Internet Draft.  One is to provide a Full
  Update for initialisation and re-initialisation of a replica, the
  other is to maintain that replica via an Incremental Update.

  Each entry to be transferred is passed through the Entry Filter and
  Fractional Entry Specification.

  Necessary extended operations will be defined to support efficient
  transfer of change information from supplier to consumer servers.


  8.2.1 Full Update Transfer

  This Full Update Protocol will provide a bulk transfer of the replica
  contents for the initial population of new replicas, and the
  refreshing of existing replicas.

  Upon receiving a full update request the Consumer must replace any
  existing information in its replica with that sent from the Supplier.

  The Consumer need not service any requests for this Naming Context
  whilst the full update is in progress.  The Consumer could return a
  referral to another replica, possibly the supplier. [REF]


  8.2.2 Incremental Update Transfer

  For efficiency the Incremental Update Protocol transmits only those
  changes that have been made to the Naming Context since updates were
  last transmitted, that the Consumer has not already received. In a
  replication topology with transitive redundant replication agreements,
  changes may propagate through the replica network via different
  routes. The Supplier uses the Consumer's Update Vector to determine
  the sequence of updates that should be sent to the Consumer.

  As the transmission of updates proceeds the Consumer may return the
  last CSN received as a form of committed acknowledgement.  This
  provides an implicit restart value for the Supplier, should the
  connection be interrupted.

  Each individual change may contain a sequence of entry modifications
  that must be preserved when transferred. The atomicity of the LDAP
  operation must be preserved when it is applied to the Consumer
  Replica.


  Merrells, Reed, Srinivasan                                  [Page 22]
                         Expires 5 February 1999



  INTERNET-DRAFT      LDAP Replication Architecture     August 1, 1998


  Changes must be transmitted in ascending change sequence number.

  Each change transmitted includes the unique identifier of the subject
  entry and the CSN of the originating operation.  This allows the
  Consumer to keep track of which changes it has received.

  The Consumer must not support multiple concurrent replication sessions
  with many Suppliers for the same Naming Context. A Supplier that
  attempts to initiate a Replication Session with a Consumer already
  participating as a Consumer in another Replication Session will
  receive the busy error code.


  8.2.2.1 Conflict Detection and Resolution

  A consequence of permitting multiple updateable replicas within a
  replication topology is that conflicting update changes may occur.

  A Consumer will receive replication changes from its various agreement
  partners. Those changes must be reconciled with the current replica
  contents and any previously received changes.  In broad outline,
  received replication changes are compared to the state information
  associated with the item being operated on. If the change has a more
  recent CSN, then it is applied to the directory contents. If the
  replica has replication agreements where it acts as a supplier then
  the change is retained for forwarding at the appropriate time. If the
  change has an older CSN it is no longer relevant and is simply
  discarded.

  Naming collisions may occur when updates are received by a server for
  a given named entry whose Unique Identifier is different from that of
  an already existing entry with the same distinguished name.  This may
  occur because events from various replicas cannot be guaranteed to
  arrive in sequence, or because of conflicting data changes being
  entered at two or more different replicas.

  Consider the following scenario:

  The entry named "A" has a Unique Identifier of "3", and it exists on
  each of three replicas, X, Y, and Z.  At replica X, entry "A" is
  deleted, and then another entry "A" is created with the same name, but
  with the Unique Identifier of "4".  If at replica Y a modification to
  entry "A" is entered before the deletion and creation events from X
  are received, Y will attempt to replicate the modification to "A" to
  X.  When received, X will note that the Unique Identifier of the entry
  "A" which is being modified is "3".  Because the entry "A" with Unique
  Identifier "3" is marked as "deleted" on X, server X will simply
  ignore the modification, since it applies to a deleted object, and not

  Merrells, Reed, Srinivasan                                  [Page 23]
                         Expires 5 February 1999



  INTERNET-DRAFT      LDAP Replication Architecture     August 1, 1998


  to the entry currently defined with name "A", whose Unique Identifier
  is "4".  Thus, the confusion over which entry was modified is
  resolved.

  This briefly describes the types of change collisions that can occur.
  The LDUP Working Group will publish an Internet Draft fully defining
  the Conflict Detection and Resolution mechanism.


  8.3 End Replication Session

  A Replication Session is terminated by the Supplier by sending an End
  Replication LDAP extended request, see section 8.3.3. The purpose of
  the request and response operations is to carry the Update Vector from
  the Supplier to the Consumer in the Full Update case, and to convey
  the Update Vector from the Consumer to the Supplier in the Incremental
  Update case.


  8.3.1 Full Update End Replication Session

  After a Full Update transfer the Supplier sends the Update Vector that
  reflects the update state of the full replica information sent.  The
  Consumer records this as its Update Vector.

  The Supplier could be accepting updates whilst the update is in
  progress.  Once the Full Update has completed, an Incremental Update
  should be performed to transfer these changes.


  8.3.2 Incremental Update End Replication Session

  After an Incremental Update transfer has completed the Supplier must
  send its Update Vector to the Consumer. If the Supplier sent none of
  its own updates to the Consumer, then its CSN within its Update Vector
  should be updated with the earliest possible CSN that it could
  generate, to allow for deletion state information to be purged in a
  timely manner.

  The Consumer records the received Update Vector in the replica entry
  it holds for the Supplier Replica.

  The Consumer then returns its resultant Update Vector to the Supplier
  so that it too can update its replica entry for the Consumer Replica.
  The Consumer's Update Vector CSN values will be at least as great as
  the Supplier's Update Vector.




  Merrells, Reed, Srinivasan                                  [Page 24]
                         Expires 5 February 1999



  INTERNET-DRAFT      LDAP Replication Architecture     August 1, 1998


  8.3.3 End Replication Request

  A client may request this operation by transmitting an LDAP PDU
  containing an LDAP ExtendedRequest, defined as follows. [LDAPv3]

  ExtendedRequest ::= [APPLICATION 23] SEQUENCE {
          requestName [0] LDAPOID,
          requestValue [1] OCTET STRING }


  The requestName field must be set to the string
  "2.16.840.1.113730.3.5.5".

  The requestValue field will contain as a value the DER-encoding of the
  following ASN.1 data type:

  SEQUENCE {
          updateVector SET OF OCTET STRING }


  When the update has completed the Supplier sends this extended request
  to inform the Consumer that all updates have been sent, and to advise
  the Consumer of its own Update Vector.


  8.3.4 End Replication Response

  If a server implements this extension, then when the request is made
  it will return an LDAP PDU containing an ExtendedResponse, defined as
  follows. [LDAPv3]

  ExtendedResponse ::= [APPLICATION 24] SEQUENCE {
          COMPONENTS OF LDAPResult,
          responseName [10] LDAPOID OPTIONAL,
          responseValue [11] OCTET STRING OPTIONAL }


  The responseName field must be set to the string
  "2.16.840.1.113730.3.5.6". The responseValue field, when present, will
  contain as a value the DER-encoding of the following ASN.1 data type:

  SEQUENCE {
          endReplicationResult  [0] endReplicationStatus,
          updateVector [1] SET OF OCTET STRING OPTIONAL,
  }


  startReplicationStatus ::= ENUMERATED {
          success                   (0), -- operation succeeded

  Merrells, Reed, Srinivasan                                  [Page 25]
                         Expires 5 February 1999



  INTERNET-DRAFT      LDAP Replication Architecture     August 1, 1998


          operationsError           (1), -- server internal failure
          protocolError             (2), -- protocol error
          other                     (80) }


  The endReplicationResult field indicates any error condition
  encountered in the processing of the operation. The Consumer returns
  its Update Vector to the Supplier.


  8.4 Integrity & Confidentiality

  Data integrity (i.e. protection from unintended changes) and
  confidentiality (i.e. protection from unintended disclosure to
  eavesdroppers) SHOULD be provided by appropriate selection of
  underlying transports, for instance TLS, or IPSEC.  Replication MUST
  be supported across TLS LDAP connections.  Servers MAY be configured
  to refuse replication connections over unprotected TCP connections.



  9. Replication Configuration and Management

  Replication management entries, such as replica or replication
  agreement entries, can be altered on any updateable replica. These
  entries are implicitly included in the directory entries governed by
  any agreement associated with this naming context.  As a result, all
  servers with a replica of a naming context will have access to
  information about all other replicas and associated agreements.

  The deployment and maintenance of a replicated directory network
  involves the creation and management of all the replicas of a naming
  context and replication agreements among these replicas.  This section
  outlines, through an example, the administrative actions necessary to
  create a new replica and establish replication agreements.  Typically,
  administrative tools will guide the administrator and facilitate these
  actions.  The objective of this example is to illustrate the
  architectural relationship among various replication related
  operational information.

  A copy of an agreement should exist on both the supplier and consumer
  side for the replication update transfer protocol to be able to start.
  For this purpose, the root of the naming context, replica objects and
  the replication agreement objects are created first on one of the
  servers.  A copy of these objects are then manually created on the
  second server associated with the agreement.



  Merrells, Reed, Srinivasan                                  [Page 26]
                         Expires 5 February 1999



  INTERNET-DRAFT      LDAP Replication Architecture     August 1, 1998


  The scenario below starts with a server (named DSA1) that holds an
  updateable replica of a naming context NC1.  Procedures to establish
  an updateable replica of the naming context on a second server (DSA2)
  are outlined.

  On DSA1:

  1) Add the context prefix for NC1 to the Root DSE attribute
    'replicaRoot'. If it does not already exist.

  2) Alter the 'ObjectClass' attribute of the root entry of NC1 to
    include the "namingContext" auxiliary class.

  3) Create a replica object, NC1R1, (as a child of the root of NC1) to
    represent the replica on DSA1.  The attributes include replica type
    (updateable, read-only etc.) and DSA1 access point information.

  4) Create a copy of the replica object NC1R2 (after it is created on
    DSA2)

  5) Create a replication agreement, NC1R1-R2 to represent update
    transfer from NC1R1 to NC1R2.  This object is a child of NC1R1.

  On DSA2:

  1) Add NC1's context prefix to the Root DSE attribute 'replicaRoot'.

  2) Create a copy of the root entry of NC1 as a copy of the one in DSA1
    (including the namingContext auxiliary class)

  3) Create a copy of the replica object NC1R1

  4) Create a the second replica object, NC1R2 (as a sibling of NC1R1)
    to represent the replica on DSA2.

  5) Create a copy the replication agreement, NC1R1-R2

  6) Create a replication agreement, NC1R2-R1, to represent update
    transfer from NC1R2 to NC1R1.  This object is a sibling of NC1R1-
    R2.

  After these actions update transfer to satisfy either of the two
  agreements can commence.

  If data already existed in one of the replicas, the update transfer
  protocol should perform a complete update of the data associated with
  the agreement before normal replication begins.


  Merrells, Reed, Srinivasan                                  [Page 27]
                         Expires 5 February 1999



  INTERNET-DRAFT      LDAP Replication Architecture     August 1, 1998


  10. Time

  The server assigns CSN for every LDAP update operation it receives.
  Since the CSN is principally based on time, the CSN is susceptible to
  the Replica clocks drifting in relation to each other (either forwards
  or backwards).

  The server must never assign a CSN older than or equal to the last CSN
  it assigned.

  The server must reject update operations, from any source, which would
  result in setting a CSN on an entry or a value which is earlier than
  the one that is there.  The error code serverClocksOutOfSync (72)
  should be returned.



  11. Security Considerations

  The preceding architecture discussion covers the server
  authentication, session confidentiality, and session integrity in
  sections 8.1.1, 17.7, and 8.4

  The internet draft "Authentication Methods" for LDAP, provides a
  detailed LDAP security discussion.  Its introductory passage is
  paraphrased below. [AUTH]

  A Replication Session can be protected with the following security
  mechanisms.

  1) Authentication by means of the SASL mechanism set, possibly backed
    by the TLS credentials exchange mechanism,

  2) Authorization by means of access control based on the Initiators
    authenticated identity,

  3) Data integrity protection by means of the TLS protocol or data-
    integrity SASL mechanisms,

  4) Protection against snooping by means of the TLS protocol or data-
    encrypting SASL mechanisms,



  12. Acknowledgements

  This document is a product of the LDUP Working Group of the IETF. The
  contributions of its members is greatly appreciated.

  Merrells, Reed, Srinivasan                                  [Page 28]
                         Expires 5 February 1999



  INTERNET-DRAFT      LDAP Replication Architecture     August 1, 1998


  13. References

  [AUTH] - M. Wahl, H. Alvestrand, J. Hodges, RL "Bob" Morgan,
  "Authentication Methods for LDAP", Internet Draft, draft-ietf-ldapext-
  authmeth-02.txt, July 1998.

  [BCP-11] - R. Hovey, S. Bradner, "The Organizations Involved in the
  IETF Standards Process", BCP 11, RFC 2028, October 1996.

  [LDAPv3] - M. Wahl, S. Kille, T. Howes, "Lightweight Directory Access
  Protocol (v3)", RFC 2251, December1997.

  [LDUP Requirements] - R. Weiser, E. Stokes LDAP Replication
  Requirements, Internet Draft, draft-weiser-replica-req-02.txt, April
  1998.

  [LDUP Info.] - E. Reed, "LDUP Replication Information Model", Internet
  Draft, draft-reed-ldup-infomod-00-1.txt, August 1998.

  [NTP] - D. L. Mills, "Network Time Protocol (Version 3)", RFC 1305,
  March, 1992.

  [REF] - T. Howes, Mark Wahl, "Referrals and Knowledge References in
  LDAP Directories", Internet draft, draft-ietf-ldapext-referral-00.txt,
  March 1998.

  [RFC2119] - S. Bradner, "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
  Requirement Levels", RFC 2119.

  [RFC2252] - M. Wahl, A. Coulbeck, T. Howes, S. Kille, "Lightweight
  Directory Access Protocol (v3): Attribute Syntax Definitions", RFC
  2252, December 1997.

  [SNTP] - D. L. Mills, "Simple Network Time Protocol (SNTP) Version 4
  for IPv4, IPv6 and OSI", RFC 2030, University of Delaware, October
  1996.

  [TLS] -  J. Hodges, R. L. "Bob" Morgan, M. Wahl, "Lightweight
  Directory Access Protocol (v3): Extension for Transport Layer
  Security", Internet draft, draft-ietf-ldapext-ldapv3-tls-01.txt, July
  1998.

  [UUID] - P. Leach, R. Salz, "UUIDs and GUIDs", Internet draft, draft-
  leach-uuids-guids-01.txt, February 1998.

  [X501] - ITU-T Recommendation X.501 (1993), ) | ISO/IEC 9594-2:1993,
  Information Technology - Open Systems Interconnection - The Directory:
  Models

  Merrells, Reed, Srinivasan                                  [Page 29]
                         Expires 5 February 1999



  INTERNET-DRAFT      LDAP Replication Architecture     August 1, 1998


  [X680] - ITU-T Recommendation X.680 (1994) | ISO/IEC 8824-1:1995,
  Information technology - Abstract Syntax Notation One (ASN.1):
  Specification of Basic Notation"

  [X525] ITU-T Recommendation X.525 (1997) | ISO/IEC 9594-9:1997,
  Information Technology - Open Systems Interconnection - The Directory:
  Replication



  14. Intellectual Property Notice

  The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
  intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to
  pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
  this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
  might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it has
  made any effort to identify any such rights.  Information on the
  IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and
  standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11. [BCP-11]
  Copies of claims of rights made available for publication and any
  assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
  attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
  such proprietary rights by implementors or users of this specification
  can be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.

  The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
  copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
  rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice
  this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF Executive
  Director.



  15. Copyright Notice

     Copyright (C) The Internet Society (1998). All Rights Reserved.

  This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
  others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
  or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published and
  distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any kind,
  provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
  included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
  document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
  the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
  Internet organizations, except as needed for the  purpose of
  developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for

  Merrells, Reed, Srinivasan                                  [Page 30]
                         Expires 5 February 1999



  INTERNET-DRAFT      LDAP Replication Architecture     August 1, 1998


  copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be followed,
  or as required to translate it into languages other than English.

  The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
  revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

  This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
  "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
  TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT
  NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN
  WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
  MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.



  16. Authors' Address

       John Merrells
       Netscape Communications, Inc.
       501 East Middlefield Road
       Mountain View
       CA 94043

       E-mail: merrells@netscape.com
       Phone: +1 650-937-5739

       Edwards E. Reed
       Novell, Inc.
       122 E 1700 S
       Provo, UT   84606

       E-mail: ed_reed@novell.com
       Phone: +1 801-861-3320
       Fax:   +1 801-861-2220

       Uppili Srinivasan
       Oracle, Inc.
       Redwood Shores

       E-mail: usriniva@us.oracle.com
       Phone: +1 650 506 3039



       LDUP Engineering Mailing List:  ldup-repl@external.cisco.com




  Merrells, Reed, Srinivasan                                  [Page 31]
                         Expires 5 February 1999



  INTERNET-DRAFT      LDAP Replication Architecture     August 1, 1998


  17. Appendix A - Open Issues


  17.1 Replication Session Initiation

  Insisting that an agreement is always consumer initiated or always
  supplier initiated is rather inflexible. There are times when a read-
  only replica will want to initiate an immediate total refresh on an
  agreement that is ordinarily supplier initiated. With the above
  restriction a read-only replica will just have to wait until a
  supplier contacts it.

  It might be preferable that the identity of the initiator be
  associated with the schedule components, rather than with the whole
  replication agrement.


  17.2 Lost and Found Container

  The replication architecture proposal submitted by Steven Legg of
  Teltra includes the concept of every entry being assigned a lost and
  found superior.  If the entry becomes orphaned from its parent, due to
  some naming collision, then the lost and found container adopts that
  entry.  This well known place would allow administrators and their
  tools to find and repair abandoned entries.


  17.3 Write Conflicts

  Servers could be administratively configured to ignore updates with
  ridiculous times, and may choose their own definitions for what times
  are considered ridiculous.  Servers that do so must declare their
  definition of ridiculous in the Root DSE or the Naming Context entry
  of the Replica.


  17.4 Management and Configuration

  Topics that need coverage.

  - Creation, Destruction, and Modification of Naming Contexts,
    Replicas, and Replication Agreements.

  - Promotion and Demotion of Replicas from Read-Only to Updateable to
    Primary.

  - Patching up of partitioned replication networks.


  Merrells, Reed, Srinivasan                                  [Page 32]
                         Expires 5 February 1999



  INTERNET-DRAFT      LDAP Replication Architecture     August 1, 1998


  - Discuss redundant replication agreements.

  - Triggering a Full Update for a Replication Agreement.


  17.5 Sparse, Fractional, and Partial Replicas

  The scope and expressiveness of the Entry Filter and Fractional
  Attribute Specification need to be defined.

  One of the replication requirements is that not all replicas hold all
  the entries or all their attributes.  There are some consequences.

  - Both Replica and Replication Agreements could specify the Partial-
    ness of a Replica.

  - What should the server behaviour be when an LDAP update operations
    is applied to Partial Replica that does not hold the data to be
    modified.

  - How is schema enforced on a Fractional Replica.


  17.6 Update Transfer: Errors, Recovery, Diagnostics and Repair

  How should the protocol react to connection loss.
  Should the Replication Agreement protocol parameters define the
  acknowledgement frequency.
  Should keep-alive and progress feedback be provided for long
  operations.  For instance replica preparation during Full Update for
  reinitialisation.

  17.7 Update Access Control

  The Supplier must be subject to the access control policy enforced by
  the Consumer. Since the access control policy information is stored
  and replicated as directory content, the access control imposed on the
  Supplier by the Consumer must be stored in the Consumer's Replication
  Agreement.










  Merrells, Reed, Srinivasan                                  [Page 33]
                         Expires 5 February 1999

