


Congestion and Pre Congestion                               T. Moncaster
Internet-Draft                                                        BT
Intended status: Standards Track                              B. Briscoe
Expires: January 12, 2009                                       BT & UCL
                                                                M. Menth
                                                 University of Wuerzburg
                                                           July 11, 2008


     Baseline Encoding and Transport of Pre-Congestion Information
                draft-moncaster-pcn-baseline-encoding-02

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 12, 2009.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

Abstract

   Pre-congestion notification (PCN) provides information to support
   admission control and flow termination in order to protect the
   Quality of Service of inelastic flows.  It does this by marking
   packets when traffic load on a link is approaching or has exceeded a
   threshold below the physical link rate.  This document specifies how



Moncaster, et al.       Expires January 12, 2009                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft            Baseline PCN Encoding                July 2008


   such marks are to be encoded into the IP header.  The baseline
   encoding described here provides for only two PCN encoding states.
   Other documents describe extended encoding schemes that allow for
   three encoding states.

Status

   This memo is posted as an Internet-Draft with an intent to eventually
   progress to standards track.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Requirements notation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   4.  Encoding two PCN States in IP  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     4.1.  Rationale for Encoding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     4.2.  PCN-Enabled DiffServ Codepoints  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
       4.2.1.  Implications of re-using a DiffServ Codepoint  . . . .  6
     4.3.  Valid and Invalid Encoding Transitions at a PCN Node . . .  6
   5.  Backwards Compatability  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   6.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   7.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   8.  Conclusions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   9.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   10. Comments Solicited . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   11. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     11.1. Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     11.2. Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   Appendix A.  Tunnelling Constraints  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   Appendix B.  Deployment Scenarios for PCN Using Baseline
                Encoding  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 13
















Moncaster, et al.       Expires January 12, 2009                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft            Baseline PCN Encoding                July 2008


1.  Introduction

   Pre-congestion notification (PCN) provides information to support
   admission control and flow termination in order to protect the
   quality of service (QoS) of inelastic flows.  This is achieved by
   marking packets according to the level of pre-congestion at nodes
   within the PCN-domain.  Two algorithms exist for that purpose.
   Excess traffic marking marks all PCN packets exceeding a certain
   reference rate on a link while threshold marking marks all PCN
   packets on a link when the PCN traffic rate exceeds the reference
   rate.  These markings are evaluated by the egress nodes of the PCN-
   domain.  [PCN-arch] describes how PCN packet markings can be used to
   assure the QoS of inelastic flows within a single DiffServ domain.

   This document specifies how these PCN marks are encoded into the IP
   header.  It also describes how packets are identified as belonging to
   a PCN flow.  Some deployment models require two PCN encoding states,
   others require three.  The baseline encoding described here only
   provides for two PCN encoding states.  An extended encoding described
   in [PCN-3-enc-state] provides for three PCN encoding states.

Changes from previous drafts (to be removed by the RFC Editor)

   From -01 to -02:

      Minor changes throughout including tightening up language to
      remain consistent with the PCN Architecture terminology

   From -00 to -01:

      Change of title from "Encoding and Transport of (Pre-)Congestion
      Information from within a DiffServ Domain to the Egress"

      Extensive changes to Introduction and abstract.

      Added a section on the implications of re-using a DSCP.

      Added appendix listing possible operator scenarios for using this
      baseline encoding.

      Minor changes throughout.


2.  Requirements notation

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].



Moncaster, et al.       Expires January 12, 2009                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft            Baseline PCN Encoding                July 2008


3.  Terminology

   The following terms are used in this document:

   o  not-PCN - packets that are not PCN capable.

   o  PCN-marked - codepoint indicating packets that have been marked at
      a PCN-interior-node using some PCN marking behaviour.  Also PM.

   o  not-Marked - codepoint indicating packets that are PCN capable but
      are not PCN-marked.  Also NM.

   o  PCN-Capable codepoints - collective term for all the NM and PM
      codepoints.

   o  PCN-enabled Diffserv codepoint - a Diffserv codepoint for which
      PCN has been enabled on a particular machine.

   In addition the document uses the terminology defined in [PCN-arch].


4.  Encoding two PCN States in IP

   The PCN encoding states are defined using the Type of Service field
   of the IP header which is a combination of the DSCP field and ECN
   field.  The baseline PCN encoding closely follows the semantics of
   ECN [RFC3168].  It allows the encoding of two PCN states: Not Marked
   and PCN-Marked.  It also allows for traffic that is not PCN capable
   to be marked as such (not-PCN).  The following table defines how to
   encode these states in IP:

      +--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+---------+
      |  DSCP  | not-ECT (00) | ECT(0) (10) | ECT(1) (01) | CE (11) |
      +--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+---------+
      | DSCP n |    not-PCN   |      NM     |      NM     |    PM   |
      +--------+--------------+-------------+-------------+---------+

    Where DSCP n is a PCN-enabled DiffServ codepoint (see Section 4.2)

                        Table 1: Encoding PCN in IP

   The following rules apply to all PCN traffic:

   o  PCN traffic MUST be marked with a PCN-enabled DiffServ Codepoint.
      That is a DiffServ codepoint that indicates that PCN is enabled.
      To conserve DSCPs, DiffServ Codepoints SHOULD be chosen that are
      already defined for use with admission controlled traffic, such as
      the Voice-Admit codepoint defined in [voice-admit].



Moncaster, et al.       Expires January 12, 2009                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft            Baseline PCN Encoding                July 2008


   o  Any packet that is not PCN capable (not-PCN) but which shares the
      same DiffServ codepoint as PCN capable traffic MUST have the ECN
      field set to 00.

   o  Any packet that belongs to a PCN capable flow MUST have the ECN
      field set to one of the two ECT codepoints 10 or 01 at the PCN-
      ingress-node.

   o  Any packet that is PCN capable and has been PCN-marked by a PCN-
      interior-node MUST have the ECN field set to 11.

4.1.  Rationale for Encoding

   The exact choice of encoding was dictated by the constraints imposed
   by existing IETF RFCs, in particular [RFC3168] and [RFC4774].  Full
   details are contained in [pcn-enc-compare].  One of the tightest
   constraints was the need for any PCN encoding to survive being
   tunnelled through either an IP in IP tunnel or an IPSec Tunnel.
   Appendix A explains this in detail.  The main effect of this
   constraint is that any PCN marking has to use the ECN field set to 11
   (CE codepoint).  If the packet is being tunneled then only the CE
   codepoint gets copied into the inner header upon decapsulation.  An
   additional constraint is the need to minimise the use of DiffServ
   codepoints as these are in increasingly short supply.  Section 4.2
   explains how we have minimised this still further by reusing pre-
   existing Diffserv codepoint(s) such that non-PCN traffic can still be
   distinguished from PCN traffic.

   The encoding scheme (Table 1) that best addresses the above
   constraints ends up looking very similar to ECN.  This is perhaps not
   surprising given the similarity in architectural intent between PCN
   and ECN.

4.2.  PCN-Enabled DiffServ Codepoints

   Equipment complying with the baseline PCN encoding MUST allow PCN to
   be enabled for a certain Diffserv codepoint or codepoints.  This
   document defines the term "PCN-Enabled Diffserv Codepoint" for such a
   DSCP.  Enabling PCN for a DSCP switches on PCN marking behaviour for
   packets with that DSCP, but only if those packets also have their ECN
   field set to indicate a codepoint other than not-PCN.

   Enabling PCN marking behaviour disables any other marking behaviour
   (e.g. enabling PCN disables the default ECN marking behaviour
   introduced in [RFC3168]).  The scheduling behaviour used for a packet
   does not change whether PCN is enabled for a DSCP or not and whatever
   the setting of the ECN field.




Moncaster, et al.       Expires January 12, 2009                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft            Baseline PCN Encoding                July 2008


4.2.1.  Implications of re-using a DiffServ Codepoint

   [RFC4774] requires that packets for which alternate ECN semantics
   (PCN semantics) are used are clearly distinguished from packets to
   which the default ECN semantics [RFC3168] apply.  One means of doing
   this is using a DSCP to indicate that the ECN field is to be
   interpreted in a different manner.  We have chosen to use this
   approach for PCN.  Non-PCN-enabled forwarding nodes treat packets
   with a PCN-enabled DSCP like ECN traffic if appropriate ECN
   codepoints are set in the IP header.  This has several consequences.

   o  Care must be taken to ensure that forwarding nodes do not
      interpret PCN encodings as ECN encodings, and that no harm is done
      if this were to happen.  To that end, appropriate marking and re-
      marking is performed at the ingress and the egress of a PCN-
      domain.

   o  The re-used DSCP should be able to serve its original purpose
      which was not PCN support.  This is achieved by marking the
      packets of such flows with a not-PCN codepoint.

   o  The scheduling behaviour is coupled with the DSCP only.
      Therefore, the same scheduling and buffer management rules are
      applied for non-PCN-capable and PCN-capable traffic using the same
      PCN-enabled DSCP.

   o  Once the ECN field of a packet is used for PCN encoding, it has
      lost its previous information unless this information is tunnelled
      through the PCN domain.  Therefore, the baseline PCN encoding
      disables ECN for PCN-enabled DSCPs.  [PCN-3-enc-state] provides
      end-to-end ECN support where this is needed.

4.3.  Valid and Invalid Encoding Transitions at a PCN Node

   PCN-boundary-node behaviour compliant with the PCN baseline encoding:

   o  Any packet with the ECN field already marked as CE or ECT arriving
      at a PCN-ingress-node SHOULD be dropped or downgraded to a lower
      class of service.  Alternatively it MAY be tunnelled through the
      PCN-domain.  It MUST NOT be admitted to the PCN-domain directly.

   o  On leaving the PCN-domain the ECN bits of every PCN-packet MUST be
      set to 00 (not-ECT).

   PCN-interior-node behaviour compliant with the PCN baseline encoding:

   o  PCN-interior-nodes MUST NOT change not-PCN to another codepoint
      and they MUST NOT change a PCN-Capable codepoint to not-PCN.



Moncaster, et al.       Expires January 12, 2009                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft            Baseline PCN Encoding                July 2008


   o  PCN-interior-nodes that are in a pre-congestion state above the
      configured level MUST set the PM codepoint by changing the ECN
      bits of NM marked packets to 11.

   o  The PM codepoint MUST NOT be changed to NM.


5.  Backwards Compatability

   BCP 124 [RFC4774] gives guidelines for specifying alternative
   semantics for the ECN field.  It sets out a number of factors that
   must be taken into consideration.  It also suggests various
   techniques to allow the co-existence of default ECN and alternative
   ECN semantics.  The alternative semantics specified here are
   compliant with this BCP:

   o  they use a DSCP to allow routers to distinguish that traffic uses
      the alternate ECN semantics;

   o  these semantics are defined for use within a controlled domain;

   o  ECN marked traffic is blocked from entering the PCN-domain
      directly (though it might be tunnelled through the PCN-domain).

   o  All traffic leaving the controlled domain is re-marked as not-ECT.


6.  IANA Considerations

   This document makes no request to IANA.  It does however suggest a
   change to the default ([RFC3168]) behaviour for the ECN field for the
   Voice-Admit [voice-admit] DSCP.


7.  Security Considerations

   Packets claim entitlement to be PCN marked by carrying a PCN-enabled
   DSCP and a PCN-Capable ECN codepoint.  This encoding document is
   intended to stand independently of the architecture used to determine
   whether specific packets are authorised to be PCN marked, which will
   be described in a future separate document on PCN edge-node
   behaviour.  The PCN working group has initially been chartered to
   only consider a PCN-domain to be entirely under the control of one
   operator, or a set of operators who trust each other [PCN-charter].
   However there is a requirement to keep inter-domain scenarios in mind
   when defining the PCN encoding.  One way to extend to multiple
   domains would be to concatenate PCN-domains and use PCN-boundary-
   nodes back to back at borders.  Then any one domain's security



Moncaster, et al.       Expires January 12, 2009                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft            Baseline PCN Encoding                July 2008


   against its neighbours would be described as part of the edge-node
   behaviour document as above.  One proposal on the table allows one to
   extend PCN across multiple domains without PCN-boundary-nodes back-
   to-back at borders [re-PCN].  It is believed that the encoding
   described here would be compatible with the security framework
   described there.


8.  Conclusions

   This document defines the baseline PCN encoding utilising a
   combination of a PCN-enabled DSCP and the ECN field in the IP header.
   This baseline encoding allows the existence of two PCN encoding
   states, not-Marked and PCN-Marked.  It also allows for the co-
   existence of traffic that is not PCN-capable within the same DSCP so
   long as theat traffic doesn't require end-to-end ECN support.  The
   encoding scheme is conformant with [RFC4774].


9.  Acknowledgements

   This document builds extensively on work done in the PCN working
   group by Kwok Ho Chan, Georgios Karagiannis, Philip Eardley and
   others.  Full details of the alternative schemes that were considered
   for adoption can be found in the document [pcn-enc-compare].  Thanks
   to Ruediger Geib for providing detailed comments on this document.


10.  Comments Solicited

   Comments and questions are encouraged and very welcome.  They can be
   addressed to the IETF congestion and pre-congestion working group
   mailing list <pcn@ietf.org>, and/or to the authors.


11.  References

11.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC4774]  Floyd, S., "Specifying Alternate Semantics for the
              Explicit Congestion Notification (ECN) Field", BCP 124,
              RFC 4774, November 2006.






Moncaster, et al.       Expires January 12, 2009                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft            Baseline PCN Encoding                July 2008


11.2.  Informative References

   [PCN-3-enc-state]
              Moncaster, T., Briscoe, B., and M. Menth, "A three state
              extended PCN encoding scheme",
              draft-moncaster-pcn-3-state-encoding-00 (work in
              progress), June 2008.

   [PCN-arch]
              Eardley, P., "Pre-Congestion Notification Architecture",
              draft-ietf-pcn-architecture-03 (work in progress),
              February 2008.

   [PCN-charter]
              "IETF Charter for Congestion and Pre-Congestion
              Notification Working Group".

   [RFC3168]  Ramakrishnan, K., Floyd, S., and D. Black, "The Addition
              of Explicit Congestion Notification (ECN) to IP",
              RFC 3168, September 2001.

   [RFC4301]  Kent, S. and K. Seo, "Security Architecture for the
              Internet Protocol", RFC 4301, December 2005.

   [pcn-enc-compare]
              Chan, K., Karagiannis, G., Moncaster, T., Menth, M.,
              Eardley, P., and B. Briscoe, "Pre-Congestion Notification
              Encoding Comparison",
              draft-chan-pcn-encoding-comparison-03 (work in progress),
              February 2008.

   [re-PCN]   Briscoe, B., "Emulating Border Flow Policing using Re-ECN
              on Bulk Data", draft-briscoe-re-pcn-border-cheat-00 (work
              in progress), July 2007.

   [voice-admit]
              Baker, F., Polk, J., and M. Dolly, "DSCPs for Capacity-
              Admitted Traffic",
              draft-ietf-tsvwg-admitted-realtime-dscp-04 (work in
              progress), February 2008.


Appendix A.  Tunnelling Constraints

   The rules that govern the behaviour of the ECN field for IP-in-IP
   tunnels were defined in [RFC3168].  This allowed for two tunnel
   modes.  The limited functionality mode sets the outer header to not-
   ECT, regardless of the value of the inner header, in other words



Moncaster, et al.       Expires January 12, 2009                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft            Baseline PCN Encoding                July 2008


   disabling ECN within the tunnel.  The full functionality mode copies
   the inner ECN field into the outer header if the inner header is not-
   ECT or either of the 2 ECT codepoints.  If the inner header is CE
   then the outer header is set to ECT(0).  On decapsulation, if the CE
   codepoint is set on the outer header then this is copied into the
   inner header.  Otherwise the inner header is left unchanged.  The
   stated reason for blocking CE from being copied to the outer header
   was to prevent this from being used as a covert channel through IPSec
   tunnels.

   The IPSec protocol [RFC4301] changed the ECN tunnelling rule to allow
   IPSec tunnels to simply copy the inner header into the outer header.
   On decapsulation the outer header is discarded and the ECN field is
   only copied down if it is set to CE.

   Because of the possible existence of tunnels, only CE (11) can be
   used as a PCN marking as it is the only mark that will survive
   decapsulation.  However there is a need for caution with all
   tunneling within the PCN-domain.  RFC3168 full functionality IP in IP
   tunnels are expected to set the ECN field to ECT(0) if the inner ECN
   field is set to CE.  This leads to the possibility that some packets
   within the PCN-domain that have already been marked may have that
   mark concealed further into the domain.  This is undesirable for many
   PCN schemes and thus standard IP in IP tunnels SHOULD NOT be used
   within a PCN-domain.  Further work is needed within the Transport
   Area to rationalise the behaviour of tunnels in respect to the ECN
   field.


Appendix B.  Deployment Scenarios for PCN Using Baseline Encoding

   This appendix illustrates possible PCN deployment scenarios where the
   baseline encoding can be used and also explain a case for which
   baseline encoding is not sufficient. {Note this appendix is provided
   for information only}.

   1.  An operator may wish to use PCN-based admission control only.  To
       that end, threshold marking based on admissible rates might be
       used as the only PCN metering and marking algorithm.  As a
       consequence, the PM marks on the packets are interpreted as
       admission-stop (AS) marks.  The admission-control algorithm is
       based on "admissible-rate overload".

   2.  An operator may wish to use PCN-based flow termination only.  To
       that end, excess rate marking based on supportable rates might be
       used as the only PCN metering and marking algorithm.  As a
       consequence, the PM marks on the packets are interpreted as
       excess-traffic (ET) marks.  The flow termination algorithm is



Moncaster, et al.       Expires January 12, 2009               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft            Baseline PCN Encoding                July 2008


       based on "supportable-rate overload".

   3.  An operator may wish to use both PCN-based admission control and
       flow termination.  To that end, excess rate marking based on
       admissible rates may be used as the only PCN metering and marking
       algorithm.  As a consequence, the PM marks on the packets are
       interpreted as admission-stop (AS) marks.  Both the admission
       control and the flow termination algorithm are based on
       "admissible-rate overload".

   4.  An operator may wish to implement admission control based on
       threshold marking at admissible rates and flow termination based
       on excess rate marking at supportable rates because these methods
       are believed to work better with small ingress-egress aggregates.
       Then two different markings are needed.  Such a deployment
       scenario is not supported by the PCN baseline encoding.


Authors' Addresses

   Toby Moncaster
   BT
   B54/70, Adastral Park
   Martlesham Heath
   Ipswich  IP5 3RE
   UK

   Phone: +44 1473 648734
   Email: toby.moncaster@bt.com
   URI:   http://www.cs.ucl.ac.uk/staff/B.Briscoe/


   Bob Briscoe
   BT & UCL
   B54/77, Adastral Park
   Martlesham Heath
   Ipswich  IP5 3RE
   UK

   Phone: +44 1473 645196
   Email: bob.briscoe@bt.com










Moncaster, et al.       Expires January 12, 2009               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft            Baseline PCN Encoding                July 2008


   Michael Menth
   University of Wuerzburg
   room B206, Institute of Computer Science
   Am Hubland
   Wuerzburg  D-97074
   Germany

   Phone: +49 931 888 6644
   Email: menth@informatik.uni-wuerzburg.de










































Moncaster, et al.       Expires January 12, 2009               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft            Baseline PCN Encoding                July 2008


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgments

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).  This document was produced
   using xml2rfc v1.32 (of http://xml.resource.org/) from a source in
   RFC-2629 XML format.



Moncaster, et al.       Expires January 12, 2009               [Page 13]

