


ROLL                                                     P. Thubert, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                             Cisco Systems
Intended status: Standards Track                          March 14, 2011
Expires: September 15, 2011


                        RPL Objective Function 0
                         draft-ietf-roll-of0-07

Abstract

   The Routing Protocol for Low Power and Lossy Networks (RPL) defines a
   generic Distance Vector protocol for Low Power and Lossy Networks
   (LLNs).  RPL is instantiated to honor a particular routing objective/
   constraint by the adding a specific Objective Function (OF) that is
   designed to solve that problem.  This specification defines a basic
   OF, OF0, that uses only the abstract properties exposed in RPL
   messages with no metric container.

Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 15, 2011.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal



Thubert                Expires September 15, 2011               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft             draft-ietf-roll-of0                March 2011


   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Goal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   4.  Selection of the Preferred Parent  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   5.  Selection of the Backup next_hop . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   6.  Abstract Interface with RPL core . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   7.  OF0 Constants and Variables  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   8.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   9.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   10. Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   11. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     11.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     11.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10

























Thubert                Expires September 15, 2011               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft             draft-ietf-roll-of0                March 2011


1.  Introduction

   The IETF ROLL Working Group has defined application-specific routing
   requirements for a Low Power and Lossy Network (LLN) routing
   protocol, specified in [I-D.ietf-roll-building-routing-reqs],
   [I-D.ietf-roll-home-routing-reqs], [RFC5673], and [RFC5548].

   Considering the wide variety of use cases, link types and metrics,
   the Routing Protocol for Low Power and Lossy Networks
   [I-D.ietf-roll-rpl] was designed as a generic core that is agnostic
   to metrics and instantiated using Objective Functions.

   RPL forms Destination Oriented Directed Acyclic Graphs (DODAGs)
   within instances of the protocol, each instance being set up to honor
   a particular routing objective/constraint of a given deployment.
   This instantiation is achieved by plugging into the RPL core a
   specific Objective Function (OF) that is designed to solve that
   problem to be addressed by that instance.

   An Objective Function selects the DODAG version that a device joins,
   and a number of neighbor routers within that version as parents and
   siblings.  The OF is also responsible for computing the Rank of the
   device, that abstracts a relative position within the DODAG and is
   used by the RPL core to enable a degree of loop avoidance and verify
   forward progression towards a destination, as specified in
   [I-D.ietf-roll-rpl].

   Since there is no default OF or metric container in the RPL main
   specification, it might happen that, unless given two implementations
   follow a same guidance for a specific problem or environment, those
   implementations will not support a common OF with which they could
   interoperate.  This specification fills the need for an Objective
   Function that can be used as a common denominator between all generic
   implementations.  This is why OF0 is very abstract as to how the link
   properties are transformed into a Rank, giving only normalized values
   for what a normal link and what the acceptable range is for a step of
   Rank are, as opposed to formulating the details of the step of Rank
   computation.

   Indeed, it is the general design in RPL that the metrics are passed
   from parent to children in a specific container and that the OF will
   derive the Rank from the natural metric.  The separation of Rank and
   metrics avoids a loss of information as the various metrics are
   propagated down the DAG.  This specification can be used when the
   link properties that are considered are such that they can be turned
   in a scalar step of Rank in a reversible fashion and the resulting
   step of rank is additive over multiple hops.




Thubert                Expires September 15, 2011               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft             draft-ietf-roll-of0                March 2011


   The Objective Function 0 (OF0) corresponds to the Objective Code
   Point 0 (OCP0).  OF0 does not leverage metric containers such as
   described in the metrics draft [I-D.ietf-roll-routing-metrics].  OF0
   does not require information in the RPL messages but the abstract
   information from the DIO base container, such as Rank and an
   administrative preference, that is transported in DIOs as
   DODAGPreference in [I-D.ietf-roll-rpl].  The Rank of a node is
   obtained by adding a step of Rank multiplied by a Rank Factor to the
   Rank of a selected preferred parent.  OF0 uses a MinHopRankIncrease
   of 0x100 so that Rank value can be stored in one octet.  This allows
   up to at least 28 hops even when each hop has the worst step of Rank
   of 9 and a Rank Factor of 1.  How the link properties are transformed
   into a step of Rank for a given hop depends on the link type and on
   the implementation.  It can be as simple as an administrative cost,
   but might also derive from a statistical metric with some hysteresis.


2.  Terminology

   The terminology used in this document is consistent with and
   incorporates that described in `Terminology in Low power And Lossy
   Networks' [I-D.ietf-roll-terminology] and [I-D.ietf-roll-rpl].


3.  Goal

   The Goal of the OF0 is to join a DODAG version that offers
   connectivity to a specific set of nodes or to a larger routing
   infrastructure.  For the purpose of OF0, Grounded thus means that the
   root provides such connectivity.  How that connectivity is asserted
   and maintained is out of scope.

   Objective Function 0 is designed to find the nearest Grounded root.
   In the absence of a Grounded root, LLN inner connectivity is still
   desirable and floating DAGs will form, rooted at the nodes with the
   highest administrative preference.

   The metric used in OF0 can be an administratively defined scalar cost
   that is trivially added up along a path to compute the RPL Rank, as
   defined in [I-D.ietf-roll-rpl].  Depending on how the step of Rank is
   computed by an implementation, the Rank of a node might be analogous
   to a weighted hop count of the path to the root.  Using a metric that
   in essence is similar to hop count implies that the quality of the
   connectivity should be asserted so that only neighbors with a good
   enough connectivity are presented to the OF.  How that connectivity
   is asserted and maintained is not covered by this specification.

   In wireless networks, Hop Count will tend to favor paths with long



Thubert                Expires September 15, 2011               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft             draft-ietf-roll-of0                March 2011


   distance links and non optimal connectivity properties.  In some
   situations, this might end up partitioning the network.  As a result,
   the link selection must be very conservative, and the available link
   set is thus constrained.  For those reasons, though it can be used on
   wired links and wired link emulations such as WIFI infrastructure
   mode, a metric derived from hop count is generally not recommended
   for wireless networks.  Instead, careful thinking should be applied
   to determine how the step of Rank is computed from the link
   properties.  For instance, the Minimum Rank Objective Function with
   Hysteresis [I-D.ietf-roll-minrank-hysteresis-of] provides guidance on
   how hysteresis can be used to maintain a certain stability of the
   resulting Rank.

   The default step of Rank is DEFAULT_RANK_INCREMENT for each hop.  An
   implementation MAY allow a step between MINIMUM_RANK_INCREMENT and
   MAXIMUM_RANK_INCREMENT to reflect a large variation of link quality
   by units of MINIMUM_RANK_INCREMENT.  In other words, the least
   significant octet in the Rank is not used.

   A node MAY stretch its step of Rank by up to MAXIMUM_RANK_STRETCH in
   order to enable the selection of a sibling when only one parent is
   available.  For instance, say that a node computes a step of Rank of
   4 units of MINIMUM_RANK_INCREMENT from a preferred parent with a Rank
   of 6 units resulting in a Rank of 10 units for this node.  Say that
   with that Rank of 10 units, this node would end up with only one
   parent and no sibling, though there is a neighbor with a Rank of 12
   units.  In that case, the node is entitled to stretch its step of
   Rank by a value of 2 units, thus using a step of Rank of 6 units so
   as to reach a Rank of 12 units and find a sibling.  But the node is
   not entitled to use a step of Rank larger than 6 units since that
   would be a greedy behavior that would deprive the neighbor of this
   node of a successor.  Also, if the neighbor had exposed a Rank of 16
   units, the stretch of Rank from 10 to 16 units would have exceeded
   MAXIMUM_RANK_STRETCH of 5 units and thus the neighbor would not have
   been selectable even as a sibling.

   The gap between MINIMUM_RANK_INCREMENT and MAXIMUM_RANK_STRETCH may
   not be sufficient in every case to strongly distinguish links of
   different types or categories in order to favor, say, powered over
   battery-operated or wired over wireless, within a same DAG.  An
   implementation SHOULD allow a configurable factor called Rank Factor
   and to apply the factor on all links and peers.  An implementation
   MAY recognizes sub-categories of peers and links, such as different
   MAC types, in which case it SHOULD be able to configure a more
   specific Rank Factor to those categories.  The Rank Factor SHOULD be
   set between MINIMUM_RANK_FACTOR and MAXIMUM_RANK_FACTOR.  Once a step
   of Rank is computed along the rules specified in this document, the
   result of the computation is multipled by the Rank Factor and the



Thubert                Expires September 15, 2011               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft             draft-ietf-roll-of0                March 2011


   result is what gets added to the Rank of preferred parent in order to
   obtain the Rank of this node.

   Optionally, the administrative preference of a root MAY be configured
   to supercede the goal to reach Grounded root.  In that case, nodes
   will associate to the root with the highest preference available,
   regardless of whether that root is Grounded or not.  Compared to a
   deployment with a multitude of Grounded roots that would result in a
   same multitude of DODAGs, such a configuration may result in possibly
   less but larger DODAGs, as many as roots configured with the highest
   priority in the reachable vincinity.

   OF0 selects a preferred parent and a backup next_hop if one is
   available.  The backup next_hop might be but does not have to be a
   parent or a sibling.  All the upward traffic is normally routed via
   the preferred parent.  When the link conditions do not let an upward
   packet through the preferred parent, the packet is passed to the
   backup next_hop.


4.  Selection of the Preferred Parent

   As it scans all the candidate neighbors, OF0 keeps the parent that is
   the best for the following criteria (in order):

   1.   [I-D.ietf-roll-rpl] spells out the generic rules for a node to
        reparent and in particular the boundaries to augment its Rank
        within a DODAG version.  A candidate that would not satisfy
        those rules MUST NOT be considered.

   2.   An implementation should validate a router prior to selecting it
        as preferred.  This validation process is implementation and
        link type dependent, and is out of scope.  A router that has
        been validated is preferrable.

   3.   When multiple interfaces are available, a policy might be
        locally configured to prioritize them and that policy applies
        first; that is a router on a higher order interface is
        preferable.

   4.   In the absence of a Grounded DODAG version, the router with a
        higher administrative preference SHOULD be preferred.
        Optionally, this selection applies regardless of whether the
        DODAG is Grounded or not.

   5.   A router that offers connectivity to a grounded DODAG version
        SHOULD be preferred over one that does not.




Thubert                Expires September 15, 2011               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft             draft-ietf-roll-of0                March 2011


   6.   When comparing 2 routers that belong to the same DODAG, a router
        that offers connectivity to the freshest sequence SHOULD be
        preferred.

   7.   When computing a resulting Rank for this node from a parent Rank
        and a Step of Rank from that parent, the parent that causes the
        lesser resulting Rank SHOULD be preferred.

   8.   A DODAG version for which there is an alternate parent SHOULD be
        preferred.  This check is optional.  It is performed by
        computing the backup next_hop while assuming that the router
        that is currently examined is finally selected as preferred
        parent.

   9.   The DODAG version that was in use already SHOULD be preferred.

   10.  The preferred parent that was in use already SHOULD be
        preferred.

   11.  A router that has announced a DIO message more recently SHOULD
        be preferred.


5.  Selection of the Backup next_hop

   o  When multiple interfaces are available, a router on a higher order
      interface is preferable.

   o  The backup next_hop MUST NOT be the preferred parent.

   o  The backup next_hop MUST be either in the same DODAG version as
      the preferred parent or in an subsequent version.  Note that if
      the backup next_hop is not from the current version then it can
      not be used as parent.

   o  A Router with a Rank that is higher than the Rank computed for
      this node out of the preferred parent SHOULD NOT be selected as
      parent, to avoid greedy behaviors.  It MAY still be selected as
      sibling if no better Back-up next hop is found.

   o  A router with a lesser Rank SHOULD be preferred.

   o  A router that has been validated as usable by an implementation
      dependant validation process SHOULD be preferred.

   o  The backup next_hop that was in use already SHOULD be preferred.





Thubert                Expires September 15, 2011               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft             draft-ietf-roll-of0                March 2011


6.  Abstract Interface with RPL core

   Objective Function 0 interacts with the core RPL in the following
   ways:

   Processing DIO:  This core RPL triggers the OF when a new DIO was
              received.  OF0 analyses the information in the DIO and may
              select the source as a parent or sibling.

   Providing DAG information  The OF0 support can be required to provide
              the DAG information for a given instance to the RPL core.
              This includes the material that is contained in a DIO base
              header.

   Providing a Parent List  The OF0 support can be required to provide
              the list of the parents for a given instance to the RPL
              core.  This includes the material that is contained in the
              transit option for that parent.

   Trigger    The OF0 support may trigger the RPL core to inform it that
              a change occurred.  This can be used to indicate whether
              the change requires a new DIO to be fired or whether
              trickle timers need to be reset.


7.  OF0 Constants and Variables

   OF0 uses the following constants:

   MinHopRankIncrease:  256

   DEFAULT_RANK_INCREMENT:  3 * MinHopRankIncrease

   MINIMUM_RANK_INCREMENT:  1 * MinHopRankIncrease

   MAXIMUM_RANK_INCREMENT:  9 * MinHopRankIncrease

   MAXIMUM_RANK_STRETCH:  5 * MinHopRankIncrease

   DEFAULT_RANK_FACTOR:  1

   MINIMUM_RANK_FACTOR:  1

   MAXIMUM_RANK_FACTOR:  4







Thubert                Expires September 15, 2011               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft             draft-ietf-roll-of0                March 2011


8.  IANA Considerations

   IThis specification requires the assignment of an OCP for OF0.  The
   value of 0 is suggested.


9.  Security Considerations

   Security Considerations for OCP/OF are to be developed in accordance
   with recommendations laid out in, for example,
   [I-D.tsao-roll-security-framework].


10.  Acknowledgements

   Most specific thanks to Philip Levis for his help in finalizing this
   document, in particular WRT wireless links, to Tim Winter, JP
   Vasseur, Julien Abeille, Mathilde Durvy, Teco Boot, Navneet Agarwal
   and Henning Rogge for in-depth review and first hand implementer's
   feedback.


11.  References

11.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

11.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.ietf-roll-building-routing-reqs]
              Martocci, J., Riou, N., Mil, P., and W. Vermeylen,
              "Building Automation Routing Requirements in Low Power and
              Lossy Networks", draft-ietf-roll-building-routing-reqs-07
              (work in progress), September 2009.

   [I-D.ietf-roll-home-routing-reqs]
              Brandt, A., Buron, J., and G. Porcu, "Home Automation
              Routing Requirements in Low Power and Lossy Networks",
              draft-ietf-roll-home-routing-reqs-08 (work in progress),
              September 2009.

   [I-D.ietf-roll-minrank-hysteresis-of]
              Gnawali, O. and P. Levis, "The Minimum Rank Objective
              Function with Hysteresis",
              draft-ietf-roll-minrank-hysteresis-of-01 (work in
              progress), February 2011.



Thubert                Expires September 15, 2011               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft             draft-ietf-roll-of0                March 2011


   [I-D.ietf-roll-routing-metrics]
              Vasseur, J., Kim, M., Pister, K., Dejean, N., and D.
              Barthel, "Routing Metrics used for Path Calculation in Low
              Power and Lossy Networks",
              draft-ietf-roll-routing-metrics-19 (work in progress),
              March 2011.

   [I-D.ietf-roll-rpl]
              Winter, T., Thubert, P., Brandt, A., Clausen, T., Hui, J.,
              Kelsey, R., Levis, P., Pister, K., Struik, R., and J.
              Vasseur, "RPL: IPv6 Routing Protocol for Low power and
              Lossy Networks", draft-ietf-roll-rpl-18 (work in
              progress), February 2011.

   [I-D.ietf-roll-terminology]
              Vasseur, J., "Terminology in Low power And Lossy
              Networks", draft-ietf-roll-terminology-04 (work in
              progress), September 2010.

   [I-D.tsao-roll-security-framework]
              Tsao, T., Alexander, R., Daza, V., and A. Lozano, "A
              Security Framework for Routing over Low Power and Lossy
              Networks", draft-tsao-roll-security-framework-02 (work in
              progress), March 2010.

   [RFC5548]  Dohler, M., Watteyne, T., Winter, T., and D. Barthel,
              "Routing Requirements for Urban Low-Power and Lossy
              Networks", RFC 5548, May 2009.

   [RFC5673]  Pister, K., Thubert, P., Dwars, S., and T. Phinney,
              "Industrial Routing Requirements in Low-Power and Lossy
              Networks", RFC 5673, October 2009.


Author's Address

   Pascal Thubert (editor)
   Cisco Systems
   Village d'Entreprises Green Side
   400, Avenue de Roumanille
   Batiment T3
   Biot - Sophia Antipolis  06410
   FRANCE

   Phone: +33 497 23 26 34
   Email: pthubert@cisco.com





Thubert                Expires September 15, 2011              [Page 10]


