


IS-IS Working Group                                        Zhenqiang Li,
Internet-Draft                                              Lianyuan Li,
Intended status: Informational                            Xiaodong Duan,
Expires: January 6, 2009                                    China Mobile
                                                            July 7, 2008



 Problem Statement: Link Degradation Isolation in Interoperable Networks
        using Intermediate System to Intermediate System (IS-IS)
             draft-li-isis-degradation-isolation-problem-00


Status of this memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

Abstract

   IS-IS protocol specifies a procedure that if a Link State Protocol
   Data Unit (LSP) with an incorrect LSP Checksum is received, the
   corruptedLSPReceived circuit event will be generated and the
   corrupted LSP will be discarded. This document aims to emphasize that
   although this procedure can maintain the network stability, it can
   not diagnose and isolate the source of the network problem. In some
   cases this procedure will create bad effect on the services carried
   by the network. This document suggests that IS-IS protocol introduce
   the mechanism for link degradation detection and isolation, which
   should be triggered when corrupted LSP is received.


Zhenqiang Li, et al.                                            [Page 1]

INTERNET-DRAFT      Link Degradation Isolation in IS-IS      July, 2008


1.  Introduction

   IS-IS Protocol [1], one of the widely deployed Interior Gateway
   Protocols (IGP), has proved to be quite durable, which, to some
   extent, is attributed to the success in handling LSP with an
   incorrect LSP Checksum.
   
   Section 7.3.14.2 e) of [1] states: An Intermediate System receiving
   a LSP with an incorrect LSP Checksum or with an invalid PDU syntax
   shall
       1) generate a corruptedLSPReceived circuit event,
       2) discard the PDU. 

   This method contributes good network stability in the case that the
   network errors occur once in a while. However, if the cause of 
   checksum error belongs to the network error, such as the 
   deterioration of transmission quality, the error in the network
   devices, etc., and the error stays for a long time, in such cases,
   the network error can not be isolated automatically. In practice, the
   implementation of certain vendor does not generate the
   corruptedLSPReceived circuit event when it receives the corrupted LSP,
   or the corruptedLSPReceived circuit event is not reported to the
   network management system. It is this ??silent discard?? method that
   makes the network error can not be detected in time and exerts bad
   effect on the services carried by the network.
   
   This document presents the problems that exist in the IS-IS protocol
   and solicits link degradation detection and isolation mechanism to be
   introduced in IS-IS protocol.
   

2.  Definitions

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [2].


3.  Implementation Suggestion

   All the implementation of IS-IS protocol SHOULD firmly comply with
   the ISO 10589 Recommendation. A corruptedLSPReceived circuit event
   MUST be generated and SHOULD be reported to the network management
   system, when network device receives a LSP with an incorrect LSP
   checksum.
   
   When network device discards the corrupted LSP, it SHOULD inform the
   corresponding router(s) in its neighbor by some specific way and the


   
Zhenqiang Li, et al.                                            [Page 2]

INTERNET-DRAFT      Link Degradation Isolation in IS-IS      July, 2008


   neighbor router(s) can check the state of the corresponding link. If
   the quality of the link degrades, such as increased bit error rate,
   and/or increased delay time, some methods SHOULD be specified for
   the router to react to the abnormality, and the router SHOULD inform
   other routers in the network about the abnormality, so as to isolate
   the problem. The available methods include but not limited to the
   followings: to increase the Metric of the link, to disconnect the
   links, etc.


4.  BFD Considerations

   Bidirectional Forwarding Detection (BFD) [3] provides short-duration
   detection of failures in the path between adjacent forwarding
   engines, including the interfaces, data link(s), and to the extent
   possible the forwarding engines themselves. However??BFD can not
   work effectively to detect the link degradation. So, it can not be
   directly used to handle the problem in IS-IS protocol depicted in
   this document. 
   

5.  Security Considerations

   Given that the mechanism of link degradation detection and isolation
   is introduced to IS-IS protocol, malicious guy can bring extra burden
   to the network just by forging checksum error LSP to network, since
   routers will trigger the mechanism of link state detection and
   isolation.
   
   However, IS-IS protocol comprises encrpytion techniques to avoid
   malicious guy to forge LSPs, including both correct and checksum
   error LSPs.
   
   
6.  References

   [1]  ISO, "Intermediate system to Intermediate system routeing
        information exchange protocol for use in conjunction with the
        Protocol for providing the Connectionless-mode Network Service
        (ISO 8473)," ISO/IEC 10589:2002.
   
   [2]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
        Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.
   
   [3]  D. Katz, and D. Ward, ??Bidirectional Forwarding Detection??,
        draft-ietf-bfd-base-08 (work in progress), March 2008. 
  
  

Zhenqiang Li, et al.                                            [Page 3]

INTERNET-DRAFT      Link Degradation Isolation in IS-IS      July, 2008


Authors' Addresses

   Zhenqiang Li (editor)
   China Mobile Research Institute
   Gate 2 Dacheng Plaza
   No. 28 Xuanwumen West Street
   Xuanwu District, Beijing  100053
   China

   Phone: +86 1391 163 5816
   Email: lizhenqiang@chinamobile.com


   Lianyuan Li
   China Mobile Research Institute
   Gate 2 Dacheng Plaza
   No. 28 Xuanwumen West Street
   Xuanwu District, Beijing  100053
   China

   Phone: +86 1391 178 9703
   Email: lilianyuan@chinamobile.com


   Xiaodong Duan
   China Mobile Research Institute
   Gate 2 Dacheng Plaza
   No. 28 Xuanwumen West Street
   Xuanwu District, Beijing  100053
   China

   Phone: +86 1391 019 1797
   Email: duanxiaodong@chinamobile.com



Zhenqiang Li, et al.                                            [Page 4]

INTERNET-DRAFT      Link Degradation Isolation in IS-IS      July, 2008


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.



Zhenqiang Li, et al.                                            [Page 5]
