





Network Working Group                                     Scott Bradner
Internet-Draft                                       Harvard University
Intended status: BCP
Updates: 4071
Expires: November 22, 2015                                 May 22, 2015


            Updating the Definition of Term for IAOC Members
                    draft-bradner-iaoc-terms-00.txt

Abstract

   The start and end dates specified in BCP 101 for IAOC members has
   proven to be impractical.  This memo updates BCP 101 to establish
   start and end dates for terms of IAOC members that will be more
   practical.  In addition, this memo clarifies the term of the IAOC
   Chair.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on November 22, 2015.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2015 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as



Bradner                                                         [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                 IAOC Terms                       May 2015


   described in the Simplified BSD License.


1. Background

   BCP 101 says "IAOC terms normally end at the end of the first IETF
   meeting of a year". ([RFC4071] Section 4.)  Having the terms of the
   IAOC members expire at the end of the first IETF meeting of the year
   has proved impractical for the IAOC to carry out its business and to
   elect its Chair during the meeting week.  For a number of years, the
   IAOC has fudged the issue somewhat by defaulting to an informal
   process of having the transition occur during the administrative
   plenary (as the IESG does). This informal arrangement violates the
   letter of BCP 101.  But even this arrangement is problematic if the
   transfer happens after the IAOC's face-to-face meeting that happens
   during the week. For a number of years, the IAOC's meeting has been
   on the morning of the administrative plenary so the incoming IAOC
   members, while present, are not seated even with the informal
   arrangement.

   Having the new IAOC members take office after the face-to-face
   meeting has caused difficulties in the chair selection and voting
   processes during the IAOC's face-to-face meeting held during the same
   week. There has been confusion over who should vote in the chair
   election and on any business actions that require a vote of the
   Trustees. If the incoming members are not seated then they should not
   vote, for example, to select a chair for the next year yet they, more
   than the outgoing members, should have a say in the chair selection.
   There is also confusion over who is eligible to be elected as chair -
   if the term of an IAOC member has not yet started could that IAOC
   member be elected chair (since the chair is selected from among the
   members) Having the terms expire at the end of the week also risks
   the IAOC not being able to raise a quorum if outgoing members decide
   to not come to the meeting.  Since the IAOC members are the Trustees
   of the IETF Trust the same issues arise with the IETF Trust and its
   ability to carry out its business and elect a Chair during the
   meeting week

   An additional issue with BCP 101 is the current definition of the
   term of the IAOC Chair.  BCP 101 says "The term of the IAOC chair
   shall be one year from the time of selection or the remaining time of
   his or her tenure on the IAOC, whichever is less".  Since the dates
   for the first IETF meeting of the year vary from year to year the
   current BCP 101 text could result in there being no IETF chair in
   weeks before the a meeting or in overlapping terms for IAOC Chairs.

2. BCP 101 Update




Bradner                                                         [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                 IAOC Terms                       May 2015


   This memo adds a requirement that the IAOC hold a face-to-face or
   teleconference meeting during the first IETF meeting of each year
   during which the IAOC members select an IAOC Chair and conduct other
   business as needed.

   This memo updates BCP 101 to define that that the terms of IAOC
   members normally run from the start of the IAOC face-to-face or
   teleconference meeting held during the first IETF meeting of a year
   until the start of the IAOC face-to-face meeting held during the
   first IETF meeting of the year in which his or her term ends.

   This memo updates BCP 101 to define that the term of an IAOC member
   that is selected to fill a vacancy runs from when the appointment or
   selection of the IAOC member is announced on the IETF Announce list
   until the start of the IAOC face-to-face or teleconference meeting
   held during the first IETF meeting of the year in which his or her
   term ends.

   This memo also updates BCP 101 to start that the term of the IAOC
   Chair runs from when the Chair is selected by the IAOC members until
   the start of the next IAOC face-to-face or teleconference meeting
   held during the first IETF meeting of a year.

   Since the IETF Trust Agreement defines Trustees of the IETF Trust as
   "then-current member[s] of the IAOC", ([Trust Agreement] sections 3.1
   and 6.1) the above change also resolves the issues with selecting a
   Chair of the IETF Trust during a face-to-face or teleconference
   meeting of the Trustees during the first IETF meeting of a year.

3. Security Considerations

   This memo relates to IETF process, not any particular technology so
   it does not impact the security of the Internet.

4. References

4.1. Normative References

   [RFC4071] Austein, R and B. Wijnen, "Structure of the IETF
      Administrative Support Activity (IASA)", BCP 101, RFC 4071, April
      2005.

   [Trust Agreement] "IETF Trust Agreement",
      http://www.ietf.org/trust/IETFtrustAgreement20051208.pdf, December
      2005.


IANA Considerations



Bradner                                                         [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                 IAOC Terms                       May 2015


   This memo requires no action by the IANA.  [this section should be
   removed for publication]

5. Editor's Addresses

   Scott Bradner
   Harvard University
   8 Story St.
   Cambridge MA, 02138
   Phone: +1 617 495 3864
   EMail: sob@harvard.edu








































Bradner                                                         [Page 4]
