Network Working Group                                        Pradeep Kumar Xplorer
Internet-Draft
Intended status: Standards Track                                  Individual
Expires: Feb 01, 2015                                	Aug 01, 2014
                                                      		
                                                          


                 Email archival services supported by may be archive.org
                         draft-emailarchives-01


Abstract

    This document describes the need for a email archival service supported
    by an organisation like archive.org to prove later that certain kind of emails
    were send.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on Jul 19, 2014.



Pradeep Kumar Xplorer     Expires Feb 01 , 2015              [Page 1]
Internet-Draft    Email archival services supported by may be archive.org    Aug 01, 2014

Copyright Notice

Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents
   1. Introduction ............................................... 2
   2. Background ..................................................2
   3. General Information of the service ..........................2
   4. Authors Addresses ...........................................3
   5. Acknowledgements ............................................3


1. Introduction

    To implement an email archival service using cc in the emails that
    need to be archived.

2. Background
	I am a vtcim of a cyber crime in which my email identities are logged into
	and compromised over a decade and money of the order of 100 million per month
	collected and used to run a company or organisation. I become aware of this
	last few years and i seek justice and protection from the criminals enjoying
	my wealth using emails to Interpol, USDOJ, FFETF, Indian and US law enforcement
	and several Yoga and fitness community beings. I use a public email service hotmail.com
	as i do not have money to pay for my hosting service because i am being stranded in
	a town in India by these cyber criminals where i would not easily get justice
	and where i could be pyhsically attacked and police would sit on the complaint for
	many months. I notice my emails are not either reaching, or being read or responded
	to as i am fighting a group that want probably ten billion for free to feed their
	wives and kids or support their causes. But if hotmail.com goes down, all evidence
	of me fighting the crime is lost and these law enforcement and Department of justices
	can walk away with the crime by taking 5 billion US dollars. 
	
3. General Information of the service
	When i send an email that i think need to be archived, i should be able to
	cc or Bcc to an email address like toarchive@archive.org and have it archived. Its costly
	but necessary. archive.org can chose to archive it and send periodic reminders
	whether it need to be archived longer. This can be like an anonymiser email service
	that was available in the 90's or a service that might still be available.






Pradeep Kumar Xplorer     Expires Feb 01, 2015                [Page 2]
Internet-Draft    Email archival services supported by may be archive.org            Aug 01, 2014




4.Authors' Addresses

    Pradeep Kumar Xplorer
    EMail: pradeepan88@hotmail.com
    URI: http://www.explodingmoon.org
	 http://www.dhyanayoga.info



5.Acknowledgement

    I am an internet publisher who is not able to even eat my food because
    of theft of Intellectual proeprty and cyber criminals logging into my
    email and collecting money. I have reported this again using email to
    several cybercrime fighting agencies but with no action taken. I need
    to prove later that i have done my part to get justice.
    AN email archival service would help me do that. The criminals that collected
    my money might claim that i do not know even how to type or browse
    and they might attack and drug me to lose all my past memory.
    The criminals in palakkad have already done that and i am not getting justice.
    The criminals in US with the help of ICE is erasing that i lived there for
    a decade. 

Pradeep Kumar Xplorer     Expires Feb 01, 2015              [Page 3]
Internet-Draft    Email archival services supported by may be archive.org             Aug 01, 2014




