



ICCRG Working Group                                              N. Romo
Internet-Draft                                                    J. Kim
Intended status: Experimental                                   M. Amend
Expires: 28 April 2022                                                DT
                                                         25 October 2021


   Profile for Datagram Congestion Control Protocol (DCCP) Congestion
                              Control ID 5
                       draft-romo-iccrg-ccid5-00

Abstract

   This document contains the profile for Congestion Control Identifier
   5 (CCID 5), BBR-like Congestion Control, in the Datagram Congestion
   Control Protocol (DCCP).  CCID 5 is meant to be used by senders who
   have a strong demand on low latency and require a steady throughput
   behavior.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 28 April 2022.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2021 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.











Romo, et al.              Expires 28 April 2022                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                    CCID5                     October 2021


   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Simplified BSD License text
   as described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Convention and Notation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  Usage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     3.1.  Relationship with TCP BBR and CCID2 . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     3.2.  Multiple-path communications  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     3.3.  Half-Connection Example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   4.  Connection Establishment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   5.  Congestion Control on Data Packets  . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     5.1.  State machine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     5.2.  Response to Idle and Application-Limited Periods  . . . .   7
   6.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   7.  Discussion  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     7.1.  ProbeRTT phase transitions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   8.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   9.  Acknowledgment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   10. Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9

1.  Introduction

   This document contains the profile for Congestion Control Identifier
   5, BBR-like Congestion Control, in the Datagram Congestion Control
   Protocol (DCCP) [RFC4340].  DCCP uses Congestion Control Identifiers,
   or CCIDs, to specify the congestion control mechanism in use on a
   half-connection.

   The BBR-like Congestion Control CCID5 sends data following the
   guidelines and principles of TCP BBR
   [I-D.cardwell-iccrg-bbr-congestion-control]. i.e, it estimates the
   path characteristics, to later update accordingly the sending data
   behavior.  It achieves an optimal point of operation by keeping the
   amount of data in flight at the BDP (Bandwidth Delay Product) level,
   avoiding the abrupt Bandwidth changes typical of loss based
   congestion control algorithms.






Romo, et al.              Expires 28 April 2022                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                    CCID5                     October 2021


2.  Convention and Notation

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].

   A DCCP half-connection consists of the application data sent by one
   endpoint and the corresponding acknowledgements sent by the other
   endpoint.  The terms "HC-Sender" and "HC-Receiver" denote the
   endpoints sending application data and acknowledgements,
   respectively.  Since CCIDs apply at the level of half-connections, we
   abbreviate HC-Sender to "sender" and HC-Receiver to "receiver" in
   this document.  See [RFC4340] for more discussion

3.  Usage

   CCID5 congestion control algorithm is aimed to achieve a high
   bandwidth and low latency by the active probe of the end-to-end link
   capacity.  The active probe helps hosts to adjust their sending rates
   before a packet loss happens at a buffer on the path.  As a result,
   the communication path experiences a consistent and low latency by
   avoiding unnecessary packet drops at buffers.

   Since CCID5 effectively avoids unnecessary packet losses, the spiky
   traffic behavior, that is commonly caused by traditional TCP
   congestion control mechanisms, is suppressed.  This leads to a stable
   throughput throughout the connection period and thus yields a higher
   throughput than that with a loss-based congestion control mechanism.

   Therefore, CCID5 suits applications that require consistent low
   latencies and stable high bandwidth.  This includes multimedia
   streaming, online video gaming, video conferencing, and latency-
   sensitive industry applications such as industrial robots and
   autonomous vehicles are usage examples of CCID5.

3.1.  Relationship with TCP BBR and CCID2

   The CCID5 congestion control mechanism closely follows TCP's
   [I-D.cardwell-iccrg-bbr-congestion-control]|BBR congestion control
   algorithm, replicating the functions intended to estimate the path
   characteristics and to determine the pace and the amount of data to
   send.  However, CCID5 must also comply with the DCCP requirements for
   a CCID profile ([RFC4340] Section 10.4) and define how the data is
   going to be acknowledged.







Romo, et al.              Expires 28 April 2022                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                    CCID5                     October 2021


   For this purpose, CCID5 implements the format of the ACK packets, the
   timing of their generation, and how they are congestion controlled.
   CCID5 uses the same ACK format as CCID2, including ACK vectors
   containing the same information that can be found in SACK options,
   and implements the ACK ratio as ACK congestion control mechanism.

   In addition, the different variables and functions used to track
   packets in flight, packets acknowledged, and their corresponding
   sending and arrival times as well as the function to detect
   application-limited periods are replicated from the CCID2
   implementation

3.2.  Multiple-path communications

   CCID 5 congestion control algorithm is adopted from TCP's BBR
   congestion control algorithm with a multiple-path communication as a
   representative use-case example.  Multiple-path communications do not
   only target to maximize the link capacity, but also are aimed to
   improve the availability on critical situations such as a link
   failure.  With that regard, MP-DCCP has been proposed.  MP-DCCP
   extends capabilities of DCCP into multiple concurrent connections.  A
   study [paper] has shown that CCID5 improves the overall bandwidth and
   the end-to-end latency compared to loss-based congestion control
   algorithms in an MP-DCCP enabled network.  The study has also shown
   that the latency difference among multiple paths has an influence on
   the overall performance of the communication.  A smaller gap among
   available paths leads to a higher aggregation performance of the link
   capacity.  CCID5 is designed to provide a low and stable latency over
   each of the available paths and thus has a potential to improve the
   multi-path communication performance.

3.3.  Half-Connection Example

   This example shows the typical progress of a half-connection using
   CCID 5's BBR-like Congestion Control, not including connection
   initiation and termination.  The example is informative, not
   normative.

   1.  The sender transmits DCCP-Data packets, each one of them
       identified with a sequence number.  The sending behavior is
       governed by two control parameters: congestion window and pacing
       rate.  The congestion window limits the amount of packets in
       flight and the pacing rate limits the sending rate.








Romo, et al.              Expires 28 April 2022                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                    CCID5                     October 2021


   2.  The Acknowledgment mechanism replicates CCID2 specifications.
       Thus, The sender sends an Ack Ratio feature option specifying the
       number of data packets to be covered by an Ack packet from the
       receiver and consequently, the receiver sends a DCCP-Ack packet
       acknowledging the data packets for every Ack Ratio data packets
       transmitted by the sender.

   3.  The sender continues sending DCCP-Data packets.  Upon receiving
       DCCP-Ack packets, the sender examines their Ack Vectors to learn
       about acknowledged and marked or dropped data packets.  With the
       information of the acknowledged packets, it proceeds to estimate
       round-trip times (as TCP does) and the delivery rate, following
       the algorithm described in
       [I-D.cheng-iccrg-delivery-rate-estimation].

   4.  The sender uses the round-trip time and delivery rate estimations
       to calculate the round-trip propagation delay (RTprop) and the
       bottleneck bandwidth (BtlBw) of the path, following the
       specifications in ([I-D.cardwell-iccrg-bbr-congestion-control]
       Section 4.1) The RTprop and BtlBw are then used to update the
       values of the congestion window and pacing rate.

   5.  As in CCID2, the sender responds to lost or marked DCCP-Ack
       packets by modifying the Ack Ratio sent to the receiver and
       acknowledges the receiver's acknowledgements at least once per
       congestion window.

4.  Connection Establishment

   The connection establishment is as specified in ([RFC4341] Section 4)

5.  Congestion Control on Data Packets

   CCID 5 is based on the BBR congestion control mechanisms described in
   [I-D.cardwell-iccrg-bbr-congestion-control].  The subsequent
   sections, present a general description of such mechanisms and
   discuss the considerations to be addressed when used within the DCCP
   protocol.

   BBR proposes an algorithm based on the characterization of the
   network path made through the estimation of the Bottleneck Bandwidth
   (BtlBW) and the Round Trip propagation time (RTProp) defined
   respectively as the maximum delivered rate and minimum RTT seen by
   the sender.  The algorithm aims to achieve an optimal point of
   operation by fulfilling two conditions






Romo, et al.              Expires 28 April 2022                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                    CCID5                     October 2021


   1.  The amount of data inflight must be equal to the Bandwidth Delay
       Product (BDP), guaranteeing that buffers are not being filled and
       therefore avoiding long delay generation

   2.  The bottleneck packet arrival must match the BtlBw to ensure its
       full utilization.

   To match those conditions, the sending data behavior is updated, by
   using three control variables: Congestion window (which limits the
   amount of data in flight), pacing rate, and send quantum (which
   limits the amount of aggregated packets in case of segmentation
   offload).  The calculation of the control parameters uses as input
   the estimated values of BtlBW and RTprop along with two dynamic gain
   factors named pacing_gain and cwnd_gain.

   The estimation of the path parameters Rtprop and BtlBw follow the
   guidelines and pseudo-code described in
   [I-D.cheng-iccrg-delivery-rate-estimation] and
   [I-D.cardwell-iccrg-bbr-congestion-control]

5.1.  State machine

   The way the control parameters are updated is governed by the BBR
   state machine Illustrated in Figure 1.  In the initial Startup state,
   the sending rate will increase rapidly until the pipe is detected to
   be full.  Afterwards, the data rate will be reduced so any possible
   queue can be drained, to finally enter into the ProbeBW state, where
   the amount of data in flight is slightly increased to probe for more
   possible bandwidth available.  From any of these states, the
   algorithm can jump into the ProbeRTT phase.  Here the data inflight
   is reduced to probe for lower RTTs.  Each state defines specific
   values for two dynamic gains: cwnd_gain and pacing_gain, which will
   finally be used in the calculation of the aforementioned control
   variables.

















Romo, et al.              Expires 28 April 2022                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                    CCID5                     October 2021


                      |
                      V
             +---> Startup  ----+
             |        |         |
             |        V         |
             |      Drain   ----+
             |        |         |
             |        V         |
             +---> ProbeBW -----+
             |      ^    |      |
             |      |    |      |
             |      +----+      |
             |                  |
             +---- ProbeRTT <---+

                        Figure 1: BBR State machine

5.2.  Response to Idle and Application-Limited Periods

6.  Acknowledgements

   The Acknowledgement format and its generation mechanism SHOULD follow
   the same specifications established for CCID2[RFC4341].  Thus, each
   Acknowledgment MUST contain an ACK vector defined with the format
   described in ([RFC4340] section 1.3) And its generation frequency
   will be controlled by the sender by using the ACK ratio feature.

7.  Discussion

7.1.  ProbeRTT phase transitions

   The transition to and from the probeRTT phase MIGHT imply drastic
   changes of the congestion window, thus the synchronization of the ACK
   ratio between and receiver SHOULD be handled carefully.  When
   entering this phase at least one Packet MUST be sent with the new
   value of the ACK ratio before the reduction of the congestion window
   to 4 packets is executed, otherwise, the receiver MIGHT not be able
   to send ACK packets, preventing the sender from updating the
   measurement of the RTProp and BtlBW variables and remaining in this
   phase longer than required.  Following a similar logic, before
   leaving the phase and restoring the congestion window value, at least
   one packet MUST be sent updating the ack ratio value, otherwise, the
   receiver MIGHT not be able to keep the pace to acknowledge the
   arriving packets, and the missing ACKs MIGHT trigger a RTO timeout.

   In addition to the synchronization of the ACK ratio, the sender and
   receiver MUST keep synchronized the Sequence and Acknowledgment
   validity windows, as defined in ([RFC4340] section 7.5) This adds an



Romo, et al.              Expires 28 April 2022                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                    CCID5                     October 2021


   additional constraint to the BBR algorithm when leaving the ProbeRTT
   phase, as at least one RTT is necessary for the sender to ensure the
   synchronization before restoring the congestion window value, causing
   again a longer duration of the probeRTT phase.  Thus, it might be
   necessary to consider the possibility of restoring the congestion
   window even if this synchronization has not yet been confirmed by the
   arrival of the last Acknowledgement sent by the receiver.

8.  IANA Considerations

9.  Acknowledgment

10.  Informative References

   [I-D.cardwell-iccrg-bbr-congestion-control]
              Cardwell, N., Cheng, Y., Yeganeh, S. H., and V. Jacobson,
              "BBR Congestion Control", Work in Progress, Internet-
              Draft, draft-cardwell-iccrg-bbr-congestion-control-00, 3
              July 2017, <https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-
              cardwell-iccrg-bbr-congestion-control-00.txt>.

   [I-D.cheng-iccrg-delivery-rate-estimation]
              Cheng, Y., Cardwell, N., Yeganeh, S. H., and V. Jacobson,
              "Delivery Rate Estimation", Work in Progress, Internet-
              Draft, draft-cheng-iccrg-delivery-rate-estimation-00, 3
              July 2017, <https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-cheng-
              iccrg-delivery-rate-estimation-00.txt>.

   [paper]    Romo Moreno, N., Amend, M., Rakocevic, V., Kassler, A.,
              and A. Brunstrom, "CCID5 An implementation of the BBR
              Congestion Control algorithm for DCCP and its impact over
              multi-path scenarios", DOI 10.1145/3472305.3472322, June
              2021, <https://doi.org/10.1145/3472305.3472322>.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.

   [RFC4340]  Kohler, E., Handley, M., and S. Floyd, "Datagram
              Congestion Control Protocol (DCCP)", RFC 4340,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC4340, March 2006,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4340>.

   [RFC4341]  Floyd, S. and E. Kohler, "Profile for Datagram Congestion
              Control Protocol (DCCP) Congestion Control ID 2: TCP-like
              Congestion Control", RFC 4341, DOI 10.17487/RFC4341, March
              2006, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4341>.



Romo, et al.              Expires 28 April 2022                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                    CCID5                     October 2021


Authors' Addresses

   Nathalie Romo Moreno
   Deutsche Telekom
   Deutsche-Telekom-Allee 9
   64295 Darmstadt
   Germany

   Email: nathalie.romo-moreno@telekom.de


   Juhoon Kim
   Deutsche Telekom
   Winterfeldstr. 21
   10781 Berlin
   Germany

   Email: j.kim@telekom.de


   Markus Amend
   Deutsche Telekom
   Deutsche-Telekom-Allee 9
   64295 Darmstadt
   Germany

   Email: Markus.Amend@telekom.de
























Romo, et al.              Expires 28 April 2022                 [Page 9]
