

SIPPING WG                                                   C. Jennings
Internet-Draft                                       Cisco Systems, Inc.
Expires: August 7, 2004                                 February 7, 2004


                  Updating the Connected Party in SIP
                draft-jennings-sipping-connected-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at http://
   www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 7, 2004.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004). All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   Communication systems often have situations in which the party at the
   far end of the call changes, making it necessary to have a way to
   notify the near end of the new identity at the far end. This draft
   discusses ways to update this "connected party" information in SIP.

   This work is being discussed on the sipping@ietf.org mailing list.










Jennings                 Expires August 7, 2004                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft            SIP Connected Party              February 2004


Table of Contents

   1.  Conventions and Definitions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3.  Use Cases  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3.1 Connected UAS or UAC Updated . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3.2 Early UAC Updated  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3.3 Early UAS Updated  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   4.  Solutions Using Transfer Mechanisms  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   4.1 Connected UAS or UAC Updated . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   4.2 Early UAC Updated  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   4.3 Early UAS Updated  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   5.  Solutions Based on UPDATE  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   6.  Why PAI is Useless . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   7.  Recommendations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   8.  Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
       Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
       Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
       Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
       Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . .  9































Jennings                 Expires August 7, 2004                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft            SIP Connected Party              February 2004


1. Conventions and Definitions

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [6].

2. Introduction

   SIP[5] initiates sessions but it also provides information on the
   identities of the parties at both ends of a session. This is
   necessary as users find it very desirable for knowing how to deal
   with the communications that SIP is initiating. As a call proceeds,
   these identities may change. This can happen for many reasons: calls
   are forwarded, calls are parked and picked up, calls are transferred,
   calls are queued to be picked up by a pool of agents, and so on. The
   use cases here are split into two categories: where the identity
   change happens in an early dialog or a connected call, or where the
   callee's or the caller's identity changes.  How the identity of the
   called party is provided to the caller is not well defined in SIP.

   This is early work discussing the problems and looking at possible
   solutions to this problem. It needs considerable work and
   consideration for how the approach would interact with existing
   systems. It is being discussed on the sipping@ietf.org mailing list.

3. Use Cases

   Identity information often contains both a human readable name and a
   network address such as a phone number or SIP URL.

3.1 Connected UAS or UAC Updated

   The classic case is when Alice calls Bob who forwarded to Charlie who
   answers the phone. Alice would like to know she is talking to Charlie
   not Bob.

   These cases do not involve early dialogs. Since the call has been
   established, the use cases are symmetrical. Either the UAS or UAC
   could need to be updated in any of these cases.

   The classic case is when a call is transferred.

   The UAS has originally answered the call with the identity Help Desk
   but wishes to change it, mid-call, to Alice.

3.2 Early UAC Updated

   In a typical example, phone A rings but user B remotely picks up the



Jennings                 Expires August 7, 2004                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft            SIP Connected Party              February 2004


   ringing phone from a different one.

   Call queuing in an ACD is another example. The call may initially be
   queued for the "Help Desk" but later be moved to ring Bob's phone.

   It should be noted that the history requirements[9] cover this case.

3.3 Early UAS Updated

   First, Alan dials Charlie on behalf of another user, Bob in this
   case. While Charlie's phone is ringing, Alan steps out of the call
   and lets Bob talk to Charlie.

4. Solutions Using Transfer Mechanisms

   Many of these use cases seem to come up because there is a B2BUA
   involved. This B2BUA may be acting as a call control system or it may
   be a PSTN inter-working GW which is effectively a B2BUA with the PSTN
   connecting the two UAs that form the B2BUA. It's fine to have a B2BUA
   connected to a P2P system; however, the whole design of the B2BUA
   concept in SIP is to make B2BUA just look like a valid peer to the
   P2P system.

   These solutions are derived by looking at what would happen if
   approximately the same functionality were done in a P2P system, and
   looking at signaling from the point of view of the UA that is
   receiving the updated identity.

4.1 Connected UAS or UAC Updated

   When A is in a connected call with B and B wishes to update the
   identity that A sees to C, this is the same from A's point of view as
   B transferring the call to C. In this case the identity can be
   updated by sending a new INVITE to A with the From set to C and
   including a replaces header to indicate it replaces the original
   call.

   This approach may have bad interaction with who gets billed.

4.2 Early UAC Updated

   Here the UAS wishes to change its identity and update the UAC. The
   UAS sends back a new early dialog with the new identity. From the UAC
   point of view, this looks like the call to a UAS that forked to form
   a new early dialog with a different UAS. This might have bad
   interactions with early media.

   Trying to solve this the same way as the when the UAC is connected



Jennings                 Expires August 7, 2004                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft            SIP Connected Party              February 2004


   does not work because the new INVITE with the replaces results in a
   completely wrong view about which UA is in the ringing state and
   which is already off hook.

4.3 Early UAS Updated

   Here the UAC wishes to change its identity and update it on all the
   UASs that it has forked to while it had an outstanding INVITE. The
   transfer issues draft [3] clearly points out that the UAS is a moving
   target due to forking with the "Consultative Turned Blind" issues.
   Changing the identity of UAC complicates this even further because
   the routing of the invite may have been dependent on the identity of
   the UAS. For example, calls from Private may go straight to voice
   mail while calls from Boss get forked to office phone and cell phone.

   It is probable that whatever solution is chosen to deal with the
   "Consultative Turned Blind" problem in [3] can also be used to update
   identity in this scenario. The recommendation here is to hold off on
   defining something special for identity updates until the solution
   for the transfer issues problem is resolved.

   The idea of sending a new INVITE with replaces, waiting a little
   while, and then sending a CANCEL to the original INVITE has been
   suggested. This fails in the case where the call is to the PSTN and
   forks to a different gateway.

5. Solutions Based on UPDATE

   User agents could send UPDATE requests that do not contain SDP, but
   do change the To and From headers. The tags in the To or From headers
   would not be changed.  Any UPDATES received by an RFC 2543 [10]
   system would fail to match the transaction due to the changed To or
   From. This would not result in the call failing but would only result
   in the identity failing to be displayed correctly.

   Changing the To and From headers was contemplated in Section 12.2.1.1
   of RFC 3261 which says "Usage of the URI from the To and From fields
   in the original request within subsequent requests is done for
   backwards compatibility with RFC 2543, which used the URI for dialog
   identification.  In this specification, only the tags are used for
   dialog identification.  It is expected that mandatory reflection of
   the original To and From URI in mid-dialog requests will be
   deprecated in a subsequent revision of this specification."

   As an alternative to changing the To and From headers, a new Name
   header could be created that represents the identity of the sender of
   the message.




Jennings                 Expires August 7, 2004                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft            SIP Connected Party              February 2004


   The biggest problem with these approaches is that they make it very
   hard to apply new policy to the call if the user's identity changes.
   Consider the example above. The identity of the caller determines
   where the call is forked; with this approach, the system would not
   change where the call was being forked if the identity of the caller
   changed.

   Another issue is how this interacts with outstanding UPDATES that are
   being used for offer/answer negotiation.

6. Why PAI is Useless

   PAI, described in RFC 3325 [4], was designed to work in very limited
   trust domains. It is primarily useful when a UAC wishes its identity
   to be anonymous to the UAS but the intermediate trust domain needs to
   know the UAC's identity for legal call trace reasons. There are no
   legal call trace requirements of this type from the UAS to the UAC.
   If the UAS wishes to change its identity to Anonymous, there is no
   need to carry the real identity along. It is important to understand
   this: the requirement solved by PAI is asymmetrical and does not
   apply in the backwards direction.

   The requirements driving the work in this document are about
   informing the party at the far end of the call of a changed identity.
   PAI will never work for this. The fundamental requirement for PAI is
   that as the PAI crosses from one trust domain A to the next trust
   domain B, the next trust domain B must discard it unless it can
   independently verify it. This is so because if B passes it to any
   other element even inside its trust domain, those elements will
   assume the PAI is true even though B does not know this to be true.
   The end user device that is capable of displaying the PAI information
   is never in the same trust domain as the network elements, so it must
   discard this information as it comes in.  RFC 3325 specifically says
   "However, if a User Agent Server receives a message from a previous
   element that it does not trust, it MUST NOT use the
   P-Asserted-Identity header field in any way." A UAS that sits in the
   user's hand is not going to be trusted by the "network" trust domain.
   Trust domains are symmetrical - you cannot have a trust domain in
   which the phone trusts the network but the network does not trust the
   phone.

   To summarize, given two trust domains A and B, even if you passed the
   PAI around in responses in A, as soon as it got passed to B, it would
   be discarded or unusable. If it got passed in a response to a proxy
   in B, 3325 says that "the proxy MUST authenticate the originator of
   the message" which of course the proxy cannot do for a response, so
   it would have to drop the PAI. There is no use case in which the UA
   producing the PAI and the UA that could display a PAI to an end user



Jennings                 Expires August 7, 2004                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft            SIP Connected Party              February 2004


   are in the same trust domain. A new header, like Name, could be
   defined as described in Section 5 but PAI is not useful for this.

7. Recommendations

   Deprecating forking and early media do not seem feasible. The early
   unattended transfer problem has been floating around for a long time
   with no good solution. Using UPDATE or some new method to update
   connected party information after a dialog is formed seems very
   appealing. This name could be in a changed To or From header or in a
   new header. This same approach could be used when the caller identity
   changed in an early dialog. History seem like a good approach for
   coping with the ever changing identity of various UASs during early
   dialogs.

8. Acknowledgments

   Thanks to Randy Baird and Rohan Mahy.

Normative References

   [1]  Sparks, R., "The SIP Referred-By Mechanism",
        draft-ietf-sip-referredby-03 (work in progress), August 2003.

   [2]  Biggs, B., Dean, R. and R. Mahy, "The Session Inititation
        Protocol (SIP) 'Replaces' Header", draft-ietf-sip-replaces-04
        (work in progress), August 2003.

   [3]  Petrie, D., "SIP Transfer Issues",
        draft-petrie-sipping-xfer-issues-00 (work in progress), October
        2003.

   [4]  Jennings, C., Peterson, J. and M. Watson, "Private Extensions to
        the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) for Asserted Identity
        within Trusted Networks", RFC 3325, November 2002.

   [5]  Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston, A.,
        Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley, M. and E. Schooler, "SIP:
        Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261, June 2002.

   [6]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
        Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

Informative References

   [7]   Elwell, J., "Interworking between SIP and QSIG",
         draft-ietf-sipping-qsig2sip-02 (work in progress), August 2003.




Jennings                 Expires August 7, 2004                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft            SIP Connected Party              February 2004


   [8]   Venkataramanan, V., "Enhancements to Asserted Identity to
         Enable Called Party Name Delivery  using SIP",
         draft-venkatar-sipping-called-name-00 (work in progress), June
         2003.

   [9]   Barnes, M., "SIP Generic Request History Capability ̞
         Requirements", draft-ietf-sipping-req-history-04 (work in
         progress), June 2003.

   [10]  Handley, M., Schulzrinne, H., Schooler, E. and J. Rosenberg,
         "SIP: Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 2543, March 1999.


Author's Address

   Cullen Jennings
   Cisco Systems, Inc.
   170 West Tasman Dr.
   MS: SJC-21/2
   San Jose, CA  95134
   USA

   Phone: +1 408 902 3341
   EMail: fluffy@cisco.com



























Jennings                 Expires August 7, 2004                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft            SIP Connected Party              February 2004


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it
   has made any effort to identify any such rights. Information on the
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11. Copies of
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of
   licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to
   obtain a general license or permission for the use of such
   proprietary rights by implementors or users of this specification can
   be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice
   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF Executive
   Director.


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004). All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assignees.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION



Jennings                 Expires August 7, 2004                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft            SIP Connected Party              February 2004


   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Acknowledgement

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.











































Jennings                 Expires August 7, 2004                [Page 10]

