

Network Working Group                                           K. Drage
Internet-Draft                                       Lucent Technologies
Intended status: Informational                          October 16, 2006
Expires: April 19, 2007


A Process for Handling Essential Corrections to the Session  Initiation
                             Protocol (SIP)
                draft-drage-sip-essential-correction-00

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 19, 2007.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).













Drage                    Expires April 19, 2007                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft        Essential Corrections to SIP          October 2006


Abstract

   The Session Initial Protocol (SIP) defined in RFC 3261 and a large
   number of extensions forms a considerable body of work, which through
   sheer size has a number of errors that require correction.  This
   document explains the process for managing essential corrections to
   SIP.












































Drage                    Expires April 19, 2007                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft        Essential Corrections to SIP          October 2006


1.  Introduction

   RFC 3261 [1] and its extensions have already had a number of issues
   identified against it, and other issues are expected.  These are
   issues where the normative text of the already published
   specification is found to be either in error, or lacking, such that
   interoperability is endangered.

   There has been a reluctance to document these issues due to updates
   to RFCs requiring a whole new RFC to be issued.  This may be appear
   too complex for a one line correction, or may just overwhelm
   potential submitters due to the complexity of the process.







































Drage                    Expires April 19, 2007                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft        Essential Corrections to SIP          October 2006


2.  Objective

   For SIP RFCs and RFCs specifying SIP extensions, provide clear
   guidelines as to when corrective RFC content is required that updates
   the original specification.  If the work is an extension or of
   editorial nature, then existing rules should be followed.













































Drage                    Expires April 19, 2007                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft        Essential Corrections to SIP          October 2006


3.  Process

   Corrections will be proposed to the SIP working group.

   All changes should be essential.  An essential change is one where in
   the absence of the correction, it will not be possible to implement
   the specification contained in the original RFC in a manner to ensure
   interoperability or correct operation.  Clarifications, statements of
   best practice, additional informative material, and editorial
   revisions are in general not essential - if publication of such
   material is necessary, it should be published as a separate
   informational RFC.  The working group will analyse the proposed
   correction and decide whether it is essential.

   The correction will be processed as an internet-draft belonging to
   the SIP working group.  For management purposes, there should be one
   correction or set of related corrections per internet draft -
   corrections relating to two different errors should be processed as
   two separate internet drafts.  When complete the internet draft will
   be working group last called by the SIP working group, along with any
   required expert review that may be appropriate to the contents.

   At an appropriate period time, an editor working on behalf of the SIP
   working group will compile all changes that have successfully
   completed working group last call into a internet draft, along with
   the contents of all previous documents that update the SIP RFC
   requiring correction.

   The internet draft will be submitted to IESG as a proposed standards
   track RFC for approval for publication, without any further working
   group last call.

   Further corrections after this point will repeat the process.


















Drage                    Expires April 19, 2007                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft        Essential Corrections to SIP          October 2006


4.  Required Contents For a Change Request Internet-Draft

   In addition to the normal rules for contents of a standards track
   RFC, sections to the RFC should document the following:

   Reason for change.  Text which explains why the change is necessary.

   Summary of change.  Enter text which describes the most important
   components of the change. i.e. how the change is made.

   Consequences if not approved.  Enter here the consequences if this
   change were to be rejected.  Explain the issues that implementations
   will have in the absence of this change, i.e. what fails to operate
   correctly.

   The change.  Clearly identify the section of the RFC to be changed,
   and show precisely how the text change.  An implementor should be
   able to take the original RFC and edit the change as described to
   obtain the new approved text.
































Drage                    Expires April 19, 2007                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft        Essential Corrections to SIP          October 2006


5.  Security considerations

   There are no security considerations relating to this document.
















































Drage                    Expires April 19, 2007                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft        Essential Corrections to SIP          October 2006


6.  IANA considerations

   This document requires no action by IANA.
















































Drage                    Expires April 19, 2007                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft        Essential Corrections to SIP          October 2006


7.  References

   [1]  Rosenberg, J., "SIP: Session Initiation Protocol", June 2002.
















































Drage                    Expires April 19, 2007                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft        Essential Corrections to SIP          October 2006


Author's Address

   Keith Drage
   Lucent Technologies
   Optimus, Windmill Hill Business Park
   Swindon, Wilts
   UK

   Email: drage@lucent.com










































Drage                    Expires April 19, 2007                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft        Essential Corrections to SIP          October 2006


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Drage                    Expires April 19, 2007                [Page 11]


