


INTERNET-DRAFT                                             Marco Liebsch
Expires March 2003                                        Yoshihiro Ohba
                                                               [Editors]
                                                               Tao Zhang
                                                          September 2002


   Architecture and Protocol framework for Dormant Mode Host Alerting
                 <draft-liebsch-dmha-framework-00.txt>


Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC 2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

Abstract

   This document discusses and describes an architecture and protocol
   framework for the design and specification of a generic IP based
   architecture and protocol for Dormant Mode Host Alerting, aka IP
   paging. It focuses on the location and operation related interworking
   of the different functional entities as required to allow for a
   flexible and scalable deployment of the protocol. Furthermore,
   protocol transport and security mechanisms are evaluated and proposed
   to meet respective requirements on a DMHA protocol. This document
   intends to be a comprehensive guideline for the design of a generic
   IP paging architecture and protocol.










Liebsch, Ohba, Zhang                                            [Page 1]

INTERNET-DRAFT A framework for Dormant Mode Host Alerting September 2002


Table of Contents

1.        Introduction ............................................ 2
1.1       Background information .................................. 2
1.2       General Overview ........................................ 3
2.        Terms ................................................... 4
3.        Dormant mode supporting nodes ........................... 6
4.        Paging area design ...................................... 6
5.        The role of the paging strategy ......................... 8
6.        Dormant mode location management ....................... 10
6.1       General description .................................... 10
6.2       Proposal evaluation .................................... 10
6.2.1     Mobility proprietary solutions ......................... 10
6.2.2     Mobility independent solutions ......................... 10
6.2.3     Hybrid solutions ....................................... 11
6.2.4     Last-hop solutions ..................................... 12
6.3       3GPP considerations .................................... 12
7.        DMA function ........................................... 13
7.1       DMA location and modes ................................. 13
7.1.1     Paging trigger packet reception ........................ 13
7.1.2     Paging trigger packet capturing ........................ 14
7.2       Filtering for DMHA ..................................... 15
8.        PA function ............................................ 15
8.1       Functional split of the PA function .................... 15
8.2       Addressing of core components .......................... 16
8.3       Addressing of last-hop components ...................... 17
9.        Signaling transport .................................... 17
10.       Security support ....................................... 18
10.1      Security threat categories ............................. 18
10.2      Consideration for Category 1 attacks ................... 19
10.2.1    Candidate security mechanisms for DMHA ................. 19
10.2.2    Establishing an SA ..................................... 20
10.3      Consideration for Category 2 attacks ................... 21
11.       Availability ........................................... 22
11.1      Related nodes .......................................... 22
11.2      Evaluated mechanisms ................................... 23
11.3      Proposed solution ...................................... 23
A         References ............................................. 23
B         Author's addresses ..................................... 25
C         Overview on access technologies ........................ 26
C.1       802.11 Power Management ................................ 26




1.  Introduction

1.1  Background information

   This document describes an architecture and protocol framework
   evaluation for the design and specification of a generic IP based



Liebsch, Ohba, Zhang                                            [Page 2]

INTERNET-DRAFT A framework for Dormant Mode Host Alerting September 2002


   architecture and protocol on Dormant Mode Host Alerting (DMHA), aka
   IP paging. This framework document is related to various candidate
   solutions for the issues addressed in [1] and focuses on the location
   and operation of the different functional entities as identified in
   [2], required for flexible and scalable deployment of the protocol.
   Furthermore, protocol transport and security mechanisms are evaluated
   and proposed to meet the requirements of a generic IP paging
   protocol, as described in [2].

   Various proposals with different characteristics are addressed,
   discussed and evaluated with respect to meeting the requirements as
   identified in [2]. Since the generic protocol for IP paging should be
   independent of the access technology, but deployment of access
   technology and interface specific support for dormant mode as well as
   paging should be allowed, the framework has to take appropriate
   functions into account to allow for mapping the generic IP paging
   protocol to technology specifics. In case of not getting support on
   dormant mode and paging from layers below the IP layer on the access
   link and respective interfaces, the framework should allow
   integration of appropriate features on IP level, supporting dormant
   mode and the paging process in an efficient way.


1.2  General Overview

   A generic IP paging architecture and protocol targets at an access
   technology independent solution for finding and re-activating dormant
   mobile terminals. The generic nature aims at the integration into
   various IP mobility managed platforms to support heterogeneous
   access. Since paging on a mobile terminal's access interface is in
   most cases optimized taking technology specific functions for dormant
   mode support and the paging procedure into account, the architecture
   and protocol to be specified for a generic IP paging solution MUST
   allow for the mapping of the common IP paging protocol to access
   technology specific functions.

   Evaluation of requirements and the attempt to integrate a set of
   candidate protocols for IP paging into various IP mobility management
   schemes has shown, that demand on the architecture and the protocol
   for IP paging varies. Therefore, aiming at a generic solution while
   meeting requirements on flexibility and scalability demands thorough
   analysis of different proposals on how to design the architecture for
   IP paging. In particular the placement and distribution or co-
   location of individual paging related functional entities, as
   indicated in [2], is to be evaluated for individual mobility schemes
   and network characteristics.

   The challenge is to find a compromise between complexity and
   flexibility, taking the placement of different paging functional
   entities and interworking between them into consideration.  Further
   issues to be evaluated are demands with respect to availability. In



Liebsch, Ohba, Zhang                                            [Page 3]

INTERNET-DRAFT A framework for Dormant Mode Host Alerting September 2002


   this regard, the IP paging architecture has to allow approaches for
   the introduction of redundancy and efficient deployment of fail-over
   handling mechanisms. A further demand is to allow providers a high
   degree of flexibility in paging area design, taking co-existence of
   L2 and L3 paging areas into account.

   This document intends to be a guideline for the design of a generic
   IP paging architecture and protocol. The various issues addressed in
   individual sections should be evaluated more and more, aiming at a
   significant framework document for design recommendations. The
   implementation and comparison of various protocol proposals as well
   as an evaluation by means of simulations and theoretical approaches
   is intended to find the best way to go for the architecture's and
   protocol's design.


2.  Terms

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119.

   In terms of IP based paging, this document tries to be as close as
   possible to the paging problem statement [1]. To resolve ambiguities,
   the following terms are defined for the context of this document.  In
   addition, please be referred to [4].


   Access Router
       a router that provides access to a (potential) L2
       connection to the mobile node

   Active State
       mobile node state, mainly characterized by the
       following characteristics:

          1. an established L2 connection

          2. the communication peer of mobile node knows the currently
             configured IP address of the MN

          3. the L2 connection is used to carry L3 data traffic

   Black Hole
      packet loss without any control of the system

   Connection
      established L2 connectivity, providing transport
      service for L3 traffic

   L2



Liebsch, Ohba, Zhang                                            [Page 4]

INTERNET-DRAFT A framework for Dormant Mode Host Alerting September 2002


      layer 2

   L3
      layer 3

   Idle State
      mobile node state, mainly characterized by:

          1. less frequent location updates

          2. network-maintained location information is less accurate
             than in Active State

          3. the MN is not currently involved in an ongoing L3
             communication

   IPsec
      Security Architecture for the Internet Protocol (RFC 2401)

   Location
      smallest indivisible unit at which a mobile node can be
      located (e.g. a single base station)

   MN
      mobile node

   Paging Area
      in this context used as general term to describe a
      set of 2 or more locations likely to be polled in the paging
      process; see also Predefined Paging Area

   Paging Strategy
      the order and mode of how a set of Locations is
      polled to locate an idle mobile node

   PAI
      Paging Area Identifier,
      used to identify a Static Paging Area

   Polling Cycle
      single step of a paging search phase

   Predefined Paging Area
      statically grouped set of locations, manually configured
      by an operator for paging purposes

   Static Paging Area
      see Predefined Paging Area

   Unreachable Mobile Node
      MN, whose location can not be resolved



Liebsch, Ohba, Zhang                                            [Page 5]

INTERNET-DRAFT A framework for Dormant Mode Host Alerting September 2002


      for the purpose of routing L3 data traffic to it


3.  Dormant mode supporting nodes


   There are three kinds of IP nodes that may support dormant mode.

   Dormant mobile hosts support both dormant mode and IP mobility (i.e.,
   Mobile IP, Mobile IPv6 and/or micro-mobility).  A dormant mobile host
   may move from one IP subnet to another without updating its mobility
   bindings needed for routing IP packets from mobility management
   agents to the host.  In other words, L3 routability is not guaranteed
   for dormant mobile hosts.  So additional signaling mechanism (i.e.,
   DMHA) is necessary for realizing locatability in order to search the
   dormant mobile hosts and notify them of the arrival of data packets
   so that they can update their mobility bindings and perform IP
   mobility signaling to recover L3 routability.

   Dormant stationary hosts support dormant mode but do not support IP
   mobility.  A dormant stationary host is not supposed to change the IP
   subnet or even location in some L2 as long as it is in dormant mode.
   However, this does not mean that L3 routability is guaranteed for
   dormant hosts.  For example, if a traffic channel and a signaling
   channel are provided separately with different frequencies, time-
   slots or codes, and a dormant stationary host does not listen to the
   traffic channel, locatability needs to be provided over the signaling
   channel in order for the dormant host to "switch-on" the traffic
   channel when it is alerted.  Or when L2 dormant mode support is
   available, some locatability needs to be provided at L3 by
   maintaining information that is necessary to utilize the L2 dormant
   mode service.  For example, although an 802.11 access point maintains
   a list of the MAC addresses of active and dormant stations associated
   with it, there must be some mechanism to maintain, as such
   information described above, the mapping between the MAC address and
   IP address of a dormant host, since 802.11 itself does not care about
   IP address.

   Dormant routers support both dormant mode and IP packet forwarding.
   A dormant router is different from a dormant host in that a previous
   hop router of the dormant router triggers alerting based on the next
   hop IP address of an incoming packet not on the destination IP
   address.  When a dormant router that wakes up to receive an incoming
   packet then may trigger another alerting to forward the packet, where
   the node to be alerted may either a dormant host or a dormant router.
   A dormant router may be stationary or mobile.


4.  Paging area design

   Paging areas can be static or dynamic. A static paging area does not



Liebsch, Ohba, Zhang                                            [Page 6]

INTERNET-DRAFT A framework for Dormant Mode Host Alerting September 2002


   change unless re-configured by the network operator manually or via
   network management system.  A dynamic paging area may change
   dynamically in response to changing network dynamics, such as the
   changing geographical distribution of the mobile user population and
   the changing mobility pattern of the mobile users.

   Paging area design is to determine how paging areas should be
   constructed and modified. Paging area design could have significant
   impact on the signaling overheads incurred for location update and
   paging. For example, small paging areas could increase the frequency
   at which mobile hosts have to update their locations, but may reduce
   the paging signaling overhead incurred by the network to locate the
   mobile host. Dynamic paging areas, if designed properly, could reduce
   the overall paging-related signaling overhead (including the
   signaling overheads for location update and paging). However,
   supporting dynamic paging areas may need complex algorithms, software
   and interactions among network nodes for maintaining and modifying
   the paging areas dynamically. Therefore, a key issue in the design of
   paging protocol is to allow a network operator to achieve a proper
   balance between paging-related signaling overheads and system
   complexity by supporting a proper degree of flexibility in paging
   area design.

   An IP layer paging area is a set of IP layer network attachment
   points.  When designing IP layer paging areas, the following issues
   that are specific to IP networks also need to be addressed:

   1. How should an IP layer paging area be mapped into IP subnets?
   2. How should an IP layer paging area be mapped into layer 2
      paging areas?
   3. How to identify an IP paging area?
   4. How to route packets to an IP paging area?
   5. How to disburse packets within an IP paging area to the dormant
      mobiles?

   A straightforward IP layer paging area design is to map IP paging
   areas one-to-one to the underlying IP subnets. That is, every subnet
   makes a separate IP paging area.  This however, could force blanket
   paging to the entire network in many cases. For example, in today's
   enterprise wireless networks, one single IP subnet is often used to
   support all the mobile users in one location. In many such existing
   networks, hundreds of mobile users are supported on the same subnet
   that has high capacity enabled by, e.g., switched LAN technologies.
   In such networks, if the IP subnet is a single IP paging area, all
   paging messages could be broadcast to all active and dormant mobile
   users on the subnet. This could lead to a significant waste of the
   scarce power resources on both the active and dormant mobiles.
   Therefore, an IP paging protocol should allow flexible design of
   paging areas. For example, it should allow an IP paging area to span
   only part of one IP subnet or across multiple IP subnets.  Such a
   flexible IP paging protocol will allow a network operator to



Liebsch, Ohba, Zhang                                            [Page 7]

INTERNET-DRAFT A framework for Dormant Mode Host Alerting September 2002


   customize the design of the paging areas to fit its own business
   requirements.

   While it is important to support flexible paging area designs, it is
   equally important to reduce the potentially high protocol and network
   complexity associated with supporting such flexible paging area
   designs. Take supporting dynamic paging area for example. When paging
   areas are changed dynamically, the number and the shapes of the
   paging areas may change accordingly. These changing paging areas need
   to be identified at the IP layer. When the paging areas covering a
   specific location changes, the changes need to be communicated to the
   network entities that are responsible for advertising the paging area
   identities to the mobiles. The mobiles in these affected locations
   also need to be informed of the changes in a timely manner. These
   requirements could significantly increase the complexity of a paging
   protocol if the protocol is not designed properly. Support for
   flexible paging area design may also impact the architecture of a
   paging protocol because it impacts the locations and operations of
   paging agents. For example, if a dedicated paging agent is used for
   each paging area and N paging agents are configured in a network,
   then no more than N paging areas can be supported simultaneously.
   Therefore, intelligent methodologies need to be developed to make the
   IP paging protocol simple and yet effective in supporting the
   flexibility needed in paging area design.

   When a paging area contains multiple IP access routers, a paging
   message can be sent to these access routers either via unicast or
   multicast. Disbursing of paging messages over the wireless media may
   be carried out in any way available in each particular wireless
   medium.


5.  The role of the paging strategy


   Many paging strategies exist today. They can be classified into the
   following categories:

   o Blanket paging:
      A paging message is broadcast simultaneously to all dormant
   mobiles inside a paging area. Blanket paging is used in most of
   today's wireless networks. Its main advantage is that it generates
   the least paging latency. The potential drawback, however, is that
   broadcasting paging messages to all mobiles in a large paging area
   could consume a significant amount of scarce resource, including
   power on all the mobiles in the paging area and the radio bandwidth
   in the radio network.

   o Sequential paging:
      With this strategy, a large paging area is divided into small
   paging sub-areas. Paging messages are first sent to a subset of the



Liebsch, Ohba, Zhang                                            [Page 8]

INTERNET-DRAFT A framework for Dormant Mode Host Alerting September 2002


   paging sub-areas where the network believes the mobile is most likely
   to be. If the target mobile is not found in one sub-area, subsequent
   paging messages will be sent to another sub-area. This process
   continues until the entire paging area is searched or the target
   mobile is located. Different techniques may be used to determine how
   to divide a large paging area into smaller paging sub-areas and which
   sub-areas should be searched first.

   o Individual paging:
      With this strategy, an individualized paging area is maintained
   dynamically for each mobile host. To page a mobile host, paging
   messages will be sent to the mobile host's individualized paging
   area.

   o Other:
      Other paging strategies also exist that cannot be clearly
   classified into any of the categories mentioned above. For example,
   Geographic position-based paging uses the geographical position of a
   mobile to determine where a paging message should be send. Group
   paging sends paging messages to a group of dormant mobiles at a time
   instead of one individual mobile each time.

   The choice of paging strategy has a significant impact on the paging
   performance (e.g., paging latency), paging-related signaling
   overhead, and network complexity.  A good paging strategy should
   allow a network operator to achieve a balance among

     * Paging-related signaling overhead,
     * Paging latency, and
     * Network complexity

   Which paging strategies fit a network operator's business needs
   depend on the specific network environment and business needs of each
   specific network operator.  It is therefore important for a paging
   protocol to support different paging strategies.

   Furthermore, paging strategy, paging area design and location update
   strategy depend on each other closely and impact the design of the
   paging protocol. For example, if only blanket paging is used, each
   mobile has to update its location every time it moves into a new
   location area and the location update has to be performed reliably.
   On the other hand, if sequential paging is used, the network could
   send subsequent paging messages to enlarge its search area if it
   cannot find a dormant mobile in one location area. Therefore, with
   sequential paging, a mobile may not necessarily have to update its
   location every time it moves into a new location area (e.g., this is
   likely the case in movement-based location update strategies) and the
   location updates do not necessarily have to be delivered reliably.
   This indicates that the range of paging strategies to be supported
   could impact the requirements and the design of the paging protocol.
   In other words, the paging protocol design could significantly impact



Liebsch, Ohba, Zhang                                            [Page 9]

INTERNET-DRAFT A framework for Dormant Mode Host Alerting September 2002


   what paging strategies and location update strategies can be
   supported.

   The discussion on different paging strategies is out of the scope of
   this document, but are discussed inter alia in [4] and [5].



6.  Dormant mode location management

6.1  General description

   This section addresses the location of the Tracking Agent (TA)
   function, tracking a host's location while being dormant. In general,
   having the TA function close to the paging areas a mobile terminal is
   roaming in allows short signaling paths for dormant mode location
   updating. Otherwise, coupling the TA function with a mobility agent
   in a mobile terminal's home domain would allow the paging protocol to
   benefit from mobility management specific functions. To find an
   appropriate solution on where to implement the TA function, more
   characteristics of individual approaches have to be studied. This
   incorporates in particular security related issues as well as
   signaling costs for dormant mode location updating and the paging
   process. In general, the location of the TA shall consider the
   balance of signaling load for registration and paging, L2 technology
   characteristics as well as the mobile terminal's roaming behavior.

6.2  Proposal evaluation

6.2.1  Mobility proprietary solutions

   This proposal assumes that each individual IP mobility management
   proposal provides proprietary extensions for paging support. This
   allows taking advantage of each mobility protocol's specific
   functions for paging. Otherwise, this will result in a set of
   specific paging protocol extensions and does not meet the requirement
   on mobility protocol independence [2], aiming at an IP paging
   architecture and protocol solution, which can be deployed with
   various IP mobility managed systems. Evaluation of mobility
   proprietary paging proposals is out of the scope of this document.


6.2.2  Mobility independent solutions

   This proposal assumes the TA function as well as the DMA function to
   be entirely de-coupled from the mobility management protocol and to
   be part of the generic IP paging framework.  Furthermore, both
   functions are located in the dormant mobile terminal's visited
   domain.

   o   Disadvantage: Location info database as well as stateful



Liebsch, Ohba, Zhang                                           [Page 10]

INTERNET-DRAFT A framework for Dormant Mode Host Alerting September 2002


       entities are to be maintained at home as well as in the visited
       domain. Required interactions between the two sites are to be
       studied thoroughly.

   o   Extra paging trigger packet buffer required in the visited
       domain for each registered (dormant) mobile terminal.

   o   Advantage: Keeps dormant mode, paging area location management
       and paging inside the visited domain (transparency).

   o   Extra requirements on the introduction of redundancy and on
       fail-over handling mechanisms (handling of stateful entities).

   o   Implies requirements on the dynamic establishment of security
       associations between a mobile terminal and the TA/DMA function.

   o   Allows flexible deployment of the DMA function w.r.t. its
       location and mode (capturing or reception of paging trigger
       packets).

6.2.3  Hybrid solutions

   This proposal assumes partitioning the protocol into a core protocol
   part, which is independent of the mobility protocol, and separate
   mobility protocol dependent parts. Dormant mode location management
   is done in a mobile terminal's home domain. Placing only the DMA
   function in the visited domain, but keeping the TA in the home
   domain, would not be a reasonable approach, since paging trigger
   packets, either captured or received in the visited domain, would
   initiate requesting the TA, located again in the terminal's home
   domain, of the addressed dormant mobile terminal's location. The only
   reasonable scenario, when placing the TA function into the mobile
   terminal's home domain, would be to place the DMA function close to
   the TA function, or even to co-locate the two functions.

   o   Requires coordination with the mobility management approach, but
       would reduce the deployment of appropriate fail-over handling
       mechanisms to one node, when co-locating the TA/DMA function
       with a home mobility agent (assumes existence of a mobility
       agent).

   o   Disadvantage: Requires inter-domain signaling for paging area
       updates while a mobile terminal is dormant.

   o   Disadvantage: L2 support for location tracking is difficult
       with regard to the security associations between a mobile
       terminal, its visited domain and the home domain.

   o   Advantage: Implicit security association available between a
       mobile terminal and functions located in its home domain.




Liebsch, Ohba, Zhang                                           [Page 11]

INTERNET-DRAFT A framework for Dormant Mode Host Alerting September 2002


6.2.4  Last-hop solutions

   This proposal has been addressed to provide paging functionality with
   a minimum degree of complexity. It assumes all paging related
   functional entities to be placed on Access Routers. This keeps
   complexity of functions required for paging low, but restricts the
   flexibility in paging area design and deployment of enhanced paging
   functions.

   The basic approach would rely on forwarding of paging trigger packets
   to the last registered IP subnet by means of standard mechanisms
   provided by the mobility management scheme. As an example, in case of
   Mobile IPv6 the Home Agent intercepts packets according to standard
   behavior and forwards these packets to the last registered care-of
   address of the dormant mobile terminal. The registered subnet's
   Access Router compares the destination address of the incoming packet
   with its routing cache entries.  If the mobile terminal is active,
   the packets could be forwarded by means of standard mechanisms. If
   the mobile terminal has entered a dormant mode before, the Access
   Router initiates polling the IP subnet to re-activate the mobile
   terminal. As an option, a set of L2 Access points, covered by the IP
   subnet, might support multiple L2 paging areas. The latter function
   would then require again an appropriate protocol between a mobile
   terminal and its current AR to handle the different paging areas
   within the current IP subnet.

   An argument to advocate such an approach is the reduced complexity of
   additional functions for paging and the fact that actually no special
   paging protocol is required. Only the Access Router should discover
   the respective mobile terminal's state and to initiate a paging
   function on the IP subnet, which might comprise multiple L2 access
   points.

   This procedure implies the following restrictions:

   o   A paging area is restricted to the scope of an individual
       Access Router's IP subnet and cannot comprise multiple subnets.

   o   Does not provide flexibility to access providers with respect
       to paging area design.

   o   No benefit in saving signaling costs when compared to standard
       IP mobility management approaches.

6.3  3GPP considerations

   Lack of interest in a solution for IP paging for 3GPP Release 99 is
   obvious, since paging is done via proprietary architecture and
   protocol solutions. Core components deploy the Radio Access Network
   Application Part (RANAP) protocol to initiate paging at Radio Network
   Controllers (RNC). On the other hand, the standardization considers



Liebsch, Ohba, Zhang                                           [Page 12]

INTERNET-DRAFT A framework for Dormant Mode Host Alerting September 2002


   more and more the integration of Internet Protocol solutions for
   various functions.  Proposals on integrating an IP based framework
   for Authentication, Authorization and Accounting (AAA) as well as IP
   based mobility management has been considered.  IP migrates more and
   more towards the architecture's radio access network.

   Ideas on "all-IP" systems consider the integration of a set of IP
   based infrastructure servers for security and mobility management.
   Hence, in case of introducing Mobile IP approaches for mobility
   management and to replace the GPRS tunneling protocol (GTP) with
   Mobile IP tunnels, stepwise replacement of RANAP procedures with IP
   based approaches is possible. In addition to functions for radio
   access bearer management and relocation handling, IP paging is a
   function to be integrated and handled efficiently.

   With respect to current discussion on IP RAN migration scenarios,
   stepwise replacement of RANAP procedures for paging could be
   considered, terminating the protocol more and more towards the core
   network and deployment of IP based approaches towards the RAN seems
   to be a reasonable procedure for smooth migration.

   Consideration of RNC decomposition into a control node (control-
   plane) and a user data packet handling node (user-plane) puts
   additional demands on a generic IP paging architecture and protocol
   with respect to placement of individual functional entities and
   mapping of the generic IP paging protocol to access technology
   specific paging functions of future heterogeneous access networks.

7.  DMA function

7.1  DMA location and modes

   This section focuses on the flexible and efficient deployment of the
   Dormant Monitoring Agent (DMA) function. Basically, the DMA function
   should be able to work in co-located mode as well as in distributed
   mode, which means being located remotely from other paging related
   functions. This allows optimization on paging delay as well as on
   related signaling costs and performance, dependent on the
   registration mechanisms of appropriate mobility management
   approaches.

   Two approaches are addressed in the following two sections, one is
   based on explicit addressing a dormant mobile terminal's DMA
   function, the other is based on a mode, where the DMA function has to
   capture data packets getting by. Reception of paging trigger packets
   assumes the DMA function to be co-located with at least the TA
   function in a separate node.

7.1.1  Paging trigger packet reception

   To allow explicitly addressing a mobile terminal's DMA function while



Liebsch, Ohba, Zhang                                           [Page 13]

INTERNET-DRAFT A framework for Dormant Mode Host Alerting September 2002


   being dormant, the DMA is to be registered with the mobility
   management system to receive initial user-data packets on behalf of
   the dormant mobile terminal. To deploy appropriate registration
   features is according to requirement 4.8 of [2]. Initial user-data
   packets are received at the DMA function and are to be buffered after
   the function has ascertained that the packet addressed a registered
   dormant mobile terminal and has not been forwarded to the DMA
   misleadingly.
   After the dormant mobile terminal has entered the active state and
   its current location has been ascertained after the paging process,
   the DMA function has to re-address and send the buffered packet(s) to
   the mobile terminal. The DMA is to be de-registered with the mobility
   management system by means of appropriate location updating
   mechanisms.

   In this mode, the acquired and registered DMA function represents a
   long-term entity to be responsible for receiving paging trigger
   packets. The DMA should not change when a new paging area has been
   entered.

   o Advantage: Avoid performance degradation at individual DMA
     functions, since usually only packets destined to registered
     dormant mobile terminals are received by this functional entity.
     This avoids running the DMA function in promiscuous mode.

   o Advantage: Could benefit from long-term DMA registration with
     the platform's mobility management system while being dormant.

   o Allows to co-locate the DMA function with the TA function.

   o In case if IP-IP encapsulated packets are received at the DMA
     function, the actual terminal identifier might be found in the
     inner IP packet, which requires additional processing of
     received packets.

   o This approach requires that nodes, implementing the DMA function,
     terminate tunnels for DMHA only.

7.1.2  Paging trigger packet capturing

   When no appropriate registration mechanisms are provided by the
   mobility management to register an individual DMA function, multiple
   DMA functions are necessary to be distributed and placed on relevant
   ingress routers or appropriate nodes, where user-data traffic packets
   go through on the way to a mobile terminal's location, which has been
   registered with the mobility management system before the terminal
   has entered the dormant mode. The DMA functions have to inspect all
   packets and to capture and process the ones addressed to mobile
   terminal's, which have been registered as dormant.

   o Advantage: Allows to forego an explicit registration of a DMA



Liebsch, Ohba, Zhang                                           [Page 14]

INTERNET-DRAFT A framework for Dormant Mode Host Alerting September 2002


     function with the mobility management system. This saves
     signaling when an individual mobile terminal decides to enter
     the dormant mode.
   o Requires an additional protocol and security association between
     the nodes implementing DMA functions and the nodes implementing
     other paging related functions.

7.2  Filtering for DMHA

   The DMA function should allow filtering of paging trigger packets to
   avoid that all packets, addressing a dormant mobile terminal, trigger
   a paging process by default. The mobile terminal should be able to
   select from a list of packet types, indicating, which packets are
   allowed to trigger the paging process. This optimizes the dormant
   mode support and further allows to reduce paging specific signaling
   costs.
   Otherwise, complex and too extensive filter configuration should be
   avoided. Therefore, the protocol should allow the mobile terminal to
   configure the filter function according to a reasonable selection of
   packet types.
   Packet filtering at DMAs supports the dormant mode for mobile
   terminals as well as for stationary hosts.


8.  PA function

   The Paging Agent functional entity is responsible for the actual
   paging process.  Being informed of the paging area to search for the
   paged mobile terminal, the PA polls the paging area by means of an
   appropriate paging strategy.

   Thorough investigation of the PA function results in a further
   functional split into a generic part and into multiple attendant
   parts, responsible for mapping the generic protocol to access
   technology specific functions.

   This chapter describes the PA functions and evaluation of addressing
   schemes for the individual PA functions and related interfaces. The
   latter evaluation distinguishes between addressing of core
   components, which includes the interface between the generic PA
   function and the PA attendants, and addressing of last-hop
   components, which is related to addressing the mobile terminal from
   PA attendants either on L3 or on L2. The role of multicast schemes is
   described and advantages and disadvantages for individual interfaces
   are evaluated.

8.1  Functional split of the PA function

   o The generic PA function

   This part of the PA function could be placed somewhere in the



Liebsch, Ohba, Zhang                                           [Page 15]

INTERNET-DRAFT A framework for Dormant Mode Host Alerting September 2002


   network, possibly being co-located with the TA function. Its protocol
   to poll the attendant functions is specified on IP layer and
   independent of the domain's individual IP subnet supporting access
   technologies.

   o The paging attendant functions

   The attendants are addressed from the generic PA function during a
   paging process.  They should be located on a domain's last-hop
   subnets, e.g. on Access Routers.  Polling a paging area, the generic
   PA function addresses all paging attendants comprising the paging
   area according to the selected paging strategy. The paging attendants
   are then responsible for mapping the generic IP paging protocol to L2
   paging functions. Furthermore, these attendants support paging area
   update related signaling by means of mapping appropriate L2 signaling
   to IP paging area update signaling, which is to be sent to the
   responsible TA function.

   In general, access technology specific dormant mode and paging
   support should be assumed to be present and is recommended to be
   used. This section of the DMHA framework document describes the
   functions to allow for this mapping, but appropriate design of paging
   attendant functions for individual access technologies is out of the
   scope of this document.

   Some further hints on technology specific support can be found in
   Appendix C.

   In case of not getting support from access technologies' L2, there
   are proposals for enhanced IP paging approaches on the access link.
   These approaches are based on multicast addressing or solicited node
   multicast addressing, as well as on slotted modes to allow a dormant
   mobile terminal to shut down its interface activities periodically.

   L3 slotted mode approach is not evaluated in this document for the
   following reasons.  First, L3 slotted mode might improve power saving
   performance of dormant hosts, but will not reduce IP signaling
   traffic in the last hop subnet. Technology specific paging on the
   access link should be utilized as much as possible when aiming at
   both saving power and IP signaling traffic. Second, L3 slotted mode
   needs more investigation on possible and required accuracy levels of
   synchronization, requirements on IP subnet design (including
   security) to realize the accuracy levels of synchronization and
   implementation costs. Of course, the discussed and proposed framework
   allows for the deployment of L3 slotted mode, but its benefit is
   expected to be less compared to the cost of design and implementation
   work for such an approach.



8.2  Addressing of core components



Liebsch, Ohba, Zhang                                           [Page 16]

INTERNET-DRAFT A framework for Dormant Mode Host Alerting September 2002


   Tbd.

8.3  Addressing of last-hop components

   Tbd.


9.  Signaling transport


   Since battery consumption of hosts is a common issue for both IPv4
   and IPv6 nodes, it is necessary that DMHA protocol supports both
   IPv4 and IPv6. There are two approaches for defining DMHA transport.

   First approach is to define a single protocol that is commonly used
   for both IPv4 and IPv6.  This is equivalent to defining a single
   DMHA protocol above IP layer (e.g, UDP), where minimum IP version
   specific information such as packet filtering information might be
   allowed to be carried in the message.

   Second approach is to define separate protocols for IPv4 and IPv6.
   There are following IPv4 specific candidates for DHMA protocol
   transport.

   o Defining new ICMPv4 types

   o Defining new Mobile IPv4 [6] extensions
     information.

   There are following IPv6 specific candidates for DHMA protocol
   transport.

   o Defining new ICMPv6 types

   o Defining new Mobile IPv6 messages and/or mobility options in
     Mobility Header [7]

   o Defining new IPv6 Destination Options. The defined IPv6 Destination
     Option could be piggybacked in any packets including data packets.

     There is another approach in which the first two approaches are
     combined, i.e., using a common transport for both IPv4 and IPv6 for
     DMHA message exchange among DMHA agents, while applying a separate
     transport for IPv4 and IPv6 for DMHA message exchange between host
     and DMHA agent.

     Basically, higher layer transport is suitable for commonality while
     lower layer transport is suitable for optimization in terms of
     coupling with other protocol such as Mobile IP. However, the actual
     protocol design must also consider security characteristics when
     choosing DMHA signaling transport.  DMHA security discussion is



Liebsch, Ohba, Zhang                                           [Page 17]

INTERNET-DRAFT A framework for Dormant Mode Host Alerting September 2002


     described in section "Security support".



10.  Security support


10.1  Security threat categories


   DMHA security threats are described in [2,8].  There are basically
   two types of attacks related to DMHA.  Note that some of the
   described attacks can be combined to organize two-party attacks [8].

   o Category 1 attacks: Attacks that can be avoided or mitigated by
     authenticating and/or encrypting signaling packets used for DMHA.
     Category 1 attacks include:

       - bogus paging registration messages (detailed explanation
         is TBD)

       - bogus paging area update messages (detailed explanation
         is TBD)

       - bogus paging request messages (detailed explanation is TBD)

       - bogus paging area advertisement messages (detailed explanation
         is TBD)

       Note that it is impossible for dormant hosts to avoid receiving
       and partially processing bogus paging request and bogus paging
       area advertisement messages, however, it is possible to mitigate
       the attacks by discarding received messages immediately when
       integrity check fails.  Considering buttery power consumption of
       dormant hosts, the integrity check applied for those messages
       should be light weight as much as possible.

   o Category 2 attacks: Attacks that cannot be solved by authenticating
     or encrypting signaling packets used for DMHA.  Category 2 attacks
     include:


       - paging trigger packets sent from malicious correspondent nodes,
       which would result in DoS amplification by (i) producing paging
       request messages to be widecast in candidate paging area(s) in
       which the target dormant host is expected to be located, (ii)
       forming a large sized queue at DMA until the target dormant host
       is awaken and (iii) awake the target dormant host to drain its
       battery.  (Avoiding this attack is not possible since DMA cannot
       make a distinction between malicious and legitimate correspondent
       nodes.)



Liebsch, Ohba, Zhang                                           [Page 18]

INTERNET-DRAFT A framework for Dormant Mode Host Alerting September 2002


       - malicious dormant hosts that do not respond to paging request
       messages. This includes the case in which a host performs paging
       registration or paging area update with incorrect paging area
       information.  (Avoiding this attack is not possible since PA
       cannot make a distinction between malicious and legitimate
       dormant hosts.)

       - malicious nodes that make active mode hosts consume batteries
       and prevent from entering dormant mode, by continuously sending
       data packets.  (Avoiding this attack is not possible since active
       mode hosts cannot make a distinction between malicious and
       legitimate senders.)



10.2  Consideration for Category 1 attacks



10.2.1  Candidate security mechanisms for DMHA


   One way to secure IP paging signaling packets is to use IPsec [9]. An
   IPsec security association (SA) is identified based on the peers' IP
   addresses, security protocol (AH or ESP) and Security Parameter Index
   (SPI) [9]. Therefore, if a peer changes its IP address, a new IPsec
   SA needs to be established. With virtually any IP paging protocol,
   after establishing an IPsec SA with a network agent, a dormant mobile
   may change the IP address it uses to communicate with the agent. For
   example, a mobile may move into a different IP subnet where it may:

     Need to receive acknowledgements to its L3 Location Updates, if a
     paging algorithm requires to know a mobile's precise current
     location area, OR


     Need a new IP address to send IP packets to outside the local IP
     subnet (e.g., to perform location update) if the local access IP
     router implements packet filtering that will discard outgoing
     packets if the source IP address is not part of the address space
     in the local subnet.

   Establishing a new IPsec SA requires Diffie-Hellman key exchange [10]
   in which intensive exponential computation is performed. This can
   lead to heavy battery consumption. Furthermore, establishing an IPsec
   SA requires at least three message round-trips that will increase
   signaling delay. Therefore, IPsec does not seem appropriate for
   securing IP paging protocols.

   Otherwise, if the IPsec security association could be based on a
   static identifier, e.g. a common paging identifier to be unique



Liebsch, Ohba, Zhang                                           [Page 19]

INTERNET-DRAFT A framework for Dormant Mode Host Alerting September 2002


   across the borders of the registered paging area as long as the
   mobile terminal is dormant, establishment of a new SA could be
   avoided in case of the mobile changes it's IP address. This is
   basically an issue of implementation and would allow IPsec mechanisms
   to be deployed for authentication and encryption without accessing
   any key distribution center or other mechanisms for the establishment
   of a new SA while a mobile is dormant.

   When Mobile IP (v4 or v6) is used for mobility management,
   establishment of a new IPsec SA may be avoided if a paging protocol
   entity sends signaling packets destined to a mobile to the mobile's
   Mobile IP Home Address, which does not change as the mobile moves
   about.  However, in order for the mobile to receive these packets in
   a visited IP subnet, the mobile would have to first obtain a new
   local Care-of Address, transition into full active mode and perform
   mobility binding with its Home Agent each time it moves into a new L3
   Location Area. This could result in a signaling cost that is
   comparable to placing the TA on the Home Agent.


   For other cases, it would be better to consider using a security
   mechanism that builds security associations based on stable
   identifiers that do not change while the mobile moves about, but
   allows mobiles to use dynamically changing local IP addresses to
   receive packets without having to perform mobility binding.

   One choice of stable identifier is Cryptographically Generated
   Address (CGA) [11]. A CGA contains a part of an IP address (i.e.,
   lower 64-bit of an IPv6 address) that is cryptographically generated
   based on public key cryptography. This part of the IP address will be
   assigned the same value by the sending entity regardless wherever the
   sending entity connects to the network. Using CGA, a signaling packet
   carries a Message Integrity Check (MIC) field calculated for the data
   to send as well as the sender's public key (the public key is
   necessary only in the first message exchange). The cryptographically
   generated address will be specified as the source IP address of the
   signaling packet so that the receiver can authenticate the sender's
   IP address as well as the data by using the attached public key.
   However, since CGA depends on a particular address structure and
   address assignment scheme, it cannot be applied if the address
   structure or address assignment scheme is different.  For example,
   CGA is difficult to apply if the entire part of an IP address is
   assigned by the network.

   Another choice is to use higher layer security mechanisms in which
   stable identifier is defined.  Use of TLS [12], or defining
   authentication field within DMHA signaling message payload [13]
   matches this approach.


10.2.2  Establishing an SA



Liebsch, Ohba, Zhang                                           [Page 20]

INTERNET-DRAFT A framework for Dormant Mode Host Alerting September 2002


   SAs that are used for avoiding or mitigating Category 1 attacks can
   be established either statically or dynamically.  Static SAs could be
   applicable for small sized networks only, where scalability is not
   necessarily required for key management.  Dynamic SAs would be
   necessary for other cases.  There are following ways to dynamically
   establish a SA between host and DMHA agent, or between two DMHA
   agents.

   o Establishing an SA based on strong authentication (i.e., by using
   some other pre-shared SA or using PKI)

     - IKE[10] (mostly used for establishing IPsec SAs)

     - AAA[14,15] with appropriate key distribution mechanisms (tied
       with client authentication)

     - Kerberos[16] (tied with client authentication)


   o Establishing an SA based on weak authentication

     - CGA[11]

   o Purpose Built Key approach

   The idea of this mechanism is to allow the establishment of a SA for
   a specific function (like dormant mode and paging). When this
   function is not required anymore (after a mobile has been paged and
   re-activated), the security association is deleted.  In case of
   paging, a key could be generated before a mobile enters the dormant
   mode and be kept on the mobile terminal as well as on paging relevant
   nodes within the network as a shared secret. The association to an
   individual mobile terminal should be identified uniquely by means of
   a static identifier, which could be a proprietary paging related
   identifier or a mobility management related static identifier (e.g.
   the home address in Mobile IP). Static means, that it should not
   change while the respective mobile terminal is dormant. Further, it
   should be avoided, that validity of this identifier is based on a
   lifetime, which is to be refreshed while being dormant. The validity
   should expire after a successful paging process and after the mobile
   terminal has been fully re-activated.

   As an option, the generation and exchange of the PBK could be coupled
   with the IP paging protocol procedures.


10.3  Consideration for Category 2 attacks


   For paging trigger packets sent from malicious correspondent nodes,
   the only way to solve this problem is packet filtering. Ingress



Liebsch, Ohba, Zhang                                           [Page 21]

INTERNET-DRAFT A framework for Dormant Mode Host Alerting September 2002


   filtering or packet filtering at access routers through which
   correspondent nodes are connected to the Internet is effective for
   blind masquerade attacks by which an attacker randomly changes the
   source IP address fields of packets used for the attack. For attacks
   from a malicious correspondent node that has a correct IP address
   assigned at the connected subnet, packet filtering at DMA as
   described in "Filtering for DMHA" would be effective for attackers
   who are not aware of what types of packets trigger paging.

   For attacks from malicious dormant hosts that do not respond to
   paging request messages, adaptive paging timeout mechanism could be
   effective in which the paging timeout value becomes small as the
   number of paging failure increases. In addition, validity check for
   paging area information contained in paging registration and paging
   area update messages against the host's actual location would be
   necessary.

   For attacks from malicious nodes that make active mode hosts consume
   batteries by continuously sending data packets, the target host can
   enter a low power mode when it receives a large amount of unimportant
   packets, as is described in [8].


11.  Availability

   Availability is an issue to be addressed and to be taken into account
   already before the actual design of the architecture and protocol for
   IP paging is done. To allow for efficient introduction of redundancy
   and deployment of mechanisms for fail-over handling, this should be
   taken into consideration when taking decisions on distributing or co-
   locating stateful entities.


11.1  Related nodes

   With regard to IP paging, this issue is mainly related to the
   Tracking Agent functional entity as well as to the DMA functional
   entity.

   o DMA co-located with TA

   When having the DMA co-located with the TA, the same database could
   be accessed to check for individual registered mobile terminals'
   entries. This requires the registration of the node implementing the
   DMA to allow reception of paging trigger packets at the DMA, as
   discussed in section 7.1.1. Otherwise, such a configuration allows
   efficient management of redundancy, since less stateful entities are
   to be mirrored. Furthermore, appropriate protocols for fail-over
   handling could manage redundant nodes easier.

   o Separated and distributed DMA(s) from TA



Liebsch, Ohba, Zhang                                           [Page 22]

INTERNET-DRAFT A framework for Dormant Mode Host Alerting September 2002


   Such a configuration requires distribution of DMAs within the network
   or on a domain's last-hop subnets, as discussed in 7.1.2. A protocol
   is to be deployed between distributed DMAs and an individual TA
   function to coordinate registries. Both functions, TA as well as
   distributed DMAs, have to keep and manage states for individual
   registered dormant mobile terminals. Dependent on the network
   topology, multiple DMAs keep the same registry for an individual
   mobile terminal.

11.2  Evaluated mechanisms

   To be done.

11.3  Proposed solution

   To be done.


A REFERENCES

   [1]  J. Kempf, "Dormant Mode Host Alerting Problem Statement",
        RFC 3132, June 2001

   [2]  J. Kempf et al., "Requirements and Functional Architecture for
        an IP Host Alerting Protocol", RFC 3154, August 2001.

   [3]  J. Kempf et al., "Dormant Mode Host Alerting (DMHA) Protocol
        Assessment",
        draft-ietf-seamoby-paging-protocol-assessment-01.txt,
        work in progress, February 2002

   [4]  C. Rose / R. Yates, Ensemble Polling Strategies for Increased
        Paging Capacity in Mobile Communication Networks, ACM Journal
        of Wireless Networks, vol. 3, no. 2, pp.159--167, 1997

   [5]  W.-S. Wong / V.M. Leung, Location Management for Next-
        Generation Personal Communication Networks, IEEE Network,
        Sept. 2000

   [6]  C. Perkins, "IP Mobility Support for IPv4", RFC 3344,
        August 2002.

   [7]  D. Johnson, et al, "Mobility Support in IPv6",
        draft-ietf-mobileip-ipv6-17.txt, work in progress.

   [8]  P. Mutaf and C. Castelluccia, "IP Paging Threat Analysis",
        draft-mutaf-paging-threats-00.txt, work in progress,
        February 2002.

   [9]  S. Kent and R. Atkinson, "Security Architecture for the Internet
        Protocol", RFC 2401, November 1998.



Liebsch, Ohba, Zhang                                           [Page 23]

INTERNET-DRAFT A framework for Dormant Mode Host Alerting September 2002


   [10] D. Harkins and D. Carrel et. al., "The Internet Key Exchange
        (IKE)", RFC 2409, November 1998.

   [11] G. Montenegro and C. Castelluccia, "SUCV Identifiers and
        Addresses", Internet-Draft, draft-montenegro-sucv-02.txt,
        work in progress, November 2001.

   [12] T. Dierks, et al., "The TLS Protocol Version 1.0", RFC 2246,
        January 1999.

   [13] T. Zhang, et al., "A Flexible and Scalable IP Paging Protocol",
        to appear in IEEE Globecom 2002.

   [14] C. Rigney, et al., "Remote Authentication Dial In User Service
        (RADIUS)", RFC 2865, June 2000.

   [15] P. Calhoun, et al., "Diameter Base Protocol", Internet-Draft,
        work in progress, June 2002.

   [16] J. Kohl, et al., "The Kerberos Network Authentication Service
        (V5)", RFC 1510, Semptember 1993.

   [17] "Wireless LAN Medium Access Control (MAC) and Physical
         Layer (PHY) specifications", IEEE Std 802.11,
         June 1997.





























Liebsch, Ohba, Zhang                                           [Page 24]

INTERNET-DRAFT A framework for Dormant Mode Host Alerting September 2002


B AUTHOR'S ADDRESS

      Marco Liebsch
      NEC Network Laboratories Europe
      Adenauerplatz 6, 69115 Heidelberg
      Germany

      Phone: +49 (0)6221 13708-11
      Fax:   +49 (0)6221 13708-28

      E-mail: marco.liebsch@ccrle.nec.de


      Yoshihiro Ohba
      Toshiba America Research, Inc.
      P.O. Box 136
      Convent Station, NJ 07961-0136
      USA

      Phone: +1 973 829 5174
      Fax:   +1 973 829 5601

      E-mail: yohba@tari.toshiba.com


      Tao Zhang
      Telcordia Technologies
      445 South Street, Room 1J-214B
      Morristown, New Jersey 07960
      USA

      Phone: +1 973 829 4539

      E-mail: tao@research.telcordia.com




















Liebsch, Ohba, Zhang                                           [Page 25]

INTERNET-DRAFT A framework for Dormant Mode Host Alerting September 2002


Appendix C Overview on access technologies

Appendix C.1 802.11 Power Management

   The power management capability of IEEE 802.11 [17] for an
   infrastructure network can be summarized as follows. A station
   changing Power Management mode informs the Access Point (AP) of this
   fact using the Power Management bits in the Frame Control field of
   the transmitted MAC frames. An AP periodically broadcasts beacon
   signals to provide time synchronization information and inform
   stations in Power Save mode of arriving frames. A station uses the
   time synchronization information received from the AP to determine
   when it should wake up periodically from Power Save mode. The AP
   buffers the MAC frames destined to the station in Power Save mode and
   transmit them at designated times.

   Unicast frames destined to a host in Power Save mode are transmitted
   by the AP and received by the station in different ways from
   broadcast/multicast frames. With every beacon transmission, the AP
   informs each station in Power Save mode of the unicast frames
   buffered by the AP for the station and whether these frames are to be
   sent to the station during a content-free or a contention time
   period. If a unicast frame is to be sent in a contention period, the
   station will poll the AP to receive the unicast frame. If a frame is
   to be sent during a contention-free period, the station will not poll
   the AP but will instead remain active until the frame is received or
   the contention-free period ends.

   The AP notifies the stations of the existence of broadcast/multicast
   frames only via selected beacons periodically and the
   broadcast/multicast frames are sent immediately after these beacons.

   By utilizing the timing differences for multicast/broadcast frames
   and unicast frames, three different dormant modes can be realized in
   the single Power Save mode.

   o All Mode: Both unicast and multicast/broadcast frames are received.

   o Unicast Only Mode: Only unicast frames are received.

   o Multicast Only Mode: Only multicast/broadcast frames are received.

   The dormancy levels of Unicast Only Mode and Multicast Only Mode are
   higher than that of All Mode. Unicast Only Mode is effective in terms
   of battery saving especially for a host connecting to the network
   where broadcast/multicast traffic is high and most of the
   broadcast/multicast traffic is not important to the dormant station.
   On the other hand, there are also important broadcast/multicast
   frames that need to be received by the dormant Host in order to to
   receive incoming SIP calls.  One example is ARP REQUEST packets which
   are broadcast by a node in the last hop subnet in order to obtain the



Liebsch, Ohba, Zhang                                           [Page 26]

INTERNET-DRAFT A framework for Dormant Mode Host Alerting September 2002


   MAC address for an IP address of the host. Thus, a mechanism would be
   necessary for converting a particular broadcast/multicast MAC frames
   to a unicast MAC frame when the dormant host is operating in Unicast
   Only Mode.


















































Liebsch, Ohba, Zhang                                           [Page 27]
