Internet Engineering Task Force                                J. Border
INTERNET-DRAFT                                    Hughes Network Systems
                                                                 M. Kojo
                                                  University of Helsinki
                                                              Jim Griner
                                              NASA Glenn Research Center
                                                           G. Montenegro
                                                  Sun Microsystems, Inc.
                                                          March 10, 2000
                     Performance Enhancing Proxies
                       draft-ietf-pilc-pep-02.txt

Status of This Memo

   The document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with all
   of the provisions of Section 10 of RFC 2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Intenet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   Distribution of this draft is unlimited.  Comments on this draft
   should be sent to the authors or to the PILC mailing list at
   pilc@grc.nasa.gov.  This draft expires on September 10, 2000.

Abstract

   This document provides a high level overview of Performance Enhancing
   Proxies. Different types of Performance Enhancing Proxies are
   described as well as the mechanisms used to improve performance. In
   addition, motivations for their development and use are described
   along with some the consequences of using them, especially in the
   context of the Internet.






Expires September 10, 2000                                      [Page 1]







INTERNET DRAFT        Performance Enhancing Proxies           March 2000


Table of Contents

1 Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
2 Types of Performance Enhancing Proxies . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
2.1 Layering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
2.1.1 Transport Layer PEPs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
2.1.2 Application Layer PEPs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
2.2 Distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
2.3 Implementation Symmetry  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
2.4 Split Connections  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
2.5 Transparency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
3. PEP Mechanisms  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
3.1 TCP ACK Handling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
3.1.1 TCP ACK Spacing  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
3.1.2 Local TCP Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
3.1.3 Local TCP Retransmissions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
3.2 Tunneling  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
3.3 Compression  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
3.4 Handling Periods of Link Disconnection with TCP  . . . . . . . .  12
3.5 Priority-based Multiplexing  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
3.6 Other Link Specific Enhancements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
3.6.1 Protocol Booster Mechanisms  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
3.6.2 TCP ACK Filtering and Reconstruction . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
3.6.3 Other Possible Mechanisms  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
4 Implications of Using PEPs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
4.1 The End-to-end Argument  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
4.1.1 Security . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
4.1.2 Fate Sharing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
4.1.3 End-to-end Reliability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
4.1.4 End-to-end Failure Diagnostics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  18
4.2 Asymmetric Routing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  18
4.3 Mobile Hosts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  18
4.4 Other Implications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  18
4.4.1 Scalability  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
4.4.2 Multi-Homing Environments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
4.4.3 QoS Transparency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
4.4.4 Others . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
5 PEP Environment Examples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
5.1 VSAT Environments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
5.1.1 VSAT Network Characteristics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  20
5.1.2 VSAT Network PEP Implementations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  21
5.1.3 VSAT Network PEP Motivation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  22
5.2 W-WAN Environments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  23
5.2.1 W-WAN Network Characteristics  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  23
5.2.2 W-WAN PEP Implementations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  24
5.2.2.1 Mowgli System  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  24
5.2.2.2 Wireless Application Protocol (WAP)  . . . . . . . . . . . .  26



Expires September 10, 2000                                      [Page 2]







INTERNET DRAFT        Performance Enhancing Proxies           March 2000


5.3 W-LAN Environments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  27
5.3.1 W-LAN Network Characteristics  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  27
5.3.2 W-LAN PEP Implementations: Snoop . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  28
6 Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  30
7 Appendix - PEP Terminology Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  31
7.1 Definitions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  31
8 Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  33
9 References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  33
10 Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  37
11 Full Copyright Statement  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  38









































Expires September 10, 2000                                      [Page 3]







INTERNET DRAFT        Performance Enhancing Proxies           March 2000


1 Introduction


   The Transmission Control Protocol [RFC0793] (TCP) is used as the
   transport layer protocol by many Internet and intranet applications.
   However, in certain environments, TCP and other higher layer protocol
   performance is limited by the link characteristics of the
   environment. [Karn99] discusses various link layer design
   considerations that should be taken into account when designing a
   link layer service that is intended to support the Internet
   protocols. Such design choices may have a significant influence on
   the performance and efficiency of the Internet. However, not all link
   characteristics, for example, high latency, can be compensated for by
   choices in the link layer design. And, the cost of compensating for
   some link characteristics may be prohibitive for some technologies. A
   Performance Enhancing Proxy (PEP) is used to improve the performance
   of the Internet protocols on network paths where native performance
   suffers due to characteristics of a link or subnetwork on the path.

   This document does not intend to advocate use of PEPs in general. On
   the contrary, we believe that the end-to-end principle in designing
   Internet protocols should be retained as the prevailing approach and
   PEPs should be used only in specific environments and circumstances
   where end-to-end mechanisms providing similar performance
   enhancements are not available. In any environment where one might
   consider employing PEP for improved performance, an end user (or, in
   some cases, the responsible network administrator) should be aware of
   the PEP and the choice of employing PEP functionality should be under
   the control of the end user, especially if employing the PEP would
   interfere with end-to-end usage of IP layer security mechanisms or
   otherwise have undesirable implications in some circumstances. This
   would allow the user to choose end-to-end IP at all times but, of
   course, without performance enhancements that employing the PEP may
   yield.

   The remainder of this document is organized as follows. Section 2
   provides an overview of different kinds of PEP implementations.
   Section 3 discusses some of the mechanisms which PEPs may employ in
   order to improve performance. Section 4 discusses some of the
   implications with respect to using PEPs, especially in the context of
   the global Internet. Finally, Section 5 discusses some example
   environments where PEPs are used: satellite very small aperture
   terminal (VSAT) environments, mobile wireless WAN (W-WAN)
   environments and wireless LAN (W-LAN) environments. A summary of
   PEP terminology is included in an appendix (Section 7).

   NOTE: This is a working draft and it may fail to cover many important
         aspects related to PEPs. In particular, this version does not



Expires September 10, 2000                                      [Page 4]







INTERNET DRAFT        Performance Enhancing Proxies           March 2000


         necessarily list all the possible implications of using PEPs
         nor does the included text on each of the implications cover
         all the aspects related to the particular implication.
         Suggestions to improve the text are solicited.


2 Types of Performance Enhancing Proxies

   There are many types of Performance Enhancing Proxies. Different
   types of PEPs are used in different environments to overcome
   different link characteristics which affect protocol performance.
   Note that enhancing performance is not necessarily limited in scope
   to throughput. Other performance related aspects, like usability of a
   link, may also be addressed. For example, [M-TCP] addresses the issue
   of keeping TCP connections alive during periods of disconnection in
   wireless networks.

   The following sections describe some of the key characteristics which
   differentiate different types of PEPs.


2.1 Layering

   In principle, a PEP implementation may function at any protocol layer
   but typically it functions at one or two layers only. In this
   document we focus on PEP implementations that function at the
   transport layer or at the application layer as such PEPs are most
   commonly used to enhance performance over links with problematic
   characteristics. It should also be noted that some PEP
   implementations operate across several protocol layers by exploiting
   the protocol information and possibly modifying the protocol
   operation at more than one layer. For such a PEP it may be difficult
   to define at which layer(s) it exactly operates on.


2.1.1 Transport Layer PEPs

   Transport layer PEPs operate at the transport level. They may be
   aware of the type of application being carried by the transport layer
   but, at most, only use this information to influence their behaviour
   with respect to the transport protocol; they do not modify the
   application protocol in any way, but let the application protocol
   operate end-to-end. Most transport layer PEP implementations interact
   with TCP. Such an implementation is called a TCP Performance
   Enhancing Proxy (TCP PEP). For example, in an environment where ACKs
   may bunch together, a TCP proxy may be used to simply modify the ACK
   spacing in order to improve performance. On the other hand, in an
   environment with a large bandwidth*delay product, a TCP proxy may be



Expires September 10, 2000                                      [Page 5]







INTERNET DRAFT        Performance Enhancing Proxies           March 2000


   used to alter the behaviour of the TCP connection by generating local
   acknowledgements to TCP data segments in order to improve the
   connection's throughput.

   (The term TCP spoofing is sometimes used synonymously for TCP PEP
   functionality. However, the term TCP spoofing more accurately
   applies to only a subset of TCP PEP implementations.)


2.1.2 Application Layer PEPs

   Application layer PEPs operate above the transport layer. Today,
   different kinds of application layer proxies are widely used in the
   Internet. Such proxies include Web caches and relay Mail Transfer
   Agents (MTA) and they typically try to improve performance or service
   availability and reliability in general and in a way which is
   applicable in any environment but they do not necessarily include any
   optimizations that are specific to certain link characteristics.

   Application layer PEPs, on the other hand, can be implemented to
   improve application protocol as well as transport layer performance
   with respect to a particular application being used with a particular
   type of link. An application layer PEP may have the same
   functionality as the corresponding regular proxy for the same
   application (e.g., relay MTA or Web caching proxy) but extended with
   link-specific optimizations of the application protocol operation.

   Some application protocols employ extraneous round trips, overly
   verbose headers and/or inefficient header encoding which may have a
   significant impact on performance, in particular, with long delay and
   slow links. This unnecessary overhead can be reduced, in general or
   for a particular type of link, by using an application layer PEP in
   an intermediate node. Some examples of application layer PEPs which
   have been shown to improve performance on slow wireless WAN links are
   described in [LHKR96] and [CTC+97].


2.2 Distribution

   A PEP implementation may be integrated, i.e., it comprises a single
   PEP component implemented within a single node, or distributed, i.e.,
   it comprises two or more PEP components, typically implemented in
   multiple nodes. An integrated PEP implementation represents a single
   point at which performance enhancement is applied. For example, a
   single PEP component might be implemented to provide impedance
   matching at the point where wired and wireless links meet.

   A distributed PEP implementation is generally used to surround a



Expires September 10, 2000                                      [Page 6]







INTERNET DRAFT        Performance Enhancing Proxies           March 2000


   particular link for which performance enhancement is desired. For
   example, a PEP implementation for a satellite connection may be
   distributed between two PEPs located at each end of the satellite
   link.


2.3 Implementation Symmetry

   A PEP implementation may be symmetric or asymmetric. Symmetric PEPs
   use identical behaviour in both directions, i.e. the actions taken by
   the PEP occur independent from which interface a packet is received.
   Asymmetric PEPs operate differently in each direction. The direction
   can be defined in terms of the link (e.g., from a central site to a
   remote site) or in terms of protocol traffic (e.g., the direction of
   TCP data flow, often called the TCP data channel, or the direction of
   TCP ACK flow, often called the [TCP] ACK channel). An asymmetric PEP
   implementation is generally used at a point where the characteristics
   of the links on each side of the PEP differ or with asymmetric
   protocol traffic. For example, an asymmetric PEP might be placed at
   the intersection of wired and wireless networks or an asymmetric
   application layer PEP might be used for the request-reply type HTTP
   traffic.

   Whether a PEP implementation is symmetric or asymmetric is
   independent of whether the PEP implementation is integrated or
   distributed.  In other words, a distributed PEP implementation might
   operate symmetrically at each end of a link (i.e. the two PEPs
   function identically).  On the other hand, a distributed PEP
   implementation might operate asymmetrically, with a different PEP
   implementation at each end of the link.  Again, this usually is used
   with asymmetric links.  For example, for a link with an asymmetric
   amount of bandwidth available in each direction, the PEP on the end
   of the link forwarding traffic in the direction with a large amount
   of bandwidth might focus on locally acknowledging TCP traffic in
   order to use the available bandwidth.  At the same time, the PEP on
   the end of the link forwarding traffic in the direction with very
   little bandwidth might focus on reducing the amount of TCP
   acknowledgement traffic being forwarded across the link (to keep the
   link from congesting).


2.4 Split Connections

   A split connection TCP implementation terminates the TCP connection
   received from an end system and establishes a corresponding TCP
   connection to the other end system. In a distributed PEP
   implementation, this is typically done to allow the use of a third
   connection between two PEPs optimized for the link. This might be



Expires September 10, 2000                                      [Page 7]







INTERNET DRAFT        Performance Enhancing Proxies           March 2000


   a TCP connection optimized for the link or it might be another
   protocol, for example, a proprietary protocol running on top of UDP.
   Also, the distributed implementation might use a separate connection
   between the proxies for each TCP connection or it might multiplex the
   data from multiple TCP connections across a single connection between
   the PEPs.

   In an integrated PEP split connection TCP implementation, PEP again
   terminates the connection from one end system and originates a
   separate connection to the other end system. [I-TCP] documents an
   example of a single PEP split connection implementation.

   Many integrated PEPs use a split connection implementation in order
   to address a mismatch in TCP capabilities between two end systems.
   For example, the TCP window scaling option [RFC1323] can be used to
   extend the maximum amount of TCP data which can be "in flight" (i.e.,
   sent and awaiting acknowledgement). This is useful for filling a link
   which has a high bandwidth*delay product. If one end system is
   capable of using scaled TCP windows but the other is not, the end
   system which is not capable can set up its connection with a PEP on
   its side of the high bandwidth*delay link. The split connection PEP
   then sets up a TCP connection with window scaling over the link to
   the other end system.

   Split connection TCP implementations can effectively leverage TCP
   performance enhancements optimal for a particular link but which
   cannot necessarily be employed safely over the global Internet.

   Note that using split connection PEPs does not necessarily exclude
   simultaneous use of IP for end-to-end connectivity. If a split
   connection is managed per application or per connection and is under
   the control of the end user, the user can decide whether a particular
   TCP connection or application makes use of the split connection PEP
   or whether it operates end-to-end. When a PEP is employed on a last
   hop link, the end user control is relatively easy to implement.

   In effect, application layer proxies for TCP-based applications are
   split connection TCP implementations with end systems using PEPs as a
   service related to a particular application. Therefore, all transport
   (TCP) layer enhancements that are available with split connection TCP
   implementations can also be employed with application layer PEPs in
   conjunction with application layer enhancements.


2.5 Transparency

   Another key characteristic of a PEP is its degree of transparency.
   PEPs may operate totally transparently to the end systems, transport



Expires September 10, 2000                                      [Page 8]







INTERNET DRAFT        Performance Enhancing Proxies           March 2000


   endpoints, and/or applications involved (in a connection), requiring
   no modifications to the end systems, transport endpoints, or
   applications.

   On the other hand, a PEP implementation may require modifications to
   both ends in order to be used. In between, a PEP implementation may
   require modifications to only one of the ends involved. Either of
   these kind of PEP implementations is non-transparent, at least to
   the layer requiring modification.

   It is sometimes useful to think of the degree of transparency of a
   PEP implementation at four levels, transparency with respect to the
   end systems (network-layer transparent PEP), transparency with
   respect to the transport endpoints (transport-layer transparent PEP),
   transparency with respect to the applications (application-layer
   transparent PEP) and transparency with respect to the users. For
   example, a user who subscribes to a satellite Internet access service
   may be aware that the satellite terminal is providing a performance
   enhancing service even though the TCP/IP stack and the applications
   in the user's PC are not aware of the PEP which implements it.

   Note that the issue of transparency is not the same as the issue
   of maintaining the end-to-end semantics. For example, a PEP
   implementation which simply uses a TCP ACK spacing mechanism
   maintains the end-to-end semantics of the TCP connection while a
   split connection PEP implementation may not. Yet, both can be
   implemented transparently to the transport endpoints at both ends.
   The implications of not maintaining the end-to-end semantics, in
   particular the end-to-end semantics of TCP connections, are
   discussed in Section 4.


3. PEP Mechanisms

   An obvious key characteristic of a PEP implementation is the
   mechanism(s) it uses to improve performance. Some examples of PEP
   mechanisms are described in the following subsections. A PEP
   implementation might implement more than one of these mechanisms.


3.1 TCP ACK Handling

   Many TCP PEP implementations are based on TCP ACK manipulation. The
   handling of TCP acknowledgements can differ significantly between
   different TCP PEP implementations. The following subsections describe
   various TCP ACK handling mechanisms. Many implementations combine
   some of these mechanisms and possibly employ some additional
   mechanisms as well.



Expires September 10, 2000                                      [Page 9]







INTERNET DRAFT        Performance Enhancing Proxies           March 2000


3.1.1 TCP ACK Spacing

   Some TCP PEP implementations are concerned only with manipulating TCP
   acknowledgements. ACK spacing is used to smooth out the flow of TCP
   acknowledgements traversing a link in order to improve performance by
   eliminating bursts of TCP data segments [BPK97], [Part98].


3.1.2 Local TCP Acknowledgements

   In some PEP implementations, TCP data segments received by the PEP
   are locally acknowledged by the PEP. This is very useful over network
   paths with a large bandwidth*delay product as it speeds up TCP slow
   start and allows the sending TCP to quickly open up its congestion
   window.  Local acknowledgements are automatically employed with split
   connection TCP implementations.

   When local acknowledgements are used, the burden falls upon the TCP
   PEP to recover any data which is dropped after the PEP acknowledges
   it.


3.1.3 Local TCP Retransmissions

   A TCP PEP may locally retransmit data segments lost on the path
   between the TCP PEP and the receiving end system, thus aiming at
   faster recovery from lost data. In order to achieve this the TCP PEP
   may use acknowledgements arriving from the end system that receives
   the TCP data segments, along with appropriate timeouts, to determine
   when to locally retransmit lost data. TCP PEPs sending local
   acknowledgements to the sending end system, are required to employ
   local retransmissions towards the receiving end system.

   Some PEP implementations perform local retransmissions even though
   they do not use local acknowledgements to alter TCP connection
   performance. Basic Snoop [SNOOP] is a well know example of such a PEP
   implementation. Snoop caches TCP data segments it receives and
   forwards and then monitors the acknowledgements coming from the
   receiving TCP end system for duplicate acknowledgements (DUPACKs).
   When DUPACKs are received, Snoop locally retransmits the lost TCP
   data segments from its cache, suppressing the DUPACKs flowing to the
   sending TCP end system until acknowledgements for new data are
   received.  (See Section 5.3 for details.)








Expires September 10, 2000                                     [Page 10]







INTERNET DRAFT        Performance Enhancing Proxies           March 2000


3.2 Tunneling

  <Text in this subsection is subject to change>

   A Performance Enhancing Proxy may encapsulate messages to carry the
   messages across a particular link. PEP at the other end of the
   encapsulation tunnel removes the tunnel wrappers before final
   delivery to the receiving end system. A tunnel might be used by a
   distributed split connection TCP implementation as the means for
   connecting split connection PEPs. A tunnel might also be used to
   support forcing TCP connections which use asymmetric routing to go
   through the end points of a distributed PEP implementation.


3.3 Compression

   Many PEP implementations include support for one or more forms of
   compression. In some PEP implementations, compression may even be the
   only mechanism used for performance improvement. Compression reduces
   the number of bytes which need to be sent across a link. This is
   useful in general and can be very important for bandwidth limited
   links. Benefits of using compression include improved link efficiency
   and higher effective link utilization, reduced latency and improved
   interactive response time, decreased overhead and reduced packet loss
   rate over lossy links. These benefits are described in more detail in
   [DMKM99].

   Where appropriate, link layer compression is used. TCP and IP header
   compression are also frequently used with PEP implementations.
   [RFC1144] describes a widely deployed method for compressing TCP
   headers. Other header compression algorithms are described in
   [RFC2507], [RFC2508] and [RFC2509].

   Payload compression is also desirable and is increasing in importance
   with today's increased emphasis on Internet security. Network (IP)
   layer (and above) security mechanisms convert IP payloads into random
   bit streams which defeat applicable link layer compression mechanisms
   by removing or hiding redundant "information." Therefore, compression
   of the payload needs to be applied before security mechanisms are
   applied. [RFC2393] defines a framework where common compression
   algorithms can be applied to arbitrary IP segment payloads. However,
   [RFC2393] compression is not always applicable. Many types of IP
   payloads (e.g. images, audio, video and "zipped" files being
   transferred) are already compressed. And, when security mechanisms
   such as TLS [RFC2246] are applied above the network (IP) layer, the
   data is already encrypted (and possibly also compressed), again
   removing or hiding any redundancy in the payload. The resulting
   additional transport or network layer compression will compact only



Expires September 10, 2000                                     [Page 11]







INTERNET DRAFT        Performance Enhancing Proxies           March 2000


   headers, which are small, and possibly already covered by separate
   compression algorithms of their own.

   With application layer PEPs one can employ application-specific
   compression. In particular, with slow links any compression that
   effectively reduces transfer volume is tremendously useful. Typically
   an application-specific (or content-specific) compression mechanism
   is much more efficient than any generic compression mechanism. For
   example, a distributed Web PEP implementation may implement more
   efficient binary encoding of HTTP headers, or a PEP can employ lossy
   compression that reduces the image quality of inline-images on Web
   pages according to end user instructions, thus reducing the number of
   bytes transferred over the slow link and consequently the response
   time perceived by the user [LHKR96].


3.4 Handling Periods of Link Disconnection with TCP

   Periods of link disconnection or link outage are very common with
   some wireless links. During these periods, a TCP sender does not
   receive the expected acknowledgements. Upon expiration of the
   retransmit timer, this causes TCP to close its congestion window with
   all of the related drawbacks. A TCP PEP may monitor the traffic
   coming from the TCP sender towards the TCP receiver behind the
   disconnected link. The TCP PEP retains the last ACK, so that it can
   shut down the TCP sender's window by sending the last ACK with a
   window set to zero. Thus, the TCP sender will go into persist mode.

   To make this work in both directions with an integrated TCP PEP
   implementation, the TCP receiver behind the disconnected link must
   be aware of the current state of the connection and, in the event
   of a disconnection, it must be capable of freezing all timers.
   [M-TCP] implements such operation. Another possibility is that the
   disconnected link is surrounded by a distributed PEP pair.

   In split connection TCP implementations, a period of link
   disconnection can easily be hidden from the end host on the other
   side of PEP thus precluding the TCP connection from breaking even
   if the period of link disconnection lasts a very long time.
   Consequently, the proxy and its counterpart behind the disconnected
   link can employ a modified TCP version which retains the state and
   all unacknowledged data segments across the period of disconnection
   and then performs local recovery as the link is reconnected. The
   period of link disconnection may or may not be hidden from the
   application and user, depending upon what application the user is
   using the TCP connection for.





Expires September 10, 2000                                     [Page 12]







INTERNET DRAFT        Performance Enhancing Proxies           March 2000


3.5 Priority-based Multiplexing

   Implementing priority-based multiplexing of data over a slow
   (expensive) link may improve the usability of the link and
   performance for selected applications or connectios.

   A user behind a slow link would experience the link more feasible to
   use in case of simultaneous data transfers, if urgent data transfers
   (e.g., interactive connections) could have shorter response time
   (better performance) than less urgent transfers. This kind of
   operation can be controlled by assigning different priorities for
   different connections (or applications).

   In flight TCP segments of an end-to-end TCP connection (with low
   priority) can not be delayed for a long time. Otherwise, the TCP
   timer at the sending end would expire, resulting in suboptimal
   performance. A split connection PEP implementation allows a PEP in an
   intermediate node to reschedule freely the order in which it forwards
   data of different connections to the destination host behind the slow
   link. This can further be assisted, if the protocol stacks on both
   sides of the slow link implement priority based scheduling of
   connections.

   With such a PEP implementation together with user-controlled
   priorities the user can assign higher priority for some interactive
   connection(s) and in this way have much shorter response time for
   selected connections, even if there are simultaneous low priority
   bulk data transfers (which would in regular end-to-end operation eat
   almost all available bandwidth of the slow link). These low priority
   bulk data transfers would then proceed nicely during the idle periods
   of interactive connections, allowing the user to keep the slow and
   expensive link (e.g., wireless WAN) fully utilized.


3.6 Other Link Specific Enhancements

   < Editor's comment: the following subsections provide placeholders
   for describing other link specific enhancements. Any help is
   appreciated and contributions on these subjects are solicited. >


3.6.1 Protocol Booster Mechanisms

   A number of possible protocol booster mechanisms are described
   in [FMSBMR98].






Expires September 10, 2000                                     [Page 13]







INTERNET DRAFT        Performance Enhancing Proxies           March 2000


3.6.2 TCP ACK Filtering and Reconstruction

   < Editor's note: the upcoming text for this subsection is to be moved
   under the section 3.1. >

   On paths with highly asymmetric bandwidth the TCP ACKs flowing on the
   low-speed direction may get congested if the asymmetry ratio is high
   enough. This issue is discussed in [RFC2760] and in a companion PILC
   document on Implications of Network Asymmetry [BaPa99].


3.6.3 Other Possible Mechanisms

   < Editor's note: contributions describing other mechanisms are
   solicited. >


4 Implications of Using PEPs

   The following sections describe some of the implications of using
   Performance Enhancing Proxies.


4.1 The End-to-end Argument

   As indicated in [RFC1958], the end-to-end argument [SRC84] is one of
   the architectural principles of the Internet. The basic argument is
   that, as a first principle, certain required end-to-end functions can
   only be correctly performed by the end systems themselves. Most of
   the negative implications associated with using PEPs are related to
   the possibility of breaking the end-to-end semantics of connections.
   This is one of the main reasons why PEPs are not recommended for
   general use.

   As indicated in Section 2.5, not all PEP implementations break the
   end-to-end semantics of connections. Correctly designed PEPs do not
   attempt to replace any application level end-to-end function, but
   only attempt to add performance optimizations to a subpath of the
   end-to-end path between the application endpoints. Doing this can
   be consistent with the end-to-end argument.


4.1.1 Security


   The most detrimental negative implication of breaking the end-to-end
   semantics of a connection is that it disables end-to-end use of
   network (IP) layer security (IPsec) [RFC2401]. If, on the other hand,



Expires September 10, 2000                                     [Page 14]







INTERNET DRAFT        Performance Enhancing Proxies           March 2000


   IPsec is employed end-to-end, it precludes PEPs from working because
   they need to examine transport or application headers but encryption
   of IP packets via IPsec's ESP header (in either transport or tunnel
   mode) renders the TCP header and payload unintelligible to
   intermediate PEPs. However, if an end user can select end-to-end IP
   for the IPsec traffic and use a PEP for other traffic, the problem is
   considerably alleviated although the encrypted traffic is not subject
   to possible performance enhancements while the other traffic is.

   If a PEP implementation is non-transparent to the users and the
   users trust the PEP in the middle, IPsec can be used separately
   between each end system and PEP. However, in most cases this is an
   undesirable or unacceptable alternative as the end systems cannot
   trust PEPs in general. In addition, this is not as secure as
   end-to-end security. And, it can lead to potentially misleading
   security level assumptions by the end systems. If the two end systems
   negotiate different levels of security with the PEP, the end system
   which negotiated the stronger level of security may not be aware that
   a lower level of security is being provided for part of the
   connection. But, the PEP could be implemented to prevent this from
   happening by being smart enough to force the same level of security
   to each end system.

   With a transparent PEP implementation, it is difficult for the end
   systems to trust the PEP because they may not be aware of its
   existence. However, IPsec can be implemented between the two PEPs of
   a distributed PEP implementation. And, if the PEP implementation is
   non-transparent to the users, the users could configure their end
   systems to use PEPs as the end points of an IPsec tunnel.

   There is also research underway investigating the possibility of
   using multi-layer IP security.  [Zhang99] describes a method which
   allows TCP headers to be encrypted as one layer (with the PEPs in the
   path of the TCP connections included in the security associations
   used to encrypt the TCP headers) while the TCP payload is encrypted
   end-to-end as a separate layer.  This still involves trusting the
   PEP, but to a much lesser extent.  However, a drawback to this
   approach is that it adds a significant amount of complexity to the IP
   security implementation.  Given the existing complexity of IPsec,
   this drawback is a serious impediment to the standardization of the
   multi-layer IP security idea.

   Note that even when a PEP implementation does not break the
   end-to-end semantics of a connection, the PEP implementation may not
   be able to function in the presence of IPsec. For example, it is
   difficult to do ACK spacing if the PEP cannot reliably determine
   which IP packets contain ACKs of interest. In any case, the authors
   are currently not aware of any PEP implementations, transparent or



Expires September 10, 2000                                     [Page 15]







INTERNET DRAFT        Performance Enhancing Proxies           March 2000


   non-transparent, which provide support for end-to-end IPsec.

  In most cases, security applied above the transport layer can be used
  with PEPs, especially transport layer PEPs.


4.1.2 Fate Sharing

   Another important aspect of the end-to-end argument is fate sharing.
   If a failure occurs in the network, the ability of the connection to
   survive the failure depends upon how much state is being maintained
   on behalf of the connection in the network and whether the state is
   self-healing. If no connection specific state resides in the network
   or such state is self-healing as in case of regular end-to-end
   operation, then a failure in the network will break the connection
   only if there is no alternate path through the network between the
   end systems. And, if there is no path, both end systems can detect
   this. However, if the connection depends upon some state being stored
   in the network (e.g. in a PEP), then a failure in the network (e.g.
   the node containing a PEP crashes) causes this state to be lost,
   forcing the connection to terminate even if an alternate path through
   the network exists.

   The importance of this aspect of the end-to-end argument with respect
   to PEPs is very implementation dependent. Sometimes coincidentally
   but more often by design, PEPs are used in environments where there
   is no alternate path between the end systems and, therefore, a
   failure of the intermediate node containing a PEP would result in the
   termination of the connection in any case. And, even when this is not
   the case, the risk of losing the connection in the case of regular
   end-to-end operation may exist as the connection could break for some
   other reason, for example, a long enough link outage of a last-hop
   wireless link to the end host. Therefore, the users may choose to
   accept the risk of a PEP crashing in order to take advantage of the
   performance gains offered by the PEP implementation. Note that
   accepting the risk must be under the control of the user and the
   user must always have the option to choose end-to-end operation.


4.1.3 End-to-end Reliability

   Another aspect of the end-to-end argument is that of acknowledging
   the receipt of data end-to-end in order to achieve reliable
   end-to-end delivery of data. An application aiming at reliable
   end-to-end delivery must implement an end-to-end check and recovery
   at the application level. According to the end-to-end argument, this
   is the only possibility to correctly implement reliable end-to-end
   operation. Otherwise the application violates the end-to-end



Expires September 10, 2000                                     [Page 16]







INTERNET DRAFT        Performance Enhancing Proxies           March 2000


   argument. This also means that a correctly designed application can
   never fully rely on the transport layer (e.g., TCP) or any other
   communication subsystem to provide reliable end-to-end delivery.

   First, a TCP connection may break down for some reason and result in
   lost data that must be recovered at the application level. Second,
   the checksum provided by TCP may be considered inadequate, resulting
   in undetected (by TCP) data corruption [Pax99] and requiring an
   application level check for data corruption. Third, a TCP
   acknowledgement only indicates that data was delivered to the TCP
   implementation on the other end system. It does not guarantee that
   the data was delivered to the application layer on the other end
   system. Therefore, a well designed application must use an
   application layer acknowledgement to ensure end-to-end delivery of
   application layer data. Note that this does not diminish the value of
   a reliable transport protocol (i.e., TCP) as such a protocol allows
   efficient implementation of several essential functions (e.g.,
   congestion control) for an application. If a PEP implementation
   acknowledges application data prematurely (before the PEP receives
   an application ACK from the other endpoint), end-to-end reliability
   cannot be guaranteed. Typically, application layer PEPs do not
   acknowledge data prematurely.

   Some Internet applications do not necessarily operate end-to-end in
   their regular operation, thus abandoning any end-to-end reliability
   guarantee. For example, Internet email delivery often operates via
   relay MTAs (relay SMTP servers): an originating MTA (SMTP server)
   sends the mail message to a relay MTA that receives the mail message,
   stores it in non-volatile storage (e.g., on disk) and then sends an
   application level acknowledgement. The relay MTA then takes "full
   responsibility" for delivering the mail message to the destination
   SMTP server (maybe via another relay MTA); it tries to forward the
   message for a relatively long time (typically around 5 days). This
   scheme does not give a 100% guarantee of email delivery, but
   reliability is considered "good enough". An application layer PEP for
   this kind of an application may acknowledge application data (e.g.,
   mail message) without essentially decreasing reliability, as long as
   the PEP operates according to the same procedure as the regular proxy
   (e.g., relay MTA).

   Transport layer PEP implementations, including TCP PEPs, generally do
   not interfere with end-to-end application layer acknowledgements as
   they let applications operate end-to-end.








Expires September 10, 2000                                     [Page 17]







INTERNET DRAFT        Performance Enhancing Proxies           March 2000


4.1.4 End-to-end Failure Diagnostics

   - Implications due to PEPs breaking the end-to-end failure
     diagnostics.
     < Editor's note: contributions providing text are solicited >


4.2 Asymmetric Routing

   Deploying a PEP implementation requires that traffic to and from the
   end hosts be routed through the intermediate node(s) where PEPs
   reside. With some networks, this cannot be accomplished, or it might
   require that the intermediate node is located several hops away from
   the target link edge which in turn is unpractical in many cases and
   may result in non-optimal routing.


4.3 Mobile Hosts

   In mobile host environments where a PEP implementation is used to
   serve mobile hosts, additional problems are encountered as the PEP
   related state information should be transferred to the new PEP
   node during a handoff.

   When a mobile host moves, it is subject to handovers by the
   serving base station. If the base station acts as the intermediate
   node and home for the serving PEP, any state information that the
   PEP maintains and is required for continuous operation must be
   transferred to the new intermediate node to ensure continued
   operation of the connection. This requires extra work and causes
   overhead. If the mobile host moves to another IP network, routing
   to and from the mobile host may need to be changed to traverse the
   new PEP node.

   In most W-WAN wireless networks today, unlike W-LANs, the W-WAN base
   station does not provide the mobile host with the connection point
   to the wireline Internet (such base stations may not even have an
   IP stack). Instead, the W-WAN network takes care of the mobility
   and retains the connection point to the wireline Internet unchanged
   while the mobile host moves. Thus, PEP state handover is not required
   in most W-WANs when the host moves.


4.4 Other Implications

   The following subsections describe other implications of using PEPs.
   < Editor's note: text for the subsections to be added in later
     versions. >



Expires September 10, 2000                                     [Page 18]







INTERNET DRAFT        Performance Enhancing Proxies           March 2000


4.4.1 Scalability

   - PEPs require more work and therefore will always be (at least)
     one step behind routers. The higher the link bandwidth and
     the number of connections (packets) traversing through PEP
     is, more likely it is that performance becomes an issue.


4.4.2 Multi-Homing Environments

   - the effect of multi-homing environments
    < Editor's note: contributions providing text are solicited >


4.4.3 QoS Transparency

   - QoS transparency implications
    < Editor's note: contributions providing text are solicited >


4.4.4 Others

   - other possible implications
    < Editor's note: contributions addressing other implications and
      providing text are solicited >


5 PEP Environment Examples

   The following sections describe examples of environments where PEP is
   currently used to improve performance.  The examples are provided to
   illustrate the use of the various PEP types and PEP mechanisms
   described earlier in the document and to help illustrate the
   motivation for their development and use.


5.1 VSAT Environments

   Today, VSAT networks are implemented with geosynchronous satellites.
   VSAT data networks are typically implemented using a star topology. A
   large hub earth station is located at the center of the star with
   VSATs used at the remote sites of the network. Data is sent from the
   hub to the remote sites via an outroute. Data is sent from the remote
   sites to the hub via one or more inroutes. VSATs represent an
   environment with highly asymmetric links, with an outroute typically
   much larger than an inroute. (Multiple inroutes can be used with each
   outroute but any particular VSAT only has access to a single inroute
   at a time, making the link asymmetric.)



Expires September 10, 2000                                     [Page 19]







INTERNET DRAFT        Performance Enhancing Proxies           March 2000


   VSAT networks are generally used to implement private networks (i.e.
   intranets) for enterprises (e.g. corporations) with geographically
   dispersed sites. VSAT networks are rarely, if ever, used to implement
   Internet connectivity except at the edge of the Internet (i.e. as the
   last hop). Connection to the Internet for the VSAT network is usually
   implemented at the VSAT network hub site using appropriate firewall
   and (when necessary) NAT [RFC2663] devices.


5.1.1 VSAT Network Characteristics

   With respect to TCP performance, VSAT networks exhibit the following
   subset of the satellite characteristics documented in [RFC2488]:

      Long feedback loops

         Propagation delay from a sender to a receiver in a
         geosynchronous satellite network can range from 240 to 280
         milliseconds, depending on where the sending and receiving
         sites are in the satellite footprint.  This makes the round
         trip time just due to propagation delay at least 480
         milliseconds.  Queueing delay and delay due to shared channel
         access methods can sometimes increase the total delay up to
         on the order of a few seconds.

      Large bandwidth*delay products

         VSAT networks can support capacity ranging from a few kilobits
         per second up to multiple megabits per second.  When combined
         with the relatively long round trip time, TCP needs to keep a
         large number of packets "in flight" in order to fully utilize
         the satellite link.

      Asymmetric capacity

         As indicated above, the outroute of a VSAT network is usually
         significantly larger than an inroute.  Even though multiple
         inroutes can be used within a network, a given VSAT can only
         access one inroute at a time.  Therefore, the incoming
         (outroute) and outgoing (inroute) capacity for a VSAT is often
         very asymmetric.  As outroute capacity has increased in recent
         years, ratios of 400 to 1 or greater are becoming more and more
         common.  With a TCP maximum segment size of 1460 bytes and
         delayed acknowledgements [RFC1122] in use, the ratio of IP
         packet bytes for data to IP packet bytes for ACKs is only
         (3000 to 40) 75 to 1.  Thus, inroute capacity for carrying ACKs
         can have a significant impact on TCP performance. (The issue
         of asymmetric link impact on TCP performance is described in



Expires September 10, 2000                                     [Page 20]







INTERNET DRAFT        Performance Enhancing Proxies           March 2000


         more detail in [BaPa99].)

   With respect to the other satellite characteristics listed in
   [RFC2488], VSAT networks typically do not suffer from intermittent
   connectivity or variable round trip times.  Also, VSAT networks
   generally include a significant amount of error correction coding.
   This makes the bit error rate very low during clear sky conditions,
   approaching the bit error rate of a typical terrestrial network.  In
   severe weather, the bit error rate may increase significantly but
   such conditions are rare (when looked at from an overall network
   availability point of view) and VSAT networks are generally
   engineered to work during these conditions but not to optimize
   performance during these conditions.


5.1.2 VSAT Network PEP Implementations

   Performance Enhancing Proxies implemented for VSAT networks generally
   focus on improving throughput (for applications such as FTP and HTTP
   web page retrievals).  To a lesser degree, PEP implementations also
   work to improve interactive response time for small transactions.

   There is not a dominant PEP implementation used with VSAT networks.
   Each VSAT network vendor tends to implement their own version of PEP
   functionality, integrated with the other features of their VSAT
   product. [HNS] and [SPACENET] describe VSAT products with integrated
   PEP capabilities. There are also third party PEP implementations
   designed to be used with VSAT networks. These products run on nodes
   external to the VSAT network at the hub and remote sites. SatBooster
   [FLASH] and Venturi [FOURELLE] are examples of such products.
   VSAT network PEP implementations generally share the following
   characteristics:

      - They focus on improving TCP performance;

      - They use an asymmetric distributed implementation;

      - They use a split connection approach with local acknowledgements
        and local retransmissions;

      - They support some form of compression to reduce the amount of
        bandwidth required (with emphasis on saving inroute bandwidth).

   The key differentiators between VSAT network PEP implementations are:

      - The maximum throughput they attempt to support (mainly a
        function of the amount of buffer space they use);




Expires September 10, 2000                                     [Page 21]







INTERNET DRAFT        Performance Enhancing Proxies           March 2000


      - The protocol used over the satellite link.  Some implementations
        use a modified version of TCP while others use a proprietary
        protocol running on top of UDP;

      - The type of compression used.  Third party VSAT network PEP
        implementations generally focus on application (e.g. HTTP)
        specific compression algorithms while PEP implementations
        integrated into the VSAT network generally focus on link
        specific compression.

   PEP implementations integrated into a VSAT product are generally
   transparent to the end systems.  Third party PEP implementations used
   with VSAT networks usually require configuration changes in the
   remote site end systems to route TCP packets to the remote site
   proxies but do not require changes to the hub site end systems.  In
   some cases, the PEP implementation is actually integrated
   transparently into the end system node itself, using a "bump in the
   stack" approach. In all cases, the use of a PEP is non-transparent to
   the user, i.e. the user is aware when a PEP implementation is being
   used to boost performance.


5.1.3 VSAT Network PEP Motivation

   VSAT networks, since the early stages of their deployment, have
   supported the use of local termination of a protocol (e.g. SDLC and
   X.25) on each side of the satellite link to hide the satellite link
   from the applications using the protocol.  Therefore, when LAN
   capabilities were added to VSAT networks, VSAT customers expected
   and, in fact, demanded, the use of similar techniques for improving
   the performance of IP based traffic, in particular TCP traffic.

   As indicated in Section 5.1, VSAT networks are primarily used to
   implement intranets with Internet connectivity limited to and closely
   controlled at the hub site of the VSAT network.  Therefore, VSAT
   customers are not as affected (or at least perceive that they are not
   as affected) by the Internet related implications of using PEPs as
   are other technologies.  Instead, what is more important to VSAT
   customers is the optimization of the network.  And, VSAT customers,
   in general, prefer that the optimization of the network be done by
   the network itself rather than by implementing changes (such as
   enabling the TCP scaled window option) to their own equipment.  VSAT
   customers prefer to optimize their end system configuration for local
   communications related to their local mission critical functions and
   let the VSAT network hide the presence of the satellite link as much
   as possible.  VSAT network vendors have also been able to use PEP
   functionality to provide value added "services" to their customers
   such as extending the useful of life of older equipment which



Expires September 10, 2000                                     [Page 22]







INTERNET DRAFT        Performance Enhancing Proxies           March 2000


   includes older, "non-modern" TCP stacks.

   Of course, as the line between intranets and the Internet continues
   to fade, the implications of using PEPs start to become more
   significant for VSAT networks. For example, twelve years ago security
   was not a major concern because the equipment cost related to being
   able to intercept VSAT traffic was relatively high. Now, as
   technology has advanced, the cost is much less prohibitive.
   Therefore, because the use of PEP functionality in VSAT networks
   prevents the use of IPsec, customers must rely on the use of higher
   layer security mechanisms such as TLS or on proprietary security
   mechanisms implemented in the VSAT networks themselves (since
   currently many applications are incapable of making (or simply don't
   make) use of the standardized higher layer security mechanisms).
   This, in turn, affects the cost of the VSAT network as well as
   affects the ability of the customers to make use of Internet based
   capabilities.


5.2 W-WAN Environments

   In mobile wireless WAN (W-WAN) environments the wireless link is
   typically used as the last-hop link to the end user. W-WANs include
   such networks as GSM [GSM], GPRS [GPRS],[BW97], CDPD [CDPD], CDMA
   [CDMA], RichoNet, and PHS. Many of these networks, but not all, have
   been designed to provide mobile telephone voice service in the first
   place but include data services as well or they evolve from a mobile
   telephone network.


5.2.1 W-WAN Network Characteristics

   W-WAN links typically exhibit some combination of the following
   link characteristics:

   - low bandwidth (with some links the available bandwidth might be
     as low as a few hundred bits/sec)

   - high latency (minimum round-trip delay close to one second is
     not exceptional)

   - high BER resulting in frame or packet losses, or long variable
     delays due to local link-layer error recovery

   - some W-WAN links have a lot of internal buffer space which tend
     to accumulate data, thus resulting in increased round-trip delay
     due to long (and variable) queuing delays




Expires September 10, 2000                                     [Page 23]







INTERNET DRAFT        Performance Enhancing Proxies           March 2000


   - on some W-WAN links the users may share common channels for
     their data packet delivery which, in turn, may cause unexpected
     delays to the packet delivery of a user due to simultaneous use
     of the same channel resources by the other users

   - unexpected link disconnections (or intermittent link outages) may
     occur frequently and the pariod of disconnection may last a very
     long time

   - (re)setting link-connection up may take a long time (several tens
     of seconds or even minutes

   - W-WAN network typically takes care of terminal mobility: the
     connection point to the Internet is retained while the user
     moves with the mobile host

   - the use of most W-WAN links is expensive. Many of the service
     providers apply time-based charging.


5.2.2 W-WAN PEP Implementations


5.2.2.1 Mowgli System

   The Mowgli system [KRA94] is one of the early approaches to address
   the challenges induced by the problematic characteristics of low
   bandwidth W-WAN links.

   <How/What>

   The indirect approach used in Mowgli is not limited to a single layer
   as in many other split connection approaches, but it involves all
   protocol layers. The basic architecture is based on split TCP (also
   UDP is supported) together with full support for application layer
   proxies with distributed PEP approach. An application layer proxy
   pair may be added between a client and server, the agent (local
   proxy) on a mobile host and the proxy on an intermediate node that
   provides the mobile host with the connection to the wireline
   Internet. Such a pair may be either explicit or fully transparent to
   the applications, but it is, at all times, under the end-user
   control. In order to allow running legacy applications unmodified
   and without recompilation, the socket layer on the mobile host is
   slightly modified to connect the application to a local agent while
   retaining the original TCP/IP socket semantics.

   Two types of application layer agent-proxy pairs can be configured
   for mobile host application use. A generic pair can be used with any



Expires September 10, 2000                                     [Page 24]







INTERNET DRAFT        Performance Enhancing Proxies           March 2000


   application and it simply provides split transport service with some
   optional generic enhancements like compression. An
   application-specific pair can be retailed for any application or
   application group that can take leverage on the same enhancements. A
   good example of enhancements achieved with an application-specific
   proxy pair is the Mowgli WWW system [LAKLR95], [LHKR96].

   Mowgli provides also an option to replace the TCP/IP core protocols
   on the last-hop link with a custom protocol that is tuned for
   low-bandwidth W-WAN links [KRLKA97]. This protocol was designed to
   provide the same transport service with similar semantics as regular
   TCP and UDP provide, but use a different protocol implementation that
   can freely apply any appropriate protocol mechanisms without being
   constrained by the current TCP/IP packet format or protocol
   operation. As this protocol is required to operate over a single
   logical link only, it could partially combine the protocol control
   information and protocol operation of the link, network, and
   transport layers. In addition, the protocol can operate on top of a
   raw link, on top of PPP, on top of IP, or even on top of a single TCP
   connection. Furthermore, the protocol can be run in different
   operation modes which turn on or off certain protocol functions
   depending on the underlying link service. For example, if the
   underlying link service provides reliable data delivery, the checksum
   and the window-based error recovery can be turned off, thus reducing
   the protocol overhead; only a very simple recovery mechanism is
   needed to allow recovery from a unexpected link disconnection.

   Therefore, the protocol design was able to use extremely efficient
   header encoding (only 1-3 bytes per packet in a typical case), reduce
   the number of round trips significantly, and various features that
   are useful with low-bandwidth W-WAN links were easy to add. Such
   features include suspending the protocol operation over the periods
   of link disconnection or link outage together with fast start after
   the link becomes operational again, priority-based multiplexing of
   user data over the W-WAN link thus offering link capacity to
   interactive applications in a timely manner even in presence of
   bandwidth-intensive background transfers, and link-level flow control
   to prevent data from accumulating into the W-WAN link internal
   buffers.

   If desired, the regular TCP/IP transport, possibly with corresponding
   protocol modifications in TCP (and UDP) that would tune it more
   suitable for W-WAN links, can be employed on the last-hop link.

   <Why>

   - transfer volume must be reduced to make the Internet access usable,
     (long) periods of link disconnection must not abort active (bulk



Expires September 10, 2000                                     [Page 25]







INTERNET DRAFT        Performance Enhancing Proxies           March 2000


     data) transfers, slow W-WAN link should be efficiently shielded
     from excess traffic and the global (wired) Internet congestion,
     (all) applications can not be made mobility/W-WAN aware in short
     time frame or maybe ever, interactive traffic must be transmitted
     in a timely manner even if there are other simultaneous bandwidth
     intensive  (background) transfers, during the periods connection
     the link must be kept fully utilized due to expensive use, ...


5.2.2.2 Wireless Application Protocol (WAP)

   Many mobile wireless devices are power, memory, and processing
   constrained, and the communication links to these devices have lower
   bandwidth and less stable connections. These limitations led
   designers to develop the Wireless Application Protocol (WAP) that
   specifies an application framework and network protocols intended
   to work across differing narrow-band wireless network technologies
   bringing Internet content and advanced data services to low-end
   digital cellular phones and other mobile wireless terminals, such
   as pagers and PDAs.

   The WAP model consists of a WAP client (mobile terminal), a WAP
   proxy, and an origin server. It requires a WAP proxy between the WAP
   client and the server on the Internet. WAP uses a layered, scalable
   architecture, specifying the following five protocol layers to be
   used between the terminal and the proxy: Application Layer (WAE),
   Session Layer (WSP), Transaction Layer (WTP) [WAPWTP], Security Layer
   (WTLS), and Transport Layer (WDP) [WAPWDP]. The Internet protocols
   are used between the proxy and the origin server. If the origin
   server includes WAP proxy functionality, it is called WAP Server.

   In a typical scenario, a WAP client sends an encoded WAP request to a
   WAP proxy. The WAP proxy translates the WAP request into a WWW (HTTP)
   request, performing the required protocol conversions, and submits
   this request to a standard web server on the Internet. After the web
   server responds to the WAP proxy, the response is encoded into a more
   compact binary format to decrease the size of the data over the air.
   This encoded response is forwarded to the WAP client [WAPPROXY].

   WAP operates over a variety of bearer datagram services. When
   communicating over these bearer services, the WAP transport layer
   (WDP) is always used between the WAP client and WAP proxy and it
   provides port addressed datagram service to the higher WAP layers.
   If the bearer service supports IP (e.g. GSM-CSD, GSM-GPRS, IS-136,
   CDPD..), UDP is used as the datagram protocol. However, if the bearer
   service does not support IP (e.g. GSM-SMS, GSM-USSD, GSM Cell
   Broadcast, CDMS-SMS, TETRA-SDS,...), WDP implements the required
   datagram protocol as an adaptation layer between the bearer network



Expires September 10, 2000                                     [Page 26]







INTERNET DRAFT        Performance Enhancing Proxies           March 2000


   and the protocol stack.

   The use of the other layers depends on the port number. WAP has
   registered a set of well-known ports with IANA. The port number
   selected by the application for communication between a WAP client
   and proxy defines the other layers to be used at each end. The
   security layer, WTLS, provides privacy, data integrity and
   authentication. Its functionality is similar to TLS 1.0 extended with
   datagram support, optimised handshake and dynamic key refreshing. If
   the origin server includes WAP proxy functionality, it migth be used
   to facilitate the end-to-end security solutions, otherwise it
   provides security between the mobile terminal and the proxy. The
   transaction layer, WTP, is used to provide necessary retransmissions
   and acknowledgements. The session layer, WSP, supports binary encoded
   HTTP 1.1 with some extensions such as long living session with
   suspend/resume facility and state handling, asynchronous transactions
   usage, header caching, etc.


5.3 W-LAN Environments

   Wireless LANs (W-LAN) are typically organized in a cellular topology
   where a base station with a W-LAN transceiver controls a single
   cell.  A cell is defined in terms of the coverage area of the base
   station.  The base stations are directly connected to the wired
   network.  The base station in each of the cells is responsible for
   forwarding packets to and from the hosts located in the cell.  Often
   the hosts with W-LAN tranceivers are mobile.  When such a mobile host
   moves from one cell to another cell, the responsibility for
   forwarding packets between the wired network and the mobile host must
   be transferred to the base station of the new cell.  This is known as
   a handoff. Many W-LAN systems also support an operation mode enabling
   ad-hoc networking. In this mode base stations are not necessarily
   needed, but hosts with W-LAN tranceiver can communicate directly with
   the other hosts within the tranceiver's transmission range.


5.3.1 W-LAN Network Characteristics

   Current wireless LANs typically provide link bandwidth from 1 Mbps to
   10 Mbps, most typically bandwidth being 1 or 2 Mbps.  In the future,
   wide deployment of higher bandwidths up to 20 Mbps or even higher can
   be expected.  The round-trip delay with wireless LANs is on the order
   of a few milliseconds or tens of milliseconds.  Examples of W-LANs
   include ... <[TBD>.

   Wireless LANs are error-prone due to wireless link corruption. TCP
   performance over W-LANs or a network path involving a W-LAN link



Expires September 10, 2000                                     [Page 27]







INTERNET DRAFT        Performance Enhancing Proxies           March 2000


   suffers as packet losses due to wireless bit errors tend to occur
   in bursts.  In addition, consecutive packet losses may occur also
   during handoffs.

   As TCP wrongly interprets these packet losses to be network
   congestion, the TCP sender reduces its congestion window and is
   often forced to timeout in order to recover from the consecutive
   losses. The result is often unacceptably poor end-to-end performance.


5.3.2 W-LAN PEP Implementations: Snoop

   Berkeley's Snoop protocol [SNOOP] is a TCP-specific approach in which
   a TCP-aware module, a Snoop agent, is deployed at the W-LAN base
   station that acts as the last-hop router to the mobile host. Snoop
   aims at retaining the TCP end-to-end semantics. The Snoop agent
   monitors every packet that passes through the base station in either
   direction and maintains soft state for each TCP connection. The Snoop
   agent is an asymmetric PEP implementation as it operates differently
   on TCP data and ACK channels as well as on the uplink (from the
   mobile host) and downlink (to the mobile host) TCP segments.

   For a data transfer to a mobile host, the Snoop agent caches
   unacknowledged TCP data segments which it forwards to the TCP
   receiver and monitors the corresponding ACKs. It does two things:

     1. Retransmits any lost data segments locally by using local timers
        and TCP duplicate ACKs to identify packet loss, instead of
        waiting for the TCP sender to do so end-to-end.

     2. Suppresses the duplicate ACKs on their way from the mobile host
        back to the sender, thus avoiding fast retransmit and congestion
        avoidance at the latter.

   Suppressing the duplicate ACKs is required to avoid unnecessary fast
   retransmits by the TCP sender as the Snoop agent retransmits a packet
   locally. Consider a system that employs the Snoop agent and a TCP
   sender S that sends packets to receiver R via a base station BS.
   Assume that S sends packets A, B, C, D, E (in that order) which are
   forwarded by BS to the wireless receiver R. Assume the first
   transmission of packet B is lost due to errors on the wireless link.
   In this case, R receives packets A, C, D, E and B (in that order).
   Receipt of packets C, D and E trigger duplicate ACKs. When S
   receives three duplicate ACKs, it triggers fast retransmit (which
   results in a retransmission, as well as reduction of the congestion
   window). The Snoop agent also retransmits B locally, when it receives
   three duplicate ACKs. The fast retransmit at S occurs despite the
   local retransmit on the wireless link, degrading throughput. Snoop



Expires September 10, 2000                                     [Page 28]







INTERNET DRAFT        Performance Enhancing Proxies           March 2000


   deals with this problem by dropping TCP duplicate ACKs appropriately
   at BS.

   For a data transfer from a mobile host, the Snoop agent detects the
   packet losses on the wireless link by monitoring the data segments
   it forwards. It then employs either Negative Acknowledgements (NAK)
   locally or Explicit Loss Notifications (ELN) to inform the mobile
   sender that the packet loss was not related to congestion, thus
   allowing the sender to retransmit without triggering normal
   congestion control procedures. To implement this, changes at the
   mobile host are required.

   When a Snoop agent uses NAKs to inform the TCP sender of the packet
   losses on the wireless link, one possibility to implement them is
   using the Selective Acknowledgment (SACK) option of TCP [RFC2018].
   This requires enabling SACK processing at the mobile host. The Snoop
   agent sends a TCP SACK, when it detects a hole in the transmission
   sequence from the mobile host or when it has not received any new
   packets from the mobile host for a certain time period. This approach
   relies on the advisory nature of the SACKs: the mobile sender is
   advised to retransmit the missing segments indicated by SACK, but it
   must not assume successful end-to-end delivery of the segments
   acknowledged with SACK as these segments might get lost later in the
   path to the receiver. Instead, the sender must wait for a cumulative
   ACK to arrive.

   When the ELN mechanism is used to inform the mobile sender of the
   packet losses, Snoop uses one of the 'unreserved' bits in the TCP
   header for ELN [SNOOPELN]. The Snoop agent keeps track of the holes
   that correspond to segments lost over the wireless link. When a
   (duplicate) ACK corresponding to a hole in the sequence space arrives
   from the TCP receiver, the Snoop agent sets the ELN bit on the ACK to
   indicate that the loss is unrelated to congestion and then forwards
   the ACK to the TCP sender. When the sender receives a certain number
   of (duplicate) ACKs with ELN (a configurable variable at the mobile
   host, e.g., two), it retransmit the missing segment without
   performing any congestion control measures.

   The ELN mechanism using one of the six bits reserved for future use
   in the TCP header is dangerous as it exercises checks that might not
   be correctly implemented in TCP stacks, and may expose bugs.

   A scheme such as Snoop is needed only if the possibility of a fast
   retransmit due to wireless errors is non-negligible. In particular,
   if the wireless link uses link-layer recovery for lost data, then
   this scheme is not beneficial. Also, if the TCP window tends to stay
   smaller than four segments, for example, due to congestion related
   losses on the wired network, the probability that the Snoop agent



Expires September 10, 2000                                     [Page 29]







INTERNET DRAFT        Performance Enhancing Proxies           March 2000


   will have an opportunity to locally retransmit a lost packet is
   small. This is because at least three duplicate ACKs are needed to
   trigger the local retransmission, but due to small window the Snoop
   agent may not be able to forward three new packets after the lost
   packet and thus induce the required three duplicate ACKs. Conversely,
   when the TCP window is large enough, Snoop can provide significant
   performance improvement (compared with standard TCP).

   < TBD: some text how Snoop tries to alleviate the problem with small
          windows >

   Snoop requires the intermediate node (base station) to examine and
   operate on the traffic between the mobile host and the other end
   host on the wired Internet. Hence, Snoop does not work if the IP
   traffic is encrypted. Possible solutions involve:

   - making the Snoop agent a party to the security association between
     the client and the server;

   - IPsec tunneling mode, terminated at the Snooping base station.

   However, these techniques require that users trust base stations.

   Snoop also requires that both the data and the corresponding ACKs
   traverse the same base station. Furthermore, the Snoop agent may
   duplicate efforts by the link layer as it retransmits the TCP data
   segments "at the transport layer" across  the wireless link.
   (Snoop has been described by its designers as a TCP-aware link layer.
   This is the right approach: the link and network layers can be much
   more aware of each other than strict layering suggests.)

   <Why>

   - to alleviate local link pkt drops due to high-BER (wireless) link


6 Security Considerations

   The security implications of using PEP are discussed in Section
   4.1.1.

   <Editor's note: are there other security considerations which need
    mentioning?>








Expires September 10, 2000                                     [Page 30]







INTERNET DRAFT        Performance Enhancing Proxies           March 2000


7 Appendix - PEP Terminology Summary

   This appendix provides a summary of terminology frequently used
   during discussion of Performance Enhancing Proxies.  (In some cases,
   these terms have different meanings from their non-PEP related
   usage.)


7.1 Definitions

   ACK spacing

      Delayed forwarding of acknowledgements in order to space them
      appropriately, for example, to help minimize the burstiness of
      TCP data.

   application layer PEP

      Performance enhancement operating above the transport layer.
      May be aimed at improving application or transport protocol
      performance (or both).

   asymmetric link

      A link which has different rates for the forward channel (used for
      data segments) and the back (or return) channel (used for ACKs).

   available bandwidth

      The total capacity of a link available to carry information at any
      given time.  May be lower than the raw bandwidth due to competing
      traffic.

   bandwidth utilization

      The actual amount of information delivered over a link in a given
      period, expressed as a percent of the raw bandwidth of the link.

   gateway

      Has several meanings depending on context:

         - An access point to a particular link;

         - A device capable of initiating and terminating connections on
           behalf of a user or end system (e.g. a firewall or proxy).

      Not necessarily, but could be, a router.



Expires September 10, 2000                                     [Page 31]







INTERNET DRAFT        Performance Enhancing Proxies           March 2000


   in flight (data)

      Data sent but not yet acknowledged.  More precisely, data sent for
      which the sender has not yet received the acknowledgement.

   local acknowledgement

      The generation of acknowledgements by an entity in the path
      between two end systems in order to allow the sending system to
      transmit more data without waiting for end-to-end
      acknowledgements.

   performance enhancing proxy

      <the definition is subject to change>

      An entity in the network acting on behalf of an end system or user
      (with or without the knowledge of the end system or user) in order
      to enhance protocol performance.

   raw bandwidth

      The total capacity of an unloaded link available to carry
      information.

   Snoop

      A TCP-aware link layer developed for wireless packet radio and
      cellular networks.  It works by caching segments at a wireless
      base station.  If the base station sees duplicate acknowledgements
      for a segment that it has cached, it retransmits the missing
      segment while suppressing the duplicate acknowledgement stream
      being forwarded back to the sender until the wireless receiver
      starts to acknowledge new data.  Described in detail in [SNOOP].

   split connection

      A connection that has been terminated before reaching the intended
      destination end system in order to initiate another connection
      towards the end system.

   TCP PEP

      Performance enhancement operating at the transport layer with TCP.
      Aimed at improving TCP performance.

   TCP splitting




Expires September 10, 2000                                     [Page 32]







INTERNET DRAFT        Performance Enhancing Proxies           March 2000


      Using one or more split connections to improve TCP performance.

   TCP spoofing

      <the definition is subject to change>

    ( Sometimes used as a synonym for TCP PEP but more accurately refers
      to using transparent mechanisms to improve TCP performance. )

   transparent

      <the definition is subject to change: refine per layer>

     ( Requires no changes to be made to either end system involved in a
      connection.)

   tunneling

      <the definition is subject to change>

      The process of wrapping a packet for transmission over a
      particular link.


8 Acknowledgements

   This document grew out of the Internet-Draft "TCP Performance
   Enhancing Proxy Terminology" and RFC 2757 "Long Thin Networks" and
   the work done in the IETF TCPSAT working group.


9 References

   [BaPa99]  H. Balakrishnan, V.N. Padmanabhan, "TCP Performance
      Implications of Network Asymmetry," Internet Draft
      (draft-ietf-pilc-asym-00.txt), Work in progress, September
      1999.

   [BPK97] H. Balakrishnan, V.N. Padmanabhan, and R.H. Katz.
      "The Effects of Asymmetry on TCP Performance.  In Proceedings
      of the ACM/IEEE Mobicom, Budapest, Hungary, ACM. September, 1997.

   [BW97]  G. Brasche, B. Walke, "Concepts, Services, and Protocols of
      the New GSM Phase 2+ general Packet Radio Service," IEEE
      Communications Magazine, Vol. 35, No. 8, August 1997.

   [CDMA]  Electronic Industry Alliance(EIA)/Telecommunications Industry
      Association (TIA), IS-95: Mobile Station-Base Station



Expires September 10, 2000                                     [Page 33]







INTERNET DRAFT        Performance Enhancing Proxies           March 2000


      Compatibility Standard for Dual-Mode Wideband Spread Spectrum
      Cellular System, 1993.

   [CDPD]  Wireless Data Forum, CDPD System Specification,
      Release 1.1, 1995.

   [CTC+97]  H. Chang, C. Tait, N. Cohen, M. Shapiro, S. Mastrianni,
      R. Floyd, B. Housel, D. Lindquist, "Web Browsing in a Wireless
      Environment: Disconnected and Asynchronous Operation in ARTour Web
      Express," in proceedings of MobiCom'97, Budapest, Hungary,
      September 1997.

   [DMKM99] S. Dawkins, G. Montenegro, M. Kojo, V. Magret, "End-to-end
      Performance Implications of Slow Links," Internet Draft
      (draft-ietf-pilc-slow-02.txt), Work in progress, October 1999.

   [FMSBMR98] D.C. Feldmeier, A.J. McAuley, J.M. Smith, D.S. Bakin,
      W.S. Marcus, T.M. Raleigh, "Protocol Boosters," in IEEE Journal
      on Selected Areas of Communication, volume 16, number 3, April
      1998.

   [FLASH] Flash Networks Ltd., performance boosting products technology
      vendor based in Kerselia, Israel.  Website at
      http://www.flash-networks.com/

   [FOURELLE]  Fourelle Systems, performance boosting products
      technology vendor based in Santa Clara, California. Website at
      http://www.fourelle.com/

   [GPRS]  ETSI, "General Packet Radio Service (GPRS): Service
      Description, Stage 2," GSM03.60, v.6.1.1 August 1998.

   [GSM]  M. Rahnema, "Overview of the GSM system and protocol
      architecture," IEEE Communications Magazine, Vol. 31, No. 4,
      pp 92-100, April 1993.

   [HNS] Hughes Network Systems, Inc., VSAT technology vendor based in
      Germantown, Maryland.  Website at http://www.hns.com/

   [I-TCP]  A. Bakre, B.R. Badrinath, "I-TCP: Indirect TCP for Mobile
      Hosts," in proceedings of the 15th International Conference on
      Distributed Computing Systems (ICDCS), May 1995.

   [Karn99]  P. Karn, A. Falk, J. Touch, M-J. Montpetit, J. Mahdavi,
      G., Montenegro, "Advice for Internet Subnetwork Designers,"
      Internet Draft (draft-ietf-pilc-link-design-01.txt), Work in
      progress, October 1999.




Expires September 10, 2000                                     [Page 34]







INTERNET DRAFT        Performance Enhancing Proxies           March 2000


   [KRA94] M. Kojo, K. Raatikainen, T. Alanko, "Connecting Mobile
      Workstations to the Internet over a Digital Cellular Telephone
      Network," in Proc. Workshop on Mobile and Wireless Information
      Systems (MOBIDATA), Rutgers University, NJ, November 1994.
      Revised version published in Mobile Computing, pp. 253-270,
      Kluwer, 1996.

   [KRLKA97] M. Kojo, K. Raatikainen, M. Liljeberg, J. Kiiskinen,
      T. Alanko, "An Efficient Transport Service for Slow Wireless
      Telephone Links," in IEEE Journal on Selected Areas of
      Communication, volume 15, number 7, September 1997.

   [LAKLR95] M. Liljeberg, T. Alanko, M. Kojo, H. Laamanen, K.
      Raatikainen, "Optimizing World-Wide Web for Weakly-Connected
       Mobile Workstations: An Indirect Approach," in Proc. 2nd Int.
       Workshop on Services in Distributed and Networked Environments,
       Whistler, Canada, pp. 132-139, June 1995.

   [LHKR96]  M. Liljeberg, H. Helin, M. Kojo, K. Raatikainen, "Mowgli
      WWW Software: Improved Usability of WWW in Mobile WAN
      Environments," in proceedings of IEEE Global Internet 1996
      Conference, London, UK, November 1996.

   [M-TCP]  K. Brown, S. Singh, "M-TCP: TCP for Mobile Cellular
      Networks," ACM Computer Communications Review Volume 27(5), 1997.
      Available at ftp://ftp.ece.orst.edu/pub/singh/papers/mtcp.ps.gz.

   [Part98]  C. Partridge, "ACK Spacing for High Delay-Bandwidth Paths
      with Insufficient Buffering," Internet-Draft
      (draft-rfced-info-partridge-01.txt), Work in progress, September
      1998.

   [Pax99] V. Paxson, "End-to-End Internet Packet Dynamics," IEEE/ACM
      Transactions on Networking, Vol 7, Number 3, 1999, pp 277-292.

   [RFC0793]  J. Postel, "Transmission Control Protocol," STD 7,
      RFC 793, September 1981.

   [RFC1122]  R. Braden, "Requirements for Internet Hosts --
      Communications Layers," STD 3, RFC 1122, October 1989.

   [RFC1144]  V. Jacobson, "Compressiing TCP/IP Headers for Low-Speed
      Serial Links," RFC 1144, February 1990.

   [RFC1323]  V. Jacobson, R. Braden, D. Borman, "TCP Extensions for
      High Performance," RFC 1323, May 1992.

   [RFC1958]  B. Carpenter, "Architectural Principles of the Internet,"



Expires September 10, 2000                                     [Page 35]







INTERNET DRAFT        Performance Enhancing Proxies           March 2000


      RFC 1958, June 1996.

   [RFC2018] M. Mathis, J. Mahdavi, S. Floyd, and A. Romanow,
      "TCP Selective Acknowledgment Options," RFC 2018, October, 1996.

   [RFC2246] T. Dierk, E. Allen, "TLS Protocol Version 1", RFC
      2246, January 1999.

   [RFC2393]  A. Shacham, R. Monsour, R. Pereira, M. Thomas, "IP Payload
      Compression Protocol (IPcomp)," RFC 2393, December 1998.

   [RFC2401]  S. Kent, R. Atkinson, "Security Architecture for the
      Internet Protocol," RFC 2401, November 1998.

   [RFC2488]  M. Allman, D. Glover, L. Sanchez, "Enhancing TCP Over
      Satellite Channels using Standard Mechanisms," BCP 28, RFC 2488,
      January 1999.

   [RFC2507]  M. Degermark, B. Nordgren, S. Pink, "IP Header
      Compression," RFC 2507, February 1999.

   [RFC2508]  S. Casner, V. Jacobson, "Compressing IP/UDP/RTP Headers
      for Low-Speed Serial Links," RFC 2508, February 1999.

   [RFC2509]  M. Engan, S. Casner, C. Bormann, "IP Header Compression
      over PPP," RFC 2509, February 1999.

   [RFC2663]  P. Srisuresh, M. Holdrege, "IP Network Address Translator
      (NAT) Terminology and Considerations," RFC 2663, August 1999.

   [RFC2760]  M. Allman, S. Dawkins, D. Glover, J. Griner, T. Henderson,
      J.  Heidemann, H. Kruse, S. Ostermann, K. Scott, J. Semke,
      J. Touch, D. Tran, "Ongoing TCP Research Related to Satellites,"
      RFC 2760, February 2000.

   [SNOOP]  H. Balakrishnan, S. Seshan, E. Amir, R. Katz, "Improving
      TCP/IP Performance over Wireless Networks," in proceedings of the
      1st ACM Conference on Mobile Communications and Networking
      (Mobicom), Berkeley, CA, November 1995.

   [SNOOPELN]  H. Balakrishnan, R. Katz, "Explicit Loss Notification
      and Wireless Web Performance," In Proc. IEEE Globecom 1998,
      Internet Mini-Conference, Sydney, Australia, November 1998.

   [SPACENET]  Spacenet, VSAT technology vendor based in Mclean,
      Virginia. Website at http://www.spacenet.com/

   [SRC84]  J.H. Saltzer, D.P. Reed, D.D. Clark, "End-To-End Arguments



Expires September 10, 2000                                     [Page 36]







INTERNET DRAFT        Performance Enhancing Proxies           March 2000


       in System Design," ACM TOCS, Vol 2, Number 4, November 1984,
       pp 277-288.

   [WAPARCH]  Wireless Application Protocol Architecture Specification,
       April 1998, http://www.wapforum.org

   [WAPPROXY]  Wireless Application Protocol Push Proxy Gateway Service
       Specification, August 1999, http://www.wapforum.org

   [WAPWDP]  Wireless Application Protocol Wireless Datagram Protocol
       Specification, November 1999, http://www.wapforum.org

   [WAPWTP]  Wireless Application Protocol Wireless Transaction Protocol
       Specification, June 1999, http://www.wapforum.org

   [Zhang99] Y. Zhang, "Multi-Layer Protection Scheme for IPSEC,"
      Internet Draft (draft-zhang-ipsec-mlipsec-00.txt), Work in
      progress, October 1999.



10 Authors' Addresses

   Questions about this document may be directed to:



























Expires September 10, 2000                                     [Page 37]







INTERNET DRAFT        Performance Enhancing Proxies           March 2000


             John Border
             Hughes Network Systems
             11717 Exploration Lane
             Germantown, Maryland  20876

             Voice:  +1-301-601-4099
             Fax:    +1-301-601-4275
             E-Mail: border@hns.com

             Markku Kojo
             Department of Computer Science
             University of Helsinki
             P.O. Box 26 (Teollisuuskatu 23)
             FIN-00014 HELSINKI
             Finland

             Voice:  +358-9-1914-4179
             Fax:    +358-9-1914-4441
             E-Mail: kojo@cs.helsinki.fi

             Jim Griner
             NASA Glenn Research Center
             MS: 54-2
             21000 Brookpark Orad
             Cleveland, Ohio  44135-3191

             Voice:  +1-216-433-5787
             Fax:    +1-216-433-8705
             E-Mail: jgriner@grc.nasa.gov

             Gabriel E. Montenegro
             Sun Labs Networking and Security Group
             Sun Microsystems, Inc.
             901 San Antonio Road
             Mailstop UMPK 15-214
             Mountain View, California 94303

             Voice:  +1-650-786-6288
             Fax:    +1-650-786-6445
             E-Mail: gab@sun.com



11 Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (1999).  All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to



Expires September 10, 2000                                     [Page 38]







INTERNET DRAFT        Performance Enhancing Proxies           March 2000


   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.





























Expires September 10, 2000                                     [Page 39]
