NVO3 Working Group                                           Y. Rekhter
Internet Draft                                         Juniper Networks
Intended status: Standards track                              L. Dunbar
Expires: April 2015                                              Huawei
                                                             R. Aggarwal
                                                              Arktan Inc
                                                             R. Shekhar
                                                        Juniper Networks
                                                           W. Henderickx
                                                          Alcatel-Lucent
                                                                 L. Fang
                                                               Microsoft
                                                              A. Sajassi
                                                                  Cisco

                                                        October 9, 2014



              Overlay Network Tenant System Address Migration
               draft-merged-nvo3-ts-address-migration-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79. This document may not be modified,
   and derivative works of it may not be created, except to publish it
   as an RFC and to translate it into languages other than English.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents
   at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html



Lopez, et al.           Expires April 9, 2015                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft           NVO3 Mobility Scheme              October 2014


   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 9, 2009.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2014 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors. All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document. Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with
   respect to this document. Code Components extracted from this
   document must include Simplified BSD License text as described in
   Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without
   warranty as described in the Simplified BSD License.

Abstract

   This document describes the schemes to overcome the network-related
   issues to achieve seamless Virtual Machine mobility in the data
   center and between data centers.

Table of Contents


   1. Introduction...................................................3
   2. Conventions used in this document..............................4
   3. Terminology....................................................4
   4. Scheme to resolve VLAN-IDs usage in L2 access domains..........8
   5. Layer 2 Extension.............................................10
      5.1. Layer 2 Extension Problem................................10
      5.2. NVA based Layer 2 Extension Solution.....................10
      5.3. E-VPN based Layer 2 Extension Solution...................12
   6. Optimal IP Routing............................................14
      6.1. Preserving Policies......................................15
      6.2. TS Default Gateway solutions.............................16
         6.2.1. E-VPN based TS Default Gateway Solutions............16
            6.2.1.1. E-VPN based TS Default Gateway Solution 1......17
            6.2.1.2. E-VPN based TS Default Gateway Solution 2......18
         6.2.2. Distributed Proxy Default Gateway Solution..........18
      6.3. Triangular Routing.......................................19



merged, et al.          Expires April 9, 2015                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft           NVO3 Mobility Scheme              October 2014


         6.3.1. NVA based Intra Data Center Triangular Routing Solution
         ...........................................................20
         6.3.2. E-VPN based Intra Data Center Triangular Routing
         Solution...................................................20
   7. L3 Address Migration..........................................21
   8. Managing duplicated addresses.................................22
   9. Manageability Considerations..................................23
   10. Security Considerations......................................23
   11. IANA Considerations..........................................23
   12. Acknowledgements.............................................23
   13. References...................................................23
      13.1. Normative References....................................23
      13.2. Informative References..................................23



  1. Introduction

   An important feature of data centers identified in [nvo3-problem] is
   the support of Virtual Machine (TS) mobility within the data center
   and between data centers. This document describes the schemes to
   overcome the network-related issues to achieve seamless Virtual
   Machine mobility in the data center and between data centers, where
   seamless mobility is defined as the ability to move a TS from one
   server in a data center to another server in the same or different
   data center, while retaining the IP and MAC address of the TS. In
   the context of this document the term mobility or a reference to
   moving a TS should be considered to imply seamless mobility, unless
   otherwise stated.

   Note that in the scenario where a TS is moved between servers
   located in different data centers, there are certain issues related
   to the current state of the art of the Virtual Machine technology,
   the bandwidth that may be available between the data centers, the
   distance between the data centers, the ability to manage and operate
   such TS mobility, storage-related issues (the moved TS has to have
   access to the same virtual disk), etc.  Discussion of these issues
   is outside the scope of this document.







merged, et al.          Expires April 9, 2015                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft           NVO3 Mobility Scheme              October 2014


  2. Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [RFC2119].

   In this document, these words will appear with that interpretation
   only when in ALL CAPS. Lower case uses of these words are not to be
   interpreted as carrying RFC-2119 significance.

   DC:   Data Center

   DCBR: Data Center Bridge Router

   LAG:  Link Aggregation Group

   POD:  Modular Performance Optimized Data Center. POD and Data Center
   are used interchangeably in this document.

   ToR:  Top of Rack switch

   TS:   Tenant System (used interchangeably with VM on servers
   supporting Virtual Machines)

   VEPA: Virtual Ethernet Port Aggregator (IEEE802.1Qbg)

   VN: Virtual Network

  3. Terminology

   In this document the term "Top of Rack Switch (ToR)" is used to
   refer to a switch in a data center that is connected to the servers
   that host TSs. A data center may have multiple ToRs. Some servers
   may have embedded blade switches, some servers may have virtual
   switches to interconnect the TSs, and some servers may not have any
   embedded switches. When External Bridge Port Extenders (as defined
   by 802.1BR) are used to connect the servers to the data center
   network, the ToR switch is the Controlling Bridge.

   Several data centers or PODs could be connected by a network. In
   addition to providing interconnect among the data centers/PODs, such


merged, et al.          Expires April 9, 2015                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft           NVO3 Mobility Scheme              October 2014


   a network could provide connectivity between the TSs hosted in these
   data centers and the sites that contain hosts communicating with
   such TSs. Each data center has one or more Data Center Border Router
   (DCBR) that connects the data center to the network, and provides
   (a) connectivity between TSs hosted in the data center and TSs
   hosted in other data centers, and (b) connectivity between TSs
   hosted in the data center and hosts communicating with these TSs.

   The following figure illustrates the above:


                      __________
                     (          )
                    ( Data Center)
                   ( Interconnect )-------------------------
                    (  Network   )                          |
                     (__________)                           |
                        |    |                              |
                    ----      ----                          |
                   |              |                         |
           --------+--------------+---------------        -------------
          |        |              |       Data     |     |             |
          |     ------          ------    Center   |     | Data Center |
          |    | DCBR |        | DCBR |    /POD    |     |    /POD     |
          |     ------          ------             |      -------------
          |        |              |                |
          |         ---        ---                 |
          |         ___|______|__                  |
          |        (             )                 |
          |       (  Data Center  )                |
          |        (   Network   )                 |
          |         (___________)                  |
          |            |      |                    |
          |        ----        ----                |
          |       |                |               |
          |  ------------        -----             |
          | | ToR Switch |      | ToR |            |
          |  ------------        -----             |
          |   |                    |               |
          |   |   ----------       |   ----------  |
          |   |--| Server   |      |--| Server   | |
          |   |  | vSwitch  |      |   ----------  |
          |   |  |  ----    |      |               |
          |   |  | | TS |   |      |   ----------  |
          |   |  |  -----   |       --| Server   | |
          |   |  |  | TS |  |          ----------  |
          |   |  |   -----  |                      |



merged, et al.          Expires April 9, 2015                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft           NVO3 Mobility Scheme              October 2014


          |   |  |   | TS | |                      |
          |   |  |    ----  |                      |
          |   |   ----------                       |
          |   |                                    |
          |   |   ----------                       |
          |   |--| Server   |                      |
          |   |   ----------                       |
          |   |                                    |
          |   |   ----------                       |
          |    --| Server   |                      |
          |       ----------                       |
          |                                        |
           ----------------------------------------

                     Figure 1: A Typical Data Center Network




   The data centers/PODs and the network that interconnects them may be
   either (a) under the same administrative control, or (b) controlled
   by different administrations.

   Consider a set of TSs that (as a matter of policy) are allowed to
   communicate with each other, and a collection of devices that
   interconnect these TSs. If communication among any TSs in that set
   could be accomplished in such a way as to preserve MAC source and
   destination addresses in the Ethernet header of the packets
   exchanged among these TSs (as these packets traverse from their
   sources to their destinations), we will refer to such set of TSs as
   an Layer 2 based Virtual Network (VN) or Closed User Group (L2-based
   CUG). In this document, the Closed User Group and Virtual Network
   (VN) are used interchangeably.

   A given TS may be a member of more than one VN or L2-based VN.

   In terms of IP address assignment this document assumes that all TSs
   of a given L2-based VN have their IP addresses assigned out of a
   single IP prefix. Thus, in the context of this document a single IP
   subnet corresponds to a single L2-based VN.  If a given TS is a
   member of more than one L2-based VN, this TS would have multiple IP
   addresses and multiple logical interfaces, one IP address and one
   logical interface per each such VN.



merged, et al.          Expires April 9, 2015                  [Page 6]

Internet-Draft           NVO3 Mobility Scheme              October 2014


   A TS that is a member of a given L2-based VN may (as a matter of
   policy) be allowed to communicate with TSs that belong to other L2-
   based VNs, or with other hosts. Such communication involves IP
   forwarding, and thus would result in changing MAC source and
   destination addresses in the Ethernet header of the packets being
   exchanged.

   In this document the term "L2 physical attachment" refers to a
   collection of interconnected devices attached to an NVE that perform
   forwarding based on the information carried in the Ethernet header.
   A trivial L2 physical attachment consists of just one non-
   virtualized server. In a non-trivial L2 physical attachment (domain
   that contains multiple forwarding entities) forwarding could be
   provided by such layer 2 technologies as Spanning Tree Protocol
   (STP), VEPA (IEEE802.1Qbg), etc.  Note that any multi-chassis LAG
   cannot span more than one L2 physical attachment. This document
   assumes that a layer 2 access domain is an L2 physical attachment.


   A physical server connected to a given L2 physical domain may host
   TSs that belong to different L2-based VNs (while each of these VNs
   may span multiple L2 physical domains). If an L2 physical attachment
   contains servers that host TSs belonging to different L2-based VNs,
   then enforcing L2-based VNs boundaries among these TSs within that
   domain is accomplished by relying on Layer 2 mechanisms (e.g.
   VLANs).

   We say that an L2 physical attachment contains a given TS (or that a
   given TS is in a given L2 physical attachment), if the server
   presently hosting this TS is part of that domain, or the server is
   connected to a ToR that is part of that domain.

   We say that a given L2-based VN is present within a given data
   center if one or more TSs that are part of that VN are presently
   hosted by the servers located in that data center.

   In the context of this document when we talk about VLAN-ID used by a
   given TS, we refer to the VLAN-ID carried by the traffic that is
   within the same L2 physical attachment as the TS, and that is either
   originated or destined to that TS - e.g., VLAN-ID only has local



merged, et al.          Expires April 9, 2015                  [Page 7]

Internet-Draft           NVO3 Mobility Scheme              October 2014


   significance within the L2 physical attachment, unless it is stated
   otherwise.

   Some of the TS-mobility solutions described in this document are E-
   VPN based. When using E-VPN in NVO3 environment, the NVE function is
   on the PE node.  NVE-PE is used to describe the E-VPN PE node that
   supports the NVE function.

  4. Scheme to resolve VLAN-IDs usage in L2 access domains

   This document assumes that within a given non-trivial L2 physical
   attachment traffic from/to TSs belonging to different L2-based VNs
   MUST have different VLAN-IDs.

   To support tens of thousands of virtual networks, the local VLAN-ID
   associated with client payload under each NVE has to be locally
   significant. Therefore, the same L2-based VN MAY have either the
   same or different VLAN-IDs under different NVEs. Thus when a given
   TS moves from one non-trivial L2 physical attachment to another, the
   VLAN-ID of the traffic from/to TS in the former may be different
   than in the latter, and thus cannot assume to stay the same.

   To describe the solution more clearly, here are the terminologies
   used:

   - Customer administered VLAN-IDs (usually hard coded in a TS's Guest
     OS and can't be changed when the TS move from one NVE to another).
     Some TSs may not have VLAN-ID attached.
   - Provider administered VLAN-IDs of local significance, and
   - Provider administered VN-IDs of global significance.

   In the scenario where there are provider administered VLAN-IDs of
   local significance (e.g. NVE in a TOR), the value is selected by NVA
   from the pool of unused VIDs when the first local TS of a VN is
   being added, and returned by NVA to the unused pool of VLAN-IDs when
   the last TS leaves. For TSs with hard coded VLAN-ID, it is necessary
   for an entity, most likely the first switch (virtual or physical) to
   which the TS is attached, to change the locally administered VLAN-
   IDs to the TSs' hard coded VLAN-IDs. For un-tagged TSs, the first
   switch has to remove the locally administered VLAN-IDs before
   sending packets to TSs.


merged, et al.          Expires April 9, 2015                  [Page 8]

Internet-Draft           NVO3 Mobility Scheme              October 2014


   The section is intended to describe:
      . NVA manages unused VLAN-IDs pool in each access L2 domain
      . NVE reports to NVA when first local TS of a VN is reachable, or
        none of TS in a VN is reachable by the NVE
      . NVA can push the global VN ID <-> locally administered VID
        mapping to NVE, or NVE can pull upon detecting a newly attached
        VN.
      . NVA manages the first switch to which TS is attached on mapping
        between TS's own VLAN-ID and "locally administered VID".

   Here is the detailed procedure:
      . NVE should get the specific VNID from NVA for untagged data
        frames arriving at the each Virtual Access Point [VNo3-
        framework 3.1.1] of a NVE.

        Since local VLAN-IDs under each NVE are locally significant,
        here are the possible ways for ingress NVE to assign VLAN-ID in
        the overlay header for data frames destined to other NVEs:

        a) carry what comes in at ingress Virtual Access point.
        Preserving vlan-id can be used to provide bundled
        service/PVLAN. In this case many vlan-ids in ingress could map
        to one logical VN (n to 1 mapping).

        b) not carrying any vlan-id and using logical VN identifier.
        The egress NVE gets the vlan-id from NVA to put on the packet
        before sending to attached TSs. This is 1-to-1 mapping between
        vlan-id and logical-VN.

      . If the data frame is already tagged before reaching the NVE's
        Virtual Access Point, the NVA should inform the first switch
        port that is responsible for adding VLAN-ID to the untagged
        data frames of the specific VLAN-ID to be inserted to data
        frames.

      . If data frames from a TS are already tagged, the first port
        facing the TS has be informed by the NVA of the new local VLAN-
        ID to replace the VLAN-ID encoded in the data frames.

        For data frames coming from network side towards TSs (i.e.
        inbound traffic towards TSs), the first switching port facing
        TSs have to convert the VLAN-IDs encoded in the data frames to
        the VLAN-IDs used by TSs.



merged, et al.          Expires April 9, 2015                  [Page 9]

Internet-Draft           NVO3 Mobility Scheme              October 2014


  5. Layer 2 Extension

   5.1. Layer 2 Extension Problem

   Consider a scenario where a TS that is a member of a given L2-based
   VN moves from one server to another, and these two servers are in
   different L2 physical attachments, where these domains may be
   located in the same or different data centers (or PODs). In order to
   enable communication between this TS and other TSs of that L2-based
   VN, the new L2 physical attachment must become interconnected with
   the other L2 physical attachment(s) that presently contain the rest
   of the TSs of that VN, and the interconnect must not violate the L2-
   based VN requirement to preserve source and destination MAC
   addresses in the Ethernet header of the packets exchange between
   this TS and other members of that VN.

   Moreover, if the previous L2 physical attachment no longer contains
   any TSs of that VN, the previous domain no longer needs to be
   interconnected with the other L2 physical attachments(s) that
   contain the rest of the TSs of that VN.

   Note that supporting TS mobility implies that the set of L2 physical
   attachments that contain TSs that belong to a given L2-based VN may
   change over time (new domains added, old domains deleted).

   We will refer to this as the "layer 2 extension problem".

   Note that the layer 2 extension problem is a special case of
   maintaining connectivity in the presence of TS mobility, as the
   former restricts communicating TSs to a single/common L2-based VN,
   while the latter does not.


   5.2. NVA based Layer 2 Extension Solution

   Assume NVO3's NVA has at least the following information for each
   TS:
      . Inner Address: TS (host) Address family (IPv4/IPv6, MAC,
        virtual network Identifier MPLS/VLAN, etc)

      . Outer Address: The list of locally attached edges (NVEs);
        normally one TS is attached to one edge, TS could also be


merged, et al.          Expires April 9, 2015                 [Page 10]

Internet-Draft           NVO3 Mobility Scheme              October 2014


        attached to 2 edges for redundancy (dual homing). One TS is
        rarely attached to more than 2 edges, though it could be
        possible;

      . VN Context (VN ID and/or VN Name)

      . Timer for NVEs to keep the entry when pushed down to or pulled
        from NVEs.

      . Optionally the list of interested remote edges (NVEs). This
        information is for NVA to promptly update relevant edges (NVEs)
        when there is any change to this TS' attachment to edges
        (NVEs). However, this information doesn't have to be kept per
        TS. It can be kept per VN.

   NVA can offer services in a Push, Pull mode, or the combination of
   the two.

   In this solution, the NVEs are connected via underlay IP network.
   For each VN, the NVA informs all the NVEs to which the TSs of the
   given VN are attached.

   When the last TS of a VN is moved out of a NVE, NVE can either
   confirm with the NVA or the NVA notifies the NVE for it to remove
   its connectivity to the VN. When an NVE needs to support
   connectivity to a VN not currently supported (as a result of TS turn
   up, or TS migration), the NVA will push the necessary VN information
   into the NVE.

   The term "NVE being connected to a VN" means that the NVE at least
   has:
      . the inner-outer address mapping information for all the TSs in
        the VN or being able to pull the mapping from the NVA,

      . the mapping of local VLAN-ID to the VNID used by overlay
        header, and

      . has the VN's default gateway IP/MAC address.








merged, et al.          Expires April 9, 2015                 [Page 11]

Internet-Draft           NVO3 Mobility Scheme              October 2014


   5.3. E-VPN based Layer 2 Extension Solution

   This section describes a [E-VPN] based solution for the layer 2
   extension problem, i.e. the L2 sites that contain TSs of a given L2-
   based VN are interconnected together using E-VPN.  Thus a given E-
   VPN corresponds/associated with one or more L2-based VNs (e.g.,
   VLANs). An L2-based VN is associated with a single E-VPN Ethernet
   Tag Identifier.

   This section provides a brief overview of how E-VPN is used as the
   solution for the "layer 2 extension problem". Details of E-VPN
   operations can be found in [E-VPN].

   A single L2 site could be as large as the whole network within a
   single POD or a data center, in which case the DCBRs of that
   POD/data center, in addition to acting as IP routers for the L2-
   based VNs present in the POD/data center, also act as PEs. In this
   scenario E-VPN is used to handle TS migration between servers in
   different POD/data centers and the PE nodes support the NVE
   function.

   A single L2 site could be as small as a single ToR with the servers
   connected to it or virtual switch with TSs attached, in which case
   the ToR or the virtual switch acts as a PE-NVE. In this scenario E-
   VPN is used to handle TS migration between servers that are either
   in the same or in different data centers. Note that even in this
   scenario this document assumes that DCBRs, in addition to acting as
   IP routers for the L2-based VNs present in their data center, also
   participate in the E-VPN procedures, acting as BGP Route Reflectors
   or BGP peer to another route-reflector for the E-VPN routes
   originated by the ToRs acting as PE-NVEs.

   In the case where E-VPN is used to interconnect L2 sites in
   different PODs/data centers, the network that interconnects DCBRs of
   these data centers could provide either (a) only Ethernet or IP/MPLS
   connectivity service among these DCBRs, or (b) may offer the E-VPN
   service. In the former case DCBRs exchange E-VPN routes among
   themselves relying only on the Ethernet or IP/MPLS connectivity
   service provided by the network that interconnects these DCBRs. The
   network does not directly participate in the exchange of these E-VPN
   routes. In the latter case the routers at the edge of the network


merged, et al.          Expires April 9, 2015                 [Page 12]

Internet-Draft           NVO3 Mobility Scheme              October 2014


   may be either co-located with DCBRs, or may establish E-VPN peering
   with DCBRs.  Either way, in this case the network facilitates
   exchange of E-VPN routes among DCBRs (as in this case DCBRs would
   not need to exchange E-VPN routes directly with each other).

   Please note that for the purpose of solving the layer 2 extension
   problem the propagation scope of E-VPN routes for a given L2-based
   VN is constrained by the scope of the PE-NVEs connected to the L2
   sites that presently contain TSs of that VN. This scope is
   controlled by the Route Target of the E-VPN routes. Controlling
   propagation scope could be further facilitated by using Route Target
   Constrain [RFC4684].

   Use of E-VPN ensures that traffic among members of the same L2-based
   VN is optimally forwarded, irrespective of whether members of that
   VN are within the same or in different data centers/PODs. This
   follows from the observation that E-VPN inherently enables
   (disaggregated) forwarding at the granularity of the MAC address of
   the TS.

   Optimal forwarding among TSs of a given L2-based VN that are within
   the same data center requires propagating TS MAC addresses, and
   comes at the cost of disaggregated forwarding within a given data
   center. However such disaggregated forwarding is not necessary
   between data centers if a given L2-based VN spans multiple data
   centers. For example when a given ToR acts as a PE-NVE, this ToR has
   to maintain MAC advertisement routes only to the TSs within its own
   data center (and furthermore, only to the TSs that belong to the L2-
   based VNs whose site(s) are connected to that ToR), and then point a
   "default" MAC route to one of the DCBRs of that data center.  In
   this scenario a DCBR of a given data center, when it receives MAC
   advertisement routes from DCBR(s) in other data centers, does not
   re-advertise these routes to the PE-NVEs within its own data center,
   but just advertises a single "default" MAC advertisement route to
   these PE-NVEs.

   When a given TS moves to a new L2 site, if in the new site this TS
   is the only TS from its L2-based VN, then the PE-NVE(s) connected to
   the new site need to be provisioned with the E-VPN Instances (EVI)
   of the E-VPN associated with this L2-based VN. Likewise, if after
   the move the old site no longer has any TSs that are in the same L2-


merged, et al.          Expires April 9, 2015                 [Page 13]

Internet-Draft           NVO3 Mobility Scheme              October 2014


   based VN as the TS that moved, the PE-NVE(s) connected to the old
   site need to be de-provisioned with the EVI of the E-VPN.
   Procedures to accomplish this are outside the scope of this
   document.

  6. Optimal IP Routing

   In the context of this document optimal IP routing, or just optimal
   routing, in the presence of TS mobility could be partitioned into
   two problems:

   - Optimal routing of a TS's outbound traffic. This means that as a
     given TS moves from one server to another, the TS's default
     gateway should be in a close topological proximity to the ToR that
     connects the server presently hosting that TS. Note that when we
     talk about optimal routing of the TS's outbound traffic, we mean
     traffic from that TS to the destinations that are outside of the
     TS's L2-based VN. This document refers to this problem as the TS
     default gateway problem.
   - Optimal routing of TS's inbound traffic. This means that as a
     given TS moves from one server to another, the (inbound) traffic
     originated outside of the TS's L2-based VN, and destined to that
     TS be routed via the router of the TS's L2-based VN that is in a
     close topological proximity to the ToR that connects the server
     presently hosting that TS, without first traversing some other
     router of that L2-based VN (the router of the TS's L2-based VN may
     be either DCBR or ToR itself). This is also known as avoiding
     "triangular routing". This document refers to this problem as the
     triangular routing problem.

   In order to avoid the "triangular routing", routers in the Wide Area
   Network have to be aware which DCBRs can reach the designated TSs.
   When TSs in a single VN are spread across many different DCBRs, all
   individual TSs' addresses have to be visible to those routers, which
   can dramatically increase the number of routes in those routers.

   If a VN is spread across multiple DCBRs and all those DCBRs announce
   the same IP prefix for the VN, there could be many issues,
   including:




merged, et al.          Expires April 9, 2015                 [Page 14]

Internet-Draft           NVO3 Mobility Scheme              October 2014


   - Traffic could go to DCBR A where target is in DCBR B. and DCBR "A"
     is connected to DCBR "B" via WAN
   -  If majority of one VN members are under DCBR "A" and rest are
     spread across X number of DCBRs. Will DCBR "A" have same weight as
     DCBR "B", "C", etc?


   If all those DCBRs announce individual IPs that are directly
   attached and those IPs are not segmented well, then all the TSs IP
   addresses have to be exposed to the WAN. So overlay hides the TSs IP
   from the core switches in one DC or one POD, but exposes them to the
   WAN. There are more routers in the WAN than the number of core
   switches in one DC/POD.

   The ability to deliver optimal routing (as defined above) in the
   presence of stateful devices is outside the scope of this document.


   6.1. Preserving Policies

   Moving TS from one L2 physical attachment to another means (among
   other things) that the NVE in the new domain that provides
   connectivity between this TS and TSs in other L2 physical
   attachments must be able to implement the policies that control
   connectivity between this TS and TSs in other L2 physical
   attachments. In other words, the policies that control connectivity
   between a given TS and its peers MUST NOT change as the TS moves
   from one L2 physical attachment to another.  Moreover, policies, if
   any, within the L2 physical attachment that contains a given TS MUST
   NOT preclude realization of the policies that control connectivity
   between this TS and its peers. All of the above is irrespective of
   whether the L2 physical attachments are trivial or not.

   There could be policies guarding TSs across different VNs, with some
   being enforced by Firewall, some enforced by NAT/AntiDDOS/IPS/IDS,
   etc.  It is less about NVE polices to be maintained when TSs move,
   it is more along the line of dynamically changing policies
   associated with the "middleware" boxes attached to NVEs (if those
   middle boxes are distributed).




merged, et al.          Expires April 9, 2015                 [Page 15]

Internet-Draft           NVO3 Mobility Scheme              October 2014


   6.2. TS Default Gateway solutions

   As TS moves to a new L2 site, the default gateway IP address of the
   TS may not change. Further, while with cold TS mobility one may
   assume that TS's ARP/ND cache gets flushed once TS moves to another
   server, one cannot make such an assumption with hot TS mobility.

   Thus the destination MAC address in the inter-VN/inter-subnet
   traffic originated by that TS would not change as TS moves to the
   new site. Given that, how would NVE(s) connected to the new L2 site
   be able to recognize inter-VN/inter-subnet traffic originated by
   that TS?  The following describes possible solutions.


  6.2.1. E-VPN based TS Default Gateway Solutions

   The E-VPN based solutions assume that for inter-VN/inter-subnet
   traffic between TS and its peers outside of TS's own data center,
   one or more DCBRs of that data center act as fully functional
   default gateways for that traffic.

   Both of these solutions also assume that VLAN-aware VLAN bundling
   mode of E-VPN is used as the default mode such that different L2-VNs
   (different subnets) for the same tenant can be accommodated in a
   single EVI. This facilitates provisioning since E-VPN related
   provisioning (such as RT configuration) could be done on a per-
   tenant basis as opposed to on a per-subnet (per L2-VN) basis. In
   this default mode, TSs' MAC addresses are maintained on a per bridge
   domain basis (per subnet) within the EVI; however, TS's IP addresses
   are maintained across all the subnets of that tenant in that EVI.
   In the scenarios where communications among TSs of different subnets
   belonging to the same tenant is to be restricted based on some
   policies, then the VLAN mode of E-VPN should be used with each
   VLAN/subnet mapping to its own EVI and E-VPN RT filtering can be
   leveraged to enforce flexible policy-based communications among TSs
   of different subnets for that tenant.








merged, et al.          Expires April 9, 2015                 [Page 16]

Internet-Draft           NVO3 Mobility Scheme              October 2014


6.2.1.1. E-VPN based TS Default Gateway Solution 1

   The first solution relies on the use of an anycast default gateway
   IP address and an anycast default gateway MAC address.

   If DCBRs act as PE-NVEs for an E-VPN corresponding to a given L2-
   based VN, then these anycast addresses are configured on these
   DCBRs. Likewise, if ToRs act as PE-NVEs, then these anycast
   addresses are configured on these ToRs. All TSs of that L2-based VN
   are (auto) configured with the (anycast) IP address of the default
   gateway.

   DCBRs (or ToRs) acting as PE-NVEs use these anycast addresses as
   follows:

   - When a particular PE-NVE receives a packet from local L2
   attachment with the (anycast) default gateway MAC address, the PE-
   NVE applies IP forwarding to the packet, and perform NVE function if
   the destination of the packet is attached to another NVE.

   - When a particular DCBR (or ToR) acting as a PE-NVE receives an
   ARP/ND Request from local L2 attachment for the default gateway
   (anycast) IP address, the DCBR (or ToR) generates ARP/ND Reply.

   This ensures that a particular DCBR (or ToR), acting as a PE-NVE,
   can always apply IP forwarding to the packets sent by a TS to the
   (anycast) default gateway MAC address. It also ensures that such
   DCBR (or ToR) can respond to the ARP Request generated by a TS for
   the default gateway (anycast) IP address.

   Except for gratuitous ARP/ND, DCBRs (or ToRs) acting as PE-NVEs must
   never use the anycast default gateway MAC address as the source MAC
   address in the packets originated by these DCBRs (or ToRs), cannot
   use the anycast default gateway IP address as the source IP address
   in the overlay header.

   Note that multiple L2-based VNs may share the same MAC address for
   the purpose of using as the (anycast) MAC address of the default
   gateway for these VNs.




merged, et al.          Expires April 9, 2015                 [Page 17]

Internet-Draft           NVO3 Mobility Scheme              October 2014


   If the default gateway functionality is not in NVEs (TORs), then the
   default gateway MAC/IP addresses need to be distributed using E-VPN
   procedures.  Note that with this approach when originating E-VPN MAC
   advertisement routes for the MAC address of the default gateways of
   a given L2-based VN, all these routes MUST indicate that this MAC
   address belongs to the same Ethernet Segment Identifier (ESI). The
   ESI must be configured on all NVEs that can act as distributed
   default gateway. However, the anycast-MAC and anycast-IP can be
   configured only on a subset of these NVEs.

6.2.1.2. E-VPN based TS Default Gateway Solution 2

   The second solution does not require configuring the anycast default
   gateway IP and MAC address on the PE-NVEs.

   Each DCBR (or each ToR) that acts as a default gateway for a given
   L2-based VN advertises in the E-VPN control plane its default
   gateway IP and MAC address using the MAC advertisement route, and
   indicates that such route is associated with the default gateway.
   The MAC advertisement route MUST be advertised as per procedures in
   [E-VPN]. The MAC address in such an advertisement MUST be set to the
   default gateway MAC address of the DCBR (or ToR). The IP address in
   such an advertisement MUST be set to the default gateway IP address
   of the DCBR (or ToR). To indicate that such a route is associated
   with a default gateway, the route MUST carry the Default Gateway
   extended community [Default-Gateway].

   Each PE-NVE that receives this route and imports it as per
   procedures of [E-VPN] MUST create MAC forwarding state that enables
   it to apply IP forwarding to the packets destined to the MAC address
   carried in the route. The PE-NVE that receives this E-VPN route
   follows procedures in Section 12 of [E-VPN] when replying to ARP/ND
   Requests that it receives if such Requests are for the IP address in
   the received E-VPN route.



  6.2.2. Distributed Proxy Default Gateway Solution

   In this solution, NVEs perform the function of the default gateway
   for all the TSs attached. Those NVEs are called "Proxy Default



merged, et al.          Expires April 9, 2015                 [Page 18]

Internet-Draft           NVO3 Mobility Scheme              October 2014


   Gateway" in this document because those NVEs might not be the
   Default Gateways explicitly configured on TSs attaches. Some of
   those proxy default gateway NVEs might not have the complete inter-
   subnet communications policies for the attached VNs.

   In order to ensure that the destination MAC address in the inter-
   VN/inter-subnet traffic originated by that TS would not change as TS
   moves to a different NVE, a pseudo MAC address is assigned to all
   NVE-based Proxy Default Gateways.

   When a particular NVE acting as Proxy Default Gateway receives an
   ARP/ND Request from the attached TSs for their default gateway IP
   addresses, the NVE suppresses the ARP/ND request from being
   forwarded and generates ARP/ND Reply with the pseudo MAC address.

   When a particular NVE acting as a Proxy Default Gateway receives a
   packet with the Pseudo default gateway MAC address:

  - if the NVE has all the needed policies for the Source &
     Destination VNs, the NVE applies the IP forwarding, i.e. forward
     the packet from source VN to the destination VN, and apply the NVE
     encapsulation function with target NVE as destination address and
     destination VN identifier in the header,
  - if the NVE doesn't have the needed policies from the source VN to
     the destination VN, the NVE applies the NVE encapsulation function
     with real host's default gateway as destination address and source
     VN identifier in the header

   This solution assumes that the NVE-based proxy default gateways
   either get the mapping of hosts' default gateway IP <-> default
   gateway MAC from the corresponding NVA or via ARP/ND discovery.

   6.3. Triangular Routing

   The triangular routing solution could be partitioned into two
   components: intra data center triangular routing solution, and inter
   data center triangular routing solution. The former handles the
   situation where communicating TSs are in the same data center. The
   latter handles all other cases. This draft only describes the
   solution for intra data center triangular routing.



merged, et al.          Expires April 9, 2015                 [Page 19]

Internet-Draft           NVO3 Mobility Scheme              October 2014


  6.3.1. NVA based Intra Data Center Triangular Routing Solution

   To be added.

  6.3.2. E-VPN based Intra Data Center Triangular Routing Solution

   This solutions assumes that as a PE-NVE originates MAC advertisement
   routes, such routes, in addition to MAC addresses of the TSs, also
   carry IP addresses of these TSs. Procedures by which a PE-NVE can
   learn the IP address associated with a given MAC address are
   specified in [E-VPN].

   Consider a set of L2-based VNs, such that TSs of these VNs, as a
   matter of policy, are allowed to communicate with each other. To
   avoid triangular routing among such TSs that are in the same data
   center this document relies on the E-VPN procedures, as follows.

   Procedures in this section assume that ToRs act as PE-NVEs, and also
   able to support IP forwarding functionality.

   For a given set of L2-based VNs whose TSs are allowed to communicate
   with each other, consider a set of E-VPN instances (EVIs) of the E-
   VPNs associated with these VNs. We further restrict this set of EVIs
   to only the EVIs that are within the same data center. To avoid
   triangular routing among TSs within the same data center, E-VPN
   routes originated by one of the EVIs within such set should be
   imported by all other EVIs in that set, irrespective of whether
   these other EVIs belong to the same E-VPN as the EVI that originates
   the routes.

   One possible way to accomplish this is

  - for each set of L2-based VNs whose TSs are allowed to communicate
     with each other, and for each data center that contains such VNs
     have a distinct RT (distinct RT per set, per data center),
  - provision each EVI of the E-VPNs associated with these VNs to
     import routes that carry this RT, and
  - make the E-VPN routes originated by such EVIs to carry this RT.
     Note that these RTs are in addition to the RTs used to form
     individual E-VPNs. Note also, that what is described here is




merged, et al.          Expires April 9, 2015                 [Page 20]

Internet-Draft           NVO3 Mobility Scheme              October 2014


     conceptually similar to the notion of "extranets" in BGP/MPLS VPNs
     [RFC4364].

   When a PE imports an E-VPN route into a particular EVI, and this
   route is associated with a TS that is not part of the L2-based VN
   associated with the E-VPN of that EVI, the PE-NVE creates IP
   forwarding state to forward traffic to the IP address present in the
   NLRI of the route towards the Next Hop, as specified in the route.

   To illustrate how the above procedures avoid triangular routing,
   consider the following example. Assume that a particular TS, TS-A,
   is currently hosted by a server connected to a particular ToR-NVE,
   ToR-1, and another TS, TS-B, is currently hosted by a server
   connected to ToR-2 (NVE). Assume that TS-A and TS-B belong to
   different L2-based VNs, and (as a matter of policy) TSs in these VNs
   are allowed to communicate with each other. Now assume that TS-B
   moves to another server, and this server is connected to ToR-3
   (NVE). Assume that ToR-1, ToR-2, and ToR-3 are in the same data
   center. While initially ToR-1 would forward data originated by TS-A
   and destined to TS-B to ToR-2, after TS-B moves to the server
   connected to ToR-3, using the procedures described above, ToR-1
   would forward the data to ToR-3 (and not to ToR-2), thus avoiding
   triangular routing.

   Note that for the purpose of redistributing E-VPN routes among
   multiple L2-based VNs, the above procedures limit the propagation
   scope of routes to individual TSs to a single data center, and
   furthermore, to only a subset of the PE-NVEs within that data center
   - the PE-NVEs that have EVIs of the E-VPNs associated with the L2-
   based VNs whose TSs are allowed to communicate with each other. As a
   result, the control plane overhead needed to avoid triangular
   routing within a data center is localized to these PE-NVEs.

  7. L3 Address Migration

   When the attachment to NVE is L3 based, TS migration can cause one
   subnetwork to be scatted among many NVEs, or fragmented addresses.

   The outbound traffic of fragmented L3 addresses doesn't have the
   same issue as L2 address migration, but the inbound traffic has the
   same issues as L2 address migration (Section 6). In theory, host


merged, et al.          Expires April 9, 2015                 [Page 21]

Internet-Draft           NVO3 Mobility Scheme              October 2014


   hosting by every NVE (including the DCBR) can achieve the optimal
   path forwarding in very fragmented network. But host routing can be
   challenging in a very large and highly virtualized data center,
   there could be hundreds of thousands of hosts/VMs, sometimes in
   millions, due to business demand and highly advanced server
   virtualization technologies.

   Optimal routing of TS's inbound traffic: This means that as a given
   TS moves from one server to another, the (inbound) traffic
   originated outside of the TS's directly attached NVE, and destined
   to that TS be routed optimally to the NVE to which the server
   presently hosting that TS, without first traversing some other NVEs.
   This is also known as avoiding "triangular routing".

   ECMP can be used by the DCBR or any NVEs that don't support host
   routing or can't access NVA to distribute traffic equally to any of
   the NVEs that support the subnet (VN). If an NVE doesn't have the
   destination of a data packet directly attached, it can query NVA for
   the target NVE to which the destination is attached, and encapsulate
   the packet with the target NVE as outer destination before sending
   it out.

   Another approach is to designate one or two NVEs as designated
   forwarder for a specific subnet when the subnet is spread across
   many NVEs. For example, if high percentage of TSs of one subnet is
   attached to NVE "X", the remaining small percentage of the subnet is
   spread around many NVEs. Designating NVE "X" as the designated
   forwarder for the subnet can greatly reduce the "triangular routing"
   for the traffic destined to TSs in this subnet.


  8. Managing duplicated addresses

   This document assumes that during VM migration a given MAC address
   within a VN can only exist at one TS at a time. As TSs move around
   NVEs, it is possible that the network state may not be immediately
   synchronized. It is important for NVEs to report directly attached
   TSs to NVA on periodically bases so that NVA can generate alarms and
   fix duplicated address issues.




merged, et al.          Expires April 9, 2015                 [Page 22]

Internet-Draft           NVO3 Mobility Scheme              October 2014


  9. Manageability Considerations

   Several solutions described in this document depend on the presence
   of NVA in the data center.

  10. Security Considerations

   In addition to the security considerations described in [nvo3-
   problem], it is clear that allowing TSs migrating across Data Center
   will require more stringent security enforcement. The traditional
   placement of security functions, e.g. firewall, at data center
   gateways is no longer enough. TS mobility will require security
   functions to enforce policies among east-west traffic among TSs.
   When TSs move across Data Center, the associated policies have to be
   updated and enforced.


  11. IANA Considerations

   This document requires no IANA actions. RFC Editor: Please remove
   this section before publication.

  12. Acknowledgements

   The authors would like to thank Adrian Farrel, David Black, Dave Allen, Tom
   Herbert and Larry Kreeger for their review and comments. The authors would also
   like to thank Ivan Pepelnjak for his contributions to this document.



  13. References

   13.1. Normative References

   [RFC2119] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
             Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   13.2. Informative References

   [nvo3-problem] Narten T.et al., "Overlays for Network
          Virtualization", draft-ietf-nvo3-overlay-problem-statement-
          04, July 2013.


merged, et al.          Expires April 9, 2015                 [Page 23]

Internet-Draft           NVO3 Mobility Scheme              October 2014


   [RFC4364] Rosen, Rekhter, et. al., "BGP/MPLS IP VPNs", RFC4364,
          February 2006

   [RFC4684] Pedro Marques, et al., "Constrained Route Distribution for
          Border Gateway Protocol/MultiProtocol Label Switching
          (BGP/MPLS) Internet Protocol (IP) Virtual Private Networks
          (VPNs)", RFC4684, November 2006

   [E-VPN] Aggarwal R., et al., "BGP MPLS Based Ethernet VPN", draft-
          ietf-l2vpn-evpn, work in progress

   [Default-Gateway] http://www.iana.org/assignments/bgp-extended-
          communities


































merged, et al.          Expires April 9, 2015                 [Page 24]

Internet-Draft           NVO3 Mobility Scheme              October 2014


Authors' Addresses

      Yakov Rekhter
      Juniper Networks
      1194 North Mathilda Ave.
      Sunnyvale, CA 94089
      Email: yakov@juniper.net

      Linda Dunbar
      Huawei Technologies
      5340 Legacy Drive, Suite 175
      Plano, TX 75024, USA
      Email: ldunbar@huawei.com

      Rahul Aggarwal
      Arktan, Inc
      Email: raggarwa_1@yahoo.com

      Wim Henderickx
      Alcatel-Lucent
      Email: wim.henderickx@alcatel-lucent.com

      Ravi Shekhar
      Juniper Networks
      1194 North Mathilda Ave.
      Sunnyvale, CA 94089
      Email: rshekhar@juniper.net

      Luyuan Fang
      Cisco Systems
      111 Wood Avenue South
      Iselin, NJ 08830
      Email: lufang@microsoft.com

      Ali Sajassi
      Cisco Systems
      Email: sajassi@cisco.com







merged, et al.          Expires April 9, 2015                 [Page 25]

