
 


Network Working Group                                       Zubair Ahmad 
Internet Draft                                                    Equant 
Category: Informational                                           E. Oki 
Expires: September 2006                                              NTT 
                                                                Lei Wang 
                                                                 Telenor 
                                                             Jaime Miles 
                                                  Level 3 Communications 
                                                                         
                                                                         
                                                                         
                                                              March 2006 
 
 
            Multi-TEchnology Recovery (MTER) Problem Statement 
 
               draft-ahmad-mter-problem-statement-00.txt 
 
Status of this Memo 
    
   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any 
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware 
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes 
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79. 
 
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other 
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.  
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt. 
    
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
Abstract 
    
   The objective of this document is to begin a discussion that will 
   determine the level of interest at the IETF in documenting how 
   multiple recovery techniques can successfully be combined to protect 
   a set of network resources and the various interactions between these 
   recovery techniques. Potential outcome of this work could be to 
   define new MIBs and/or OAM techniques devoted to such interactions. 
 
 
 
 
Ahmad, Oki, Wang, Miles      MTER Problem Statement             [Page 1] 
  
             draft-ahmad-mter-problem-statement-00.txt    January 2006 


 
Conventions used in this document 
 
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119. 
 
Table of Contents 
    
   1.      Note........................................................2 
   2.      Terminology.................................................3 
   3.      Introduction................................................3 
   4.      Non objectives..............................................4 
   5.      Three MTER scenarios........................................4 
   5.1.    IGP Fast Convergence and MPLS FRR...........................4 
   5.1.1.  Description.................................................4 
   5.1.2 Evaluation....................................................5 
   5.1.3 Potential side effects........................................5 
   5.2.    IGP Fast Convergence & Graceful Restart.....................5 
   5.2.1.  Description.................................................5 
   5.2.2.  Interactions................................................6 
   5.3.    IGP Fast Convergence and GMPLS Protection and 
           Restoration.................................................7 
   5.3.1.  Description.................................................7 
   5.3.2.  Evaluation..................................................8 
   5.3.3.  Potential Side effects......................................8 
   5.3.4.  Required functions..........................................8 
   6.      Multi Techno OAM............................................9 
   6.1.    Failure detection and isolation in an MTER context..........9 
   6.2.    MIBs/OAM...................................................10 
   7.      Future items...............................................10 
   8.      Acknowledgment.............................................10 
   9.      References.................................................10 
   10.     Authors' Addresses:........................................11 
   11.     Intellectual Property Statement............................12 
    
1. Note 
    
   The first revision of this document aims to start discussions that 
   will be used to determine the level of interest in the IETF in 
   documenting the impacts of combining multiple recovery techniques.  
   The content in this document is not exhaustive but instead 
   illustrates some of the challenges and opportunities encountered when 
   combining a few of the multiple recovery techniques.  Ideally the 
   discussions generated from this document will also highlight the 
   priority of which combinations a future working group should look at 
   first. Potential outcome of this work could be to define new MIBs 
   and/or OAM techniques devoted to such interactions. 
    
    
    

 
Ahmad, Oki, Wang, Miles      MTER Problem Statement             [Page 2] 
  
             draft-ahmad-mter-problem-statement-00.txt    January 2006 


2. Terminology 
 
   Recovery Mechanism: A network mechanism that restores network 
   connectivity upon link, node or SRLG failure. 
    
   MPLS Fast Reroute: MPLS Recovery Mechanism that relies on pre-
   established local backup LSPs. 
    
   GMPLS P&R: GMPLS Protection and Restoration. Set of GMPLS Recovery 
   Mechanisms under definition within the CCAMP WG. This includes end-
   to-end recovery and segment recovery. 
  
   IGP Fast Convergence: The set of IGP improvements to minimize IGP 
   convergence time upon failure. This includes, but is not limited to, 
   fast LSA/LSP triggering (with back-off) upon routing adjacency 
   changes, fast SPF triggering (with back-off), and incremental SPF. 
    
   Graceful Restart: Control plane recovery mechanism allowing a control 
   plane element to restart and recover state information from its 
   neighbors with no impact on the data plane. A set of graceful restart 
   mechanisms have been defined for routing and signaling protocols 
   (e.g. OSPF, ISIS, BGP, LDP, RSVP, etc.). 
 
   MTER: Multi-TEchnology Recovery : This refers to the combination of 
   at least two distinct recovery mechanisms to protect against network 
   elements failures (link, node, SRLG). 
 
3. Introduction 
    
   Over the past few years a plethora of recovery techniques (involving  
   global and local mechanisms for protection and restoration) have been 
   defined in various Working Groups at the IETF, implemented by the 
   vendor community, and deployed by network operators.  Examples of 
   these techniques include IGP Fast Convergence, MPLS Fast Reroute 
   ([FRR]), GMPLS P&R ([E2E-RECOVERY], [SEG-RECOVERY]), and Graceful 
   Restart ([RFC3847], [RFC3623], [RFC3478], [RSVP-RESTART]).  The goal 
   of this work has been to improve overall availability of the networks 
   that implement these recovery techniques.   
 
   Unfortunately no single recovery technique can protect a network 
   against all possible failure types. Consequently network operators 
   have found that the variety of failure types usually requires that 
   they deploy multiple recovery techniques with different scopes (link, 
   node control plane, node data plane, SRLG...) to improve their 
   overall network availability. This is referred to as Multi-Technology 
   Recovery (MTER). 
    
   As network operators have combined several of the recovery 
   technologies into their networks they have discovered that there can 
   be interactions between the combined recovery techniques. The 
   following sections of this document will look at several combinations 

 
Ahmad, Oki, Wang, Miles      MTER Problem Statement             [Page 3] 
  
             draft-ahmad-mter-problem-statement-00.txt    January 2006 


   of recovery techniques and their unique interactions when deployed 
   together. 
    
   For each of the combinations studied, this document analyses the 
   potential side effects and look at various recovery metrics such as 
   scope of recovery, robustness, recovery time, number of states, 
   stability, ability to provide bandwidth protection, transient 
   congestion (micro-loops) that impact other flows, race conditions, 
   and backup bandwidth overbooking.  
   Note that recovery times referenced in this document will be in terms 
   of an order of magnitude as they strongly depend on implementations 
   and network engineering. 
    
   Although various techniques already exist so as to safely deploy a 
   set of recovery mechanisms in combination, there are no defined tools 
   to manage and monitor their combined use. 
    
4. Non objectives 
    
   This document does not provide a detailed description of the 
   referenced recovery techniques.  For a detailed description of each 
   recovery technique see the referenced RFCs or Drafts.  Additionally 
   this paper does not compare recovery technologies or seek to make any 
   recommendations as to which recovery techniques to combine. Moreover, 
   the objective of this work is not to propose extensions of existing 
   protocols that are defined in existing Working Groups. 
    
   Finally, there are cases where a recovery technique is mainly 
   available because of a vendor implementation optimization or specific 
   algorithm. This document will not cover such implementation specific 
   aspects. 
 
5. Three MTER scenarios 
 
5.1. IGP Fast Convergence and MPLS FRR 
 
5.1.1. Description 
 
   In this MTER scenario, recovery upon link and SRLG failures relies on 
   MPLS FRR link protection with one-hop unconstrained primary tunnels, 
   while recovery upon node failures relies on IGP Fast Convergence. 
    
   The motivation for such MTER scenario may be, for instance, to rely 
   on FRR for link protection only so as to avoid the deployment of a 
   potentially large number of end-to-end TE LSPs and rely on the IGP  
   in case of node failures. Furthermore, in a MPLS/VPN network MPLS FRR 
   node protection coverage is currently limited to P routers, PE 
   routers recovery still rely on BGP/IGP Fast Convergence. 
    
    
    

 
Ahmad, Oki, Wang, Miles      MTER Problem Statement             [Page 4] 
  
             draft-ahmad-mter-problem-statement-00.txt    January 2006 


5.1.2 Evaluation 
    
   In case of link protection, the traffic is fast rerouted along the 
   pre-established backup tunnel path and the recovery time is on the 
   order of a few tens of ms thanks to the local protection nature of 
   MPLS FRR (see [FRR]). In case of node protection, the recovery relies 
   on IGP fast convergence, and the sub-second convergence should be 
   achievable by IGP fast convergence in some circumstances. 
 
5.1.3 Potential side effects 
    
   With this combination, a link failure is likely to trigger both FRR 
   and IGP recovery which compete for the resources to offer the same 
   protection with the following potential side effects: 
        - The IGP is unnecessarily stressed, 
        - There might be a risk of congestion that may be due to  
          inherent IGP micro-loops or lack of bandwidth ressources; 
 
5.1.4 Required functions 
    
   The problem relies on the fact that there is no way to distinguish 
   links and node failures. A useful way to avoid double recovery 
   activation would be to rely on a mechanism to rapidly distinguish 
   link and node failures. This would allow activating the appropriate 
   mechanism upon failure.  
   Another currently available solution, although not entirely optimal, 
   consists of advertising the primary TE-LSP as a link within the IGP 
   so as not to activate IGP convergence upon link failure. 
    
   Note that there are currently no defined tools (MIBs, OAM) allowing 
   for the monitoring of such interaction. For example, is there a need 
   for a MIB that would keep track of the number of times each mechanism 
   has triggered a recovery action and the reasons for each activation? 
    
    
5.2. IGP Fast Convergence & Graceful Restart  
 
5.2.1. Description 
    
    
   In this MTER scenario Graceful Restart (GR) is combined with IGP Fast 
   Convergence. GR is used to ensure recovery upon node control plane 
   failures, and IGP fast convergence is used to ensure recovery upon 
   data plane (link & node) failures. 
    
   Graceful Restart (GR) mechanisms have been defined at the IETF for 
   various protocols including BGP [BGP-RESTART], ISIS [RFC3847], OSPF 
   [RFC3623], LDP [RFC3478] and RSVP-TE ([RFC3473], [RSVP-RESTART]).  
   Graceful restart allows networks to protect against Control Plane 
   failures on Edge and Core Routers (e.g. Control plane processor 
   Failure/ Switchover, Planned Maintenance Operations, etc).  The key 
   objective of GR is to gracefully recover the control plane following 
 
Ahmad, Oki, Wang, Miles      MTER Problem Statement             [Page 5] 
  
             draft-ahmad-mter-problem-statement-00.txt    January 2006 


   control plane processor failure/switchover and reduce or eliminate 
   the impact on traffic forwarding.  
    
   IGP Fast Convergence allows quick recovery from backbone link 
   failures as well as Node Data Plane failures.   
    
    
5.2.2. Interactions 
    
   During GR operation, the neighbors/peers continue to forward traffic 
   through the node which is undergoing a Control Plane Restart, whereas 
   in the case of IGP Fast Convergence the idea is to re-route around 
   the failed link/node as quickly as possible upon failure detection. 
   Although the respective behaviors of GR and IGP Fast Convergence seem 
   to be orthogonal at a first sight, there can be some interactions 
   when both of these functions are used in conjunction. 
 
   Indeed, the GR protocols rely on support of their neighbors to 
   provide the routing information during a Control Plane Restart. When 
   a failure/ switchover occurs on a GR capable device, its neighbors 
   are supposed to wait a certain amount of time (i.e. Restart timer in 
   case of BGP GR, ISIS Holdtime in case of ISIS GR..) to allow for the 
   recovery of the node control plane after completing the IGP process 
   restart (making the assumption of a recoverable control plane 
   failure).  In order to allow the GR mechanism to work effectively, it 
   is required that the IGP process restarted and IGP Hellos are sent to 
   the adjacent neighbors before the IGP Holdtime/Dead-interval expires 
   ([RFC3847], [RFC3623]).  In case the IGP process restart takes longer 
   or the IGP Hellos are not sent within the Holdtime/Dead-interval, the 
   IGP adjacency will be declared down by the neighbors, thus triggering 
   routing convergence and causing packet loss. This implies that 
   certain Control Plane failures may actually cause to abort GR and 
   trigger IGP convergence.  
    
   Another implication of GR mechanism and inherent IGP process restart 
   time is that it may require compromising the IGP adjacency’s failure 
   detection time i.e. the IGP Holdtime/ Dead-interval must be greater 
   than the process switchover time.  So, this aspect may limit the 
   ability to aggressively tune the IGP Adjacency failure detection time 
   (e.g. using IGP Fast Hellos or BFD, etc.) and may not allow for a 
   faster detection of link and node data plane failures, in cases where 
   data plane failure detection relies on IGP adjacency loss. It should 
   be noted however, that Fast failure detection is not necessarily 
   incompatible with Graceful Restart.  The issue really is that when an 
   IGP adjacency is lost, the peer does not know whether this is due to 
   Control Plane or Data Plane failure, and hence does not know if it 
   has to continue sending traffic to the neighbor or rather trigger IGP 
   convergence. 
    
   This is to be noted that GR mechanism only protects from Control 
   Plane failures and is built on the premise that forwarding can be 
   preserved during Control Plane Restart on the GR capable device. 
 
Ahmad, Oki, Wang, Miles      MTER Problem Statement             [Page 6] 
  
             draft-ahmad-mter-problem-statement-00.txt    January 2006 


   There may be a situation where a Control Plane Restart occurs and 
   forwarding cannot be truly preserved (e.g. due to memory corruption, 
   software bug, etc.).  In this scenario it should be desirable to 
   trigger IGP Fast Convergence and avoid blackholing of traffic.  
   However, in this situation the IGP convergence is likely to be 
   delayed due to having the GR mechanism activated.   
 
   To summarize, GR mechanism requires the neighbors to wait for some 
   time mainly due to the inherent control plane processor switchover 
   time.  If this time is set to be too short, it will likely interfere 
   with GR mechanism by triggering routing convergence at the neighbors.  
   If this time is set a bit higher, it will delay IGP Fast Convergence 
   in case of link and node data plane failures. This issue arises 
   mainly due to the lack of a mechanism to make a clear distinction 
   between Control Plane failures and Data Plane failures. Such 
   mechanism may be considered to efficiently handle this MTER scenario. 
    
   As in the previous case, there are currently no defined tools (MIBs, 
   OAM) allowing for the monitoring of such interaction. Is there a need 
   to be able to record a case where a GR procedure has failed leading 
   to increasing convergence time of the IGP? Is there a need to be able 
   to monitor the GR performances in order to be able to tune more 
   aggressively IGP timers? 
    
5.3. IGP Fast Convergence and GMPLS Protection & Restoration 
    
5.3.1. Description 
    
   In this third MTER scenario, IP links are supported by a transport 
   network (SDH, WDM…) managed by a GMPLS control plane. Protection 
   against link and node failures is as follows: 
      - Link recovery relies on an underlying GMPLS protection and 
   restoration (P&R) mechanism.   This includes end-to-end recovery and 
   segment recovery mechanisms ([E2E-RECOVERY],[SEG-RECOVERY]).  
      - Node recovery relies on IGP Fast Convergence. 
    
   Note that some data plane recovery mechanisms such as the SONET/SDH 
   protection mechanism may co-exist with GMPLS P&R mechanisms. The co-
   existence with data plane recovery and GMPLS recovery mechanisms is 
   not addressed in this section. 
    
   GMPLS P&R mechanisms are activated at either end nodes in the case of 
   the end-to-end recovery or at an end node or transit node along the 
   GMPLS LSP route in the case of the segment recovery. Recovery may be 
   triggered by one of the following events: 
   - Some physical interface alarms. A physical interface alarm is 
   invoked by detecting data plane errors such as a loss of light or 
   error of control bits. 
   - Receiving GMPLS control plane messages. The messages include Notify 
   Message, and Path/Resv Error Messages; 


 
Ahmad, Oki, Wang, Miles      MTER Problem Statement             [Page 7] 
  
             draft-ahmad-mter-problem-statement-00.txt    January 2006 


   - GMPLS message time out. A RSVP state is expired, as no refresh 
   message is received at the node within the configured refresh 
   interval time-out value; 
   - Link Manage Protocol (LMP) Detection. LMP [RFC4204] is able to 
   detect node or link failures.  
 
   IGP Fast Convergence may be triggered by one of the following events:  
   - Some physical interface alarms. This case is the same as the case 
   of GMPLS P&R mechanisms. 
   - IGP time out. IGP neighbor establishment is expired, as no hello 
   message is received at the node within the configured time interval. 
   - BFD. A BFD timer expired 
    
   Upon transport network failure, both IGP Fast Convergence and GMPLS 
   P&R may be simultaneously activated.  
    
5.3.2. Evaluation 
    
   Orders of GMPLS recovery times (IP link failure) are usually from 
   several tens of milliseconds to several hundreds of milliseconds (to 
   a few seconds in case of E2E rerouting with a large number of LSPs). 
    
   Orders of IGP Fast Convergence times (IP node failures)  are 
   typically from few hundreds of millisecond to a few seconds.  
    
5.3.3. Potential Side effects 
    
   Upon transport network failure, both IGP Fast Convergence and GMPLS 
   P&R may be simultaneously activated.  
 
   This has the following side effects: 
      - This may lead to congestion at the IP layer while backup 
   transport resources are available.    
      - This may lead to race conditions: IGP rerouting on an IP link 
   that is going to be preempted by the GMPLS recovery process; 
      - This may generate useless IGP stress: Link-state re- 
   advertisement and SPF re-calculation: A large amount of control-plane  
   packets are transmitted within a short time period. Processing load  
   at each node is increased.  
      - This may lead to useless IGP instabilities: Congestion due to 
   transient routing loops, etc. 
 
5.3.4. Required functions 
    
   Recovery mechanisms should be coordinated between packet and 
   transport layers to satisfy high availability needs while using 
   network resources efficiently. In other words it must be possible to 
   avoid simultaneous recovery activations in both layers. For the sake 
   of illustration the inter-layer recovery coordination may rely, for 
   instance, on a hold off timer approach or on a separate layer 
   recovery approach. 
    
 
Ahmad, Oki, Wang, Miles      MTER Problem Statement             [Page 8] 
  
             draft-ahmad-mter-problem-statement-00.txt    January 2006 


   Although not entirely optimal, a hold-off timer approach allows a 
   transport layer recovery to be performed first before a packet layer 
   recovery is activated. In case the transport layer recovery does not 
   succeed within a certain time, a packet layer recovery is activated. 
   In order for the packet layer to judge whether the transport layer 
   recovery succeed or not, a hold off timer is used. With this approach, 
   network operators should not allow a physical interface alarm to 
   invoke both GMPLS P&R mechanism and IGP Fast Convergence when both 
   mechanisms co-exist. In addition, network operators should configure 
   the IGP time-out value more than the time required for GMPLS recovery.  
    
   The pros of the hold-off timer approach is the simplicity, and the 
   major cons is the delay introduced in case of node failure. Indeed, 
   in case of node failure, neighbor routers wait, while they could 
   immediately activate IGP rerouting. This may be applied for best 
   effort traffic.  
    
   The separate layer recovery approach allows an inter-layer recovery 
   mechanism to make the distinction between IP link and IP node 
   failures, and to control which layer will be in charge of the 
   recovery. If an IP node failure is detected, the packet layer 
   recovery is activated while the transport layer recovery is not. On 
   the other hand, if an IP link failure, caused by an optical link or 
   node failure, is detected, the transport layer recovery is activated 
   while the packet layer recovery is not.  
   The separate layer recovery approach may be applied for non best 
   effort traffic, because recovery time in case of node failure can be 
   reduced compared to the hold-off timer approach.  
   To be efficient this approach requires to rapidily distinguish 
   failure types (link and node) and this may be quite  challenging.  
    
   The separate layer recovery approach can be combined with the hold 
   off timer approach. In the separate layer recovery approach, even 
   after an IP link failure is detected the transport layer recovery may 
   not succeed. In that case, the packet layer recovery will be 
   activated after the hold off timer expired.  
    
   Similarly to the two previous cases, there are currently no defined 
   tools (MIBs, OAM) allowing for the monitoring of such interaction. Is 
   there a need to be able to record a case where a GMPLS P&R procedure 
   has failed leading to increasing the IGP convergence time? Is there a 
   need to be able to monitor the GMPLS P&R performances in order to be 
   able to tune more aggressively IGP timers? 
    
    
6. Multi Techno OAM  
 
6.1. Failure detection and isolation in an MTER context. 
    
   In an MTER context it appears relevant to study mechanisms allowing 
   to detect and isolate failures (control plane/data plane, link/node, 
   SRLG...). Particular attention would have to be given on the time for 
 
Ahmad, Oki, Wang, Miles      MTER Problem Statement             [Page 9] 
  
             draft-ahmad-mter-problem-statement-00.txt    January 2006 


   such detection/isolation, as this may diminish the benefits of such 
   mechanisms.  
    
   Various mechanisms have been defined to detect failures: Layer 2  
   alarms (e.g. Sonet AIS), control plane alarms (e.g. GMPLS Notify),  
   control plane hellos (e.g. IGP hello), BFD [BFD], LMP [RFC4204], etc.  
   Applicability of these technologies to the detection and isolation of  
   failures, would have to be documented for each MTER scenario.  
 
6.2. MIBs/OAM 
    
   There is a need for a MTER MIB that would, non exhaustively contain 
   the following information for each failure occurrence: 
        - the location of the failure (link, node, SRLG) and the exact  
          reason for the rerouting; 
        - the set of P&R mechanisms triggered; 
        - an order of magnitude of the recovery time. 
 
7. Future items  
    
   Here is a non exhaustive set of additional items that need to be 
   covered as part of the MTER work: 
    - Other combinations of recovery techniques (e.g. BGP-IGP   
      interactions, IGP-IPFRR interactions, etc.); 
    - Superset of elementary combinations (e.g IGP Fast Convergence for  
      node data plane failures + Graceful Restart for node control plane  
      failures + MPLS FRR link protection for link failures). 
   -  Combination of recovery techniques to protect distinct traffics  
      (e.g. IGP Fast convergence and end-to-end MPLS-TE recovery); 
    
8. Acknowledgments  
    
We would like to thank Jean-Louis Le Roux, Jean-Philippe Vasseur and 
Raymond Zhang, for their useful comments and suggestions. 
 
9. References 
 
   [RFC2119] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate 
   Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997. 
    
   [RFC3667] Bradner, S., "IETF Rights in Contributions", BCP 78, RFC 
   3667, February 2004. 
 
   [BCP79] Bradner, S., "Intellectual Property Rights in IETF 
   Technology", RFC 3979, March 2005. 
 
   [RFC3945] Mannie, E., et. al. "Generalized Multi-Protocol Label 
   Switching Architecture", RFC 3945, October 2004. 
    
   [FRR] P. Pan, G. Swallow, A. Atlas, et al "Fast Reroute Extensions to 
   RSVP-TE for LSP Tunnels", FRC 4090, May 2005. 
    
 
Ahmad, Oki, Wang, Miles      MTER Problem Statement            [Page 10] 
  
             draft-ahmad-mter-problem-statement-00.txt    January 2006 


   [BGP-RESTART] P. Sangli, Y. Rekhter, R. Fernando, J. Scudder, E. 
   Chen, "Graceful Restart Mechanism for BGP", work in progress. 
    
   [RFC3847] M. Shand, L. Ginsberg, "Restart Signaling for 
   Intermediate System to Intermediate System (IS-IS)", RFC3847, July 
   2004. 
 
   [RFC3623] J. Moy, P. Pillay, A. Lindem, "Graceful OSPF Restart", 
   RFC3623, November 2003. 
    
   [RFC3478] M. Leelanivas, Y. Rekhter, R. Aggarwal, "Graceful Restart 
   LDP", RFC3478, February 2003. 
    
   [RFC3473] L. Berger et al., "GMPLS RSVP-TE extensions", RFC3473, 
   January 2003. 
    
   [RSVP-RESTART] A. Satyanarayana, R. Rahman, "Extensions to GMPLS RSVP 
   Graceful Restart", work in progress. 
    
   [E2E-RECOVERY] J. Lang, Y. Rekhter, D. Papadimitriou, "RSVP-TE 
   Extensions in support of End-to-End Generalized Multi-Protocol Label 
   Switching (GMPLS)-based Recovery", work in progress.   
    
   [SEG-RECOVERY] L. Berger, I. Bryskin, D. Papadimitriou, A. Farrel, 
   "GMPLS Based Segment Recovery", work in progress. 
    
   [RFC4204] J. Lang et al. "Link Management Protocol", RFC 4204, 
   October 2005. 
    
   [BFD] D. Katz, D. Ward, "Bidirectional Forwarding Detection", work in 
   progress. 
 
10. Authors' Addresses:  
  
   Zubair Ahmad  
   Equant 
   13775 McLearen Road, Oak Hill VA 20171 
   Email: zubair.ahmad@equant.com 
    
   Eiji Oki 
   NTT 
   3-9-11 Midori-Cho 
   Musashino, Tokyo 180-8585, Japan 
   Email: oki.eiji@lab.ntt.co.jp 
    
   Lei Wang  
   Telenor  
   Snaroyveien 30  
   Fornebu  1331  
   NORWAY  
   Email: lei.wang@telenor.com  
    
 
Ahmad, Oki, Wang, Miles      MTER Problem Statement            [Page 11] 
  
             draft-ahmad-mter-problem-statement-00.txt    January 2006 


    
   Jaime Miles 
   Level 3 Communications 
   Email: jaime.miles@level3.com 
 
11. Intellectual Property Statement 
 
   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to 
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in 
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights 
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has 
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information 
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be 
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 
    
   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of 
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 
    
   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at  
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org. 
    
   Disclaimer of Validity 
    
   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an 
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS 
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET 
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, 
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE 
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED 
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
    
   Copyright Statement 
    
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).  This document is subject 
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and 
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights. 
 







 
Ahmad, Oki, Wang, Miles      MTER Problem Statement            [Page 12] 
  
