Internet Engineering Task Force
Internet Draft                                    James M. Polk
Expiration: August 23rd, 2001                     Cisco Systems   
File: draft-polk-mlpp-over-ip-00.txt            


   
   
   

   
        Multi-Level Precedence and Preemption over IP
   
                    February 23rd, 2001 
   
     

     
Status of this Memo 
     
This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance 
with all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026. 
    
Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engi-
neering Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. 
Note that other groups may also distribute working documents 
as Internet-Drafts. 
    
Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-
Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as 
"work in progress." 
    
The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
    
The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed 
at http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 


Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", 
   "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  
   "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be 
   interpreted as described in [RFC-2119].



Polk          draft-polk-mlpp-over-ip-00.txt         Page 1

Internet Draft         MLPP over IP          Feb 23rd, 2001


Abstract 

This document describes how the ANSI specification T1.619-
1992[1] and its extension T1.619a-1994 [2] should be mapped or 
correlated or migrated over to either a mixed TDM and IP network 
(with Gateways in between) or a pure IP network that requires 
the functionality of these two specs as Standard Operating 
Procedure.

Table of Contents 
     
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  2 
Table of Contents  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  2 
1.0 Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  2 
2.0 MLPP Overview  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
3.0 Requirements for MLPP in an IP Infrastructure  . . . . .  8
3.1 General Priority Requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
3.2 General Preemption Requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.3 End Station Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
3.4 End user Requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
3.5 Internetworking Device Requirements  . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.6 Media Gateway (MG) Requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.7 General Security Requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4.0 IP Infrastructure  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
5.0 IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
6.0 Security Considerations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
7.0 References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
8.0 Author Information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16


1.0 Introduction

This document describes how the ANSI specification T1.619-
1992[1] and its extension T1.619a-1994[2] should be mapped or 
correlated or migrated over to either a mixed TDM and IP network 
(with Gateways in between) or a pure IP network that requires 
the functionality of these two ANSI specs as Standard Operating 
Procedure within the IP portion of a network.

T1.619-1992 describes an ISDN based ability of marking and 
tracking each and every (TDM) phone call, from call set-up, to 
connection, to completion (hang-up) throughout a defined Voice 
Network. I believe ISDN was originally chosen because of the D-
Channel(s) and its control over associated bearer channels 
(usually 1 D-Channel controls 23 bearer channels in a PRI T1 
circuit, but can and is take down to the BRI circuit (two B-
Channels at 64kbps and one 16kbps D-Channel). In this marking 


Polk          draft-polk-mlpp-over-ip-00.txt         Page 2
Internet Draft         MLPP over IP          Feb 23rd, 2001

and tracking of every single phone call, the network becomes 
priority "aware" of which phone calls are important and which 
are not. Which phone calls have priority over others, and which 
do not. There are 5 levels of defined Priority given to every 
phone call. Under normal operating conditions of an T1.619-1992 
enabled Voice network, no calls ever dropped, or prioritized 
greater than others that would cause anything to occur to those 
lessor Prioritized calls because there are no network 
bottlenecks, no congested interfaces, and no call flow problems. 

But this isn't always the case. Certain environments require the 
ability to prioritize calls over others in those network 
situations that bottlenecks occur and are deemed "important" 
phone call that need to get completed even if it means 
disconnecting an existing, pre-established call somewhere within 
the network.

T1.619-1992 was written for networks that have this type of 
requirement. To have multiple levels of priority for all voice 
calls and the ability in the time of need, to preempt voice calls 
that are deemed less important than others in order to get 
those fewer, more important calls through the network to their 
intended destination. This specification has been called MLPP, 
for 'Multi-Level Precedence and Preemption' ever since its 
original publication in 1992. The Clarification document T1.619-
1994[2] merely clarifies some errors from the original 
specification and added some minor functionality, but didn't 
change the essence of the original specification.

I am going to use the words 'Precedence' and 'Priority' inter-
changeably throughout the remainder of this ID.

Why is this document here needed in the IETF?

Because these MLPP enabled networks were built. And they were 
sometimes built very big, by anyone's standards. One closed 
network I know of has 800+ Class 5's in it, for example; that's 
fairly large and fairly complicated, and it will be fairly 
difficult to migrate to our current love: Packets. IP packets to 
be more specific with our area of focus in the IETF.

So, there needs to be a migration from an ISDN based, PBX based, 
TDM based Voice infrastructure to a partial ISDN/PBX/TDM based 
infrastructure and partial IP-based infrastructure, or just 
completely to an IP based infrastructure with MLPP capabilities. 
No functionality can be lost in this transition or build out.


Polk          draft-polk-mlpp-over-ip-00.txt         Page 3

Internet Draft         MLPP over IP          Feb 23rd, 2001

Conventional wisdom sez that in order for consumers to move from 
one 'thing' or 'habit' to another, it requires some form of 
motivation to do that new 'thing' or 'habit'. In the telephony 
case, it's usually the case which this new idea costs a whole 
lot less (possibly with less functionality) or it has a whole 
lot more functionality (possibly costing more). But none of the 
consumers which are connected to MLPP enabled networks are 
paying a dime out of their own pockets for these networks, 
because they are utilizing this functionality only in their 
respective work environments. So, if cost isn't a factor 
(arguably), functionality is; an all-of-a-sudden-lack-in-
functionality would and will be noticed and likely not positively.

This document was written with another ID in mind that is 
intended to be a Standards track ID within the SIP WG [3] that 
is intended to be the smaller, SIP focused aspects of MLPP that 
needed extending within a WG that a "general" Informational-
based ID could not stipulate or require. In other words, the 
intent here is to try not to solve MLPP in one BIG document. 
Where would it go, and who would oversee it? I decided to break 
it up into several ID's. This one is the larger overview, 
general ID, and Informational. In talking to Scott Bradner, he 
and I felt it wise to create this larger ID on an Info track, 
and submit the smaller Standards Track ID's into the appropriate 
WG's that had the need for adjustment or extensions for MLPP-
specific features and capabilities. SIP was the first I 
identified and submitted into; there will likely be many others. 
I hope, as Scott does I believe, that each of these WG 
extensions will be small in nature and scope, tweaks if you 
will. MLPP is not the biggest thing to come to networking, and I 
don't want to treat it like it is. But there is a customer 
requirement (many actually) for these specific features and 
functionalities, and in talking with customers on both sides of 
the Atlantic, IP and voice communications will remain separated 
until these capabilities are incorporated into an IP-Manageable 
infrastructure in a Standards accepted way where multiple 
companies can provide products for bid.


2.0 MLPP Overview

Multi level Precedence and Preemption Service Capability 
stipulates a relative priority ranking order of all Call flows 
on a hop-by-hop basis through a Voice Network from their 
relative beginning Voice device (calling party) to the end 
Voice device (called party). Within the TDM world, these 

Polk          draft-polk-mlpp-over-ip-00.txt         Page 4

Internet Draft         MLPP over IP          Feb 23rd, 2001

call flows were in a closed circuit switched network from 
a PBX or Tandem Switch to PBX or Tandem Switch. Each 
Switch, upon initiation of a higher priority call flow 
where there were no available outbound resources or trunks, 
preempted a lesser priority call flow by seizing the 
resources of an existing external truck circuit to satisfy 
that higher Priority Call. Eliminating the previous call with-
out giving either end station a choice or chance to continue 
the call flow of the switch determined overridden call. 
Typically, an audible tone occurred on the inbound caller's 
phone receiving the Preempting call flow. But this only occurred 
if that caller happened to be the resource that was preventing 
the higher priority call from being completed. In other words,  
like a forced call waiting with all the tones and such, but the 
existing call is not put on hold, it's disconnected. I don't 
know if that aspect of the MLPP spec is desired still or not, 
and should be looked at as a choice perhaps with a timer 
controlling how long the preempted call waits for the new call 
to be disconnected in order to reconnect the original call; with 
that first call being disconnected after an agreed upon 
timeframe within this spec.

The MLPP concept was created so that there was a real-time 
method of prioritizing voice communications. It was created 
back before electronic switching in the U.S. Government 
"AUTOVON" network. It is designed so that normal telephone 
traffic would not cause problems in the event of a crisis.

By contrast, in a Packetized Voice Network, there will likely 
not be fixed or pre-configured outbound circuits waiting for 
higher priority call flows to occur on a per-MLPP-enabled IP 
Internetworking device basis. This presents a more challenging 
problem of preemption in a less statically configured Network 
Topology. Also, every network device will need to have the code 
within it to make this Prioritization and Preemption 
determination similar or exactly like the Class 5's of today's 
MLPP networks, or there will be weaknesses in the IP 
Infrastructure that might prevent the proper completion of a 
(deemed) very important voice session.

Here is an example using Military Rank as a conceptual com-
parison:

The lowest level, ROUTINE, would be used for all normal call 
traffic. If a Company commander needed to reach his platoon 
leaders, he/she would use the PRIORITY precedence level. If a 
crisis arose, normal traffic would be preempted by command 

Polk          draft-polk-mlpp-over-ip-00.txt         Page 5

Internet Draft         MLPP over IP          Feb 23rd, 2001

traffic. The lower level command traffic would use the PRIORITY 
and potentially the IMMEDIATE precedence levels. The field 
grade traffic (brigade, battalion, and division) would use 
the IMMEDIATE, and in some cases FLASH precedence levels. 
Communications within the Corps and Theater commanders would 
use FLASH. The President, the Joint Chiefs, and some select 
theater commanders (e.g. CICNORAD, or CICSAC) would use the 
FLASH OVERRIDE precedence. This guarantees (in theory) that 
the most important commands (the President forbidding nuclear 
launch) would get through even over all other traffic of any 
priority or type.

This pre-grading of importance is a method of assigning maximum 
levels of priority to traffic based on user Profile (e.g. what 
they are authorized to do). Someone who was authorized to use 
IMMEDIATE precedence would normally use ROUTINE unless there 
was a legitimate reason to escalate the precedence to a higher 
level.

ANSI T.619-1992 states the 5 levels of Precedence (or Priority) 
for MLPP networks as the following:

     bits  Name
     ----  ----
     0000  "Flash Override" (0)
     0001  "Flash" (1)
     0010  "Immediate" (2)
     0011  "Priority" (3)
     0100  "Routine" (4)

     0101 to
     1111  "Spare"

There are actually 16 values/levels possible within the ANSI 
spec, but any additional levels will have a preemption func-
tionality below, or less than, "Routine". The intent is that 
"Flash Override" is always the highest level capable within a 
MLPP-compliant network.

In any case, a call session of any given Precedence level or 
value can preempt any Precedence level of a lesser level or 
value where network resources are already utilized. If these 
call values are equal, then other mechanisms, if any, can react 
according to their individual capabilities (e.g. Call waiting).

One very important concept to keep in mind with anything here, 
is that if network bandwidth or resources or trunks have the 

Polk          draft-polk-mlpp-over-ip-00.txt         Page 6

Internet Draft         MLPP over IP          Feb 23rd, 2001

capacity to complete the call, it doesn't matter what the 
priority is of *any* call, each will get treated equally. 

Key concept: Unless resources are at their respective maximum
             somewhere in the network, the Priority level any 
             call has doesn't matter in the least.

Preemption can take one of two forms. First, the called party 
may be busy with a lower Precedence call which must be pre-
empted in favor of completing the incoming higher Precedence 
call from the calling party. Second, the network resources 
somewhere in between the calling and called party may be satur-
ated with some combination of call sessions of lower Precedence 
requested by the calling party and other traffic (data). If the 
data traffic is of some lower priority level (perhaps a lower 
DSCP value[4]), it should receive less priority in order to 
allow this higher priority call session to seize outbound 
resources. If there is still not enough available outbound 
interface resources, then one or more of the lower Precedence 
calls shall be preempted to complete the higher Precedence call. 

There are three characteristics of preemption:

a)     Any party whose connection was preempted (whether that
       resource was reused or not) shall receive a distinctive
       audible notification. An addition notification can be 
       provided via some visual indication if possible or 
       desirable;

b)     Any called party of an active call that is being pre-
       empted by a higher Precedence call shall be required to 
       acknowledge the preemption before being connected to 
       the new calling party, and 

c)     When there are no idle resources, preemption of the 
       lowest of these lower level Precedence resources shall 
       occur;

Any call session can be preempted anytime after the Precedence 
value has been established for a call and call clearing has 
begun.

If there is a user or IP Voice device that is configured 
(somehow compliant with the parameters within that 
Administrative Domain (AD), and outside the scope of this 
document) to disable the ability to be preempted, that user or 


Polk          draft-polk-mlpp-over-ip-00.txt         Page 7

Internet Draft         MLPP over IP          Feb 23rd, 2001

IP Voice phone device will not experience preemption of calls by 
higher precedence calls, if the cause of preemption would be due 
to called party busy condition (e.g. call waiting is enacted 
here). However, the user may still experience preemption of 
calls due to a lack of network resources other than the user's 
own access resources [1].

Precedence calls that are not responded to by the called party 
(e.g. the called party chooses to hang up their phone without 
taking the call) may have their phone speaker initialized for 
that inbound Precedence call in order to complete the call; 
sometimes regardless if this called party wants the Precedence 
call [1]. An alternative to this approach could be to have an 
'alternate called party' signaled (e.g. that person's admini-
strator). This mechanism would be a per Domain decision.

An MLPP call session should automatically be set up with the 
lowest precedence level by default, until the user chooses a
level up to their maximum allowed within that Domain.


3.0 Requirements for MLPP in an IP Infrastructure

Since this is not currently a Working Group item from any WG in 
the IETF, this effort (right now) will not go through the 
process of a WG in the defining of Requirements first and attain 
consensus on those before proceeding. Hence, this section deals 
with the requirements of MLPP as I see them now. There could 
very well be more, that I am more than open to comment on this 
effort from my peers to that end, and possible inclusion in the 
next version of this I-D.

Actually, this draft doesn't have a known home (email reflector) 
for discussion within the IETF either, and I'd like that to be 
solved by the London meeting. There has been some talk about 
placing this along with the IEPS efforts of Hal Folts [5] - and 
that's certainly possible. That is a worthy effort, and fairly 
similar in scope and architecture and complexity.

And to make matter worse, I think it's questionable whether MLPP 
should *only* be written for Voice Communications over the long 
run. I see the great need to have it focus presently on Voice 
sessions (calls), but this should apply to anything that's RTP 
based at least, which is not just voice. And then in the future 
when authentication can be verifiable to a list of applications 
and Protocols within a IP-Managed network domain, to them as 


Polk          draft-polk-mlpp-over-ip-00.txt         Page 8

Internet Draft         MLPP over IP          Feb 23rd, 2001

well (but not yet). Therefore, I believe these requirements 
shall be written with Voice as an application in mind, 
discussions of this draft should also focus on what should be 
included, or removed, for other applications to take advantage 
of Priority and Preemption.

I will simply put the requirements for MLPP over IP in bullet 
form for this version of the ID and categorize them into areas 
of scope or functionality. Keep in mind that these requirements 
must be adhered to by all devices within a single, IP-Managed 
Domain in order to function properly.

3.1 General Priority Requirements

o   ANSI T.619-1992 states the 5 levels of Precedence (or
    Priority) for MLPP networks as the following:

     bits  Name
     ----  ----
     0000  "Flash Override" (0)
     0001  "Flash" (1)
     0010  "Immediate" (2)
     0011  "Priority" (3)
     0100  "Routine" (4)

     0101 to
     1111  "Spare"

    There are actually 16 values/levels possible within the ANSI
    spec, but any additional levels will have a preemption func-
    tionality below, or less than, "Routine". The intent is that 
    "Flash Override" is always the highest level capable within 
    a MLPP-compliant network.

    Where ANS.1/binary coding occurs, there must be 4 bits given 
    to MLPP Prioritization as shown above where 0000 is the   
    highest Priority level and 16 is the lowest. This doesn't 
    match the TOS or Diffserv bit mapping, so this must be done 
    somewhere else in the packet (of every packet).

    Where text coding occurs, the names associated with the 5 
    level of Priority must match the above order with "Flash 
    Override" being the highest, and "Routine" being the lowest 
    known one used.

    I acknowledge right now I'm not a coder, BTW.


Polk          draft-polk-mlpp-over-ip-00.txt         Page 9

Internet Draft         MLPP over IP          Feb 23rd, 2001

o   It is unclear if this infrastructure should apply to 
    Instant messaging for Priority yet, but it likely will at 
    some point


3.2 General Preemption Requirements

o   Any party whose connection was preempted (whether that
    resource was reused or not) shall receive a distinctive
    audible notification [1]. An addition notification can be 
    provided via some visual indication if possible or 
    desirable;

o   Any called party of an active call that is being pre-
    empted by a higher Precedence call shall be required to 
    acknowledge the preemption before being connected to 
    the new calling party, 

o   When there are no idle resources, preemption of the 
    lowest of these lower level Precedence resources shall 
    occur;

o   How to chose which established session, amongst the probable 
    many that traverse an interface experiencing congestion, is 
    to be terminated when a higher Priority session is initiated 
    through an internetworking device is likely a topic needing 
    discussion. I would vote for the session that has existed 
    the longest through that interface, meaning per session 
    timers must be kept either within the internetworking device 
    (in COPS [6], the PEP) or the server/node making the policy 
    decisions for that internetworking device (in COPS [6], the 
    PDP, which could be co-located and is allowed for in that 
    RFC)

o   If more than one session must be preempted in order to allow 
    that new high priority session through a congested network 
    interface, this must be allowed to occur on any inter-
    networking interface within this MLPP domain

o   Discussion is needed to determine if Voice (and possibly 
    Video) session should be allowed to drown out or starve all 
    other types of traffic through any congested network 
    interface. The Diffserv WG had similar discussions and I 
    don't know if an outcome was chosen. Conventional wisdom has 



Polk          draft-polk-mlpp-over-ip-00.txt         Page 10

Internet Draft         MLPP over IP          Feb 23rd, 2001

    a limited amount of the bandwidth through any interface for 
    any one application or Protocol, but that is absolutely  
    choice for each domain.

o   It is unclear if this infrastructure should apply to Instant 
    messaging  for Preemption yet, but it likely will at some 
    point


3.3 End Station Requirements

This section includes the IP devices that start the MLPP-enabled 
communication (IP phones, PC's, Handheld's and the likeà)

o   Ability of the End Station to generate RTP sessions with 
    all 5 MLPP Priority levels in the Packet headers, whether 
    that's self signalled (like would be the case in SIP), or 
    determined from another Node on the network (Server or Media 
    Gateway Controller) for a defined Standard (MEGACO [7]) or 
    Proprietary Control Protocol; 

I don't know if the initial Priority level should be set to 
"Routine" for all users and have them individually raise the 
level within what they are authorized to set to if they need to, 
or if this aspect is more network controlled on logon and 
authentication to the network, and that user's profile within 
that domain controls each, or at least the default Priority 
level. Discussion on this should occur to reach consensus.

o   Ability to differentiate users and allow each user's access 
    only to those priority levels they are authorized to 
    initiate per session (in the current MLPP-ISDN networks, the 
    level of Priority is determined by, and only by, the color 
    of the phone; which is hardwired to a PBX interface that is 
    configured at a certain single MLPP Prioritization level)

o   The Preemption audible tone and generator stipulated in [1] 
    must be built/written into each end station


3.4 End user Requirements

This section includes the people themselves that are placing the 
Voice (and possibly Video) call sessions for now, but will 
likely include the automated initiation of sessions by non-
humanoids soon  ;-)  But this could fall under whether IM 



Polk          draft-polk-mlpp-over-ip-00.txt         Page 11

Internet Draft         MLPP over IP          Feb 23rd, 2001

receives this applicability of MLPP.

o   Ability to uniquely identify themselves to the MLPP enabled 
    network in order to be granted the priority choices (this 
    quickly gets into the Security aspects discussed below)


3.5 Internetworking Device Requirements

This section includes Layer 2 & 3 switches, Routers and Servers:

o   Monitor all interfaces within each internetworking device 
    for congestion and resource allocation

o   Appropriately self regulate all congestion interfaces 
    similar to COPS configurations [6] in which a individual 
    internetworking device makes decisions either locally (it is 
    both the PEP and PDP for a scenario or as a rule within that 
    network), to utilizes the COPS Protocol for communication 
    with a COPS Server for specific traffic instructions down to 
    the session level

o   When an MLPP session preempts another MLPP session on an 
    internetworking device, and that internetworking device is 
    not directly attached to any of the 3 or 4 end users of 
    either session, it must signal the end stations that were 
    preempted notifying them of the occurrence(I'm not sure what 
    Protocol should be used here, but SNMP could be utilized 
    even if authentication is necessary, although its 
    modification might be necessary via an ID)


3.6 Media Gateway (MG) Requirements

This section includes Media Gateways that are not end stations 
within the MLPP infrastructure, but translate either from IP to 
some TDM infrastructure (ISDN could mean another MLPP network, 
PSTN TDN means from a non-MLPP network):

o   If the MG is connected between an IP-based MLPP network and 
    a non-MLPP network, it must set the Priority to "Routine" 
    for that incoming call (unless someone clever creates a way 
    for that user to uniquely identify themselves to an IP-MLPP 
    device and allows the session to receive higher Priority; 
    comments here are again welcome)


Polk          draft-polk-mlpp-over-ip-00.txt         Page 12

Internet Draft         MLPP over IP          Feb 23rd, 2001

o   If the MG is connected to a known and trusted MLPP-enabled 
    network (in either direction and determination which is 
    outside of the current scope of this document), let the 
    Priority of the calling party continue (unless your network 
    has a policy to do something different with the incoming 
    call request, of course)

An example of this case is the transition of an MLPP enabled 
ISDN network to that of an MLPP enabled IP network. With these 
existing networks being the size they are, there will be a mi-
gration from one infrastructure type to the other, maybe not 
completely getting ride of the ISDN network for quite some time, 
if ever.

There are several other examples of MG networking scenarios, but 
I won't list them all here just yet. Suffice to say, the MG is 
either in your network from the IP network to an ISDN network 
(which may or may not be MLPP enabled) or PSTN point of view, 
and is either connected to a trusted side and an untrusted side 
(as is likely the case in connection to any network not MLPP 
enabled), or both sides are trusted either in a transition mode, 
or through an SLA interconnection. Updated versions of this ID can 
have any example of infrastructures interconnectivity for simplicity 
or as a more firm example if necessary.


3.7 General Security Requirements

o   This is an somewhat ambiguous requirement for the 
    authentication and authorization of all End users, this is 
    likely network specific to some external form of 
    authentication such as a SmartCard for the *trusted* 
    identification of each authorized user, granting them access 
    to resources as well as MLPP Priority levels for call 
    sessions 

4.0 IP Infrastructure

Obviously, if [1] is to be adhered to but in an IP infra-
structure, and even in a transitionary network (one that is 
migrating from ISDN enabled to IP enabled MLPP), a lot of 
aspects of how RTP sessions (principally Voice) over IP will 
require sometimes significant changes in how networks are 
currently configured. Some of these changes will require 
Standards to be modified and new code to be written from those 
Standards into some or most of existing network devices in order 
to follow [1] to the letter. 


Polk          draft-polk-mlpp-over-ip-00.txt         Page 13

Internet Draft         MLPP over IP          Feb 23rd, 2001


Customers that I've talked to have not been willing (so far) 
to give away any functionality from [1] within their networks. 
It gets more complicated where GETS requirements are included 
from [5], because that involves theoretically every phone and 
phone line in the US; but that's for another ID to deal with.

Below is a list of topics that need discussing in order to change/
modify/extend/enhance existing IETF Specifications to enable MLPP 
in IP networks. I believe this list will get longer with time and 
discussion and more detailed in nature.

o   Within the IETF for Signaling Protocols and Media Gateway 
    Control Protocols, SIP & MEGACO are affected by this effort. 
    Each will have to (for the strict MLPP compliance) modify 
    their respective headers to include the 5 levels stipulated 
    in 3.1

o   RSVP [8] is not mandatory for MLPP, but it is the only 
    bandwidth aware IP Protocol within the IETF that can handle 
    RTP streams that I'm aware of. Without this virtual session 
    created by RSVP, I'm at a loss now as to how any inter-
    networking device will be able to differentiate one RTP 
    session from another, making Preemption virtually 
    impossible. Therefore, I believe RSVP

o   COPS apparently isn't aware of both endpoints of an RTP 
    session, so it for signaling or even making aware of a
    Preemption occurrence is not yet likely possible

Problem with SIP in [9] and the bis draft [10] is that they 
modified in the bis draft to go to 5 levels from 4, but the 
5th level was placed at "less than normal", and doesn't coincide 
with the MLPP 5 levels. This might not be a big deal to a lot 
people, but people running MLPP network mandate the existing 5 
levels defined in [1]. This is part of what [3] covers, along 
with a additional Header-Field "MLPP Enabled", it provides the 5 
MLPP levels due to this inconsistency between the two requirements. 
This also relieves the SIP WG for making the main effort of that 
WG responsible for complete incorporation of MLPP into every SIP 
based product (at this point). I'm trying not to disrupt WG's as 
much as possible.

This section should and will have more substance to it in the next 
version of this I-D. But due to time constraints and an 



Polk          draft-polk-mlpp-over-ip-00.txt         Page 14

Internet Draft         MLPP over IP          Feb 23rd, 2001

unforeseen event, this -00 version wasn't as fulfilling as it shall 
be in the near future. Comments will also (hopefully) substantially 
add and clarify this I-D as it progresses. 


5.0 IANA Considerations

This author doesn't believe there are any within this document 
at this time.

6.0 Security Considerations

A wise person said once (OK, it was Dave Oran, one of our AD's, 
and I'm paraphrasing): "End user Security for real time sessions 
never was that important until the effective use of QoS (priori-
tization) could be realized". This effort is stipulating that 
exactly that scenario and Architecture can be and is built in 
the Packet world.

All arguments with whether Dave's statement is exactly correct 
aside, I believe there is a great amount of truth to this in 
concept. Every session between anyone can have all the 
prioritization anyone wants, but until there is an effective way 
to preempt another's session, it's meaningless.

But on the other hand, imagine (at least in the US) you have the 
ability to set your voice call into Ticketmaster to get priority 
treatment for all concert and sporting events tickets? Very few 
would notice they had been the one's to have their calls dropped 
while waiting on hold, but it would still be a unfair treatment 
of network traffic loads and unfair to the person you just 
preempted. 

This creates the need for some form of user authentication and 
authorization. I don't think the major IP carriers are going to 
evoke or enable MLPP in their networks, but anywhere there is 
Priority and the possibility of Preemption, there needs to be 
some checks and balances. 

On those closed boundary networks that enable this feature(s), 
authentication and authorization is required in my opinion; 
unless, that network is perfectly traffic engineered and there 
can never be a situation where network resources can bottleneck 
in any way. Because, when enabled, even a single interface that 
has too little resources can and likely will experience this 
Preemption on that interface. 


Polk          draft-polk-mlpp-over-ip-00.txt         Page 15

Internet Draft         MLPP over IP          Feb 23rd, 2001


7.0 References

 [1] ANSI specification ANSI T1.619-1992.

 [2] ANSI specification ANSI T1.619A-1994.

 [3] James M. Polk, "draft-polk-sip-mlpp-mapping-01.txt", IETF 
Internet Draft, February 2001

 [4] V. Jacobson, K. Nichols, K. Poduri, "An Expedited 
Forwarding PHB" RFC 2598, June 1999

 [5] H. Folts, H. Ohno, "draft-folts-ohno-ieps-considerations-
00.txt" IETF Internet Draft, June 2000

 [6] D. Durham, J. Boyle, R. Cohen, S. Herzog, R. Rajan, A. 
Sastry, "The COPS (Common Open Policy Service) Protocol" RFC 
2748 January 2000

 [7] F. Cuervo, N. Greene, A. Rayhan, C. Huitema, B. Rosen, J. 
Segers, "Megaco Protocol Version 1.0", Request for Comments: 
3015, November 2000

 [8] Braden, R., Ed., Zhang, L., Estrin, D., Herzog, S., and 
S. Jamin, "Resource ReSerVation Protocol (RSVP) -- Version 1,
Functional Specification", RFC 2205, September 1997.

 [9] M. Handley, H. Schulzrinne, E. Schooler, J. Rosenberg "SIP: 
Session Initiation Protocol" RFC 2543, March 1999

 [10] M. Handley, H. Schulzrinne, E. Schooler, J. Rosenberg 
"draft-ietf-sip-rfc2543bis-02" IETF Internet Draft November 24, 
2000


8.0 Author Information

James M. Polk
Cisco Systems
18581 N. Dallas Parkway, Suite 100
Dallas, TX 75287
jmpolk@cisco.com




Polk          draft-polk-mlpp-over-ip-00.txt         Page 16

Internet Draft         MLPP over IP          Feb 23rd, 2001

"Copyright (C) The Internet Society (February 23rd, 2001). 
All Rights Reserved.

This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished
to others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise 
explain it or assist in its implementation may be prepared, 
copied, published and distributed, in whole or in part, without 
restriction of any kind, provided that the above copyright 
notice and this paragraph are included on all such copies and 
derivative works.  However, this document itself may not be 
modified in any way, such as by removing the copyright notice 
or references to the Internet Society or other Internet organi-
zations, except as needed for the purpose of developing Internet 
standards in which case the procedures for copyrights defined 
in the Internet Standards process must be followed, or as 
required to translate it into languages other than English.

The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not
be revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

This document and the information contained herein is provided 
on an "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET 
ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR 
IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE 
USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR 
ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A 
PARTICULAR PURPOSE."




The Expiration date for this Internet Draft is:

August 23rd, 2001














Polk          draft-polk-mlpp-over-ip-00.txt         Page 17

