
Network Working Group                                        M. Schultz
INTERNET DRAFT                                                   NUMNet
Updates RFC 1591                                             May 1997
Category:  Informational
Expire in six months

     Creation of and Registration in the ".NUM" Top Level Domain

Status of this Memo

 
This document is an Internet-Draft.  Internet-Drafts are working
documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its
areas, and its working groups.  Note that other groups may also
distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.
 
Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-
Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as
"work in progress."
 
To view the entire list of current Internet-Drafts, please check
the "1id-abstracts.txt" listing contained in the Internet-Drafts
Shadow Directories on ftp.is.co.za (Africa), ftp.nordu.net
(Europe), munnari.oz.au (Pacific Rim), ds.internic.net (US East
Coast), or ftp.isi.edu (US West Coast).

This memo provides information for the Internet community.
This memo does not specify an Internet standard of any kind.
Distribution of this memo is unlimited.

 
Introduction

	This document describes the creation, registration requirements,
and administration of the new top level domain (TLD) NUM.

Definition

	NUM is the TLD provided for the registration of an
individual's or organization's in-service, assigned telephone number
as the second level domain (SLD).  Those numbers or letters are
recognized as a phone number by the NUM extension.  It is
international in nature.

Creation

	The NUM TLD has been created to meet the growing demand in
the Internet community for more top level domain name options.  The
creation of this new TLD is supported by the assertion that the
impetus for designing the domain name system (DNS) was to
accommodate growth on the Internet and designed to be "intentionally
extensible" (RFC 1034).  Therefore, NUM was created to serve as an
additional choice for any entity that chooses to be classified by
its in-service, assigned telephone number.

	The original goal for the DNS system was for a more clear,
concise classification system (RFC 1591), giving each individual or
organization a unique, easily identifiable domain.  NUM will fit
within these parameters, while creating a new way to be classified.
Using an in-service, assigned telephone number as a second level
domain will greatly reduce instances of trademark infringement
conflict, as well as reduce the unnecessary registering of
prospective domain names, i.e. "domain name hoarding".  It will also
provide organizations the opportunity to have a unified corporate
identity to facilitate phone number recognition through printed
materials.



Schultz                                                         [Page 1]


INTERNET DRAFT            NUM Top Level Domain                  May 1997


Registration Requirements.

       1. The SLD must be the registering party's telephone number
              assigned to them by their servicing telephone company.
       2. The telephone number must be in working order at the time
              of registration and must remain in working order while
              registered to the holding individual or organization.
       3. The SLDs must contain the country code, the city or area code and the telephone
              number, e.g. country code-city or area code-telephone number.  The country
              codes can be referenced at http://www.num.net or ftp://ftp.num.net.
       4. The telephone number may be represented by numerals or
              letters if the letters directly correspond to the
              numerical telephone number, e.g. "1-800-55-KITES.NUM".

Administration

        The administration of NUM will be provided by NUMNet of
Fairfax, Virginia, in accordance with the requirements set forth in
RFC 1591.  This RFC updates 1591 in the categories which list the
other TLDs and their designated managers.

Security Considerations

	Security issues are not discussed in this memo.

References

	[1]  Postal, J., "Domain Name System Structure and
        Delegation", RFC 1591, USC/Information Sciences Institute,
        March 1994.

	[2]  Mockapetris, P., "Domain Names-Concepts and
        Facilities", STD 13, RFC 1034, USC/Information Sciences
        Institutes, November 1987.


Author's Address

	Mark Schultz 
	NUMNet
	12817 Shadow Oak Lane
	Fairfax, VA  22033
        Phone:  703-391-1946
	Fax:  703-620-5472 
	Email:  Schultz@num.net 



Schultz                                                         [Page 2]


