





Internet Draft                               Don Fedyk, David Allan 
Document: draft-fedyk-gmpls-ethernet-ivl-00.txt              Nortel 
Category: Standards Track                              October 2005 
 
 
                GMPLS control of Ethernet IVL Switches 
 
Status of this Memo 
 
   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any 
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware 
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes 
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
   documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts 
   as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in 
   progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt. 
    
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
   This Internet-Draft will expire in April, 2006. 
    
   Copyright Notice Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005). 
    
   Abstract 
    
   This memo describes how GMPLS signaling may be applied to 
   appropriately configured Ethernet Independent VLAN Learning capable 
   switches in order to configure Ethernet switched paths. 
    
    
1. Introduction 
    
   Ethernet switches are growing in capability. As a consequence the 
   role of Ethernet is rapidly expanding in networks that were the 
   domain of other technologies such as SONET/SDH TDM and ATM. The 
   question of how Ethernet will evolve and what capabilities it can 
   offer in these areas is still under development.   
    



     
   Fedyk et.al          Expires April 2006                  Page 1 








                GMPLS Control of Ethernet IVL Switches  

   This draft explores some unique capabilities that Ethernet has and 
   blends them with some of the values of control planes developed in 
   the IETF.  
    
   The techniques for repurposing Ethernet switching outlined in this 
   draft have been introduced elsewhere as a complement to 802.1ah 
   Provider Backbone Bridging under the title "Provider Backbone 
   Transport". 
    
2. Terminology 
 
   In addition to well understood GMPLS terms, this memo uses 
   terminology from IEEE 802.1 and introduces a few new terms: 
 
   B-MAC        Backbone MAC 
   B-VID        Backbone VLAN ID 
   B-VLAN       Backbone MAC 
   C-MAC        Customer MAC 
   C-VID        Customer VLAN ID 
   DA           Destination Address 
   ESP          Ethernet Switched Path 
   IVL          Independent VLAN Learning 
   PBB          Provider Backbone Bridge 
   PBT          Provider Backbone Transport 
   SA           Source Address 
   S-VID        Service VLAN ID 
 
3. IVL Overview and ability to configure Ethernet Switched Paths 
 
   Ethernet as specified today is a system. How spanning tree, data 
   plane flooding and MAC learning combine to populate forwarding 
   tables and produce resilient any-to-any behavior in a bridged 
   network is well understood.  
    
   What is less obvious is that the resulting behavior is purely a 
   consequence of this particular combination of functions combined 
   with what the underlying hardware can do, and that by simply 
   disabling some Ethernet functionality, it is possible to employ 
   alternative control planes and obtain different forwarding 
   behaviors.  
 
 





     
   Fedyk et al.           Expires April 2006               Page 2 








                GMPLS Control of Ethernet IVL Switches  

   Customer     Provider        Provider         
   Bridge/      Bridge          Backbone                                         
                                Bridge 
        
   C-MAC/C-VID------------------802.1Q ------------------C-MAC-CVID 
                S-VID-----------802.1ad------------S-VID 
                        B-MAC---802.1ah---B-MAC 
                        B-VID---802.1ah---B-VID 
    
                    Figure 1 802.1 MAC/VLAN Hierarchy 
    
   Recent work in [PWE] and IEEE 802 are leading to a separation of 
   Ethernet functions permitting an increasing degree of carrier 
   control. So while the Ethernet service to the customer appears the 
   same, the carrier components and behaviors have become decoupled 
   from the customer presentation. 
     
   One example of this is the 802.1ah work in hierarchical bridging. 
   Once the carrier is in exclusive control of their Ethernet sub-
   network and all customer specific state pushed to the edges of 
   that sub-network, the ability of the carrier to exploit latent 
   Ethernet behavior is facilitated. One key capability is to 
   overcome limitations imposed by bridging. 
    
   Bridging offers a simple solution for any-to-any connectivity 
   within a VLAN partition but attempting to use degenerate forms of 
   bridged connectivity for point to point services puts strain on 
   the control plane for forwarding and learning and may not offer 
   the engineerability that providers require in offering P2P 
   services. It is easier to modify Ethernet to scale engineered P2P 
   as a special case than to specify forms of any-to-any that are so 
   scalable that consumption of any-to-any transport instances for 
   point to point connectivity is inconsequential. 
    
   Ethernet Switches may perform Individual B-VLAN Learning (IVL) 
   based unicast forwarding on the basis of a B-VID/B-MAC tuple. This 
   means the forwarding hardware performs a full 60 bit lookup (B-VID 
   (12) + B-MAC DA (48)) only requiring uniqueness of the full 60 
   bits for forwarding to resolve correctly.  
    
   We can redefine the semantics of the constituent elements and get 
   complete route freedom for each 60 bit entry so long as the 
   overall requirement for global uniqueness is maintained. For 
   compatibility and flexibility reasons, it makes sense to preserve 
   the global uniqueness and semantics of MAC addresses as interface 
   names, but we can redefine the semantics associated with 
   administration and use of VLAN values.  
    
   We partition the B-VID space and allocate a range of B-VIDs (say 
   'n' B-VIDs) as only significant when combined with a destination 
   B-MAC address. We can then consider a B-VID in that range as an 
   individual instance identifier for one of a maximum of 'n' P2P 
   connections or MP2P multiplexed connections (subsequently termed 

     
   Fedyk et al.           Expires April 2006               Page 3 








                GMPLS Control of Ethernet IVL Switches  

   "shared forwarding" to distinguish from simple merges) terminating 
   at the associated destination MAC address. While a B-VID in the 
   allocated range is not unique on an Ethernet subnetwork basis, the 
   B-VID/DA tuple is, and procedures can be designed to delegate 
   administration of the allocated VID range to the node/interface 
   identified by the DA MAC.  
    
   This technique results in a single unique and invariant identifier 
   or label associated with the path termination and not a sequence 
   of local identifiers associated with the individual link 
   terminations. One consequence of this particular allocation is 
   there can be up to 4094 labels to any one destination MAC address, 
   a space that is consider large for P2P applications and overkill 
   when shared forwarding is leveraged. In practice, most network 
   scaling requirements may be met via delegation of only a small 
   portion of the VID space, resulting in minimal impact of the 
   number of bridging VLANs that can be supported in addition to this 
   behavior.  
    
   In order to use this unique 60 bit label, we then disable the 
   normal mechanisms by which Ethernet populates the forwarding table 
   for the allocated range of B-VIDs, and use a separate control or 
   management plane to populate the forwarding table. When we do that 
   for a specific label across a contiguous sequence of IVL capable 
   Ethernet switches, this will create a unidirectional connection or 
   Ethernet Switched Path (ESP). A bi-directional path is composed of 
   two unidirectional paths. The technique does not require the VID 
   to be common in both directions. Just as is the case for regular 
   Ethernet these paths are preferred to be symmetrical such that a 
   single bidirectional connection is composed of unidirectional 
   paths that have common routing in the network. 
    
   There are a few modifications required to standard Ethernet to 
   make this approach robust: 
    
   1. In Standard Ethernet, discontinuities in forwarding table 
   configuration in the path of a connection will normally result in 
   packets being flooded as "unknown". In the proposed point to point 
   case this is unnecessary and potentially catastrophic in meshed 
   topologies, therefore "unknown" flooding must be disabled for the 
   allocated B-VID range. Flooding is similarly disabled for 
   broadcast/multicast traffic. 
    
   2. B-MAC learning is not required for the ESP, and may interfere 
   with management/control population of the forwarding tables. For 
   this reason Provider B-MAC learning is disabled for the allocated 
   B-VID range. 
    
   3. Blocking must be disabled to achieve complete configured route 
   freedom. Similarly a configured path is assumed to be loop free. 
   Spanning tree is disabled for the allocated B-VID range.  
    


     
   Fedyk et al.           Expires April 2006               Page 4 








                GMPLS Control of Ethernet IVL Switches  

   4. Robustness is enhanced with the addition of data plane OAM to 
   provide both fault and performance management. How the hardware 
   performs unicast packet forwarding of known MAC addresses is 
   unmodified from how Ethernet currently works, so the OAM currently 
   defined [802.1ag, Y.17ethoam] can also be reused without 
   modification of the protocols, but with slightly altered semantics 
   (primarily w.r.t. implementation scaling variations). An 
   additional benefit of global path identifiers for dataplane 
   forwarding is the tight coupling of the 60 bit unique connection 
   ID (B-VID + B-MAC:DA) and the associated OAM packets. It is a 
   simple matter to determine lost or misdirected packet because the 
   unique connection ID cannot be altered. 
    
   Ethernet VLAN tags include priority tagging in the form of the 
   802.1p priority bits. When combined with configuration of the 
   paths via management or control plane, this produces the Ethernet 
   equivalent of MPLS TE E-LSPs and L-LSPs. Priority tagged Ethernet 
   PDUs self-identify the required queuing discipline independent of 
   the configured connectivity. This significantly simplifies the 
   task of signaling scalable connectivity.   
    
4. Deployment Scenarios  
    
   This technique of GMPLS controlled Ethernet switching is 
   applicable to all deployment scenarios considered by the design 
   team [CCAMP-ETHERNET]. 
    
5. Path creation and maintenance 
    
   One simple mode of path creation described earlier is 
   configuration. Node by node a path can be created by simple 
   configuration or by a set of commands originating from a 
   management station.   
    
   One improvement to node by node configuration is to look at single 
   ended provisioning and signaling. Since this is the domain of 
   CCAMP and GMPLS we will discuss the applicability of GMPLS to this 
   problem.   
    
5.1.1   Using a GMPLS Control Plane for IVL 
    
   GMPLS has been adapted to the control of optical switches for the 
   purpose of management optical paths. GMPLS signaling is well 
   suited to setup paths with labels but it does require a minimal IP 
   control plane and IP connectivity so it is suited to certain 
   scenarios where a large number of paths or dynamic path management 
   of IVL is required.    
    
   In many situations for IVL the addition of a complete GMPLS 
   control plane may be overkill for the switches or the application.  
   So we well decompose the problem into Signaling, Routing, Link 
   discovery and Path management. While we discuss the options it 
   will become apparent that using all functions of GMPLS is less of 

     
   Fedyk et al.           Expires April 2006               Page 5 








                GMPLS Control of Ethernet IVL Switches  

   an operational overhead than any other combination. However, using 
   only some components of GMPLS can lead to more provisioned 
   parameters than a purely static system.   
    
   Link discovery is one of the foundations of GMPLS. It is also a 
   capability that has been specified for Ethernet in IEEE 802.1AB. 
   All link discovery is optional but the benefits of running link 
   discovery in large systems are significant. A recommendation is 
   that 802.1AB could be run with an extension to feed information 
   into an LMP based discovery. The LMP based discovery would allow 
   for a complete functional LMP for the purpose of GMPLS topology 
   discovery. LMP requires an IP control plane (as does GMPLS). 
   802.1AB does not have the ability to carry all of the LMP 
   messages. So the LMP implementation would be compatible with 
   802.1AB but add the extensions for LMP discovery.  See Figure 3.    
    
               +---------+           +---------+ 
               |         |           |         |    
               |  LMP    | ----------|  LMP    | 
               | +-------+  IP (opt) +-------+ | 
               | |802.1AB| ----------|802.1AB| |  
               +-+-------+  Ethernet +-------+-+ 
    
                    Figure 3 Link Discovery Hierarchy 
     
5.1.2   Control Plane Network 
    
   In order to have a GMPLS control plane, an IP control plane 
   consisting of and IGP with TE extension needs to be established. 
   This foundation of routing and traffic engineering parameters is 
   used to establish control channels with only minimal capability to 
   forward IP packets.   
    
   This IP control plane can be provided as a separate independent 
   network or integrated with the Ethernet switches.  
    
   If it is a separate network, it may be provided as a Layer 2 
   connected VLAN where the Ethernet switches are connection via a 
   bridged network or HUB.  It may also be provided by a network that 
   provides IP connectivity where an IPVPN provides the IP 
   connectivity.  
    
   If it is an integrated with the switches it may be provided by a 
   bridged VLAN that uses the Data bearing channels of the network 
   for adjacent nodes. This ties the fate of IVL service and the IP 
   control plane links, but then the same Ethernet hardware is 
   already being shared.   
    
5.1.3   Signaling  
    
   GMPLS signaling is the well suited to the set up of Ethernet 
   Switched Paths on IVL capable Ethernet switches. GMPLS signaling 
   uses link identifiers in the form of IP addresses either numbered 

     
   Fedyk et al.           Expires April 2006               Page 6 








                GMPLS Control of Ethernet IVL Switches  

   or unnumbered. If LMP is used the creation of these addresses can 
   be automated. If LMP is not used there is an additional 
   provisioning requirement to add GMPLS link identifiers. For large 
   implementations LMP would be beneficial. As mentioned earlier the 
   primary benefit of signaling is the control of a path from an 
   endpoint. GMPLS can be used to create bidirectional or 
   unidirectional paths, bi-directional paths being the preferred 
   mode of operation for numerous reasons (OAM consistency etc.).   
    
   Signaling enables the ability to dynamically establish a path and 
   to adjust the path in a coordinated fashion after the path has 
   been established. Signaling also allows multi-vendor 
   interoperability since the signaling is based on GMPLS signaling 
   protocols. This allows the network to adapt to changing conditions 
   or failures with a single mechanism. Signaling can be used in pure 
   static paths as well, but the benefit of maintaining a GMPLS 
   control plane for a pure static path application could be 
   questioned.    
    
   To use GMPLS RSVP-TE for signaling, a new label is defined that 
   contains the B-VID/B-MAC DA tuple, which is 60 bits.  On the 
   initiating and terminating nodes, a function administers the B-
   VIDs associated with the IVL B-MAC SA and B-MAC DA respectively.  
   To initiate a bidirectional path, the initiator of the PATH 
   message uses procedures outlined in [GMPLS-SIGNALLING], it: 
    
   1) Sets the LSP encoding type to Ethernet. 
    
   2) Sets the LSP switching type to L2SC. 
    
   3) Sets the GPID to unknown. 
    
   4) Sets the UPSTREAM_LABEL to the B-VID/B-MAC SA tuple where the 
   B-VID is administered from the range reserved for IVL forwarding.   
    
   At intermediate nodes the UPSTREAM_LABEL object and value is 
   passed unmodified.  The B-VID/B-MAC SA tuple is installed in the 
   forwarding table at each hop. 
    
   At the destination, a B-VID is allocated in the IVL range for the 
   B-MAC DA and the B-VID/B-MAC DA tuple is passed in the 
   GENERALIZED_LABEL in the RESV message.  As with the 
   UPSTREAM_LABEL, intermediate nodes use the GENERALIZED_LABEL 
   object and pass it on unchanged, upstream.  The B-VID/B-MAC DA 
   tuple is installed in the forwarding table at each hop. 
    
5.1.4   IVL Label 
    
   The new IVL label is a new generalized label and a suggested 
   format is: 
    
    
    

     
   Fedyk et al.           Expires April 2006               Page 7 








                GMPLS Control of Ethernet IVL Switches  

    0                   1                   2                   3 
    0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+ 
   |0 0 0 0|        VLAN ID        |       MAC (highest 2 bytes)   |  
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+ 
   |                       MAC Address                             | 
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+ 
    
    
   Note that there is no syntax in signaling to force the label in 
   the UPSTREAM_LABEL and GENERALIZED_LABEL objects to be passed 
   unchanged, and so the semantics of the new label type are that the 
   label is passed unchanged.  This has similarity to how a 
   wavelength label is handled at an intermediate node that cannot 
   perform wavelength conversion, and is described in [GMPLS-RSVP]. 
    
5.1.5   Ethernet Service 
    
   Ethernet Switched Paths that are setup either by configuration or 
   signalling can be used to provide Ethernet service to customers of 
   the IVL network.  The Metro Ethernet Forum has defined some 
   services in MEF.6 and MEF.11 (e.g., Ethernet Private Line), and 
   these are also aligned with ITU-T G.8011.x Recommendations.  Of 
   particular interest are the bandwidth profile parameters in MEF.10 
   and whose associated bandwidth profile algorithm are based on [DS-
   COLOR].  Consideration should be given to supporting these in any 
   signalling extensions for ESPs. This will be addressed in a future 
   version of this specification. 
    
5.1.6   GMPLS Routing 
    
   GMPLS routing is IP routing with the TLV extensions for the 
   purpose of carrying around GMPLS TE information. The TE 
   information is populated with TE resources from LMP or from 
   configuration if LMP is not available. GMPLS Routing is an 
   optional piece but it is highly valuable in maintaining topology 
   for path management.  
    
5.1.7   Path Computation 
    
   There has been a lot of recent activity in the area of path 
   computation.  Originally MPLS path computation was performed 
   locally in a TE database on a router. While this is effective when 
   a few paths are required in a primarily connectionless 
   environment, if a large number of coordinated paths are required, 
   it is advantageous to have a more sophisticated path computation 
   engine capable of more elaborate paths. The longer lived the paths 
   and the higher bandwidth the greater the computational budget 
   required in order to get well engineered and cost effective paths. 
   This is highly dependent on topology, since in simple topologies 
   path computation is trivial.  
    


     
   Fedyk et al.           Expires April 2006               Page 8 








                GMPLS Control of Ethernet IVL Switches  

   Path computation in GMPLS generates explicit route objects (EROs) 
   that can be used directly by GMPLS signaling.   
    
5.1.8   Combinations of GMPLS Features 
    
   The combinations of LMP, Routing, Signaling and Path computation 
   can be all supported on a switch or a subset of GMPLS pieces can 
   be supported.  
    
   Signaling is the minimal function that might be supported on a 
   small switch. The ability to process Signaling messages with an 
   ERO may be all that is desired on an end point. 
    
   Routing is the next important function since it provides the 
   forwarding of signaling functions. However it is possible to 
   design switches without routing that could proxy their routing to 
   other larger switches. From the routing perspective there would be 
   little difference in the routing database but the small switches 
   would not have to perform routing operations. The information for 
   the proxied routing might be configured or it might be data filled 
   by an automated procedure.  Rather than creating a new protocol it 
   is probably better to put in a full OSPF or IS-IS control plane.  
    
   LMP is optional as mentioned earlier. The primary benefit of LMP 
   over 802.1AB is LMP's capability for optimizing routing 
   information for the purpose of link bundling on large switches. 
   LMP has the capability to compress the information required to 
   represent a large number of parallel resources automatically.  
    
   Path computation is one function that is probably best done on a 
   centralized database for this application. Depending on the 
   physical topology the explicit route object (ERO) may be trivial 
   to calculate or more elaborate. Some form of path protection 
   either based on Fast Reroute techniques or local computation may 
   also be desirable for network outages but the targeted service for 
   this is long lived relatively static paths.  
     
5.2 Addresses, Interfaces, and Labels 
    
   PBT is currently envisioned to have no explicit UNI or E-NNI which 
   simplifies the addressing of the control plane. This specification 
   uses an addressing scheme and a label space for the ingress/egress 
   connection: the hierarchical GMPLS Node Address/Port ID and the 
   Ethernet MAC/VID tuple for the delegated VID range as a label 
   space.  
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    

     
   Fedyk et al.           Expires April 2006               Page 9 








                GMPLS Control of Ethernet IVL Switches  

    
    
    
    
                                     GMPLS Node Address 
                                             | 
                                             V          N=named port 
        +----+                            +-----+         <port index> 
        |    |       label=B-VLAN/B-MAC   |     |         <B-MAC> 
        | PB |                            |     |         <string> 
   -----N    N----------------------------N PBB N---------- 
        |    |                            |     |   \     
        |    |                            |     |     Externally 
        +----+                            +-----+     Facing      
      PBT Transit                         PBT edge    Ports 
        Switch                             Switch 
            Figure 4 Ethernet/GMPLS Addressing & Label Space 
    
    
   Depending on how the service is defined and set up one or more of 
   these labels may be used for actual setup. It is also to be noted 
   that although it is possible for a terminating node to offer any 60 
   bit label value that can be guaranteed to be unique, the convention 
   of using MAC addresses to name specific ports is retained, an 
   Ethernet port name being common to both PBT and bridging modes of 
   operation. One implication of this is that a port index and a MAC 
   address of a port on the node may be effectively interchangeable 
   for signaling purposes, although incorrect information can result 
   in an incorrect association between a GMPLS Node Address and the 
   set of MAC named interfaces local to that node. 
    
   For a GMPLS based system the GMPLS Node Address/logical port is the 
   logical signaling identifier for the control plane via which 
   Ethernet layer label bindings are solicited. In order to create a 
   point to point path for IVL an association must be made between the 
   ingress and egress node.  But the actual IVL label distributed via 
   signaling and instantiated in the switch forwarding tables contains 
   the egress interface name (B-MAC) of the port on the egress PBB. 
   See Figure 4.  
    
   GMPLS uses identifiers in the form of 32 bit number which are in 
   the IP address notation but these are not IP addresses. An IP 
   routing control plane for the propagation of TE information may be 
   supported.  The provider B-MAC addresses are exchanged by the LLDP 
   and by LMP if supported. Actual label assignment is performed by 
   the signaling initiator and terminator. 
    
   A particular port on a Provider network node would have:  
   - A B-MAC 
   - A 32 bit IPv4 Node address r 128 bit IPv6 address plus 32 bit 
     port Identifier  
   - One (or more) Mnemonic String Identifiers 
    

     
   Fedyk et al.           Expires April 2006               Page 10 

                GMPLS Control of Ethernet IVL Switches  

   This multiple naming convention leaves the issue of resolving the 
   set given one of the port identifiers. On a particular node, 
   mapping is relatively straight forward.  The preferred solution to 
   this is to use the GMPLS IP node address for signaling resolution. 
   In so doing, the problem of setting up a path is reduced to 
   figuring out what node supports a B-MAC address and then finding 
   the corresponding GMPLS IP node address and performing all 
   signaling and routing with respect to the GMPLS node address.  
    
   There are several options to achieve this:  
   - Provisioning 
   - Auto discovery protocols that carry MAC address (e.g. 802.1ab) 
   - Augmenting Routing TE with B-MAC Addresses 
   - Name Servers with identifier/address registration 
   This will be clarified in a subsequent version of this draft. 
    
    
6. Specific Procedures 
    
6.1 PT to PT connections  
    
   The Data Plane for IVL has three key fields. B-VID, B-MAC DA and B-
   MAC SA.  A connection instance is uniquely identified by the B-MAC 
   DA, B-VID and B-MAC SA for the purpose of the provider network 
   terminations. The B-VID and B-MAC DA tuple identifies the 
   forwarding multiplex at transit switches and a simple degenerate 
   form of the multiplex is P2P (only one SA/VID/DA connection uses 
   the VID/DA tuple).  
    
   This results in unique labels end to end and no merging or 
   multiplexing of tunnels. The data streams may merge but the 
   forwarding entries are unique allowing the connection to be de-
   multiplexed downstream.     
    
6.2 PT to PT connections with shared forwarding 
    
   The B-VID/B-MAC DA can be considered to be a shared forwarding 
   identifier for a multiplex consisting of some number of P2P 
   connections distinctly identified by the B-MAC SA/B-VID/B-MAC DA 
   tuple.  
    
   VLAN tagged Ethernet packets include priority marking. This means 
   that the queuing discipline applied is selectable on a per flow 
   basis and is decoupled from the actual steering of the packet at 
   any given node. As noted earlier, GMPLS signaled paths can have 
   similar properties to MPLS traffic engineered E-LSPs[MPLS-DS]. What 
   this means is that multiple Ethernet switched paths to a 
   destination may be considered functionally equivalent. This is a 
   useful property when considering setup of shared forwarding 
   Ethernet switched paths. A terminating node will frequently have 
   more than one suitable candidate path with which new path requests 
   may be multiplexed on the data plane (common VID/DA, unique SA). 
    

     
   Fedyk et al.           Expires April 2006               Page 11 

                GMPLS Control of Ethernet IVL Switches  

6.3 Dynamically established P2P symmetry with shared forwarding 
    
   Similar to how a destination node may select a B-VID/B-MAC DA from 
   the set of existing shared forwarding multiplexes rooted at the 
   destination node, the originating node may also do so for the 
   reverse path. Once the initial ERO has been computed, the 
   originating node may select the optimal (by whatever criteria) 
   existing shared forwarding multiplex for the new destination to 
   merge with and offer its own B-VID/B-MAC DA tuple for itself as a 
   destination. This is identified via use of the UPSTREAM LABEL 
   object. 
    
6.4 Planned P2P symmetry 
    
   Normally the originating node will not have knowledge of the set of 
   shared forwarding path rooted on the destination node. 
    
   Use of a Path Computation Server or other planning style of tool 
   with more complete knowledge of the network configuration may wish 
   to impose pre-selection of the a more optimal shared forwarding 
   multiplexes to use for both directions. In this scenario the 
   originating node uses the SUGGESTED LABEL and UPSTREAM LABEL 
   objects to indicate complete selection of the shared forwarding 
   multiplexes at both ends. This may also result in the establishment 
   of a new B-VID/B-MAC DA path as the SUGGESTED LABEL object may 
   legitimately refer to a path that does not yet exist. 
    
7. Error conditions 
    
   The following errors have been identified as being unique to these 
   procedures in addition to those already defined: 
    
7.1 Invalid B-VID value 
    
   The originator of the error is not configured to use the B-VID 
   value in conjunction with GMPLS signaling. This may be either the 
   initiating or terminating node. 
    
7.2 Invalid ERO  
    
   The ERO offered has discontinuities with the identified VID/MAC 
   path in either the UPSTREAM LABEL or SUGGESTED LABEL objects.  
    
8. Security Considerations 
    
   TBD. 
         
    
9. IANA Considerations 
 
   TBD. 
 


     
   Fedyk et al.           Expires April 2006               Page 12 

                GMPLS Control of Ethernet IVL Switches  

10.References 
    
10.1 Normative References 
    
   [GMPLS-RSVP] Berger, L. et.al., "Generalized Multi-Protocol Label        
      Switching (GMPLS) Signaling Resource ReserVation Protocol-  
      Traffic Engineering (RSVP-TE) Extensions", IETF RFC 3473, 
      January 2003 
    
    
10.2 Informative References 
    
 
   [CCAMP-ETHERNET] Papdimitriou, D. et.al, "A Framework for 
      Generalized  MPLS (GMPLS) Ethernet", internet draft, draft-
      papadimitriou-ccamp-gmpls-ethernet-framework-00.txt , June 2005  
    
   [DS-COLOR] Aboul-Magd, O. et.al. "A Differentiated Service Two-
      Rate, Three-Color Marker with Efficient Handling of in-Profile 
      Traffic", IETF RFC 4115, July 2005 
     
   [GMPLS-ARCH] E. Mannie, Ed., "Generalized Multi-Protocol Label 
      Switching (GMPLS) Architecture", RFC 3495. 
    
   [GMPLS-SIGNALING] Berger, L. (editor), "Generalized MPLS -
      Signaling Functional Description", January 2003, RFC3471. 
    
   [GMPLS-ROUTING] Kompella, K., Rekhter, Y., "Routing Extensions in 
      Support of Generalized MPLS", work in progress. 
    
   [LMP] Lang. J. Editor, "Link Management Protocol (LMP)" work in 
      progress. 
    
   [IEEE 802.1ab] "IEEE Draft Standard for Local and Metropolitan 
      Area Networks, Station and Media Access Control Connectivity  
      Discovery" 
                          
   [IEEE 802.1ag] "IEEE standard for Connectivity Fault Management", 
      Work in Progress, July 2005. 
    
   [IEEE 802.1ah] "IEEE standard for Provider Backbone Bridges", Work 
      in Progress, July 2005. 
    
   [MEF.6] The Metro Ethernet Forum MEF 6 (2004), "Ethernet Services 
      Definitions - Phase I" 
    
   [MEF.10] The Metro Ethernet Forum MEF 10 (2004), "Ethernet 
      Services Attributes Phase 1" 
    
   [MEF.11] The Metro Ethernet Forum MEF 11 (2004), "User Network  
      Interface (UNI) Requirements and Framework" 
    
   [MPLS-DS] Le Faucheur, F. et.al., "Multi-Protocol Label Switching  

     
   Fedyk et al.           Expires April 2006               Page 13 

                GMPLS Control of Ethernet IVL Switches  

      (MPLS) Support of Differentiated Services" IETF RFC 3270, May   
       2002 
    
   [PATH-COMP] Farrel, A. et.al., "Path Computation Element (PCE) 
      Architecture", Internet draft, draft-ietf-pce-architecture-
      02.txt, September 2005 
    
   [Y.17ethoam] ITU-T Recommendation, "Draft Recommendation Y.17ethoam 
      - OAM Functions and Mechanisms for Ethernet based Networks " 
      work in progress,  May 2005. 
  
11.Author's Address 
 
   Don Fedyk 
   Nortel Networks 
   600 Technology Park Drive 
   Billerica, MA, 01821 
   Email: dwfedyk@nortel.com 
    
   David Allan 
   Nortel Networks              Phone: 1-613-763-6362 
   3500 Carling Ave.            Email: dallan@nortel.com 
   Ottawa, Ontario, CANADA 
 
12.Intellectual Property Statement 
 
   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed 
   to pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described 
   in this document or the extent to which any license under such 
   rights might or might not be available; nor does it represent that 
   it has made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  
   Information on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC 
   documents can be found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 
    
   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use 
   of such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository 
   at http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 
    
   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at ietf-
   ipr@ietf.org. 
 
13.Disclaimer of Validity 
 
   This document and the information contained herein are provided on 
   an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE 
   REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND 
     
   Fedyk et al.           Expires April 2006               Page 14 


                GMPLS Control of Ethernet IVL Switches  

   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, 
   EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT 
   THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR 
   ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A 
   PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
 
 
14.Copyright Statement 
 
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).  This document is 
   subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 
   78, and except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their 
   rights. 
 
 
15.Acknowledgments 
 
   The authors would like to thank Nigel Bragg, Stephen Shew and 
   Sandra Ballarte for their extensive contributions to this document. 



































     
   Fedyk et al.           Expires April 2006               Page 15 

