

Mobile IPv6 Working Group                                  Rajeev Koodli
INTERNET DRAFT                                     Nokia Research Center
14 February 2005


              IP Address Location Privacy and IP Mobility
               draft-koodli-mip6-location-privacy-00.txt

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is subject to all provisions
   of section 3 of RFC 3667.  By submitting this Internet-Draft, each
   author represents that any applicable patent or other IPR claims of
   which he or she is aware have been or will be disclosed, and any of
   which he or she become aware will be disclosed, in accordance with
   RFC 3668.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note
   that other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at
   any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This document is a submission of the IETF MIP6 WG. Comments should be
   directed to the MIP6 WG mailing list, mip6@ietf.org.


   Abstract

   In this document, we discuss Location Privacy as applicable to IP
   Mobility.  We discuss two problems:  disclosing a new IP address to a
   correspondent, and revealing a fixed identity to an eavesdropper.  We
   document some of the previous discussion on possible solutions.












Koodli                  Expires 14 August 2005                  [Page i]

Internet Draft           IP Location Privacy            14 February 2005




                                 Contents


Abstract                                                               i

 1. Introduction and Problem Description                               1

 2. Disclosing the Care of Address                                     2

 3. Revealing the Home Address                                         3

 4. Conclusion                                                         4

 5. IANA Considerations                                                4

 6. Security Considerations                                            4

Intellectual Property Statement                                        5

Disclaimer of Validity                                                 5

Copyright Statement                                                    6

Acknowledgment                                                         6


   1. Introduction and Problem Description

   Location Privacy with IP communication is interesting, especially
   with IP mobility.  Although there has been some discussion, and even
   very rough consensus of certain topics, little has been documented.
   In [2], the terminology and problem description involving IP address
   and Layer 2 identifier tracing is presented.  And, in [1], there is
   a solution proposal (which pre-dates the current Route Optimization
   technique for Mobile IPv6) for protecting the Home Address from being
   revealed to an on-looker.  The purpose here is to document the scope
   of IP Address Location Privacy in the presence of Mobile IPv6.  We
   briefly review some of the available solutions and identify the
   specific problems that need attention.

   The location privacy topic is broad and often has different
   connotations.  It also spans multiple layers in the OSI reference
   model.  Besides, there are attributes beyond an IP address alone
   that can reveal hints about location.  For instance, even if a
   correspondent is communicating with the same end-point it is used
   to, the ``time of the day'' attribute can reveal a hint to the
   user.  Some roaming cellphone users may have noticed that their SMS



Koodli                  Expires 14 August 2005                  [Page 1]

Internet Draft           IP Location Privacy            14 February 2005


   messages carry a timestamp of their ``home network'' timezone (for
   location privacy or otherwise) which can reveal that the user is in
   a different timezone when messages are sent during ``normal'' time
   of the day.  Furthermore, tools exist on the Internet which can map
   an IP address to the physical address of an ISP or the organization
   which owns the prefix chunk.  Taking this to another step, with
   in-built GPS receivers on IP hosts, applications can be devised
   to map geo-locations to IP network information.  Even without GPS
   receivers, geo-location can also be obtained in environments where
   [Geopriv] is supported, for instance as a DHCP option [4].  In
   summary, a user's physical location can be determined or guessed with
   some certainty and with varying levels of granularity by different
   means even though IP addresses themselves do not inherently provide
   any geo-location information.

   For the purposes of this document, we restrict ourselves to IP
   addresses and IP mobility.  There are two problems in this space:
   Disclosing a new IP address to a correspondent, and revealing a fixed
   IP address to an eavesdropper.  So, a MN may wish to use a fixed Home
   Address with a correspondent but may not wish to disclose its new
   Care-of Address, whereas it may not wish to reveal its fixed identity
   (Home Address) to an on-looker, but has to use the CoA from its
   visited network.  We discuss each separately.


   2. Disclosing the Care of Address

   Consider a Mobile Node at its home network.  Whenever it is involved
   in IP communication, its correspondents can see an IP address
   valid on the home network.  Elaborating on this, the users involved
   in peer - peer communication are likely to see a user-friendly
   identifier such as a SIP URI, and the communication end-points in
   the IP stack will see IP addresses.  Users uninterested or unaware
   of IP communication details will not see any difference when the
   MN acquires a new IP address.  Of course any user can ``tcpdump''
   or ``ethereal'' a session, capture IP packets and map the MN's IP
   address to an approximate geo-location.  When this mapping reveals a
   ``home location'' of the user, the correspondent can conclude that
   the user has not roamed.  Assessing the physical location based on IP
   addresses is similar to assessing the geographical location based on
   the area-code of a telephone number.  The granularity of the physical
   area corresponding to an IP address can be large, especially for a
   mobile wireless network.

   Now consider that the MN roams to a new IP network, acquires a Care
   of Address and would like to communicate with its correspondents.  It
   can either communicate directly or reverse tunnel its packets through
   the Home Agent.  Using reverse tunneling does not reveal the new IP
   address of the MN, although performance may vary depending on the



Koodli                  Expires 14 August 2005                  [Page 2]

Internet Draft           IP Location Privacy            14 February 2005


   particular scenario.  In some instances, the performance difference
   could be noticeable enough to serve as a hint to the user.  In any
   event, a MN should use reverse tunneling with those correspondents
   with which it does not wish to reveal that it has a new IP address
   outside of its home network.  With those correspondents with which
   it can disclose its new IP address ``on the wire'', the MN has
   the option of using route-optimized communication.  The transport
   protocol still sees the Home Address with route optimization.  Unless
   the correspondent runs some packet capturing utility, the user cannot
   see which mode (reverse tunneling or route optimization) is being
   used, but knows that it is communicating with the same peer whose URI
   it knows.  This is similar to conversing with a roaming cellphone
   user whose phone number, like the URI, remains unchanged.

   The above-mentioned observation is valid regardless of whether a
   Home Address is fixed or dynamically allocated.  In either case, the
   mapping of IP address to geo-location will most likely yield results
   with the same level of granularity.  With the freely available tools
   on the Internet, this granularity is the physical address of the ISP
   or the organization which registers ownership of a prefix chunk.
   Since an ISP or an organization is not, rightly, required to provide
   a blue-print of its subnets, the granularity remains fairly coarse,
   especially with a mobile wireless network.

   If disclosing a new IP address is acceptable, a protocol such as
   Hierarchical Mobile IPv6 can hide further changes to IP addresses
   within an administrative area.  In other words, frequency of roaming
   can be hidden but not roaming itself.  Even if a temporary Home
   Address from the visited network can be assigned to a roaming MN,
   the user identifier (such as a URI) still remains constant and
   thus enables detection of roaming.  Using changeable URIs would be
   interesting, but presumably that belongs to a different problem of
   anonymity.


   3. Revealing the Home Address

   When a MN does decide to use route optimization with a particular
   correspondent, it is faced with the problem of revealing its
   Home Address to an eavesdropper, who can determine that the user
   has roamed as well as profile the user's packets.  RFC 3041 [3]
   identifies the profiling problem associated with using a constant
   Interface Identifier in IP addresses and recommends guidelines to
   regularly change the IID. This could work fine for Care od Addresses
   in Mobile IPv6, although it can increase the frequency of Mobile
   IPv6 signaling depending on the frequency of changing the IID. When
   routers advertise multiple prefixes, it may also be useful for a MN
   to switch to different prefixes for additional protection against
   profiling.



Koodli                  Expires 14 August 2005                  [Page 3]

Internet Draft           IP Location Privacy            14 February 2005


   Applying RFC 3041 to Home Addresses involves further consideration.
   Since a Home Address can be entered in the DNS, changing it
   often means updating the DNS often as well.  So, a Home Agent
   may be required to initiate DNS updates upon every change of Home
   Address for each MN. Changing the Home Address often also means
   re-negotiating the IPsec security association between each MN and
   the Home Agent often.  Even if these operational overheads were
   considered acceptable, presence of a constant name that maps to a
   reachable IP address in the DNS can undermine the utility served by
   RFC 3041.  For these reasons, frequently changing the Home Address
   is not desirable.  This motivates investigation of alternative
   techniques to disrupt Home Address profiling.


   4. Conclusion

   In this document, we have formulated the IP Location Privacy problem
   due to IP Mobility.  We have alluded to often-talked-about solutions.
   Perhaps more importantly, we conclude that there is a need for
   a document that describes the already available solutions, and
   investigates further solutions for Home Address profiling.

   The Location Privacy problem with IP communication itself needs
   broader discussion.  Documents such as [2] are good sources for such
   a discussion.


   5. IANA Considerations

   There are no IANA considerations introduced by this draft.


   6. Security Considerations

   This document discusses location privacy because of IP mobility.
   Solutions to provide location privacy, especially any signaling over
   the Internet, must be secure in order to be effective.  Individual
   solutions must describe the security implications.


   References

   [1] C. Castelluccia and F. Dupont.  A Simple Privacy Exension
       for Mobile IPv6 (work in progress).  Internet Draft, Internet
       Engineering Task Force, February 2001.

   [2] W. Haddad and et al.  Privacy for Mobile and Multi-homed Nodes:
       MoMiPriv Problem Statement (work in progress).  Internet Draft,
       Internet Engineering Task Force, October 2004.



Koodli                  Expires 14 August 2005                  [Page 4]

Internet Draft           IP Location Privacy            14 February 2005


   [3] T. Narten and R. Draves.  Privacy Extensions for Stateless
       Address Autoconfiguration in IPv6.  Request for Comments 3041,
       Internet Engineering Task Force, January 2001.

   [4] J. Polk, J. Schnizlein, and M. Linsner.  DHCP Option for
       Coordinate-based Location Configuration Information.  Request for
       Comments 3825, Internet Engineering Task Force, July 2004.


   Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the
   use of such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


   Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided
   on an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE
   REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE
   INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR
   IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.









Koodli                  Expires 14 August 2005                  [Page 5]

Internet Draft           IP Location Privacy            14 February 2005


   Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


   Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.









































Koodli                  Expires 14 August 2005                  [Page 6]


