INTERNET-DRAFT                          Danny McPherson, Ed.
                                           Geoff Huston, Ed.
                                        Olaf M. Kolkman, Ed.
                                 Internet Architecture Board
Expires: August 2010                        February 4, 2010
Intended Status: Best Current Practice

            Defining the Role and Function of IETF Protocol
                      Parameter Registry Operators
                        <draft-iab-iana-05.txt>



Status of this Memo


   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the document
   authors. All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal Provisions
   Relating to IETF Documents (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info)
   in effect on the date of publication of this document.  Please
   review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights and
   restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Simplified BSD License
   text as described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and
   are provided without warranty as described in the Simplified BSD
   License.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering Task
   Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other groups
   may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference material
   or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html




McPherson, Huston, Kolkman                                      [Page 1]

INTERNET-DRAFT            Expires: August 2010             February 2010


   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html



Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) (2010) The IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

Abstract


   Many IETF protocols make use of commonly defined values that are
   passed within protocols.  To ensure consistent interpretation of
   these values by independent implementations, the values and
   associated semantic intent must be uniquely defined.  The IETF uses
   registry functions to record assigned protocol parameter values and
   their associated semantic intent. For each IETF protocol parameter it
   is current practice for the IETF to delegate the role of protocol
   parameter registry operator to a nominated entity.  This document
   provides a description of and the requirements for these delegated
   functions.




























McPherson, Huston, Kolkman                                      [Page 2]

INTERNET-DRAFT            Expires: August 2010             February 2010



Table of Contents


   1. Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   2. Roles and Responsibilities concerning IETF Proto-
   col Registries. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
    2.1. Protocol Parameter Registry Operator Role . . . . . . . . .   5
    2.2. IAB Role. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
    2.3. IESG Role . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
    2.4. Role of the IETF Trust. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
    2.5. Role of the IAOC. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   3. Miscellaneous. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   4. Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   5. Security Considerations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   6. IANA Considerations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   7. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
    7.1. Normative References. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
    7.2. Informative References. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   8. Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   9. Appendix A: Considerations on the term IANA. . . . . . . . . .  13
   10. Appendix B: IANA registries in context. . . . . . . . . . . .  14
    10.1. IETF Protocol Parameter Registry Definition. . . . . . . .  14
    10.2. Publication of Protocol Parameter Registry
    Assignments. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
    10.3. The Procedures related to IETF Protocol
    Parameter Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
    10.4. Registries for IETF Protocol Parameters. . . . . . . . . .  16
    10.5. Current IETF  Protocol Parameter
    Assignments. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17
   11. Appendix C: IAB Members . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17




















McPherson, Huston, Kolkman                                      [Page 3]

INTERNET-DRAFT            Expires: August 2010             February 2010


1.  Overview


   Many IETF protocols make use of commonly defined values that are
   exchanged within protocols. To ensure consistent interpretation of
   these values by independent implementations, the values and their
   semantic intent must be uniquely defined.  The IETF uses registries
   to record each of the possible values of a protocol parameter and
   their associated semantic intent.  These registries, their
   registration policy, and the layout of their content are defined in
   the "IANA Considerations" sections of IETF documents.

   The organizational separation between the IETF and its registry
   operator(s) is one that appears to be a relatively unique arrangement
   in the context of standards development organizations (SDOs), and
   similar arrangements of structural separation are not generally used
   by SDOs. Other SDOs that undertake a similar protocol parameter
   registration function generally do so as part of their secretariat
   service functions or their equivalent, thereby avoiding the overhead
   of detailed coordination of activity across multiple distinct
   organizations.  However, this structural separation of roles exists
   within several places in the IETF framework (e.g., to include the RFC
   Editor function).  The IAB, on behalf of the IETF, has the
   responsibility to define and manage the relationship with the
   protocol registry operator.  This responsibility includes the
   selection and management of the protocol parameter registry
   operator(s), as well as management of the parameter registration
   process and the guidelines for parameter allocation.

   As with other SDO's, the IETF asserts full authority over the
   management of all the IETF protocol parameters. This document
   describes the function of these registries as they apply to
   individual protocol parameters defined by the IETF Internet Standards
   Process [RFC 2026] as to allow for an orderly implementation by the
   IAOC under guidance from the IAB.

   Below we provide a description of the requirement for these delegated
   functions which the IETF has historically referred to as the IANA
   function.




2.  Roles and Responsibilities concerning IETF Protocol Registries


   It has been the longstanding practice of the IETF to outsource the
   management and implementation of some important functions (e.g., [RFC



McPherson, Huston, Kolkman                          Section 2.  [Page 4]

INTERNET-DRAFT            Expires: August 2010             February 2010


   5620]). The protocol parameter registry function falls into this
   category of outsourced function, and what follows here is a
   comprehensive and normative description of the roles and
   responsibility with respect to the registration of IETF protocol
   parameters.

   Specifically, this document describes the operation and role of a
   delegated IETF Protocol Parameter Registry Operator, to be selected
   and administered by the IETF Administrative Support Activity (IASA)
   [RFC 4071].  While there is generally a single Protocol Parameter
   Registry Operator, additional Operators may be selected to implement
   specific registries.  This document also describes the roles of other
   bodies that interact with related bodies with IETF protocol parameter
   registry operators.

   Many protocols make use of identifiers consisting of constants and
   other well-known values. Even after a protocol has been defined and
   deployment has begun, new values may need to be assigned (e.g., for a
   new option type in DHCP, or a new encryption or authentication
   algorithm for IPSec).  To ensure that such quantities have consistent
   values and interpretations in different implementations, their
   assignment must be administered by a central authority in a
   coordinated and mechanical manner. For IETF protocols, that role is
   provided by a delegated Protocol Parameter Registry operator.  For
   any particular protocol parameter there is a single delegated
   registry operator.  In the case of IP addresses and AS numbers, the
   IANA function resides at the root of the number space, while a
   subsequent allocation hierarchy exists below IANA, and the Regional
   Internet Registries (RIR) make further allocations of those resources
   using policies established through the RIRs' bottom-up policy
   development process.




2.1.  Protocol Parameter Registry Operator Role


   The IETF Protocol Parameter registry function is undertaken under the
   auspices of the Internet Architecture Board.

   The roles of a Protocol Parameter registry operator are as follows:

   o Review and Advise

     * A registry operator may be requested to review
       Internet-Drafts that are being considered by the Internet
       Engineering Steering Group (IESG), with the objective of



McPherson, Huston, Kolkman                        Section 2.1.  [Page 5]

INTERNET-DRAFT            Expires: August 2010             February 2010


       offering advice to the IESG regarding the need for an
       "IANA Considerations" section, whether such a section,
       when required, is clear in terms of direction to the registry
       operator, and whether the section is consistent with the
       current published registry operator guidelines.

   o Registry

     * To operate a registry of protocol parameter assignments.

     * The delegated registry operator registers values for
       Internet protocol parameters only as directed by the
       criteria and procedures specified in RFCs, including
       Proposed, Draft and full Internet Standards, Best Current
       Practice documents, and other RFCs that require protocol
       parameter assignment.  If they are not so specified, or in
       case of ambiguity, the registry operator will continue to
       assign and register only those protocol parameters that have
       already been delegated to the operator, following past and
       current practice for such assignments, unless otherwise
       directed in terms of operating practice by the IESG.

     * For each protocol parameter, the associated registry
       includes:

       + a reference to the RFC document that describes the
         parameter and the associated "IANA Considerations"
         concerning the parameter, and

       + for each registration of a protocol parameter value,
         the source of the registration and the date of the
         registration, if the date of registration is known.

     * If in doubt or in case of a technical dispute, the registry
       operator will seek and follow technical guidance exclusively from
       the IESG.  Where appropriate the IESG will appoint an expert to
       advise the registry operator.

     * The registry operator will work with the IETF to develop any
       missing criteria and procedures over time, which the registry
       operator will adopt when so instructed by the IESG.

     * Each protocol parameter registry operates as a public registry,
       and the contents of the registry are openly available to the
       public, on-line and free of charge.

     * The registry operator assigns protocol parameter values in
       accordance with the policy associated with the protocol



McPherson, Huston, Kolkman                        Section 2.1.  [Page 6]

INTERNET-DRAFT            Expires: August 2010             February 2010


       parameter.  Some policies are listed in [RFC 5226].

   o Mailing Lists

     * The registry operator maintains public mailing lists as
       specified in IANA Considerations [RFC 5226]. Such lists are
       designated for the purpose of review of assignment proposals
       in conjunction with a designated expert review function.  In
       addition, each protocol parameter registry operator should
       maintain a mailing list that enables the registry staff of
       the registry operator to be contacted by email.  For example,
       iana@iana.org currently provides this function for IANA.

   o Liaison Activity

     * The registry operator will nominate a liaison point of contact.
       The registry operator, though this liaison, may be requested to
       provide advice to the IESG on IETF protocol parameters as well
       as the IANA Considerations section of Internet-Drafts that are
       being reviewed for publication as an RFC.  Where appropriate the
       IESG will appoint an expert to advise the registry operator.

   o Reporting

     * The registry operator will submit periodic reports to the IAB
       concerning the operational performance of the registry function.
       As an example of the requirements for such reports the reader is
       referred to a supplement to the MoU outlined in [RFC 2860] that
       was established by the IASA [RFC 4071] and provides service level
       agreement (SLA) guidelines under which the protocol parameter
       registry, as implemented by ICANN, must operate.

     * At the request of the chair of the IETF, IAB, or IAOC the
       registry operator will undertake periodic reports to the IETF
       Plenary concerning the status of the registry function.

     * The registry operator will publish an annual report describing
       the status of the function and a summary of performance
       indicators.

   o  Intellectual Property Rights and the Registry Operator

     * All assigned values are to be published and made available free
       of any charges and free of any constraints relating to further
       redistribution, with the caveat that the assignment information
       may not be modified in any redistributed copy.

     * Any intellectual property rights of the IETF Protocol Parameter



McPherson, Huston, Kolkman                        Section 2.1.  [Page 7]

INTERNET-DRAFT            Expires: August 2010             February 2010


       assignment information, including the IETF Protocol Parameter
       registry and its contents, are to be held by the IETF Trust
       [RFC 4748], and all IETF Protocol Parameter registry publications
       relating to assignment information are to be published under the
       terms of Section 10 of [RFC 2026], and are to include the
       copyright notice as documented in Section 10.4 (C) of [RFC 2026].



2.2.  IAB Role


   An operator of an IETF Protocol Parameter registry undertakes the
   role as a delegated function under the authority of the Internet
   Architecture Board (IAB).

   The IAB has the responsibility to review the current description of
   the registry function on a schedule of its own choosing.  The IAB
   shall direct the registry operator to adopt amendments relating to
   its role and mode of operation of the registry according to the best
   interests of the IETF.

   The IAB has the responsibility to appoint an organization to
   undertake the delegated functions of the Protocol Parameter registry
   operator for each IETF protocol parameter.  Specifically, the IAB
   defines the role and requirements for the desired functions (e.g., as
   with [RFC 5620]), and in consultation with the IAB, the IAOC is
   responsible for identifying potential vendors and managing aspects of
   the relationships with that vendor.  To be clear, the IAB is in the
   deciding role (e.g., for appointment and termination), but must work
   in close consultation with the IAOC.

   The IAB has the responsibility to determine the terms and conditions
   of this delegated role. Such terms and conditions should ensure that
   the registry operates in a manner that fully conforms to the
   functions described in this document. In addition, such terms and
   conditions must not restrict the rights and interests of the IETF
   with respect to the registry content and maintenance.



2.3.  IESG Role


   The IESG is responsible for the technical direction of the IETF
   Protocol Parameter registries and maintaining the policies by which
   such technical directions are given (e.g., see Appendix B).
   Technical direction itself is provided through the adoption of IETF



McPherson, Huston, Kolkman                        Section 2.3.  [Page 8]

INTERNET-DRAFT            Expires: August 2010             February 2010


   RFC documents within the "IANA Considerations" section of such
   documents, or as stand-alone "IANA Considerations" RFC documents.

   The IESG shall verify that Internet-Drafts that are offered for
   publication as IETF-stream RFCs [RFC 4844] include IANA
   Considerations sections when needed, and that IANA Considerations
   sections conform to the current published guidelines.  For other RFC
   streams, the respective approval bodies for those streams are
   responsible for verifying tha the documents include IANA
   consideration when necessary, and that those IANA considerations
   conform to the current published guidelines.

   Since technical assessment is not a responsibility of the registry
   operator, the IESG, as part of providing the technical direction, is
   responsible for identifying the technical experts that are required
   to, where appropriate, review registration requests or resolve open
   technical questions that relate to the registration of parameters.

   The IESG will at its discretion organize the liaison activities with
   the registry operator's liaison point of contact; as to facilitate
   clear communications and effective operation of the registry
   function.



2.4.  Role of the IETF Trust


   Any intellectual property rights of IETF Protocol Parameter
   assignment information, including the registry and its contents, and
   all registry publications, are to be held by the IETF Trust on behalf
   of the IETF.

   The IETF Trust [RFC 4748] was formed to act as the administrative
   custodian of all copyrights and other intellectual property rights
   relating to the IETF Standards Process, a function that had
   previously been performed by ISOC and the Corporation for National
   Research Initiatives (CNRI).



2.5.  Role of the IAOC


   In consultation with the IAB, the IAOC is responsible for identifying
   a potential vendor based on IAB consultation, and managing the
   various aspects of the relationships with that vendor.




McPherson, Huston, Kolkman                        Section 2.5.  [Page 9]

INTERNET-DRAFT            Expires: August 2010             February 2010


   In addition, the IAOC has the responsibility to ensure long-term
   availability and stability across all such registries and their
   contents. This responsibility is of particular significance in the
   event that a relation with a protocol parameter registry operator is
   terminated.



3.  Miscellaneous


   In it's current incarnation, the IANA function operator also
   maintains registries from other SDOs that are of interest to the IETF
   community, or add new codepoints to IETF protocols.  Some registries
   are also specified and used by ICANN itself.  Some example registries
   include "NLPIDs of Interest", "IEEE 802 Numbers", "Address Family
   Numbers", and "Repository of IDN Practices".  While these registries
   are not specified or expressly requested on behalf of the IETF, and
   their contents are not captive to express oversight by the IETF, they
   are relevant to IETF work.



4.  Acknowledgements


   This document is adapted from [RFC 5226], and has been modified to
   include explicit reference to Intellectual Property Rights, and the
   roles of the IAB and IESG in relation to the IETF Protocol Parameter
   registry function.

   The Internet Architecture Board acknowledges the assistance provided
   by reviewers of earlier drafts of this document, including Scott
   Bradner, Leslie Daigle and Thomas Narten.



5.  Security Considerations


   This document does not propose any new protocols, and does not
   involve any security considerations.









McPherson, Huston, Kolkman                         Section 5.  [Page 10]

INTERNET-DRAFT            Expires: August 2010             February 2010


6.  IANA Considerations


   This document requires no direct IANA actions.



7.  References




7.1.  Normative References




7.2.  Informative References


   [RFC 1700] Reynolds, J. and J. Postel, "Assigned Numbers", RFC 1700,
              STD 2, October 1994.

   [RFC 2026] Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision
              3", RFC 2026, BCP 9, October 1996.

   [RFC 2780] Bradner, S. and V. Paxson, "IANA Allocation Guidelines
              For Values In the Internet Protocol and Related Headers",
              RFC 2780, BCP 37, March 2000.

   [RFC 2850] Carpenter, B., "Charter of the Internet Architecture
              Board", RFC 2850, BCP 39, May 2000.

   [RFC 2860] Carpenter, B., Baker, F. and M. Roberts, "Memorandum of
              Understanding Concerning the Technical Work of the
              Internet Assigned Numbers Authority", RFC 2860, June
              2000.

   [RFC 2939] Droms, R., "Procedures and IANA Guidelines for Definition
              of New DHCP Options and Message Types", RFC 2939, BCP 43,
              September 2000.

   [RFC 2978] Freed, N. and J. Postel, "IANA Charset Registration
              Procedures", RFC 2978, BCP 19, October 2000.

   [RFC 3232] Reynolds, J., "Assigned Numbers: RFC 1700 is Replaced by
              an On-line Database", RFC 3232, January 2002.




McPherson, Huston, Kolkman                       Section 7.2.  [Page 11]

INTERNET-DRAFT            Expires: August 2010             February 2010


   [RFC 4071] Austein, R., Wijnen, B., "Structure of the IETF
              Administrative Support Activity (IASA)", RFC 4071,
              April 2005.

   [RFC 4748] Bradner, S., "RFC 3978 Update to Recognize the IETF
              Trust", RFC 4748, BCP 78, October 2006.

   [RFC 4844] Daigle, L., Ed. and IAB, "The RFC Series and RFC
              Editor", RFC 4844, July 2007.



   [RFC 5226] Narten, T., Alvestrand, H., "Guidelines for Writing
              an IANA Considerations Section in RFCs", RFC 5226,
              May 2008.

   [RFC 5620] Kolkman, O., IAB,  "RFC Editor Model (Version 1)",
                  RFC 5620, August 2009.


   [IANA] Reynolds, J., "IANA Protocol Numbers and Assignment
          Services", October 1994, <http://www.iana.org/numbers.htm>.

   [IAOC_SUPP] ICANN/IANA-IETF MoU Supplemental Agreement
   <http://iaoc.ietf.org/documents/IETF-
   ICANN_Supplemental_Agreement.pdf>

   [CORR] Dyson, E., "Correspondence from Esther Dyson, Interim
          Chairman, ICANN to Scott Bradner, Brian Carpenter and
          Fred Baker of the IETF", February 1999,
        <http://www.icann.org/correspondence/bradner-dyson-25feb99.htm>.


   [ENUM_INSTR] IAB, "ENUM LIAISON ON IAB INSTRUCTIONS TO RIPE-NCC",
              September 2002,
       <http://www.iab.org/Documents/sg2-liaison-e164-sep-02.html>.

   [RIPE ENUM]  RIPE NCC, "ENUM Registry", September 2002,
       <http://www.ripe.net/enum>.



8.  Authors' Addresses








McPherson, Huston, Kolkman                         Section 8.  [Page 12]

INTERNET-DRAFT            Expires: August 2010             February 2010


   Danny McPherson, Editor
   Arbor Networks, Inc.
   Email: danny@arbor.net

   Geoff Huston, Editor
   APNIC
   Email: gih@apnic.net

   Olaf M. Kolkman, Editor
   NLnet Labs
   Email: olaf@NLnetLabs.nl

   Internet Architecture Board
   Email: iab@iab.org





9.  Appendix A: Considerations on the term IANA



   The term "Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA)" has been used
   historically in different contexts.  Specifically:


     1) "IANA" has is commonly referred to as the set of protocol, DNS,
        and Address registry functions operated by ICANN:

        It is noted that there is current general use of the term
        "IANA" or "IANA function" to refer specifically to the set of
        registries operated by ICANN funded through a contract
        [DoC_IANA] between ICANN and the U.S. Government's National
        Telecommunications and Information Administration (NTIA).


     2) Within the IETF context "IANA" has been referred to as the set
        of registry operators of the IETF protocol parameters:

        At the time of the writing this document (December 2009) the
        operation of the majority of the protocol parameter registries
        are delegated to the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names
        and Numbers (ICANN). Not all IETF protocol parameter
        registries are delegated to ICANN, and at present the
        operation of the 'e164.arpa' registry has been delegated to
        the RIPE Network Coordination Center (RIPE NCC) [ENUM_INSTR].




McPherson, Huston, Kolkman                         Section 9.  [Page 13]

INTERNET-DRAFT            Expires: August 2010             February 2010


     3) Additionally, and also within IETF context, "IANA" has been
        referred to as the entire set of IETF protocol parameter
        registries:

        The IETF documents continue to use the term "IANA
        Considerations" when referring to specific functions to be
        performed with respect to a protocol parameter registry [RFC
        5226], it is noted that the use of the term 'IANA' in this
        context does not necessarily imply the delegation of the
        parameter registry operation to the function operated by ICANN.



   In addition to the multiple contexts of the use of the term "IANA",
   the structure and association of the U.S. Government's contractual
   relationship with ICANN over the performance of a protocol parameter
   registry operation that is commonly known as the "IANA" role, is a
   source of some common confusion regarding the question as to who
   maintains ultimate authority over the protocol parameter registries
   themselves. ICANN undertakes these "mechanical" tasks on behalf of
   the IETF at the discretion of the IAB, as defined in the Memorandum
   of Understanding [RFC 2860] between the IETF Administrative Support
   Activity (IASA) and ICANN, and in supplements [IAOC_SUPP] provided
   thereafter.




10.  Appendix B: IANA registries in context



10.1.  IETF Protocol Parameter Registry Definition


   Using the term 'IANA' in the sense of the entire set of IETF protocol
   parameter registries, the Internet Standards document, STD 2 [RFC
   1700], published in October 1994, defined the role of the IANA as
   follows:

     The Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA) is the central
     coordinator for the assignment of unique parameter values for
     Internet protocols.  The IANA is chartered by the Internet
     Society (ISOC) and the Federal Network Council (FNC) to act as
     the clearinghouse to assign and coordinate the use of numerous
     Internet protocol parameters.

     The Internet protocol suite, as defined by the Internet



McPherson, Huston, Kolkman                      Section 10.1.  [Page 14]

INTERNET-DRAFT            Expires: August 2010             February 2010


     Engineering Task Force (IETF) and its steering group (the IESG),
     contains numerous parameters, such as Internet protocol addresses,
     domain names, autonomous system numbers (used in some routing
     protocols), protocol numbers, port numbers, management information
     base object identifiers, including private enterprise numbers, and
     many others.

     The common use of the Internet protocols by the Internet
     community requires that the particular values used in these
     parameter fields be assigned uniquely.  It is the task of the
     IANA to make those unique assignments as requested and to maintain
     a registry of the currently assigned values [RFC 1700].

   Again using the term 'IANA' in the sense of the entire set of IETF
   protocol parameter registries, the definition of the protocol
   parameter registry role is provided in [RFC 5226]:

     Many protocols make use of identifiers consisting of constants
     and other well-known values.  Even after a protocol has been
     defined and deployment has begun, new values may need to be
     assigned (e.g., for a new option type in DHCP, or a new encryption
     or authentication transform for IPsec).  To ensure that such
     quantities have consistent values and interpretations across all
     implementations, their assignment must be administered by a
     central authority.  For IETF protocols, that role is provided by
     the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA).

   This text appears to confuse two of the three (1 and 3) contexts
   presented in Appendix A with which the "IANA" term is used.



10.2.  Publication of Protocol Parameter Registry Assignments


   Currently there are two registry operators that publicize protocol
   parameter registry assignments: the IANA registry as operated by
   ICANN, and the RIPE NCC.

   The current mode of publication of protocol parameter registry
   assignments undertaken within registries whose operation is currently
   delegated to ICANN is described in the Informational Document [RFC
   3232], published in January 2002:

     From November 1977 through October 1994, the Internet
     Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA) periodically published
     tables of the Internet protocol parameter assignments in
     RFCs entitled, "Assigned Numbers". The most current of these



McPherson, Huston, Kolkman                      Section 10.2.  [Page 15]

INTERNET-DRAFT            Expires: August 2010             February 2010


     Assigned Numbers RFCs had Standard status and carried the
     designation: STD 2.  At this time, the latest STD 2 is
     RFC 1700.

     Since 1994, this sequence of RFCs have been replaced
     by an online database accessible through a web page
     (currently, www.iana.org). The purpose of the present RFC
     is to note this fact and to officially obsolete RFC 1700,
     whose status changes to Historic.  RFC 1700 is obsolete, and
     its values are incomplete and in some cases may be wrong
     [RFC 3232].

   The mode of publication of the e164.arpa protocol parameter registry
   operated by the RIPE NCC is documented in reference [RIPE ENUM].




10.3.  The Procedures related to IETF Protocol Parameter Management


   IETF Protocol Parameter registry actions are defined through the
   inclusion of an "IANA Considerations" section in IESG-approved RFC
   documents, as described in [RFC 5226].  Within these considerations
   the IETF defines the policies through which a registry operator
   manages assignments within the registry. There are also RFCs that
   specifically address IETF protocol parameter considerations for
   particular protocols, such as [RFC 2780], [RFC 2939], and [RFC 2978].



10.4.  Registries for IETF Protocol Parameters


   As documented in the IAB Charter [RFC 2850], the role of the IAB
   includes responsibility for the IETF Protocol Parameter registration
   function (referred to in the charter as 'IANA'). The IAB, acting on
   behalf of the IETF, approves the appointment of an organization to
   act as a protocol parameter registry operator on behalf of the IETF,
   and also approves the terms and conditions of this delegation of this
   function.

   The technical direction of the IETF Protocol Parameter registry
   function is provided by the Internet Engineering Steering Group
   (IESG) [RFC 2850].






McPherson, Huston, Kolkman                      Section 10.4.  [Page 16]

INTERNET-DRAFT            Expires: August 2010             February 2010


10.5.  Current IETF  Protocol Parameter Assignments


   The list of current IETF  protocol parameters for which parameter
   value assignments are registered within registries whose operation is
   currently delegated to ICANN is listed in reference [IANA]. In
   addition there is the e164.arpa registry function, which is listed in
   reference [RIPE ENUM].

   As provided in the list contained in [IANA], those protocol parameter
   registries that refer to registrations related to the allocation of
   public unicast IPv4 addresses, public unicast IPv6 addresses, public
   use Autonomous System Numbers (ASNs) and the top level delegations
   within the Domain Name System, have associated registration
   mechanisms that have been delegated to the IANA function operated
   under the auspices of ICANN, as defined in [RFC 2860]. In these cases
   other bodies are responsible for the development of policies to
   manage the registrations of allocations performed as part of this
   aspect of the registration function. Registrations that refer to
   reservations (e.g., IP address blocks for documentation purposes or
   ASNs defined for documentation purposes) and all other use cases
   within those registries must be performed under the exclusive
   direction of the IETF.








11.  Appendix C: IAB Members


   Internet Architecture Board Members at the time this document was
   published were:


      Marcelo Bagnulo
      Gonzalo Camarillo
      Stuart Cheshire
      Vijay Gill
      Russ Housley
      John Klensin
      Olaf Kolkman
      Gregory Lebovitz
      Andrew Malis
      Danny McPherson



McPherson, Huston, Kolkman                        Section 11.  [Page 17]

INTERNET-DRAFT            Expires: August 2010             February 2010


      David Oran
      Jon Peterson
      Dave Thaler





Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) (2010) The IETF Trust and the persons
   identified as the document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document. Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with
   respect to this document.
































McPherson, Huston, Kolkman                        Section 11.  [Page 18]
