

INTERNET-DRAFT           EXPIRES JANUARY 1998            INTERNET-DRAFT





Network Working Group                                          J. Walker
INTERNET-DRAFT                                       Cisco Systems, Inc.
                                                            04 July 1997


                     The Site Installation Handbook
                     <draft-rfced-info-walker-00.txt>

Status of this Memo

This document is an Internet-Draft.  Internet-Drafts are working
documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas,
and its working groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute
working documents as Internet-Drafts.

Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts as reference
material or to cite them other than as ``work in progress.''

To learn the current status of any Internet-Draft, please check the
``1id-abstracts.txt'' listing contained in the Internet- Drafts Shadow
Directories on ftp.is.co.za (Africa), nic.nordu.net (Europe),
munnari.oz.au (Pacific Rim), ds.internic.net (US East Coast), or
ftp.isi.edu (US West Coast).

This memo provides information for the Internet community.  This memo
does not specify an Internet standard.  Distribution of this memo is
unlimited.



Introduction

   This memo is a first attempt at providing guidance on how to deal with
   the perplexity of new LAN and WAN site installs.  Experienced and
   less experienced network engineers often do each installation blindly
   without any form or fashion.  This document is an attempt to document
   specific install issues, practices and procedures.  It is also
   intended to be a future installation reference handbook.  Please
   email me with any comments or additional items that may have been
   overlooked.  Hopefully you will see this as a starting point to
   collect data for the site installation that you are completing.

Purpose of this Work

   This handbook should be used as a manual for necessary details
   pertaining to site installs.  This manual lists issues and factors
   that a site must consider when setting up their own Data closets,
   Wiring closets, or Data Centers.  This handbook is only a framework
   for setting install procedures and practices.  In order to have an
   effective set of procedures and practices, each location will have to
   make decisions particular to their needs and requirements.

Audience

   The audience for this document is network engineers, system
   engineers, systems integration specialists, and cable installation
   specialists.  The focus of this document is on the procedures and
   practices that need to be in place to support any technical data room
   that a site may be implementing.









Walker                                                          [Page 1]





                       July 11, 1997





                           - 2 -


I/D                 Site Installation Handbook           04 July 1997


Scope

   This document covers issues about what a site implementation guide
   should contain, and what kinds of procedures are needed to ensure a
   successful install.  This memo assumes that all preliminary user input
   into the network design has been completed before site installation.

   Remember each site has different needs; the installation in one
   building with one set of requirements might well be different from
   another building or site.  Be sure it fits the needs and requirements
   of the site and the users involved. To work and be successful it must
   be timely and functional.

Documentation

   The most important process of the whole install is documentation.
   This begins with the pre-install document and ends with a post-
   install document.  The items to start with are initial physical and
   logical network diagrams.  Next, what specific protocols and their
   addresses per interfaces will be needed.  All standard contact info
   for SNMP should be entered into the device and on the documentation.
   Relevant information that will be used can be very important both
   before and after the install.  It should include circuit numbers
   along with any other pertinent information like DLCI numbers or
   framing or encapsulation type, carrier phone numbers and your
   company's contact names and numbers, utility company phone numbers,
   and equipment manufacturer numbers along with serial numbers and
   warranty contract numbers.  It is helpful to have a sheet showing
   rack placement and equipment location placement.  To reduce
   confusion, labels are helpful to document where lines go.   However,
   do not forget to place them on the lines.  Also, take advantage of
   any vendor's place to input descriptions into the network hardware
   configs.  After the install the pre-install documentation can be
   turned into post-install documentation that can aid in
   troubleshooting or disaster recovery later.  Minimum user guides for
   equipment installed should be left with the equipment along with the
   completed post-install documentation.

Communication Lines

   This section deals with what communication lines you will need for
   the particular site install that is being completed.  The most
   important line that will ever be needed is an async line preferably
   installed in wiring closets with at least "800#" access for the
   purpose of troubleshooting with data centers or vendor tech support.
   In the event of voice troubleshooting the network equipment with a
   technician or dialing into that same equipment, you will really need
   this line.  In addition to your primary lines, if budget allows, an






                       July 11, 1997





                           - 3 -


Walker                                                          [Page 2]





I/D                   Site Installation Handbook           04 July 1997


   ISDN line for WAN backup will save a lot of time and money for you
   and your users in the event of dedicated line outage.  If your budget
   is tight you can still use an async line for a primary link backup as
   well.  As for the LAN lines this will depend on your environment,
   just be sure you have enough interfaces for your particular needs,
   i.e. ATM, Ethernet, Token Ring.  The WAN lines should also be ordered
   for the particular bandwidth requirement this particular site has,
   i.e. DS-3, OC-3, T1 or FT1.  Also, be certain that you know if you
   need ATM, SONET, Frame Relay, or ISDN.  Before you go to the site or
   send the equipment out, make sure you have all the LAN, WAN, and
   general cables that are needed to complete the install.

Premise or Structure

   If this is a new install, take measures to ensure that you have the
   proper location for the data or wiring closet, preferably in the
   center of the building.  Equal distances to all four corners of the
   office space could save issues with cable run distances.  Actual runs
   of LAN cable should be certified to be of correct distance and type.
   It is suggested that additional cables are pulled at time of
   installation if possible, this will allow migration to future
   technologies and general growth.  Always be sure that you have a
   large enough room for today's equipment and tomorrow's expansion of
   technology.  You can never have enough room or cable.  Both existing
   and new installs should accommodate for equipment rack placement and
   be free of any hazards such as water pipes that could damage or
   obstruct the equipment.  There should be 36 inches clear on all four
   sides of the rack.  Equipment should be placed in racks in such a way
   that the removal/replacement of circuit card assemblies is easy.  If
   forced to choose between placement for the viewing of LEDs verses
   ease of repair, repair wins.  Cables should be installed in such a
   way that they are easily traced and not block access to card removal
   or installation.  Equipment itself should not be placed in such a way
   that it becomes a tempting shelf.  This could block cooling of the
   equipment or worse, become a shelf for a liquid that could be spilled
   on the equipment.  This can be avoided by placing the equipment near
   the top of racks or by installing an actual shelf above the
   electronic equipment.  The shelf, mentioned above can make a great
   location to rest a PC used for configurations or a LAN Monitor device
   for traps and troubleshooting.  It is also very important to have the
   proper air conditioner tonnage for correct cooling of the room and
   that it will be on twenty-four hours a day seven days a week.  Check
   with your State and City laws about emergency power shutoff
   regulations and accommodate accordingly.  Two items that are often
   overlooked are power requirements and receptacle types.  Tied in with



                       July 11, 1997





                           - 4 -


   this is UPS sizing.  Check your equipment first, to see if it is AC
   or DC, next check WATTS, AMPS, VOLTS, and possibly receptacle plug
   types.  Decide if you need online, backup, or standby UPS.  Grounding



Walker                                                          [Page 3]





I/D                  Site Installation Handbook           04 July 1997


   is also a very important issue for the safety and longevity of your
   devices.  You may want to look at your particular City's Code Book
   for Data or wiring closets.  You may need certain types of fire
   extinguishers or sprinklers.  Remember the old adage, "better safe
   that sorry."  All equipment, if possible, should be mounted so that
   the power switch and cord are out of the way of traffic.  This also
   applies for LAN and WAN cables.  Tie wrap all cables to the data rack
   for a clean and manageable installation.

Security Considerations

   Physical security of the data room is very important not only to
   prevent purposeful tampering, but accidental tampering as well.  A
   log should be kept of anyone who walks into the room.  This will help
   in tracking down issues that may mysteriously arise.  Alarms for fire
   should be heard if this is a Data Center room.


























                       July 11, 1997





                           - 5 -


Walker                                                          [Page 4]





I/D                  Site Installation Handbook           04 July 1997


Install Template

DOCUMENTATION


   Diagrams


   Physical

   Logical

   Rack Placement

   Equipment Placement


   Interfaces


   Protocols

   Addresses by Protocol


   Snmp


   Contact

   Location

   Chassis' ID


   Numbers


   Project Contact Phone Numbers

   Circuit Numbers, DLCI info, PVC info, and Framing info

   Carrier Phone Numbers and Contacts

   Utility Companies Phone Numbers and Contacts



                       July 11, 1997





                           - 6 -


   Equipment Manufacturer Phone Numbers and Contacts




Walker                                                          [Page 5]





I/D                   Site Installation Handbook           04 July 1997


   Hardware


   Device Serial Numbers

   Device Warranty Numbers or Contract Numbers


   Hardware Description Field in Device Software


   To and From Information per Interface

   Circuit Number on WAN Interfaces

   Contact Phone Numbers per Interface if Needed

   Purpose per Interface


   Labeling


   Device Name

   Interface Information


COMMUNICATION LINES


   Async Lines


   Number Needed


   LAN Lines and Type





                       July 11, 1997





                           - 7 -


   Number Needed of Each Type

   Ethernet

   Fast Ethernet

   ATM




Walker                                                          [Page 6]





I/D                     Site Installation Handbook           04 July 1997


   Token Ring

   FDDI


   WAN Lines and Type


   Number Needed of Each Type

   OC-3

   DS-3

   T1

   64K

   56K

   Type I.E. ATM, SONET, FRAME-RELAY, DEDICATED, SWITCHED

   Speed I.E. OC-3 at 10Mbps or DS-3 at 20Mbps


   Cables


   Purchase all required cables for LAN and WAN


PREMISE





                       July 11, 1997





                           - 8 -


   Location

   Size

   Placement of Equipment on Floor and in Racks

   Tie wraps for Dressing

   Air Conditioner Sizing

   Emergency Power Shutoff

   Power Requirements for Each Device




Walker                                                          [Page 7]





I/D                   Site Installation Handbook           04 July 1997


   Receptacle Type for Each Device

   UPS Sizing and Type

   Grounding

   Fire Equipment Needed

   City Codes


SECURITY


   Physical Security


   Locks or Card Readers or Combo Locks             Audit Trail


   Logbook or Card Reader Logs

   Alarms


   Audible Alarm Siren to hear building Alarms





                       July 11, 1997





                           - 9 -


Walker                                                          [Page 8]





I/D                  Site Installation Handbook           04 July 1997


Acknowledgments

   Thanks to my wife for putting up with the long hours and many
   frustrations during my numerous installations.

   Thanks goes to Kevin Hanahan (Cisco Systems, Inc.) who is right now
   going through numerous installations of his own and suggested that we
   document the procedures in writing not only for us, but for the
   Internet Community and every engineer out there.  His added comments
   and editing have been immensely appreciated.

   Thanks also go to my Professor, Chip McGinnis (NCR/Park College) for
   direction on my Senior Computer Science project.




Author's Address

   James Walker
   Systems Engineer
   Cisco Systems, Inc.
   9300 W. 110th St.
   Suite 260, Bldg. 55
   Overland Park, KS 66210

   Phone: (913) 344-6114
   EMail: jawalker@CISCO.COM




















                       July 11, 1997

INTERNET-DRAFT           EXPIRES JANUARY 1998         INTERNET-DRAFT
