





INTERNET-DRAFT                                               J. Morris
                                   Center for Democracy and Technology
                                                           D. Mulligan
                   Samuelson Law, Technology, and Public Policy Clinic
                                                              S. Kelin
                   Samuelson Law, Technology, and Public Policy Clinic
                                                           A. Davidson
                                   Center for Democracy and Technology
draft-morris-geopriv-scenarios-00.txt                    November 2001
Expires May 2002

              Framework for Location Computation Scenarios


Status of this Memo


     This document is an Internet-Draft and is subject to all provisions
     of Section 10 of RFC2026. Internet-Drafts are working documents of
     the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its
     working groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute working
     documents as Internet- Drafts.

     Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
     months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
     documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts
     as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in
     progress."

     The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
     http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

     The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
     http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.


Copyright Notice

     Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2001). All Rights Reserved.


Abstract


     This document defines a framework for describing location
     computation scenarios.  The framework is intended to be a starting
     point for a discussion of privacy and security issues for location-
     based services.



Morris, Mulligan, Kelin & Davidson                              [Page 1]

Internet-Draft       Location Computation Scenarios        November 2001


1.  Introduction


     Location-based services (applications that require geographic
     location information as input) are becoming increasingly common.
     The collection and transfer of location information about a
     particular target can have privacy implications.  The ability to
     derive or compute a target's location, and access to the derived or
     computed location, are key elements of the location-based services
     privacy equation.  Central to a target's privacy are (a) the
     identity of entities that have access to raw location data, derive
     or compute location, and/or have access to derived or computed
     location information, and (b) whether those entities can be trusted
     to know and follow the target's privacy rules.  This document seeks
     to list location-computation scenarios and identify for each
     scenario which entities must be trusted to ensure a target's
     privacy.


2.  Scope of This Document


     The framework set out below assumes that "location information" is
     a relatively specific way of describing where a target is located
     and that the location information is either (a) derived or computed
     from information generally viewed as non-public, or (b) determined
     by a device that is not generally publicly addressable or
     accessable.  For example, location information could include
     information calculated by triangulating on a wireless signal with
     respect to carriers' cell phone towers, or longitude and latitude
     information determined by a device with GPS (global positioning
     satellite) capabilities.  The framework below also encompasses, for
     example, scenarios in which the non-mobile position of a target is
     derived from "caller-ID" or ANI (automatic number identification)
     information obtained by a service provider offering dial-in network
     access.

     Excluded from the framework below is location information that is
     based on generally available information such as an IP or e-mail
     address.  It is important to note that information like IP address
     can enable someone to roughly estimate a location.  Commercial
     services exist, for example, that offer to provide rough location
     information based on IP address.  Currently, this type of location
     information is less accurate and has a coarser granularity than the
     type of location information addressed in this document. This less
     accurate type of location computation still raises significant
     potential privacy and public policy concerns, but such scenarios
     are outside the scope of this document.



Morris, Mulligan, Kelin & Davidson                              [Page 2]

Internet-Draft       Location Computation Scenarios        November 2001


     For the purposes of this document, "privacy rules" are rules that
     regulate an entity's activities with respect to location
     information, including, but not limited to, the collection, use,
     disclosure, and retention of location information. These rules must
     generally comply with fair information practices. For example, see
     the OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development)
     Guidelines on the Protection of Privacy and Transborder Flows of
     Personal Data at http://www1.oecd.org/dsti/sti/it/secur/prod/PRIV-
     EN.HTM. Specific parameters of these rules are outside the scope of
     this document, but they must be fully articulated in a separate
     document prior to creating location privacy technologies.


3.  Framework


     The framework to describe location computation scenarios has three
     attribute categories: mobility of the target, which entity has
     control over the raw data, and the site of the location
     computation.

     The first attribute category, the mobility of the target, has two
     possible values: fixed or mobile.  Because human beings are not
     inherently trackable, location-based services often use location
     information based on devices that people use or carry.  In other
     words, the location of a target's device is often used as a proxy
     for the location of the target him/herself.  In other scenarios,
     the desired location is that of the device itself, for example if a
     device is installed in a vehicle or other object to be tracked.

     For purposes of this framework, what is relevant is not primarily
     the actual portability of a target device, but the method of the
     device's data connection.  For example, a laptop computer using a
     wired data connection (including a dial-up connection through the
     public switched telephone network) typically indicates that the
     target is in a fixed location at the point of the location inquiry,
     while a laptop computer using a wireless data connection should be
     viewed as "mobile" even if the laptop is in fact not moving.  Thus,
     the type of data connection can indicate a target's "mobility."

     The other two attribute categories can be thought of as decision
     points that are related to steps in the location computation
     process.  The location computation process contains two steps: 1)
     obtaining raw data about the target's location, and 2) deriving or
     computing the target's location using this raw data.  One example
     of such a location computation process is signal triangulation.
     The raw data (Step 1) includes the direction a cell phone is from
     certain cell towers and where those cell towers are located.  Given



Morris, Mulligan, Kelin & Davidson                              [Page 3]

Internet-Draft       Location Computation Scenarios        November 2001


     this information, one can compute the cell phone's location (Step
     2).

     It is significant that the raw information from Step 1 and the
     computed location from Step 2 both provide information about the
     target's position.  In Step 2, the raw data from Step 1 is
     transformed (and perhaps joined with external geographic or other
     data) into a more useful format.  Because location information can
     be expressed in many formats, it is also possible that the location
     computed in Step 2 will be further transformed so that it is more
     useful to the requestor.  After the target's location has been
     computed, the location is available to be used in a location
     service or otherwise served to a requestor (as discussed in Section
     7 below).

     The first decision point is who has control over the raw data (Step
     1). There are two possible values: the target or the target's
     (wired or wireless) carrier network.  In this framework, if the
     target cannot control the dissemination of the raw data (such as
     with a cell phone that transmits information from a GPS chip to the
     wireless carrier without regard to the user's preferences), then
     the correct value would be the carrier (even though the user may
     have the ability to turn the cell phone, and thus the GPS
     reporting, off entirely).

     The second decision point is the site of the location computation
     (Step 2). There are three possible values: the target's device, the
     carrier network of the target's device, or a third party who is
     neither the target nor the carrier.

     There are two distinct decision points because the entity or device
     that controls the raw data may transmit it to a different entity
     before the location computation is performed.  Although some
     initial implementions of location-based services may assume that a
     wireless carrier will perform the location computation, any
     framework to protect privacy should accommodate a model in which
     third parties receive raw locational data, derive or compute a
     location, and then serve or otherwise act on the location in
     accordance with a target's privacy rules.


4.  Significance of Decision Points


     To ensure privacy, the target must be able to set and communicate
     privacy rules. Furthermore, the privacy rules of the target must be
     honored both by entities with access to the raw data and by
     entities (if different) that perform the location computation (and



Morris, Mulligan, Kelin & Davidson                              [Page 4]

Internet-Draft       Location Computation Scenarios        November 2001


     possibly by additional entities that later receive and/or re-serve
     the computed location).

     The first decision point - who has access to and control over the
     raw data - is important because any entity with access to this raw
     data can likely determine the location of the target independent of
     the desires of the target.  If the target has control over the raw
     data, the target (if given appropriate tools) can limit
     transmission of the raw data according to appropriate privacy
     rules.  This would include situations in which raw data is
     generated by a GPS-enabled device controlled by the target, but
     also would include scenarios in which a target manually inputs his
     location into a device or location service.  In contrast, if a
     carrier has access to or control over the location information
     (such as when the raw data is drawn from a wireless carrier's
     network), the carrier must know or learn - and follow - the
     appropriate privacy rules.

     The second decision point - who performs the location computation -
     is equally important because, by definition, any such entity knows
     the target's location.  If the target (or target's device) performs
     the location computation, the target (if given appropriate tools)
     can limit transmission of location information according to
     appropriate privacy rules.  In contrast, if either a carrier or
     third party performs the location computation, the carrier or third
     party must know or learn - and follow - the appropriate privacy
     rules.

     Together, the entities that control the raw data and perform the
     location computation determine who knows the target's location.
     Thus, these entities must protect the location information
     consistent with the privacy rules set by the target during all uses
     and disclosures.


5.  Basic Scenarios


     The three attribute categories and their possible values yield a
     total of 12 basic scenarios, as illustrated below. In the diagram,
     the following words stand for the following phrases:










Morris, Mulligan, Kelin & Davidson                              [Page 5]

Internet-Draft       Location Computation Scenarios        November 2001


           mobility    - mobility of the target
           data        - who controls or has access to raw location data
           computation - who performs the location computation
           carrier     - carrier network of the target's device
           target      - the target or the target's device
           Sc n        - scenario number


     [mobility]     [data]        [computation]

     fixed -----+-- target ---+-- target ------- (Sc1)
                |             |
                |             +-- carrier ------ (Sc2)
                |             |
                |             +-- third party -- (Sc3)
                |
                +-- carrier --+-- target ------- (Sc4)
                              |
                              +-- carrier ------ (Sc5)
                              |
                              +-- third party -- (Sc6)

     mobile ----+-- target ---+-- target ------- (Sc7)
                |             |
                |             +-- carrier ------ (Sc8)
                |             |
                |             +-- third party -- (Sc9)
                |
                +-- carrier --+-- target ------- (Sc10)
                              |
                              +-- carrier ------ (Sc11)
                              |
                              +-- third party -- (Sc12)




6.  Examples of Scenarios


     Of the 12 scenarios identified, some reflect well-known business
     and technical models that currently are being implemented.  For
     example, Sc11 is where the location of a cellular telephone user is
     determined by the user's wireless carrier based on information in
     the carrier's network.

     Other scenarios reflect plausible if less visible business models,
     such as Sc9 in which a target has a cellular telephone or other



Morris, Mulligan, Kelin & Davidson                              [Page 6]

Internet-Draft       Location Computation Scenarios        November 2001


     device containing a GPS chip, and the target (or target's device)
     transmits the raw data to a third party, which returns the target's
     current street location.

     Among the "fixed" mobility scenarios, for example, Sc3 would
     include a situation in which a target manually provides current
     location information and a third party returns driving direction to
     a particular retail establishment.  Sc5 would include a possible
     business model in which a carrier provided highly localized
     targetted advertisements based on "caller ID" information drawn
     from a dial-in modem port.

     Finally, certain scenarios, such as Sc4, do not reflect any readily
     apparent practical implementations but are included to ensure a
     complete analysis of the scenarios.

     It is important to acknowledge that particular types or formats of
     location data cannot be easily categorized as always "raw data" or
     always "computed location information."  For example, in Sc9,
     longitude and latitude data may be the "raw data" returned by a GPS
     device, and a third party may derive a street address from that raw
     data.  But in Sc12, the raw data may be triangulation data
     available to a carrier through its network, and based on that raw
     data the carrier may compute longitude and latitude data to be
     provided to a law enforcement agency involved in a wilderness
     search and rescue.  Moreover, as discussed below, computed location
     information may be further transformed into additional, perhaps
     more useful, location formats.


7.  After the Location Computation


     After the target's location has initially been computed, there are
     at least five possible outcomes:
















Morris, Mulligan, Kelin & Davidson                              [Page 7]

Internet-Draft       Location Computation Scenarios        November 2001


          (a) the transaction is complete (if, for example, the target
     wants to know its own location and the target computes the location,
     as in Sc10);
          (b) the entity that computes the location transmits it back to
     the target, or transmits to the target other information (such as
     driving directions) that are based on the target's location;
          (c) the entity that computes the location transmits it to a third
     party that makes immediate use of the information;
          (d) the entity that computes the location stores it for later
     retrieval by the target or possibly a third party; or
          (e) the entity that computes the location transmits it to a third
     party that in turn serves or stores the location information.



     Once a location has been computed, it is available to be
     transmitted or served to a requestor.  An entity that serves
     location information is known as a "location server."  It is
     important to note that any entity can be a location server,
     including the target's device, the carrier, or a third party.  To
     protect the privacy of the target, any location server must receive
     and follow the target's privacy rules when it stores location
     information and/or uses or discloses this information.


8.  Implications


     As discussed above, two critical elements of location computation
     scenarios are who controls the raw data and who computes or derives
     the location.  If the target does not both control the raw data and
     perform the location computation, he or she must form a
     relationship (even if, in some cases, a very brief one) with at
     least one other entity, and privacy rules must control this
     relationship.   Who these other entities are must be considered
     because different entities have different relationships with the
     target, face different technical constraints, and are subject to
     different legal considerations.

     For example, a target who uses a computer to dial into a network
     (and most other wired connections) typically does so through an
     Internet Service Provider as the "carrier," and it is likely (but
     not certain) that the user has a pre-existing relationship with the
     ISP. In cases where there is a pre-existing relationship,
     technology may not be necessary to transmit privacy rules to that
     carrier.  Instead, the target and carrier might reach a contractual
     agreement about privacy, and the target may first express privacy
     rules in an online or offline form that is stored by the carrier.



Morris, Mulligan, Kelin & Davidson                              [Page 8]

Internet-Draft       Location Computation Scenarios        November 2001


     For wireless scenarios, a target typically (but not always) has a
     pre-existing relationship with a wireless carrier, but there may
     not be any direct relationship with the relevant carrier while a
     target is "roaming" away from the primary carrier's service area.

     As for technical constraints, it is possible that a target's mobile
     device will be small, lightweight, and low on computing power.
     These characteristics may mean that the device cannot efficiently
     perform its own computations.  Thus, to protect his or her privacy,
     the target would need to form a trusted relationship with his or
     her carrier or a third party, obligating them to compute the
     location and either provide it back to the target's device for
     serving or abide by the target's rules about privacy.

     Carriers and others may be constrained by national or local laws
     regarding how they handle information.  For example, in some
     relevant situations within the United States, "Customer Proprietary
     Network Information" (CPNI) rules require that telecommunications
     carriers obtain customer approval before using, disclosing, or
     permitting access to individually identifiable CPNI.  See 47 United
     States Code Section 222 at
     http://www4.law.cornell.edu/uscode/47/222.html.


9.  Possible Technologies to be Developed


     It is not the purpose of this document to identify the specific
     technologies necessary to protect privacy of location information.
     But, in considering the framework set out above, the scenarios
     suggest a number of possible technological needs to protect a
     target's privacy and transmit a target's privacy rules.  Those
     possible technological needs include:



          (a) a method to transmit to a carrier that has access to raw
     location data the applicable privacy rules of the target;
          (b) a method to transmit a target's privacy rules to an entity
     that computes or derives location; and
          (c) a method to transmit a target's privacy rules to any
     subsequent entity (after the location computation is complete).



     A single technology could be created to accomplish all three listed
     needs.  It is also possible, however, that the first listed need
     (to protect privacy of raw data) could be accomplished by the



Morris, Mulligan, Kelin & Davidson                              [Page 9]

Internet-Draft       Location Computation Scenarios        November 2001


     transmission of a more limited amount of data than might be
     required to accomplish the other needs.  For example, if a privacy
     model permits other entities to receive and follow more complex
     privacy rules, then a carrier with access to raw data might need to
     receive only one instruction regarding what other entity should
     receive the raw data.


10.  Conclusion


     Scenarios are a good way to begin discussing the privacy issues of
     location-based services.  To be useful, these scenarios should
     include the details of location computation, which can in turn
     suggest the specific entities that must receive and honor a
     target's privacy rules.


11.  Security Considerations


     This document does not introduce new security issues. The entire
     document, however, does address the need to protect the privacy and
     confidentiality of location information.


Authors


     John B. Morris, Jr.
     Center for Democracy and Technology
     1634 I Street NW, Suite 1100
     Washington, DC 20006
     +1.202.637.9800
     jmorris@cdt.org



     Deirdre K. Mulligan
     Samuelson Law, Technology, and Public Policy Clinic
     Center for Clinical Education
     Boalt Hall School of Law
     Berkeley, CA 94720-7200
     dmulligan@law.berkeley.edu







Morris, Mulligan, Kelin & Davidson                             [Page 10]

Internet-Draft       Location Computation Scenarios        November 2001


     Sabra-Anne R. Kelin
     Samuelson Law, Technology, and Public Policy Clinic
     Center for Clinical Education
     Boalt Hall School of Law
     Berkeley, CA 94720-7200
     sakelin@boalthall.berkeley.edu



     Alan Davidson
     Center for Democracy and Technology
     1634 I Street NW, Suite 1100
     Washington, DC 20006
     abd@cdt.org


     draft-morris-geopriv-scenarios-00.txt Expires May 2002


































Morris, Mulligan, Kelin & Davidson                             [Page 11]

