SAM                                                    J. Buford, Avaya 
Internet Draft                                      S. Kadadi, Motorola 
Intended Status: Informational                           March 12, 2008 
Expires: Sept 12, 2008                                                  
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                    
 
                                      
                           SAM Problem Statement 
                  draft-irtf-sam-problem-statement-02.txt 


Status of this Memo 

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that       
   any applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is       
   aware have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she       
   becomes aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of       
   BCP 79. This document may not be modified, and derivative works of 
   it may not be created, except to publish it as an RFC and to 
   translate it into languages other than English. 

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html 

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 18, 2008. 

Copyright 

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).   




 
 
 
Buford                  Expires Sept 12, 2008                  [Page 1] 

Internet-Draft          SAM Problem Statement            March 12, 2008 
    

Abstract 

   We describe the generally expected behavior of a scalable and 
   adaptive multicast architecture, leaving further details to separate 
   documents on requirements and the SAM design space. This document is 
   a starting point for discussions of feasibility, priority, and 
   deployability. 

Conventions used in this document 

   In examples, "C:" and "S:" indicate lines sent by the client and 
   server respectively. 

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [RFC2119]. 

Table of Contents 

    
   1. Introduction...................................................2 
   2. Heterogeneous Multicast Infrastructure.........................3 
      2.1. Varying Infrastructure by Network Region..................3 
      2.2. Regional Transitions......................................4 
   3. Quality of Service.............................................4 
      3.1. Native QOS, No Native Multicast...........................4 
      3.2. Other Combinations........................................5 
   4. Mobility.......................................................5 
      4.1. Multicast Service Selection...............................6 
      4.2. Transitions between ALM and Native Multicast..............7 
      4.3. Other Considerations......................................7 
   5. Security Considerations........................................8 
   6. Conclusions....................................................8 
   7. IANA Considerations............................................8 
   8. References.....................................................8 
      8.1. Normative References......................................8 
      8.2. Informative References....................................8 
   Author's Addresses................................................9 
   Full Copyright Statement..........................................9 
   Intellectual Property.............................................9 
   Acknowledgment...................................................10 
    
1. Introduction 

   The concept of scalable adaptive multicast includes both scaling 
   properties and adaptability properties.  Scalability is intended to 
   cover: 
 
 
Buford                  Expires Sept 12, 2008                  [Page 2] 

Internet-Draft          SAM Problem Statement            March 12, 2008 
    

   o  large group size 

   o  large numbers of small groups 

   o  rate of group membership change 

   o  admission control for QoS 

   o  use with network layer QoS mechanisms 

   o  varying degrees of reliability 

   o  trees connecting nodes over global internet 

   Adaptability includes 
   o  use of different control mechanisms for different multicast trees 
      depending on initial application parameters or application class 

   o  changing multicast tree structure depending on changes in 
      application requirements, network conditions, and membership 

   o  use of different control mechanisms and tree structure in 
      different regions of network depending on native multicast 
      support, network characteristics, and node behavior 

   The following sections describe some adaptation scenarios.  After the 
   base scenarios are elaborated, then scenarios for scalability and 
   dynamic adaptation should be added. 

2. Heterogeneous Multicast Infrastructure 

2.1. Varying Infrastructure by Network Region 

   Regions A, B, C are disjoint areas of the network with some type of 
   native multicast support.  Region Z is all other areas of the network 
   with no native multicast support.  Region Z may be partitioned by A, 
   B, and/or C. 

   A multicast connection between nodes in A, B, C, and Z is needed. In 
   each region A, B, C, the respective native multicast mechanism is 
   used.   

   Multicast topology choices include: 



 
 
Buford                  Expires Sept 12, 2008                  [Page 3] 

Internet-Draft          SAM Problem Statement            March 12, 2008 
    

   o  Multicast applications see an end-to-end multicast application 
      layer which is mapped to a native layer transparently in the 
      regions that it is available. The overlay's group management 
      mechansisms hold for all nodes, and are mapped transparently to 
      the native layer mechanisms in the appropriate regions.  All nodes 
      have addresses in the overlay. 

   o  Multicast applications see an end-to-end native multicast, where 
      nodes in region Z connect to native regions using tunnels. The 
      native group management mechanisms hold for all nodes. 

   Homogeneous sub-case: regions A, B, C may use the same native 
   multicast protocol.   

2.2. Regional Transitions 

   A node in a new region D joins the multicast tree.  Region D has 
   native support. 

   What is the minimum number of nodes in a region needed for native 
   support to be used in that part of the tree? 

3. Quality of Service 

3.1. Native QOS, No Native Multicast 

   Each endpoint in the multicast tree specifies QOS constraints such as 
   bandwidth, delay, and jitter for a given source.  Multicast join 
   includes admission control step for the selected QOS mechanism. This 
   means that the join decision combines both multicast tree 
   considerations (eg., best metrics) and an admission control decision.  
   Paths to different endpoints from a given source might have different 
   QOS constraints.  A given multicast tree may mix QOS delivery and 
   best effort delivery to different receivers. 

   Available IP QOS mechanisms include Intserv, Diffserv, and MPLS. 
   Assume all regions of network have interoperable native QOS 
   mechanism.  Assume all receivers have homogenous capabilities. 

   The topology of the overlay is not assumed to be isomorphic to 
   available QOS paths.  The overlay must be sophisticated enough to 
   determine what paths are available and arrange its tree construction 
   and routing behaviour accordingly. 

   In order to enforce QOS, a measurement mechanism is needed. The 
   scalability of the measurement, feedback and policing mechanism is an 

 
 
Buford                  Expires Sept 12, 2008                  [Page 4] 

Internet-Draft          SAM Problem Statement            March 12, 2008 
    

   important issue.  RTP is such a measurement and feedback protocol for 
   UDP. 

   A source might adapt its bit rate and quality depending on feedback 
   from receivers.  There might be graceful degradation mechanisms such 
   as multi-description coding over different multicast paths.  This 
   behavior is application dependent. 

3.2. Other Combinations 

   Heterogeneous QOS refers to either 1) portions of the network where 
   no QOS mechanism exists at native level, or 2) receivers which have 
   heterogeneous capabilities.   

   These combinations need further elaboration. 

   o  Native QOS with Regional Native Multicast 

   o  Heterogeneous QOS, No Native Multicast 

   o  Heterogeneous QOS, Regional Native Multicast 

4. Mobility 

   We assume mobile nodes use Mobile IP (MIP), and that regions of the 
   network that mobile nodes operate in are MIP enabled. Any node in the 
   multicast tree may be mobile, and we consider source node mobility as 
   a special case. 

   A mobile node's home address (HoA) is associated with its overlay 
   address (if this is an overlay) or group multicast address.   As the 
   node moves to another network, multicast messages are routed to it 
   via the home agent (HA).  In addition to increased latency, node 
   mobility can impact robustness of multicast delivery due to loss of 
   connectivity during mobility transitions. Some link layer solutions 
   may mitigate or eliminate connectivity loss, but may require sending 
   packets to both old and new care-of addresses during the transition. 

   If the node uses its care-of address (CoA) in the overlay or 
   multicast tree, then any mobility transition will be disruptive, 
   causing a leave-join sequence.  

   Forwarding of packets can be through the home agent.  If the source 
   address is the care-of address, these might be rejected by nodes 
   expecting packets only from overlay-registered addresses. 


 
 
Buford                  Expires Sept 12, 2008                  [Page 5] 

Internet-Draft          SAM Problem Statement            March 12, 2008 
    

   In general, mobile node transitions to another network lead to lost 
   packets during the transition, and downstream nodes in the tree will 
   also be disconnected.  Possibile solutions are bi-casting the packets 
   to both old and new CoA, or buffering packets at the HA or old or new 
   anchored points. 

   If the overlay is aware that the node is mobile, then it could 
   construct a mesh rather than tree to connect to.  The mesh might 
   provide redundant paths to the mobile node's children in the tree. 

   The overlay might use knowledge about node movement to make a set of 
   target anchor points prejoin the multicast group/service so that the 
   handoff delay can be reduced. Solutions similar to low latency 
   handoffs/Fast MIPv6 (prereg) could be used. 

   There can be different scenarios depending on whether all nodes in 
   multicast tree are mobile or a subset of nodes. 

4.1. Multicast Service Selection 

   As the node moves from one network to another network, it can get 
   multicast service in the new network in three ways: 1) from the new 
   foreign network, 2) from the home network via a tunnel, 3) from the 
   old foreign network via a tunnel, if the transition was from one 
   foreign network to another.  The selection may depend on what is 
   available in the new foreign network and which of the three 
   mechanisms was used in the previous foreign network. 

   1. Multicast service to/from the new foreign network 

   o  In the case of native multicast, this means that the new foreign 
      network has a multicast router which the mobile node uses. The 
      mobile node can use the new IP address (obtained in the new 
      network). This causes a leave-join sequence. If the router in the 
      new network is not already a part the multicast tree, there will 
      be additional delay to join the multicast tree in the foreign 
      network. The mobile node uses either the CoA as the source address 
      of control messages or its HoA.  

   2. Multicast service via home network  

   o  Multicast packets are tunneled to/from the mobile node by the HA.  
      The mobile node uses HoA for multicast control messages. No need 
      to join/leave the multicast group during handoff. The transmission 
      path is not optimal. 


 
 
Buford                  Expires Sept 12, 2008                  [Page 6] 

Internet-Draft          SAM Problem Statement            March 12, 2008 
    

   o  If the tunnel end-point is not a mobile node, this may result in 
      duplicate packets. Consider the case where packets of the same 
      multicast group are tunneled to the new network. This means two 
      HAs are tunneling packets for the same multicast group to the same 
      foreign network. Possible solutions to this are: 1) applications 
      in mobile node takes care of duplicate packets, 2) multicast 
      packets are sent to mobile node as unicast packets (e.g., Mobile 
      IPv4 uses this solution).    

   3. Multicast service from old foreign network 

   o  The mobile node gets the packets from its old multicast service 
      anchor point until it registers/joins new multicast service anchor 
      point in new network. Once it starts getting packets from new 
      anchor point, it leaves its old anchor point. This means that 
      packets are tunneled from the old foreign network until the mobile 
      node gets multicast service from the new foreign network. 

   o  There is minimal packet loss. There may be duplicate packets 
      during the transition. A leave and join sequence results. 

4.2. Transitions between ALM and Native Multicast 

   Transitions of mobile nodes between heterogeneous multicast networks 
   (say, from a native multicast region to OL/ALM multicast region or 
   vice versa) need to be considered. 

4.3. Other Considerations 

   o  Multicast source mobility: Mobile source nodes may have more 
      impact than other cases, and overlay tree/mesh may be reorganized 
      when the multicast source moves to a new network.  There may be 
      solutions specific to source node mobility that may not scale to 
      mobile nodes in general. 

   o  Scalability of advertisement mechanisms. Multicast advertisements 
      are also multicast packets with well known multicast group address 
      and port number. If mobile nodes which are in the foreign network 
      want to know about multicast services in home network, these 
      advertisement packets should be sent to foreign network. The home 
      agent can tunnel packets to the foreign network, but it can 
      increase the load on the HA. 

   o  Network topology supported by the access network. 



 
 
Buford                  Expires Sept 12, 2008                  [Page 7] 

Internet-Draft          SAM Problem Statement            March 12, 2008 
    

5. Security Considerations 

   [RESC2006] surveys the security issues specific to overlay networks  
   which include: 

   o  Correctness of routing due to malicious nodes acting individually 
      or collectively 

   o  Node impersonation due to lack of secure routing and identity 

   o  Fairness enforcement since each node acts autonomously, it can 
      chose to limit its resource contribution to the operation of the 
      overlay 

   o  Denial of service (DOS) 

   o  Using overlays for launching DDoS attacks [ROSS2006] 

   SAM will not solve the overlay security problems, but should work 
   with overlays that provide security mechanisms. 

6. Conclusions 

   Using this discussion with the separately developed SAM Design Space, 
   we will be able to enumerate those ares of the problem space for 
   which solutions exist and those which are open problems.  This will 
   suggest the steps by which the SAM Framework [BUF2008] is designed. 

7. IANA Considerations 

   This document has no actions for IANA. 

8. References 

8.1. Normative References 

   [RFC2119] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate 
             Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997. 

8.2. Informative References 

   [MUR2006] E. Muramoto, Y. Imai, N. Kawaguchi. Requirements for 
             Scalable Adaptive Multicast Framework in Non-GIG Networks.  
             November 2006.  Internet Draft draft-muramoto-irtf-sam-
             generic-require-01.txt, work in progress. 


 
 
Buford                  Expires Sept 12, 2008                  [Page 8] 

Internet-Draft          SAM Problem Statement            March 12, 2008 
    

   [RESC2006] E. Rescorla.  Introduction to Distributed Hash Tables.  
             IETF-65 Technical Plenary, March 2006. 
             www3.ietf.org/proceedings/06mar/slides/plenaryt-2.pdf 

   [ROSS2006] K. Ross.  Exploiting P2P Systems for DDOS Attacks.  IETF 
             65 P2PRG CORE Subgroup.  www.cs.uml.edu/~buford/irtf-
             p2prg/ietf65/ietf65-irtf-p2prg-core-ddos.pdf 

   [BUF2008] J. Buford. Hybrid Overlay Multicast Framework. IRTF SAM RG. 
             draft-irtf-sam-hybrid-overlay-framework-02. March 2008, 
             Work in Progress. 

Author's Addresses 

   John Buford 
   Avaya Labs 
   307 Middletown-Lincroft Road, 1J 243 
   Lincroft, NJ 07738 
   USA 
   Email: buford at samrg dot org 
    
   Shivanand Kadadi 
   Motorola Bangalore India 
   Email: a22063@motorola.com 

Full Copyright Statement 

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008). 
   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions 
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors 
   retain all their rights. 
   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an 
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE 
   REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE 
   IETF TRUST AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL 
   WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY 
   WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY 
   RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A 
   PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
 
Intellectual Property 

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to 
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in 
 
 
Buford                  Expires Sept 12, 2008                  [Page 9] 

Internet-Draft          SAM Problem Statement            March 12, 2008 
    

   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights 
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has 
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information 
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be 
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 
   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of 
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at 
      http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 
   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at 
      ietf-ipr@ietf.org. 
 
Acknowledgment 

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF 
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA). 























 
 
Buford                  Expires Sept 12, 2008                 [Page 10] 

