Internet Area Working Group                                     Rob Brew
Internet Draft                                                Rydal Inc.
Intended status: Standards Track                            January 2020
Expires: July 16, 2020

                           GPS Over WiFi.
		draft-brew-intarea-underground-01

Abstract

When users are at known underground locations, such as tube stations
they often do not have a GPS signal, as the radio waves from the
satellites required cannot penetrate the earth, this draft suggests
providing GPS locations over WiFI using remote IP detection for a
server to respond with the correct name of clients location and
the clients GPS location.IP address.


Extending this to those without WiFI access the standard goes one
stage further, by offering a hidden WiFI network with a standard name,
such as .location. The principle being that mobile devices can
look for this network in cases where GPS data cannot be collected. It
is hoped that this will allow those using mapping services to know
where they are when travelling on underground trains etc.


Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents
   at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 13, 2018.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2020 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF
   Trust's Legal Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents  
carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with
   respect to this document.  Code Components extracted from this
   document must include Simplified BSD License text as described in
   Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without
   warranty as described in the Simplified BSD License.








1. Introduction 

1.1 Motivation

Those travelling underground networks, such as the London underground
or the German autobahn do know where they are when underground. At
best apps such as citymapper will estimate where people are based
on the time the carridge takes to get to their location.  It would
be convenient for them to know where they are. This protocol resolves
this problem, not just to those who have a wireless location but also
to those who do not.

1.2 The code for this servlet, implemented in Java running on tomcat8
is available at https://www.github.com/rydal/underground.

1.3 Security considerations: In order to prevent spoofing of the
location https can be used.

1.4 IANA Considerations:
 This document has no actions for IANA.

2. Mechanisms.
2.1
The Server, with the aforementioned outline code, knows the IP 
address of the WiFi hot spot.  It holds a  list of GPS locations, 
related to the IP address of the provided underground network.
Using this list it responds to the client (the Wireless
network of the underground network), with the relevant GPS 
co-ordinates of the physical site being referenced by the 
incoming IP address. The server responds with a name of the 
location, it's GPS latitude and GPS longitude in a JSON array.

2.2:
Making this more accessible, including to user's not currently
connected to a WiFi network, we can implement a hidden wireless 
network with a standardized name, such as ".location".

The operating system's of mobile phones can then search for 
such a wireless network when GPS is unavailable. The hidden 
wireless network can then act in the same manner as described
in section 2.1.

2.3:
As referenced in section 1.3.  Standard https encryption can 
prevent location spoofing.

3.
Interested parties:
The transport organisations for the relevant underground locations
would need to be involved in this to provide said wireless 
networks. The mobile manufacturers would need to add a function
to their GPS location code.  

 
Author's Address
  Rob Brew
  flat 5, Rydal mount, 20 hayne road, beckenham, kent, br3 4hy
  UK
  Phone: +44 7782200684 
 
  EMail: sputnik2012@gmail.com
