


rai                                                        H. Tschofenig
Internet-Draft                                    Nokia Siemens Networks
Intended status: Informational                            H. Schulzrinne
Expires: September 5, 2009                           Columbia University
                                                              M. Isomaki
                                                                   Nokia
                                                           March 4, 2009


A Pragmatic Approach for Reducing Delays in Publishing Documents within
        the Real-time Applications and Infrastructure (RAI) Area
              draft-tschofenig-rai-reducing-delays-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 5, 2009.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents in effect on the date of
   publication of this document (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info).
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.





Tschofenig, et al.      Expires September 5, 2009               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft               Reducing Delays                  March 2009


Abstract

   During the last year, participants in the Real-time Applications and
   Infrastructure (RAI) area have been quite active in discussing
   proposals that could improve their way of working.  This document is
   a contribution to that discussion and focuses on the reduction of
   delays experienced in producing specifications.  We believe that this
   is one of the main problems in the RAI area (and quite likely in
   other areas of the IETF as well) and it requires attention.  A number
   of side effects, caused by the long specification work, are
   illustrated in this document.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Reasons for Delays . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Suggestions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   4.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   5.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   6.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17





























Tschofenig, et al.      Expires September 5, 2009               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft               Reducing Delays                  March 2009


1.  Introduction

   Many participants in the Real-time Applications and Infrastructure
   (RAI) area have noticed that it takes several years for a
   specification from the initial working group item to the published
   RFC.  A brief look at http://www.arkko.com/tools/lifecycle/ (for
   documents like ICE, SIP Location Conveyance, SIP configuration
   framework) very quickly confirms this observation.  Several years are
   quickly spent.  In various cases these delays have had negative
   effects on the deployment situation and on interoperability.  In some
   other cases the relationship between a long delay and lack of
   deployment cannot be directly observed and there are more complex
   reasons that can only be analysed on a per-specification basis.  For
   example, some of the interoperability problems that got discussed
   during the SIP Interoperability Workshop at IETF#70 (see http://
   www.sipforum.org/component/option,com_docman/task,cat_view/gid,42/
   Itemid,75) may have been caused by specifications with too many
   options.

   The authors are not aware of a detailed and structured analysis of
   the documents within the RAI area with respect to their delays.  With
   some documents there is the question whether additional delay is
   actually problematic, particularly when they have a research
   character.  One could argue that optimizations to the process should
   not be started without a detailed analysis of the main causes for
   these delays.  Unfortunately, the delays are the effects of actions
   taken by individuals and blaming them for the problems is not
   helpful, particularly since the accused persons are very likely to
   disagree.

   Protocol specifications that are not deployed are useless regardless
   how fast they found their way through the IETF.  This document,
   however, does not attempt to discuss problems of publishing
   specifications that do not meet market demands (especially since
   different IETF participants target different market segments, some of
   which might not even closely reflect the properties of the Internet).

   Instead, this document only focuss on delays assuming that the only
   problem to be solved is that specifications are not published in a
   timely fashion.











Tschofenig, et al.      Expires September 5, 2009               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft               Reducing Delays                  March 2009


2.  Reasons for Delays

   The authors believe that the following list provides a fairly
   complete list of reasons for delays in the process of publishing a
   specification:

   Interworking between different working groups:

      While it may sound fairly unproblematic to work on a single
      specification in different working groups experience has shown the
      opposite.  Typically, the problems are related to the lack of
      understanding of the usage scenarios, different schedules and
      priorities, unclear responsibilities, different workstyles in
      different groups, etc.  A similar problem can also be observed
      when special expert groups need to get involved, e.g., in the form
      of XML directorates, reviews of URI schemes, application layer
      design aspects.

      Examples that support the above statement can be found with RADIUS
      GEOPRIV [I-D.ietf-geopriv-radius-lo] (interaction between GEOPRIV
      and RADEXT), HELD [I-D.ietf-geopriv-http-location-delivery]
      (interaction between GEOPRIV and the APPS area), and SIP Location
      Conveyance [I-D.ietf-sip-location-conveyance] (interaction between
      GEOPRIV and SIP).

   Interworking with other SDOs:

      Similarly to the interworking between different IETF working
      groups one might already expect problems in the interworking with
      other SDOs as the differences might quickly increase due to the
      different set of participants, fairly different standardization
      procedures and deadlines ('yes, in some SDOs deadlines are taken
      serious even though they are completely artificial'), different
      architectural approaches, different business models, different
      target markets (e.g., enterprise networks, cellular networks,
      military networks) different security assumptions.

      Examples can be found throughout the IETF.  In the RAI area the
      SIP change process (see [RFC3427] and the currently discussed
      revision of it [I-D.peterson-rai-rfc3427bis]) build the basis of
      the interworking.  Unfortunately, it turned out that in practice
      problems show up with the lack of participation of persons in both
      organizations.  A high priority item from, for example, the TISPAN
      leads to a lot of confusion and lack of interest in the IETF RAI
      area due to the lack of context.  There are, however, different
      models in the IETF as well where a lot of the actual protocol work
      is outsourced to the respective organization.  An example would be
      the RADEXT working group with their work on RADIUS [RFC2865]; a



Tschofenig, et al.      Expires September 5, 2009               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft               Reducing Delays                  March 2009


      protocol that is being used by a number of SDOs.  Although the
      specifications that are sometimes produced outside the IETF do not
      meet the quality expectations in the IETF they do at least not
      cause resources from IETF participants to be wasted when there is
      little to no interest in that specific work.  To provide a minimum
      degree of guidance rules have been outlined that should be
      followed when defining new extensions for RADIUS, see
      [I-D.ietf-radext-design].

   Disagreement about architectural approaches:

      Sometimes document authors have a different architectural approach
      in mind that is incompatible with a large part of the working
      group members.  Often, these aspects are discovered fairly late in
      the process particularly when the document lacks a description of
      the assumptions and the security architecture.  Often, the
      problems are related to the interworking with other SDOs as the
      solution approach developed with the IETF specification as seen by
      the authors as a building block that has then to be fit into an
      architecture developed elsewhere (often without explicitly stating
      who else would be doing that work).

      Examples include the stream of work regarding GETS/MLPP (partially
      done in the IEPREP working group).

   Review marathon:

      Getting a document through the IETF process does not happen
      without reviews.  There are reviews before the document becomes a
      WG item, reviews while the document is within the group, some
      chairs demand reviews before they issue a WGLC to probe
      'readiness', someone in between reviews by special expert groups
      are done (also by other SDOs and external groups, if necessary),
      then comes the WGLC, review by the responsible AD, review by the
      IESG, review by directorates (and there are many of those) and
      (depending on the type of document and history) an IETF Last Call.
      Everybody has an opinion, often not necessarily a technical
      opinion, on how documents should be written and why other solution
      approaches have not been explored.  Reviewers need time and then
      the review comments often cannot be ignored but need to be
      discussed and resolved.  When reviews happen later in the process
      then text changes are often expected to keep the reviewer happy.
      IESG members frequently put DISCUSSes on reviews and this
      increases their priority allowing a single person to, for example,
      delay the publication of a document for an extended period of
      time.  From a psychological point of view reviewers are in the
      unfortunate position that they have the feeling that something
      must be improved as an outcome of the review activity.  As soon as



Tschofenig, et al.      Expires September 5, 2009               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft               Reducing Delays                  March 2009


      documents leave the working group the transparency is largely
      lost, despite IESG comments being sent to the authors, WG chairs
      and responsible ADs and despite information being available in the
      I-D tracker.  Mentally, many working group members consider
      documents to be 'done' when they leave the working group.

      The authors are not arguing that reviews are unnecessary but there
      has to be balance with respect to the goal that is about to be
      accomplished.

   Degeneration of the 3-level Standards Track process:

      RFC 2026 [RFC2026] describes the 'Internet Standards Process' and
      describes the level of Standards Track documents, namely 'Proposed
      Standard' to 'Draft Standard' to 'Internet Standard'.  It appears
      that IETF participants are less likely to spend their time on
      advancing documents from 'Proposed Standard' to 'Draft Standard',
      particularly since the industry to a large extent does not
      understand the standards process anyway.  More and more it can be
      observed how a fairly small group of people get together and
      produce de-facto standards by finishing specifications in an
      astonishing time frame together with a large number of
      implementations that the Internet community is willing to deploy.
      The standards process utilized in the IETF is, unfortunately, not
      tailored to these type of developments.  Experimental documents on
      the other hand, although easier to publish through the IETF, have
      the stigma of being very unbaked.  In certain environments the
      label of 'experimental' is considered as a problem.  Putting
      normative references to informational or experimental RFCs in
      Standards Track documents later makes the publication process more
      complex due to the need for Down-Refs [RFC3967].

   Feature creep and overall complexity:

      Setting up a working group takes some time, getting working group
      members to agree that a certain document has to become WG item
      also takes a lot of time, the time it takes to publish it as an
      RFC takes even longer and producing more extensions involves also
      a certain overhead (e.g., re-chartering, new working group/BOF,
      new milestones, support from the working group).  It is therefore
      not surprising that document authors/edtiors or the working group
      are sometimes tempted to add a tiny feature here and another small
      feature there.

      A further favorite 'hobby' is to generalize the solution.  In
      theory this is a good idea as the same protocol can be then used
      in a variety of different usage scenarios.  In most case, this has
      lead to more complexity, much longer time to finish the



Tschofenig, et al.      Expires September 5, 2009               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft               Reducing Delays                  March 2009


      specification and sometimes none of the use cases are consequently
      covered appropriately.  For some, the SIP configuration framework
      might be an example.

   Lack of time:

      The IETF to a large extend consists of volunteers (rather than
      standardization specialists and consultants), who have a fairly
      limited time budget.  Those who are involved in the development of
      standards tend to have time constraints (e.g., authors, WG
      participants, WG chairs, ADs, Expert Reviewers, etc.).  This is
      quite normal.

      Problems arise when the lack of time causes considerable delays in
      completing work other people rely on.  Consider the following
      hypothetical case.  Bob is an expert in writing specifications and
      he has a lot of energy and enthusiasm.  He is assigned as the main
      editor of a specification.  The work on the specification takes
      some time (typically years) but Bob does his job well and the
      community respects him.  Over time Bob develops new interests,
      might even change his job and does not show the same availability
      anymore.  Still, Bob remains in charge of the document and Bob
      does not recognize that he is unable to commit the necessary time
      to get the job done.  A similar situation can happen in any other
      role previously mentioned.

   Missing running code:

      Although most people would agree that running code is very useful
      many specifications are not backed up with it.  Since
      specifications change a lot over the lifetime before being
      published as an RFC (even at a very late stage) it can be pretty
      frustrating to have running code in an early stage.  The standards
      process considers interoperable code but due to the long time it
      takes to publish specifications it is rarely utilized.

      As an example, the TURN specification [I-D.ietf-behave-turn] has
      changed quite considerably over time.  Those who implemented
      earlier versions essentially had to re-write their code.

   Onerous extensibility rules:

      Many document authors feel insecure when writing IANA
      consideration sections and for some reasons these consideration
      sections often demand Standards Track documents to introduce new
      extensions.

      A recent example can be found with the Service URN document



Tschofenig, et al.      Expires September 5, 2009               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft               Reducing Delays                  March 2009


      [RFC5031], which requires a Standards Track document for
      allocating a new top-level top-level service labels.  With the new
      extensions that the working group had seen it became cumbersome to
      progress these documents in a timely fashion through the working
      group.

   AD and IESG overload:

      Some documents need significant time after leaving the working
      group until they are published.  It is unclear that these delays
      yield significantly better documents in the end.  Part of the
      problem is that the current IETF area director model seems to
      assume that ADs spend the equivalent of a full-time job on their
      "volunteer" job, which appears to be unrealistic, particularly
      when ADs have been in office for several years.  Compared to other
      organizations, the AD "span of control" is very large, supervising
      twenty or more working group chairs.

   Exhaustion:

      As the publication process wears on, the amount of change per time
      unit continuously decreases.  Because of the long delays, authors
      are often working on many documents in parallel, making it
      difficult for them to switch context and remember all the issues
      when they update documents.  As the initial excitement about a
      problem fades after a few years, editing such documents becomes a
      chore, further delaying the publication.  This leads to author
      exhaustion.

      Thus, to the extent possible, most documents should be finished in
      no more than three IETF meetings: gauge interest and agreement on
      basic approach during the first IETF meeting and assign reviewers,
      reach consensus on the technical issues during the second IETF
      meeting and get a final WG approval during the third one, if
      needed.
















Tschofenig, et al.      Expires September 5, 2009               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft               Reducing Delays                  March 2009


3.  Suggestions

   Below, we present a set of suggestions to reduce publication delays.
   We believe that many of the suggestions can be used together, and
   some can be used experimentally to see if they produce significant
   improvements.

   Improving the chartering process:

      It takes far too long to add an item to a charter.  If there's
      interest in the working group and the document is below a certain
      size and complexity (based on the judgement by the WG chair) and
      three reviewer volunteers, the document should just get into the
      next cycle.

   State assumptions clearly:

      Sometimes a specific protocol specification is target for usage in
      a certain environment (or envisioned context).  The working group
      may be fine with such an approach but often the document does not
      state the usage environment.  This often leads to confusion in the
      review process.  For example, some documents are being progressed
      through the IETF where the main use case can be found in the 3GPP
      IMS architecture.  Maybe the document assumes that other
      organizations utilize the specification in a specific context.
      There are often additional operational aspects that need to be
      considered in order to come to a complete solution.

      A recent example can be found in the work on
      [I-D.ietf-ecrit-local-emergency-rph-namespace] where the document
      essentially only specifies the syntax but the semantic is supposed
      to be provided by organizations outside the IETF.

   Delegate down:

      In most organizations, middle management is given significant
      decision authority, usually described by the financial impact of a
      decision.  A CEO of company does not approve every contract, user
      manual or feature list.  The current IETF review model is
      predicated on the notion that the IESG reviews protocols to ensure
      that they do not damage the Internet.  However, most of the
      current RAI documents are extensions and bug fixes that are likely
      to have only local effects.

      To reduce AD and IESG load, working group chairs should be able to
      handle most documents until they reach the RFC editor, unless
      there is an objection during IETF last call.  IESG members are
      expected to voice their objection during that last call period,



Tschofenig, et al.      Expires September 5, 2009               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft               Reducing Delays                  March 2009


      triggering formal IESG review.  Only efforts that introduce new
      protocols or are likely to have significant Internet-wide impact
      require more extensive review.

      When a document is added to the WG work list, it should be flagged
      to indicate that it will require a full review.  All other
      documents receive a lighter late-stage review.

   Clearly label IETF discussion slots:

      Given the three-meeting model mentioned earlier, the IETF meeting
      presentations should be structured accordingly, with a clear set
      of questions to be answered.  For example, the first presentation
      needs to answer questions about architectural assumptions,
      relation to other work, dependencies, importance of the problem
      and alternative approaches.  Working group chairs should work with
      document authors to structure presentations, possibly providing
      templates.  In this model, the second discussion is crucial and
      should be given ample time, if necessary enhancing the plenary
      working group meeting with break-out meetings before and after the
      WG meeting slot.  (It is a waste of time to have 200 people listen
      to a discussion where only a handful can really make significant
      contributions.)

   Journal-like review model:

      When a new document is submitted to the working group, the working
      group chair determines at latest at the next IETF meeting whether
      there is sufficient interest to pursue this work.  If so, he or
      she seeks at least three reviewers from the working group.  If
      such reviewers cannot be found, the document lacks sufficient
      interest.  Authors may suggest qualified reviewers.  Reviewers are
      given a two-month review deadline, so that reviews would typically
      arrive mid-cycle between IETF meetings.  The basic process could
      follow the GenArt review model, which could proceed in parallel.
      As needed, a specialized reviewer might be assigned to only look
      at specific issues, such as XML usage, security aspects or
      congestion control.

      The reviews should be tracked in an issue tracker, in addition to
      being disseminated via the working group mailing list.  As a
      short-term measure until the IETF tools are enhanced, existing
      conference review tools might be used, as they offer definable
      review forms (e.g., to separate editorial and technical issues)
      and automated review reminder mechanisms.

      This approach closely models the review process used by scientific
      journals and technical conferences.



Tschofenig, et al.      Expires September 5, 2009              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft               Reducing Delays                  March 2009


   Increasing implementation feedback:

      When documents are able to progress faster through the IETF
      participants should feel encouraged to provide an update that
      includes bug fixes and other corrections based on implementation
      efforts.  A possible approach to accomplish this today is to
      publish documents as informational and experimental RFCs (faster)
      and to advance them to Standars Track once implementation (or even
      deployment) experience is available.

   Delegate work to other SDOs:

      We believe that the updated version of the SIP Change Process
      [I-D.peterson-rai-rfc3427bis] goes into the right direction
      already.

   Additional WG chair training:

      We suggest to use some of the WG chair training lunches to offer
      room for discussions on how to avoid delays in progressing
      documents and to collect the best current practises.

   Virtual interim meetings:

      Many document authors do their IETF work in the two-week period
      around the submission deadlines before an IETF meeting.  This
      leads to fairly low document update cycles.  A tool to increase
      the time that is spent on documents per IETF cycle working style
      is to hold virtual interim meetings (i.e., phone conferences).
      This is common practice also in other organizations and helps to
      stay focused on open issues.  Sometimes chairs regularly contact
      the main document authors to discuss the editing progress and the
      status of open issues.  It is useful to allow working group
      members to participate and distribute notes about this informal
      communication.

   Publish WG status updates:

      Sometimes no progress is made because there is uncertainty about
      who is responsible for taking the next step.  Periodic reminders
      (even with tool support) would help to make the workflow more
      visible.  Examples of these periodic status updates can be found
      here
      http://www.ietf.org/mail-archive/web/ecrit/current/msg05785.html,
      http://www.ietf.org/mail-archive/web/ops-area/current/
      msg00467.html and
      http://www.ietf.org/mail-archive/web/saag/current/msg02242.html.




Tschofenig, et al.      Expires September 5, 2009              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft               Reducing Delays                  March 2009


   Assign new editors:

      If the original author clearly cannot complete the work in a
      timely fashion, the working group chair should routinely assign an
      editor to the document, after, say, a one-year delay since the -00
      draft.  If no other person is capable to take that role, this
      indicates that the document is either too long, too complicated or
      of insufficient interest to merit further consideration as-is and
      needs to be split up, simplified or abandoned.

   Enhance I-D tracker:

      The I-D tracker should indicate who is supposed to be reviewing
      the document and by what deadline.  It should also clearly
      indicate who has the "token" on the document, i.e, whether the
      next action is expected to come from the working group chair, a
      reviewer or set of reviewers, a directorate, or the authors.


































Tschofenig, et al.      Expires September 5, 2009              [Page 12]

Internet-Draft               Reducing Delays                  March 2009


4.  Security Considerations

   This document discusses process related aspects that are not directly
   related to security.  However, the outcome of an improved process
   might have a positive impact on security provided by the deployed
   specifications.













































Tschofenig, et al.      Expires September 5, 2009              [Page 13]

Internet-Draft               Reducing Delays                  March 2009


5.  Acknowledgements

   We would like to thank all of those you care about the process
   related aspects in the IETF as they contribute to the impact of the
   work produced by the IETF in the future.  We would also like to thank
   everyone participating on the RAI area mailing list for their input
   during the RAI reorganization discussions.












































Tschofenig, et al.      Expires September 5, 2009              [Page 14]

Internet-Draft               Reducing Delays                  March 2009


6.  Informative References

   [I-D.ietf-behave-turn]
              Rosenberg, J., Mahy, R., and P. Matthews, "Traversal Using
              Relays around NAT (TURN): Relay Extensions to Session
              Traversal Utilities for NAT (STUN)",
              draft-ietf-behave-turn-13 (work in progress),
              February 2009.

   [I-D.ietf-ecrit-local-emergency-rph-namespace]
              Polk, J., "IANA Registering a SIP Resource Priority Header
              Namespace for Local  Emergency Communications",
              draft-ietf-ecrit-local-emergency-rph-namespace-01 (work in
              progress), February 2009.

   [I-D.ietf-geopriv-http-location-delivery]
              Barnes, M., Winterbottom, J., Thomson, M., and B. Stark,
              "HTTP Enabled Location Delivery (HELD)",
              draft-ietf-geopriv-http-location-delivery-13 (work in
              progress), February 2009.

   [I-D.ietf-geopriv-radius-lo]
              Tschofenig, H., Adrangi, F., Jones, M., Lior, A., and B.
              Aboba, "Carrying Location Objects in RADIUS and Diameter",
              draft-ietf-geopriv-radius-lo-22 (work in progress),
              February 2009.

   [I-D.ietf-radext-design]
              Weber, G. and A. DeKok, "RADIUS Design Guidelines",
              draft-ietf-radext-design-06 (work in progress),
              February 2009.

   [I-D.ietf-sip-location-conveyance]
              Polk, J. and B. Rosen, "Location Conveyance for the
              Session Initiation Protocol",
              draft-ietf-sip-location-conveyance-12 (work in progress),
              November 2008.

   [I-D.peterson-rai-rfc3427bis]
              Peterson, J. and C. Jennings, "Change Process for the
              Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)",
              draft-peterson-rai-rfc3427bis-01 (work in progress),
              February 2009.

   [RFC2026]  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision
              3", BCP 9, RFC 2026, October 1996.

   [RFC2865]  Rigney, C., Willens, S., Rubens, A., and W. Simpson,



Tschofenig, et al.      Expires September 5, 2009              [Page 15]

Internet-Draft               Reducing Delays                  March 2009


              "Remote Authentication Dial In User Service (RADIUS)",
              RFC 2865, June 2000.

   [RFC3427]  Mankin, A., Bradner, S., Mahy, R., Willis, D., Ott, J.,
              and B. Rosen, "Change Process for the Session Initiation
              Protocol (SIP)", BCP 67, RFC 3427, December 2002.

   [RFC3967]  Bush, R. and T. Narten, "Clarifying when Standards Track
              Documents may Refer Normatively to Documents at a Lower
              Level", BCP 97, RFC 3967, December 2004.

   [RFC5031]  Schulzrinne, H., "A Uniform Resource Name (URN) for
              Emergency and Other Well-Known Services", RFC 5031,
              January 2008.





































Tschofenig, et al.      Expires September 5, 2009              [Page 16]

Internet-Draft               Reducing Delays                  March 2009


Authors' Addresses

   Hannes Tschofenig
   Nokia Siemens Networks
   Linnoitustie 6
   Espoo  02600
   Finland

   Phone: +358 (50) 4871445
   Email: Hannes.Tschofenig@gmx.net
   URI:   http://www.tschofenig.priv.at


   Henning Schulzrinne
   Columbia University
   Department of Computer Science
   450 Computer Science Building
   New York, NY  10027
   US

   Phone: +1 212 939 7004
   Email: hgs+ecrit@cs.columbia.edu
   URI:   http://www.cs.columbia.edu


   Markus Isomaki
   Nokia
   P.O.BOX 100
   00045 NOKIA GROUP
   Helsinki
   Finland

   Phone:
   Email: markus.isomaki@nokia.com

















Tschofenig, et al.      Expires September 5, 2009              [Page 17]


