INTERNET-DRAFT                                                 S. Stoner
HARTS Working Group                                             ArtsEdge
Catagory: Informational                                           J. Max
                                                                Rainfarm
                                                           November 1996
                                                        Expires May 1997

      Humanities and Arts: Sharing Center Stage on the Internet


Status of this Memo

   This draft, file name draft-ietf-harts-guide-00.txt is
   intended to become and information FYI RFC.  Distribution of this
   document is unlimited.  Please send information and comments to
   harts@isi.edu. 

   This document is an Internet-Draft.  Internet-Drafts are working
   documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas,
   and its working groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   To learn to current status of any Internet-Draft, please check the
   "1id-abstracts.txt" listing contained in the Internet-Drafts Shadow
   Directories on ftp.is.co.za (Africa), nic.nordu.net (Europe),
   munnari.oz.au (Pacific Rim), ds.internic.net (US East Coast), or
   ftp.isi.edu (US West Coast).

   This memo provides information for the Internet, Humanities, and
   Arts communities.  This memo does not specify an Internet standard
   of any kind.  Distribution of this memo is unlimited.

Abstract

   This document is designed primarily for individuals who have 
   limited knowledge of or experience with the Internet.

   The purpose of this document is to provide members of the arts and
   humanities communities with an introduction to the Internet as a
   valuable tool, resource, and medium for the creation, presentation,
   and preservation of arts and humanities-based content.

   The intended audience is practicing artists, scholars, related
   professionals, and others who's knowledge, expertise and support is
   important to ensuring the arts and humanities are well-placed in the
   global information infrastructure.

   For purposes of simplicity this document will use the word "Artist"
   to mean both Artist and Humanist: "all practitioners who work in
   the fields of the visual, performance, and literary arts, as well as
   museum curators, librarians, and others who are involved in the
   research, restoration, and presentation of that which comprises our
   cultural heritage."  (See Section 1.1 for further definitions of
   Arts and Humanitites.)




Humanities and Arts                                             [Page 1]

INTERNET-DRAFT                      Sharing Center Stage on the Internet     

Table of Contents

   i.    Conventions for this Draft..................................

   1.    Introduction................................................
   1.1   Definition of Arts and Humanities...........................
   1.2   What is the Internet........................................
   1.3   What is the World Wide Web..................................

   2.    What does the Internet mean to the "Artist?"................
   2.1   Access to the Global Community:
         Museums, libraries, newspapers, periodicals, stores.........
   2.2   Discovering the work of others..............................
   2.3   Freely Available software, and other information............
   2.4   Sharing and Collaborating...................................
   2.5   Communicating about the arts................................
   2.6   Sharing your work with others...............................

   3.    Electronic Forums...........................................
   3.1   Message Based Communications................................
   3.1.1 Electronic mail (email).....................................
   3.1.2 Mailing list server (listserv)..............................
   3.1.3 Newsgroups..................................................
   3.1.4 Electronic Bulletin Board System (BBS) .....................
   3.2   Real-Time Communications....................................
   3.2.1 IRC - Internet Relay Chat...................................
   3.2.2 MUD - Multi-User Dungeon....................................
   3.2.3 Audio/Video Conferencing....................................
   3.2.4 Whiteboard Systems..........................................
   3.3   Archived Forums.............................................
   3.3.1 Indexing vs Searching.......................................
   3.3.2 Compound Searches...........................................

   4.    Accessing the Internet......................................
   4.1   Getting Started.............................................
   4.2   Internet Service Providers..................................
   4.3   Computer Software and Hardware Tools........................
   4.4   Scanners, recorders, encoders/decoders, multimedia..........

   5.    Creating Content............................................
   5.1   When you need assistance: Consultants, Web Page Designers,
         Providers, etc. ............................................
   5.2   Basic Design Issues: Understanding Formats..................
   5.3   Text and Hypertext..........................................
   5.4   Graphic and Moving Images...................................
   5.5   Music and Sound.............................................
   5.6   Publicizing your Work.......................................

   6.    Issues and Challenges.......................................
   6.1   Security and Viruses........................................
   6.2   Copyright: Laws in Flux.....................................
   6.3   Marketing, Doing Business...................................
   6.4   Netiquette..................................................

   7.    Glossary - pointer to userglos, trainmat, etc...............

Humanities and Arts                                             [Page 2]

INTERNET-DRAFT                      Sharing Center Stage on the Internet     

   8.    Resources...................................................
   8.1   RFCs........................................................
   8.1.1 Using RFC-INFO@ISI.EDU to retrieve RFCs.....................

   9.    References..................................................
   10.   Security Considerations.....................................
   11.   Acknowledgements............................................
   12.   Authors' Address............................................

   Appendix A.  Examples/Projects on the Internet of Interest to the
                Arts and Humanities Communities

   Appendix B.  Some other URL's of interest

   Appendix C.  Examples for using the RFC server RFC-INFO@ISI.EDU

i. Conventions and Notes in the November 1996 Draft.

   We have agreed that testimonial sections are essential, so we need
   Everyone to begin collecting quotes and experiences for each chapter.
   Also every section should have many pointers to more information.
   Any and all input, suggestions, and submissions graciously accepted.

   This draft includes the following notation: 
   - At the sign of two asterisks(**) are important notes and questions.
   - At the sign of two plus signs(++) information is needed.  Where
     known a contributor is mentioned by name, otherwise, please
     volunteer! 
   - At the sign of two question marks(??) we need to decide what
     goes there.

1. Introduction

   This document has been structured to provide information about,
   and examples of, the wide range of functions and capabilities
   inherent to online services.  It will also show the potential of
   networking technologies for enhancing arts and humanities content
   and interests.

   The basic functions of the Internet are described, along with
   their application for building online communities of interest
   (including the arts and humanities).

   This is followed by discussion and examples of how arts and
   humanities content can be represented, stored, and retrieved on
   the Internet.

   Also provided are examples of hardware and software being used,
   and in development, to support the creation and presentation of new
   artistic and literary works. 

   In addition to illustrating the great potential of the Internet,
   this document aspires to provide an introduction to the issues and
   challenges that affect the development and presentation of arts and
   humanities content online. 

Humanities and Arts                                             [Page 3]

INTERNET-DRAFT                      Sharing Center Stage on the Internet     


   Finally, some tools and resources have been provided to assist both
   novice and experienced users in benefiting from, and contributing
   to the global online arts and humanities community. 

1.1 Definitions of Arts and Humanities

   For purposes of this document the term "Arts" includes, but is not
   limited to, dance, design arts, folk arts, literary arts, media
   and film arts, music, theater, and visual arts.

   The term "Humanities" includes, but is not limited to, the study
   of the following: language, both modern and classical; linguistics;
   literature; history; jurisprudence philosophy; archaeology;
   comparative religion; ethics; the history, criticism and theory of
   the arts; those aspects of social sciences which have humanistic
   content and employ humanistic methods; and the study and application
   of the humanities to the human environment.

1.2 What is the Internet?

   As new users, the first question that probably comes to mind is:
   "What is the Internet?"  The answer is: "People, computers and
   information electronically linked around the world by a common
   Protocol for communicating with each other." 

   The beginnings come from the US Department of Defense's desire to
   transport government and military information during the time of a
   "nuclear event".  Thus the Advanced Research Projects Agency was
   formed, which created ARPANET.  From this, over the next 26 years
   or so, grew the network known as "The Internet", now dubbed the
   "Information Superhighway".  There are several million computers
   connected and over 40 million users.

   The common language or "Communication Protocol" which these
   computers on the Internet speak, is the Internet Protocol, or IP.
   This is the underlying layer which allows transmission of diverse
   data, information, text, pictures, sound, etc. to be passed between
   otherwise incompatible machines.

   The Internet should not be confused with the World Wide Web, which
   is a subset of computer sites which support the HyperText Transfer
   Protocol (See 1.3), or America OnLine (AOL), Compuserve, Prodigy,
   and other Service Providers, which use their own protocols and are 
   sites unto themselves but have connections to the Internet.


1.3 What is the World Wide Web?


++ Sheer volunteered to compose a few paragraphs:
++ WWW - What is the WWW (brief), approx # of sites, content,
++ resources, w3 consortium, pointers to more info...
++ html/ Hypertext content,It is important that we define http, HTML
++ and URL here! see also: chapter 4 for URL definition.

Humanities and Arts                                             [Page 4]

INTERNET-DRAFT                      Sharing Center Stage on the Internet     


2. What does the Internet mean to the Artist?

   The invention and evolution (or more aptly, revolution) of the
   Internet exemplifies a synergy between the arts and sciences that
   may be a critical factor in preserving our global cultural heritage
   for future generations. 

   Once an environment of technical information and databases used
   primarily by scientists and engineers, cyberspace has emerged as part
   of a "global village" that has already demonstrated a profound impact
   on contemporary culture.    

   A great many visual and performing arts institutions and
   organizations have established sites on the World Wide Web and a
   significant number of online discussion groups focus on the arts and
   humanities.  Consortiums of museums and libraries are now using
   networking technologies to support research and projects involving
   more effective ways to collect, store, and disseminate objects of
   antiquity and other non-textual primary sources, as well as
   textual sources. 

   Thousands of sites are also created by individuals and for
   institutions, organizations, and businesses that, on the whole,
   promise to profoundly influence the way we perceive ourselves and
   the world in which we live, whether in the past, present, or future.
 
   The Internet visitor can expect to find sites that offer sensory
   appeal and stimulation via multi-media applications, as well as
   interactive opportunities to share ideas and information with
   others.  The arts and humanities are key stakeholders in this
   cultural transition.                     ^^^^^^^^^^^^

++ need more here - stakeholders: Why?  How?

2.1 Access to the Global Community

   Access to art is no longer constrained by vicinity.  Hang out your
   electronic shingle and just imagine who might drop in.  The
   Internet connects hundreds of countries, thousands of cities, and
   countless groups and individuals around the globe.  The Internet
   explorer will find that more and more sites are multilingual.

2.2 Discovering the work of others

   Once you have the basic tools for using the Internet (See Chapter 4)
   you will begin to understand how easy, helpful, informative, and
   exciting it can be.  With a few quick strokes you have accessed a
   great library, museum, or gallery, toured a faraway city, or looked
   up an old friend.  You might find an out of print book you have
   always wanted, then either read it on your computer screen, or print
   it out on your printer.  If you do not have a printer, simply save
   it to your floppy disk and bring that to a shop or friend with a
   printer.  Its really that easy.


Humanities and Arts                                             [Page 5]

INTERNET-DRAFT                      Sharing Center Stage on the Internet     


   You could spend the afternoon at the Smithsonian, or the Louvre
   without ever leaving your chair.  Or, for a more athletic
   adventure, put your computer in front of your treadmill, and jog 
   through the online Olympics site.

   When you are ready, you can explore deeper.  Follow other links to
   smaller sites, lesser known writers, artists, poets, and thinkers,
   and discover the emerging world they are creating.  With the proper
   tools you can even view moving pictures, and listen to music and
   other audio.

   With access to the Internet, the world is at your fingertips.
   Even more than art, literature, and humour, online is information.
   Bring your questions on health, the environment, government, and
   religion, and look though volumes of documentation on your concerns,
   or discuss your questions with others electronically.  Once you get
   used to it, you will even be downloading more information and tools
   to assist you further.

   Examples of sites to explore, and good starting points can be
   found in Appendices A and B.

2.3 Access to Freely Available Software, and Other Information

   There is a world of useful software available to you via the
   Internet.  Known as Shareware, Public Domain, or Freely Copyable,
   you can find many software programs you may download and use on
   your own machine, often completely free, occasionally for a
   small and/or optional fee which helps the author to afford to
   create more software for general use. There are also libraries,
   stores, and news groups you can peruse in search of just the tool
   or information you want.  

   As you explore the Internet, you will begin to find information
   that is beyond your reach without the right tools for viewing,
   listening, etc.  For example, someone may have put up a sound file
   using a format which cannot be recognized by the software you have
   installed.  In these cases, that person will often have included a
   pointer to the exact tool necessary to recognize their format, or
   convert the format, and you can download, install, and use this tool
   right away. 

   Using the basic tools acquired to access the Internet (See Chapter
   4), you can begin to add to your collection software tools, both
   for accessing the information already on the Internet, and for
   creating your own content (See Chapter 5).

2.4 Sharing and Collaborating

   There are many people both like, and unlike, yourself with whom
   you can meet, communicate, and share ideas.  Some like to just talk,
   you can listen if you like.  Others like to just listen, so you and
   others can talk.


Humanities and Arts                                             [Page 6]

INTERNET-DRAFT                      Sharing Center Stage on the Internet     


   There are also many forms that communication can take, from private
   electronic mail, to group video conferencing, to moderated
   newsgroups, to public bulletin boards.  See Chapter 3 for more
   information on Electronic Forums.

   Artists often want to share their work with other artists on the
   Internet so that they will receive comments and recognition for their
   work. It is a great place to explore new ideas with other artists as
   well.  Perhaps a painter has tried a new paint and has a review of
   it, or has developed a new way to mix colors, or a photographer wants
   to share how to get a difficult shot.  Perhaps you would like to
   locate a rare album, or debate one musicians merit over anothers.

   There are many types of content that artists can share.  Including:

      - text: stories, poetry, historic accounts, transcripts, etc.
      - images of their visual work: paintings, photographs, sculpture,
      - images of themselves: photographs, self-portraits, other people
      - sound files of their audio works or voice presentations
        of their works: books on tape, speeches, tutorials, music
      - moving pictures: video arts, performance arts, etc.
      - a description of their art process and works of art
      - resume and/or biographical data
      - contact information in the form of electronic mail address,
        postal mail address, phone, etc.  Electronic mail is most
        popular because it allows people to respond spontaniously.

2.5 Communicating about the arts

++ to provide the opportunity for professional discourse about...
++ criticism, aesthetics, etc. 

2.6 Sharing your work with others

++  The Internet is a global marketplace for your work.
++  Artists can often find buyers and sponsers of their work by
++  showing it on the Internet.   See 5.3 Publicizing your Work.

3. Forums

   Many forums exist on the Internet.  There are interactive forums
   where you can share information in real-time and carry on
   discussions with others.  There are message-based forums where you
   send or receive a message and others involved in that forum wait
   for responses, and there are archived forums where information is
   stored, and may be retrieved by anyone but modified only by its
   owner.

++ we need to describe email addresses before we show them
++ just using "foo@bar.com" may be intimidating to a novice.

++ be aware that there are always new things being created.



Humanities and Arts                                             [Page 7]

INTERNET-DRAFT                      Sharing Center Stage on the Internet     


3.1 Message-based Communications

   In Message-based communication, a message is sent by one user, and
   received by one or many.  For example, you might send a dinner
   invitation to an individual, a couple, or a group.  In the same way,
   you send electronic messages to individuals or groups.  Just like
   your Postal Service for physical mail, there are electronic mail
   servers for electronic mail.  Just like you have a physical address
   to which your physical mail is sent, there is an electronic mail
   address to which your electronic mail is sent.

   Message-based Communications include electronic mail, listservs,
   newsgroups, and bulletin boards.

3.1.1 E-mail

   Electronic mail (email) is a system whereby a computer user can
   exchange messages with other computer users (or groups of users)
   via a communications network.

   Typical use of email consists of downloading messages as received
   from a mailbox or mail server, then reading and replying to
   them solely electronically using a mail program which behaves much
   like a word processor for the most part.  The user can send mail
   to, or receive mail from, any other user with Internet access.

   Electronic mail is much like paper mail, in that it is sent,
   delivered, and contains information.  That information can be
   textual, graphic, or even sound.  See Chapter 4 (Accessing the
   Internet) and 5 (Creating Content) for more information on
   non-textonly email messages. 

   You will get an Electronic mail, or Email address usually from
   your Internet Service Provider (See Chapter 4).  Your email address
   contains your name, and the address of the machine on which you
   receive your mail.  The name of the machine will be in two parts,
   (separated by a dot or period symbol ".") the name of the machine
   itself, and the "domain" it is in.  (See the documents reference
   in Section 8 - Resources,  for more information on domain names).

   The possible extensions for a domain name will be one of: .edu, for
   educational institutions; .gov, for government sites; .com, for
   commercial companies; .org, for other organizations; or it might be a
   locational domain name which would contain the city, state, region,
   and country, as la.ca.us would be Los Angeles, California, United
   States.

   An email address takes the form "yourname"@"yoursite"."yourdomain"
   For example, if your name is Jo Cool and you get your Internet
   service from Dirigible Online, your email address might be
   jcool@dirigible.com.  




Humanities and Arts                                             [Page 8]

INTERNET-DRAFT                      Sharing Center Stage on the Internet     

3.1.2 Listserv (mailing list server)

   A Listserv is an automated program that accepts email messages
   from users and performs basic operations on mailing lists for those
   users.  In the Internet, listservs are usually accessed as either
   "list-request@host.domain" or "listserv@host.domain";
   for example, the list server for the hypothetical list
   "newsreports@acme.org" would be "newsreports-request@acme.org".

   Sending email to "newsreports@acme.org" causes the message to be
   sent to all the list subscribers, which is inappropriate for
   "Subscribe" and "Unsubscribe" requests, while sending a message
   to "listserv@acme.org" sends the message only to the list server.
   Using "listserv@acme.org" you would put the listname in the subject
   field with "Subscribe me@my.domain" as the body of the message.
   Not all mailing lists use list servers to handle list
   administration duties. 

3.1.3 Newsgroups

   A Newsgroup is an electronic bulletin board system created
   originally by the Unix community and which is accessible via the
   Internet.  Usenet News forms a discussion forum accessible by
   millions of users in almost every country in the world.  Usenet
   News consists of thousands of topics arranged in a hierarchical
   form.  Major topics include "comp" for computer topics, "rec" for
   recreational topics, "soc" for social topics, "sci" for science
   topics, and there are many others we will not list here.  Within
   the major topics are subtopics, such as "rec.music" for general music
   content, and "rec.music.classical" for classical music, or
   "sci.med.physics" for discussions relating to the physics of medical
   science. 

   There are also many General, Regional, and even Local site
   groups.  For example, if you wanted to find something for sale in
   your area, rather than peruse "misc.forsale" you might rather try
   "ne.forsale" if you were in the New England region of the U.S. or
   "ba.forsale" if you were in the Bay Area of California.  States
   are also considered regions, and you can often find groups that
   meet in person, in such places as ???

++ more here

3.1.4    Electronic Bulletin Board System (BBS)

   A Bulletin Board System consists of a computer, and associated
   software, typically providing electronic messaging services,
   archives of files, and any other services or activities of interest
   to the bulletin board systems' operator.

   Typical use of a BBS has the user dial into the BBS via their modem
   and telephone line and select from a hierarchy of lists, files,
   subdirectories, or other data maintained by the operator.  Once
   connected, the user can often send messages to other BBS users
   within the system.

Humanities and Arts                                             [Page 9]

INTERNET-DRAFT                      Sharing Center Stage on the Internet     


   Although BBSs have traditionally been the domain of hobbyists, an
   increasing number of BBSs are connected directly to the Internet,
   and many BBSs are currently operated by government, educational,
   research, and commercial institutions. 

3.2.  Real-Time Communications

   Real-Time Communications describes the process of communicating
   with others via the Internet virtually simultaneously.  Generally in
   a forum where you type something, which another user sees on their
   screen, and types something, which you see a moment later.  The
   moment between when they begin typing, and you begin seeing their
   words, is known as "net-lag".

   Forums which communicate in real-time are the Internet Relay Chat
   (IRC), the Multi-User Dungeon (MUD), Audio/Video Conferencing (AVC),
   and White Board Systems (WBS).

3.2.1  IRC - Internet Relay Chat, WebChat

   Internet Relay Chat, or IRC, is an interactive forum set up in
   virtual rooms that you can move between, and where others can
   virtually "hang out" in.  In IRC parlance, you "join" a ???

++ needs more

3.2.2  MUD - Multi-User Dungeon

   An interactive game environment where both real other players and
   virtual other players exist and with whom you can communicate to
   share ideas or solve puzzles, etc.

++ needs more

++ add MOO's - object oriented mud
** (http://ftp.parc.xerox.com/pub/MOO/papers)
++ vrml, avitar, digital editing systems, proprietary
** (palace, urban desires)
++ Expand on the concept of "shared construction" -- that this 
++ enables information and ideas to accrue over time.

3.2.3  Audio/Video Conferencing

++  CUSEEME - video conferencing
++  multicasting
++  Expand on uses

3.2.4  Whiteboard Systems

++ Jonathan Kean: commercial, non-commercial, internet, non-internet.





Humanities and Arts                                            [Page 10]

INTERNET-DRAFT                      Sharing Center Stage on the Internet     

3.3  Archived Forums

   Archive is defined in Webster's New World Dictionary as:
    n. 1 a) a place where public records, documents, etc. are kept
    b) a place where material having documentary interest, as
    private papers, institutional records, memorabilia, or
    photographs, is kept. 

   Archives on the Internet are defined in almost exactly the same
   way.  The motive and much of the content is the same, but the media
   changes (from paper files, to electronic files), and as such
   allows for a much greater diversity of content.

   Archives on the Internet also allow many people access to their
   files simultaniously, and from all over the world.

   Any and all information that people want to make available on the
   Internet can be.  This means there is alot of information out
   there, and necessitates powerful tools to sort through it all.

   Imagine that you have traveled back in time to the famed Library
   of Alexandria, where all the diverse knowledge of the ancient
   world was collected for study.  And imagine trying to find
   Plato's writings without benefit of a card catalog..."Oh, try
   looking in that urn over there, in the second nook back."

   Once you are on the Internet it quickly becomes clear that a great
   deal of information is "out there", and that finding and sorting
   through all the possible sources of data is a daunting task. 
   Indexing and searching tools are two of the most popular and useful
   services available today on the Internet.  This section describes
   useful features, and shows how they might best be used.

3.3.1 Indexing vs. Searching

   The difference between indexing and searching is comparable to
   collecting and sorting card catalog cards at a library, versus
   browsing through someone elses cards or the shelves themselves.

   In the former, you are creating definite categories, and can then
   "zoom in" on the topic and subtopics of interest.  Search engines, on
   the other hand, allow the user to enter a subject, name, title, or
   random string pattern, which is then cross checked against a large
   collection of WWW pages or USENET news articles.  This can lead to
   both a large volume of information, and some rather startling
   discoveries of information from unsuspected sources.  










Humanities and Arts                                            [Page 11]

INTERNET-DRAFT                      Sharing Center Stage on the Internet     


   Some of the available Searchers and Indices on the Internet include: 

   Yahoo      - Index of WWW sites, with search capabilities
                http://www.yahoo.com/
   DejaNews   - USENET (news groups) search engine
                http://www.dejanews.com/
   WebCrawler - http://query.webcrawler.com/
   Lycos      - http://www.lycos.com/
   AltaVista  - WWW and USENET search engine
                http://www.altavista.digital.com/
   Magellan   - Index of reviewed and rated Internet sites, with
                search capabilities
                http://www.mckinley.com/

   Yahoo, for example, has a high-level category called "Arts", which
   has a multitude of subcategories below it, most of which have further
   subdivision, each of which can contain lists of lists.  For example,
   to find information on Modern Dance, one can follow the links to

   http://www.yahoo.com/Recreation/Dance/Modern/Groups

++ info on WAIS

3.3.2 Compound Searches

   After experimenting with the available search engines, it quickly
   becomes clear that searching on a broad category can result in
   too much information.  For example, a recent search at AltaVista
   for the subject "Rembrandt" matched over 8500 individual items,
   including information on the famous artist
   (Rembrandt von Rijn (1606-1669)),
       URL:[http://www.bod.net/CJackson/rembrand/rembrand.htm]
   and His Self-Portrait,
       URL:[http://found.cs.nyu.edu/fox/art/rembrandt/self1660.html]
   a hotel in Thailand (Rembrandt Hotel and Plaza, Bangkok),
       URL:[http://www.siam.net/rembrandt/index.html]
   and a pizza restaurant in California
       URL:[http://www.lososos.com/Rembrandt'sCafe/].

   To be more particular in what you find, all of the available
   search engines allow you to do compound searches, in which
   multiple keywords are used, possibly in combination with Boolean
   logic operators such as AND, OR, and NOT. For example, to focus
   in on Rembrandt the artist, at the exclusion of pizza cafes, try
   the following advanced search in Magellan:

   Rembrandt +artist -pizza








Humanities and Arts                                            [Page 12]

INTERNET-DRAFT                      Sharing Center Stage on the Internet     


   Note that the method of entering search items differs slightly
   from service to service.  When trying a new service, check the
   available help topic before searching.  And as with any new
   skill, practice, practice, practice!

++ Joe: art.net; Internet Yellow pages
++ Let them know that searching is an iterative process, keep going,
++ from one search key and continue, multiple levels... part of the joy
++ of the net, exploring the net.

   Test of search scope:
     Lycos:     <unavailable>
     Yahoo:     rembrandt                     11 matches
     Magellan:  rembrandt +artist +portrait   1309 links
     AltaVista: rembrandt +artist +portrait   "about 10000" links
     WebCrawler: rembrand artist portrait     17299

4.  Accessing the Internet

   Accessing the Internet in terms of simply receiving, downloading,
   and viewing files uses most of the same networking tools (software
   and hardware) needed to create files and make them available on the
   Internet.  This Chapter and the next overlap in the areas of basic
   hardware and networking software.

   The Internet can be accessed in many comfortable ways: at school, at
   home, at work, and even at trendy CyberCoffeeHouses.  Accessing the
   Internet is not synonymous with publishing and displaying on the
   Internet, however.  You will need different equipment for creating
   vs. retrieving content.  This chapter describes how to do both, but
   first you will need to get your feet wet with Internet terminology.

   A URL (Uniform Resource Locator) is a type of Internet 'address'
   which identifies where a file (text, graphic, audio, video, etc)
   resides.  The URL may look like
   'http://www.machine.com/directory/file_name.extension.'  Just like
   humans who live in different types of residences: condominiums,
   houses, mobile homes, igloos, etc., files reside in different types
   of computer servers.  (Computers that are connected to a network
   (such as the Internet) and distribute information are generally
   called servers.)  Unlike a human address, the document's type of
   residence must be identified in its URL.  For example, if the
   document lives on a World-Wide Web server, its URL will start with
   http:// (which stands for HyperText Transfer Protocol).  If the file
   calls a File Tranfer Protocol server home, its address will start
   with ftp:// (for File Tranfer Protocol).  Other common residences
   include gopher:// and telnet://.
   







Humanities and Arts                                            [Page 13]

INTERNET-DRAFT                      Sharing Center Stage on the Internet     


   After the type of residence is identified, the document's URL
   describes the exact computer that houses the document.  The name of
   the computer contains letters or numbers unique to that
   computer. This name is called an Internet Protocol (IP) address and
   describes the type of neighborhood the computer resides in.  For
   example, all the servers that belong to a specific organization will
   contain similar numbers (but each individual server will still
   contain a unique indentifier).  This means that all the computers
   that are associated with the US government will belong to the
   neighborhood '.gov'. Computers in Canada belong to the '.ca'
   neighborhood. Numerous neighborhoods around the world are given
   '.'distinctions.
   
   Neighborhoods can be further divided into sections. For example, all
   the servers at the White House in the US may have '.whitehouse.gov'.
   To distinguish between all the servers at the white House, another
   set of letters (or numbers) is needed:
   'president.whitehouse.com'. Thus, a WWW server at the White House may
   have the URL: 'http://president.whitehouse.com' .
   
   But, this address just identifies the document's neighborhood; to
   find its house, the URL must include more specific information. A
   neighborhood is generally divided into streets. Likewise, a computer
   server is divided into directories or folders. Steering through a
   server to find a document may require many directories. For example,
   a graphic may reside in a directory called 'icons'. (The names of
   directories differ on all computers.) If the graphic is called
   help.gif, its URL may be
   'http://president.whitehouse.com/icons/help.gif'. '.gif' is a
   document extension that describes its format. Document formats
   include .html,.txt (for text documents) .gif, .jpg (for graphics),
   .ram, .wav (for audio), and others.

4.1 Getting Started

++ Non-electronic media (magazines, etc.) containing pointers
++ Organizations, pointers to cyber-coffee houses, educational
++ institutions or programs, etc.

   Creating online content involves moving your art into an electronic
   format and then, perhpas, re-formatting it for the Internet.  For
   some art forms, the intitial electronic step is fairly painless:
   translating a short story, poem, novel (or any type of creative
   writing that doesn't have much desktop publishing formatting, for
   example) into HTML (HyperText Markup Language) is fairly straight
   forward.  Likewise, moving a computer graphic to the Internet
   requires a convertor program to make the graphic follow the right
   format (please see the Web Provider section below).  Performing arts,
   sculpture, and other pieces that are hard to capture on a computer
   disk, require more work and creative thinking.





Humanities and Arts                                            [Page 14]

INTERNET-DRAFT                      Sharing Center Stage on the Internet     

   
   Much of the information needed to help you think creatively about
   publicizing your work online is available in classes, books, local
   Internet cafes, and on the Internet itself.  Many INternet magazines
   are available for subscriptions or individual issues can help get you
   started.  Most new bookstores and, to some extent, used bookstores
   provide numerous volumes of Internet information.  However, even the
   most recently published books may contain outdated information.  For
   the latest 'standards' contact the IETF.
   
   If you learn better by doing, rather than reading, you may be
   interested in taking a HTML or Internet Introduction course at a
   local college.  Most larger metropolitan area schools provide classes
   for the basics, which can also expose you to other artists.  Make
   sure you read the course description; some courses may only cover
   accessing the Internet while you may want to actually be creating
   documents.  If not colleges in your area offer classes, contact the
   computer science department or the continuing education office and
   suggest a topic.  If the school can attain enough support, they may
   offer a class in the following semester.
   
   Many Internet Service Providers (see below) will offer free classes
   to get you started accessing and sometimes creating on the Intnernet.
   With the competition of Internet providers, you should be able to
   find one or two that offer the classes you need.
   
   Artists in smaller communities may need to rely more heavily upon
   online sources of information.  To learn about using the Internet,
   you may want to use point a WWW browser to ???
++   
   For more information creating your own content, the following sites
   should be helpful: ???
++   
   If your hometown college does not offer classes about the Internet,
   you may still be able to find a helpful outlet.  When several
   students from large universities returned home to Taos, NM, a couple
   summers ago, they left behind their Interent connections.  Fearing
   that they would have withdrawal symtoms, they approached the owner of
   a local bakery and suggested he start an Internet room where he could
   charge surfers by the hour to use the Internet.  The entrepenurial
   baker applied for a governmental grant and received a couple
   computers with high speed modems.
   
   You may be able to find CyberCafes (rather than building one) by
   talking with local people or reading the 'Computer Science' magazine.
   Unfortunately, this local newsletter is generally only available in
   large Metropolitan areas in the United States (North America?) You
   may need to surf the Internet to locate the cafes.  One searchable
   index of cafes is available via the Yahoo web page at:
   http://www.yahoo.com/Society_and_Culture/Cyberculture/Internet_Cafes/
   .  Another list of Internet Cafes is available at
   http://www.cyberiacafe.net/cyberia/guide/ccafe.htm.




Humanities and Arts                                            [Page 15]

INTERNET-DRAFT                      Sharing Center Stage on the Internet     

   
   You may want to use a web crawler, or web search engine, to find a
   cafe.  Yahoo is a common search engine (http://www.yahoo.com).  In
   the search field type the name of the city/state/country and
   'Internet Cafe' or 'CyberCafe'.  The newsgroup alt.cybercafes should
   also provide some helpful information.  The cafes, some of which
   offer a local bulletin board (either online or on the wall), provide
   a great atmosphere for discussing Internet issues.
   
4.2  Internet service providers
   
   Being an Internet Service Provider (ISP) these days is pretty
   easy and can be financially worthwhile, so there are alot of
   them, and they are starting and failing every day.  In addition
   to the information and pointers you will find in this document,
   many organizations exist to help you locate, and choose a service
   provider.  In any case, be sure to get references, not only for
   the ISP but also for the organizations who recommend them.  Some
   organizations exist solely to recommend those who pay them.

++ Include pointers to providers lists
++ include a discussion about Free-Nets and public access sites
++ Michael will try to track Free-Nets down for Canada
++ libraries, community centers, etc.
++ provide basic information about the process for locating ISP's
++ Include International
++ research lists to lists of isp's.

   The following is sent out by the IANA in response to a request
   for an IP network number assignment.

         You should get your IP address (a 32bit number) from your
         network service provider.

         Your network service provider works with a regional registry
         to manage these addresses.  The regional registry for the US
         is the Internic, for Europe is RIPE, for the Asia and Pacific
         region is the AP-NIC, and parts of the world not otherwise
         covered are managed by the Internic. 

         If for some reason your network service provider does not
         provide you with an IP address, you can contact the your
         regional registry at one of the folling addresses:

              Internic        <hostmaster@internic.net>
              RIPE            <ncc@ripe.net>
              AP-NIC          <admin@apnic.net>

         Please do contact your network service provider first,
         though.  The regional registry will want to know all the gory
         details about why that didn't work out before they allocate
         you an address directly.  

++ newspapers, consultants, get references, ipnic, telephone companies
++ electronic arts organizations - Jonathan Kean "will look at it"

Humanities and Arts                                            [Page 16]

INTERNET-DRAFT                      Sharing Center Stage on the Internet     


4.3   Computer Software and Hardware Tools

   A basic computer system consists of a box containing a Central
   Processor Unit (CPU), MotherBoard, and Floppy Drive.  It will
   also come with a keyboard, and you will need a Hard Drive,
   Memory, and a Video Monitor.  How much memory, how large a hard
   drive, and how fabulous a monitor, will vary with your needs and
   experience.

   To connect to an ISP you will also need a modem and a phone line.
   Your normal telephone line will do, but if you have call-waiting
   you may want to disable it for the duration of your networking
   session so that you do not lose data to a lost connection.
   
   There are many types of computers available including PC's, Macs,
   and other Workstations.  The most affordable systems are
   generally PCs and Macs.  You may also need to choose an Operating
   System (OS) for the machine you choose.

   Personal Computers (PCs) can run a version of DOS, anything from
   Microsoft(R), or a version of Unix (BSDI, FreeBSD, Linux, etc.)
   Apple MacIntosh computers can run the common Mac Windows, or Apples
   version of Unix.  Workstations generally run a Unix derived OS.

   With any system you should ensure that it contains the software
   and hardware necessary to maintain itself as well as your data.
   Make sure you get backup media, and backup and virus checking
   software with any operating system.

   Determining your ideal hardware and software configuration will
   take some time and patience.  You need an understanding of what
   you can, and wish to, create, and how.  You'll also want to know
   the limitations and expandability potential of the system, so you
   can determine if it will have a useful lifespan.  If the machine
   cannot grow for the forseeable few years, it will become obsolete
   before its given you its fullest value.

   Depending upon your needs, you may require special hardware
   installed in the machine, or attached externally by cables.
   These additional pieces of hardware are known as peripherals.

   The peripherals needed for accessing information on the
   Internet might include the following:
   - a sound card and speakers (to hear sounds, music, speech, etc.)
   - a cdrom player (to read stored images of artwork)
   - midi equipment for audio artists
   - video equipment for participating in video forums
   - Other equipment for creating content See Chapter 5

   Most of these peripherals will require specialized software.  If
   you plan to purchase all the hardware and software at once, find
   a vendor who will connect and test all the hardware, software,
   and peripherals for you.  Due to the complexity of these systems,
   they can be difficult to configure for the inexperienced user.

Humanities and Arts                                            [Page 17]

INTERNET-DRAFT                      Sharing Center Stage on the Internet     


4.4   Scanners, recorders, encoders/decoders, multimedia.........

++ need info.

5.  Creating Content

   Access to a computer, or someone with a computer is necessary in
   order to add content to the Internet.  Artists can put their work
   on the Internet through agencies, consultants, other artists, and
   friends, or by either buying, renting, leasing or borrowing
   equipment.  Artists using their own machines will still need
   Internet Access, in the form of an "Internet account" via an
   organization, job, school, or an Internet Service Provider (ISP)
   where they may also have their Web Page.  In addition to an ISP,
   one can also get web space from a dedicated Web Space Provider (WSP).

   For the World Wide Web, the computer is used to create html
   formatting and the various types of files used to share art
   (ie. image, sound, motion files, etc.).  Once an artist gets
   their work digitized and stored on cdrom or disk, they will need
   the computer to edit the files and incorporate them in the html
   documents.

++  Alone or with Assistance overview
++  What you do will indicate the equipment needed and the format you'll
++  want to create.  Intro to Software needed for use with speakers,
++  scanners, multimedia, etc.

5.1  When you need assistance: Consultants, Web Page Designers,
        Providers, etc. 

++  Trusted judges of good consultants, web page designers, etc.
++  discuss with other artists
++  collectives
++  decide what you want
++  How to find them and choose them.
++  get references

5.2 Basic design issues: Understanding Formats
    (Sound, Image, Text, Hypertext)

++ first list, define, and describe, formats and extensions...

   Some artists are actually using html as a medium in itself and are
   helping to push the boundaries of this medium creating perhaps a
   new bleeding edge in this technology.

++ What content exists now?  What is a thumbnail?
++ Mention scanners, tablets, speakers, recorders,
++ encoders/decoders, slide reader video equipment, software needed, 
++ wav, mpeg, jpeg, gif, jpg, Compression: jpg vs gif
++ soundtracker mods aka .mod, J. "Sheer" Pullen



Humanities and Arts                                            [Page 18]

INTERNET-DRAFT                      Sharing Center Stage on the Internet     


**   Save in-depth for the appropriate subsection.

++ Don't forget Examples: How people are creating content ...

5.3  Text and Hypertext

++ 

5.4  Graphic and Moving images

++ 


5.5  Music and Sound

   The World Wide Web supports audio data as well as visual data.
   The most obvious way to send audio across the net would be to use
   digital audio like that used for the Compact Disc or "CD".
   However, CD format digital audio requires 44,100 16 bit words
   per second for a mono signal, and twice that for a stereo signal.
   While there are many places where one can find digital audio in
   Windows ".wav", or the Macintosh ".au" format, these files
   typically take a very long time to download even a few seconds
   of audio.  The size of these formats makes them too inefficient for  
   widespread use on the net today.

   It is however possible to do "useful" audio over the net. The
   emerging "de facto" standard seems to be _RealAudio_, based on the
   freely distributable server/player application, _RealAudio_ version
   2.0, developed by the Seattle based company Progressive Networks.
   First released in 1995, RealAudio allows useable digital audio in
   realtime over a 28.8 kB line, and has already been put into service
   on the home pages of most major record companies as well as in many
   niche applications.  In addition, RealAudio provides a "Voice mode"
   optimized for understandable speech transmission over a 14.4kB line.

   Unfortunately the quality of _RealAudio_ leaves much to be desired.
   In particular, the sample rate in Music Mode is only 8Khz (as
   compared to CD quality 44.1 Khz), meaning that all high frequencies
   above 4khz are simply missing.  The resulting audio is still pleasing
   to listen to, but sounds very dull and dark.

   More information about RealAudio can be found at www.RealAudio.com.

   Clearly Digital Audio is the way of the future, but until more
   bandwidth is available to the average person, it may not be the way
   of the present.  Fortunatly, at least in the area of music, there is
   an interesting alternative.







Humanities and Arts                                            [Page 19]

INTERNET-DRAFT                      Sharing Center Stage on the Internet     


   MIDI (the Musical Instrument Digital Interface), as developed for
   electronic musical instruments (keyboards, samplers, drum machines,
   etc.) works well for certain kinds of music over the net.  It
   involves sending no sound sources at all, just the description of the
   music -- kind of like the score, without the instruments.  If the
   receiver has the right instruments on their computer (such as the
   sounds defined in the General Midi soundset found on many
   soundcards), they can play back the musical score.

   The big disadvantage to using MIDI is that other than the limited 
   selection of sounds in the General Midi set, it is extremely 
   difficult to make sure the music sounds more than approximately 
   like the original.   And there is no way to handle non-MIDI 
   instruments such as guitar or voice, so it is useless to hear 
   the new song by your favorite rock and roll band.

   The big advantage to MIDI is how fast it works over slow net
   connections.  For example, five minutes of music, fits in a mere
   30k file, and usually will not take more than a few seconds even
   on the slowest of dialup connections!  This makes it ideal for 
   applications such as networked games, or music to go along with a
   web page.
   
   There are many ways of embedding MIDI files into HTML documents,
   for WWW distribution.   

   Anyone who wants to add MIDI to a page can choose to use
   existing public access MIDI file banks, of which there are many,
   or to produce new MIDI themselves.

   Crescendo is one package available for embedding MIDI files in HTML
   http://www.liveupdate.com Crescendo works for both Macintosh and
   Windows. 

   Helpful Links: Publicly Available Audio and Music Applications
   http://reality.sgi.com/employees/cook/audio.apps/public.html 

   Music of J.S. Bach for keyboard
   ftp://ftp.cs.ruu.nl/pub/MIDI/SONGS/CLASSICAL/BACH/HARPSICHORD/

   RISM (repertoire of manuscript sources), plus other access to
   online scholarly music resoruces. http://rism.harvard.edu/RISM/

   Crescendo is used in the web pages at http://mcentury.citi.doc.ca
   along with a growing number of others.  One very interesting use of
   Crescendo occurs on the Music Theory Online publication, a serious
   scholarly site for publishing and debating musicology and music
   theory.  Articles there now routinely include short musical
   examples, a great sign of the future of scholarly publishing in
   the age of dynamic, interactive content.
   http://boethius.music.ucsb.edu/mto/issues/mto.96.2.4/ 




Humanities and Arts                                            [Page 20]

INTERNET-DRAFT                      Sharing Center Stage on the Internet     


   Formerly, debate on musical form and structure occured in the
   pages of journals, referring usually to music examples in terms of
   its visual notation.  This notation requires a certain degree of
   training to decode, effectively restricting the potential
   readership to those with this professional training.  With sound
   examples embedded directly in the text, at least the aural effect
   of the music comes across, even to those unable to read the
   notation accurately.  This shift is appropriate to the newer
   trends in music scholarship, which talk about music in terms of
   its social and cultural context, instead of only in formal terms.

5.6  Content Design Issues

++

5.7  Publicizing your work

++

6.  Issues and Challenges

**   Reminder that this is BRIEF!  Summary in nature, and in no way
**   to be considered binding, etc. etc...
++   Censorship issues, need *your* help.

6.1 Security Issues see Section 10.

++

6.2 Viruses see also Security Section 10.

++ jkrey has a very specific general information rfc on viruses...

++ What they can do, where they come from, how to mitigate
++ damages, "yes they can get you!"

6.3 Rights

++ Intro to protecting your copyright on the Internet.
++ References: Copyright law, cases, etc.

** Remember Laws on Intellectual property are constantly changing!

++ examples of: copyright, trademark, disclaimers, international
++ concerns big issue re: other countries who do not recognize U.S law

++ goes both ways... respecting others copyrights

++ dan to send pointers to eff and blue ribbon

++  The implications of the Telecom Reform Bill with regard to
++  Freedom of Speech.
++ INTERNATIONALIZE: ie: Canada will not allow the import of anything
++ that is "degrading" to women.  Etc.

Humanities and Arts                                            [Page 21]

INTERNET-DRAFT                      Sharing Center Stage on the Internet     

6.4 Conducting Business over the Internet

++ Secure transaction are possible, pointers to pgp, etc.

6.5 Netiquette

++ The Responsible Use of the Network document outline, and pointers. 
++ ie: AVOID SHOUTING

   FYI 28 "Netiquette Guidelines", (Also RFC 1855), October 1995.

** This was produced by the RUN WG, and they will be meeting at
** San Jose to work on extensions and updates to the above document.

++ It never hurts to keep silent til you know your audience better.
++ Not being offended by others, ie: don't take it personally
++ keeping in mind international cultural differences, etc.

7.  Glossary

++ point to userglos, trainmat, and useful stuff that needs to be on
++ the same doc. for ease of use

   FYI 29  "Catalogue of Network Training Materials",
   (Also RFC 2007), October 1996.

   FYI 22 "Frequently Asked Questions for Schools",
   (Also RFC 1941), May 1996.

   FYI 18  "Internet Users' Glossary", (Also RFC 1983), August 1996. 

** words contained within this document which need to be defined for
** the audience: boolean,

8.  Resources

++ Places to find more information of use and interest.
++ specific arts and humanities studies, projects, programs, getty

   Much of the information provided by this document was gathered
   from other documents.  Wherever important to the discussion, a
   pointer to the document was given, however, many more documents are
   available on many other topics.

8.1 Request for Comment

   One of the most important collections of informational documents
   about the Internet are written as Requests for Comment by the
   Internet Engineering Task Force.  The name Request for Comment is
   historical, as these documents are submitted by their authors' for
   the approval of the Internet community as Internet Standards, and
   valid Informational RFCs called FYIs, of which this document is
   one.  Basically, if the IETF collective uses a tool or resource,
   they document its use in an RFC so that there is no mystery to its
   functionality, uses, designations, specifications, or purposes.

Humanities and Arts                                            [Page 22]

INTERNET-DRAFT                      Sharing Center Stage on the Internet     


   More information on RFCs, FYIs, the IETF, and its organizations,
   documents, policies and purposes can be found in the RFCs themselves,
   by a number of means.

8.1.1  The ISI RFC-INFO service

   There are many way to get copies of RFCs over the Internet (see
   ConneXions, Vol.6,No.1, January 1992).  Most of these simply access a
   directory of files where each RFC is in a file.  The searching
   capability (if any) is limited to the filename recognition features
   of that system.

   The ISI RFC-INFO server is a system you can search for an RFC by
   author, date, or keyword (all title words are automatically
   keywords).

   RFC-INFO is an e-mail based service to help in locating and retrival
   of RFCs and FYIs.  Users can ask for "lists" of all RFCs and FYIs
   having certain attributes ("filters") such as their ID, keywords,
   title, author, issuing organization, and date.  Once an RFC is
   uniquely identified (e.g., by its RFC number) it may also be
   retrieved.

   To use the service send e-mail to RFC-INFO@ISI.EDU with your requests
   in the body of the message.  Feel free to put anything in the
   SUBJECT, the system ignores it.  (All is case independent,
   obviously.)

   Examples of messages to send to RFC-INFO@ISI.EDU can be found in
   Appendix C. of this document.

9. References

++ should we create [#] footnotes?? ie: ISN doc, etc.
++ reference the publications and/or sites of key 
++ arts and humanities organizations (e.g. Getty, NINCH)

10. Security Considerations

** jkrey points to site sec. handbook:
** "The "current" Work in Progress for the Site Security Handbook WG
** is the I-D - draft-ietf-ssh-handbook-03.txt.  This group is also
** working on a companion document for the "user".  Stay tuned for
** the I-D.  They should have that out before San Jose."

   There are a wide variety of ways in which systems can be violated,
   some intentional, some accidental.  Of the intentional attacks, a
   portion may be exploratory, others simply abusive of your
   resources  (using up your CPU time) but many are actively
   malicious.  No system is 100% safe, but there are steps you can
   take to protect against misconfigured devices spraying packets,
   casual intruders, and a variety of focused assaults.



Humanities and Arts                                            [Page 23]

INTERNET-DRAFT                      Sharing Center Stage on the Internet     


   Your best defense is to educate yourself on the subject of
   security.  There are places on the net devoted to teaching users
   about security - most prominently, the CERT Coordination Center
   located at the Software Engineering Institute at Carnegie Mellon
   University.  You can point your web browser (or direct your ftp
   connection) to

   ftp://info.cert.org/pub/cert_faq

   to start.  This is a frequently asked questions guide and general
   overview on CERT.  It includes a bibliography of suggested reading
   and a variety of sources to find more information. 

   Next, you should probably read

   ftp://info.cert.org/pub/tech_tips/security_info

   which contains a (primarily based on the UNIX operating system)
   checklist to help you determine whether you're site has suffered a
   security breach.  You can use it to guide you through handling a
   specific incident if you think your system has been compromised or
   you can use it as a list of common vulnerabilities.  CERT also
   maintains a wide variety of bulletins, software patches, and tools
   to help you keep up to date and secure.

   Before you are even online, you should consider some basic steps:

10.1 Formulate a security policy.

   It should include policies regarding physical access procedures,
   security incident response, online privileges and back-up media.
   Put a message at the login to establish your policy clearly.

   An example:

   "This system is for the use of authorized users only.  It may be
   monitored in the course of routine operation to detect
   unauthorized use.  Evidence of unauthorized use or criminal
   activity may result in legal prosecution."

10.1.1. Talk to your Internet Service Provider.

   Depending upon your provider and router management situation,
   there are a number of things your ISP should be able to do for you
   to make your site more secure.  Foremost, packet filtering on the
   router that connects you to the internet.  You will want to
   consider IP filters to allow specific types of traffic (web, ftp,
   mail, etc.) to certain machines (the mailhost, the web server,
   etc.) and no others.  Other filters can block certain types of IP
   spoofing where the intruder masks his or her identity using an IP
   address from inside your network to defeat your filters.  Discuss
   your concerns and questions with your provider - the company may
   have standards or tools they can recommend.


Humanities and Arts                                            [Page 24]

INTERNET-DRAFT                      Sharing Center Stage on the Internet     


10.1.2. Make sure your systems are up to date.

   A significant number of incidents happen because older versions of
   software have well-known weaknesses that can be exploited from
   almost anywhere on the internet.  CERT provides a depository for
   software patches designed by concerned net.citizens, CERT's
   engineers and by the vendors themselves.

10.1.3. Use the tools available.

   Consider recording MD5 checksums on read-only media (the MD5
   message-digest algorithm determines an electronic "fingerprint"
   for files to indicate their uniqueness -comparing more recent
   checksums to older ones can alert you to changes in important
   system files), installing tripwire on your systems (notes size and
   MD5 checksum changes, among other sanity checks), and periodically
   testing the integrity of your machines with programs an intruder
   might use, like SATAN and crack.  [Details on MD5 are contained in
   RFC 1321.]

   Most files and fixes go through the basics before leaving you to
   figure things out on your own, but security can be a complicated
   issue, both technically and morally.  When good security is
   implemented, no one really notices.  Unfortunately, no one notices
   when it's not taken care of either.  That is until the system
   crashes, your data gets corrupted, or you get a phone call from an
   irate company whose site was cracked from your machines.  It
   doesn't matter if you carry only public information.  It doesn't
   matter if you think you're too small or unimportant to be noticed.
   No one is too small or too big, no site is immune.  Take
   precautions and be prepared.


11. Acknowledgements

   Joseph Aiuto
   Michael Century
   Kelly Cooper
   Lile Elam
   Dan Harrington
   Julie Jensen
   Walter Stickle

12. Authors' Address

   Janet Max
   jlm@rainfarm.com

   Scott Stoner
   stoner@artsedge.kennedy-center.org





Humanities and Arts                                            [Page 25]

INTERNET-DRAFT                      Sharing Center Stage on the Internet     

Appendix A.

++humanities computing projects, research projects, 
++text encoding project (michael century) need to maintain perspective
++of the historic art archives and the "current" art in culture
++AHIB?  Marty Harris, Susan Sigfried NIDGE?

   Examples of Projects on the Internet of Interest to the Arts and
   Humanities Communities

   The commonplace insight about the web as a new distribution
   channel for cultural products is that it effaces the traditional
   border between producer and consumer.  Publishers exploit two-way
   interactivity by re-designing the editorial mix to include reader
   response.  Here follows some examples of the way creative artists
   attempt to design structures flexible enough for significant
   viewer input.

   RENGA (http://renga.ntticc.or.jp) - An inspired transposition of a
   traditional collaborative writing practice into the realm of
   digital media supported by the NTT InterCommunication Centre in
   Tokyo.   Renga means linked-image or linked-poem, and draws on the
   Japanese tradition of collaboration which effaces the unique
   notion of original author.

   PING (http://www.artcom.de/ping/mapper) - by Art+Com, a Berlin
   based media centre and thinktank.  Art+Com is a leader in
   producing high-end net visualization projects.  Ping lets the
   browser add a link, which then becomes a part of the ongoing
   visual structure.  It is similar, in this sense, to the Toronto
   Centre for Landscape Architecture's OASIS site.
   
   Art+Com's T-Vision project (http://www.artcom.de/projects/terra)
   which uses satellites and networked VR computers to permit an
   astonishing fly-in to earth from space: acclaimed as one of the
   most imaginative realizations of the potential of networked
   computing.

   OASIS (http://www.clr.toronto.edu/PROJECTS/Oasis/Oasis1.html)
   Toronto Centre for Landscape Architecture's OASIS site requires a
   specialized browser, but from a standard Netscape connection, you
   can view stills that give a sense of the beautiful images produced
   by the collaborative "design process".  It is introduced by its
   designers as follows:  

   Oasis is a shared 3-Dimensional navigational environment for the
   world wide web.  This virtual landscape allows one to bury their
   own information links throughout the terrain or to discover and
   connect to new information left by others.







Humanities and Arts                                            [Page 26]

INTERNET-DRAFT                      Sharing Center Stage on the Internet     

   TechnoSphere (http://www.lond-inst.ac.uk/TechnoSphere/)
   Is TechnoSphere a Game?

   Yes and no. It's an experiment on a global scale, a chance to
   develop complex artificial life on digital networks.  TechnoSphere
   is interactive like a game, but transgresses the linear boundaries
   of branching and hierarchical games narrative to enable freer
   movement.  TechnoSphere is designed to encourage a non-linear
   experiental exploration.

   Body Missing (http://yorku.ca/BodyMissing/index.html)

   Toronto artist Vera Frenkel created this richly evocative site on
   the disappearance of art and memory as an extension of her Transit
   Bar installation.  It is conceived as a site open to new
   'reconstructions' of the artworks confiscated during the Third
   Reich.  First opened to the public as part of the ISEA95
   exhibition in Montreal, it has since earned widespread critical
   comment and praise. 

   Molecular Clinic 1.0
   (http://sc_web.cnds.canon.co.jp/molecular_clinic/artlab_bionet)

   Molecular Clinic 1.0 ' is an art project realized through a
   collaboration between ARTLAB and Seiko Mikami, and is one of the
   most elaborate custom designed art projets yet created for the
   Web.  During their initial visit users should download the
   MOLECULAR ENGINE VIEWER, which is a type of molecular laboratory
   for their computer.  What they will see on the web site after this
   initial download is a virtual space containing a three dimensional
   computer generated Spider and Monolith object.  The user will be
   able to navigate through and into this virtual space and can zoom
   into the spider all the way to the molecular level.

   File Room (http://fileroom.aaup.uic.edu/FILEROOM.html) -
   Cumulative database info on Censorship, hosted in Chicago but
   conceived by Spanish artist Antoni Muntadas. 

   Idea Futures  (http://if.arc.ab.ca/~jamesm/IF/IF.html) - 

   Winner of the grand prize at the 1995 Ars Electronica competition
   for Web Sites, Idea Futures is a stock market of ideas, based on
   the theories of mathematical economist Robin Hanson.  The 'truth'
   of any claim is assigned a weight calculated by the amount of
   virtual cash which members of the exchange are willing to bet.
   The scheme leads might lead toward a radical democratization of
   academic discourse, but just as easily, toward the trivialization
   of thought.  See the following for a philosophical critique of the
   system.  (http://merzbau.citi.doc.ca/~henry/Matrix/Erewhon.html)







Humanities and Arts                                            [Page 27]

INTERNET-DRAFT                      Sharing Center Stage on the Internet     


   Firefly (http://www.agents-inc.com/) also a prize winner at Ars
   Electronica in 1995, Firefly is an prototypical example of what
   enthsiasts call a "personal music recommendation agent", which
   makes suggestions for what you might like to listen to, based on a
   stored profile of your own likes and dislikes, and the evolving
   ratings submitted to the system by other members.  Worth visiting,
   if only to understand what all the fashionable hype about
   'intelligent agents' is all about; skeptics should know that even
   the promoters of these services admit the circularity of their
   systems: they're capable of reinforcing existing taste, but little
   else.


Appendix B:  Some other URL's of interest

   Arts on the Net
      http://www.art.net/Welcome.html
   Artist Memorials(?)
      http://www.cascade.net/kahlo.html
   Writers
      http://the-tech.mit.edu/Shakespeare/
      http://www.rain.org/~da5e/tom_robbins.html
   Photography
      http://www.nyip.com/
   Personal Journals
      http://grateful.dead.net/RobertHunterArchive.html
      http://www.cjnetworks.com/~jessa/
   Musical Groups
      http://www.dead.net (Grateful Dead)
      http://www.netspace.org/phish/ (Phish)
 
























Humanities and Arts                                            [Page 28]

INTERNET-DRAFT                      Sharing Center Stage on the Internet     

Appendix C: 

   To get started you may send a message to RFC-INFO@ISI.EDU with
   requests such as in the following examples (without the
   explanation between []): 

        Help: Help              [to get this information]

        List: FYI               [list the FYI notes]
        List: RFC               [list RFCs with window as keyword or
                                 in title] 
         keywords: window
        List: FYI               [list FYIs about windows]
         Keywords: window
        List: *                 [list both RFCs and FYIs about
                                 windows] 
         Keywords: window
        List: RFC               [list RFCs about ARPANET, ARPA
                                 NETWORK, etc.] 
         title: ARPA*NET
         List: RFC              [list RFCs issued by MITRE, dated
                                 1989-1991] 
          Organization: MITRE
          Dated-after:  Jan-01-1989
          Dated-before: Dec-31-1991
        List: RFC               [list RFCs obsoleting a given RFC]
          Obsoletes: RFC0010
        List: RFC               [list RFCs by authors starting with
                                 "Bracken"] 
         Author: Bracken*       [* is a wild card matches everything]
        List: RFC               [list RFCs by both Postel and Gillman] 
          Authors: J. Postel    [note, the "filters" are ANDed]
          Authors: R. Gillman
        List: RFC               [list RFCs by any Crocker]
          Authors: Crocker
        List: RFC               [list only RFCs by S.D. Crocker]
          Authors: S.D. Crocker
        List: RFC               [list only RFCs by D. Crocker]
          Authors: D. Crocker

        Retrieve: RFC           [retrieve RFC-822]
          Doc-ID: RFC0822       [note, always 4 digits in RFC number]

        Help: Ways_To_Get_RFCs  [to get the list of RFC library hosts]
        Help: Manual            [to retrieve the long user manual]
        Help: List              [how to use the LIST request]
        Help: Retrieve          [how to use the RETRIEVE request]
        Help: Topics            [list topics for which help is
                                 available] 
        Help: Dates             ["Dates" is such a topic]
        List: keywords          [list the keywords in use]
        List: organizations     [list the organizations known to the
                                 system] 
   Please try using this service.  Report problems to
   RFC-MANAGER@ISI.EDU 

Humanities and Arts                                            [Page 29]


