


Network Working Group                                            C. Vogt
Internet-Draft                               Universitaet Karlsruhe (TH)
Expires: February 22, 2007                                      J. Kempf
                                                         DoCoMo USA Labs
                                                         August 21, 2006


    Security Threats to Network-Based Localized Mobility Management
                    draft-ietf-netlmm-threats-03.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on February 22, 2007.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

Abstract

   This document discusses security threats to network-based localized
   mobility management.  Threats may occur on two interfaces:  the
   interface between an LMA and a MAG, as well as the interface between
   a MAG and a mobile node.  Threats to the former interface impact the
   localized mobility management protocol itself.





Vogt & Kempf            Expires February 22, 2007               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft         Security Threats to NETLMM            August 2006


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.1   Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.  Threats to Interface between LMA and MAG . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     2.1   LMA Compromise or Impersonation  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     2.2   MAG Compromise or Impersonation  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     2.3   Man in the Middle Attack . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   3.  Threats to Interface between MAG and Mobile Node . . . . . . .  8
     3.1   Mobile Node Compromise or Impersonation  . . . . . . . . .  8
     3.2   Man in the Middle Attack . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   4.  Threats from the Internet  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   5.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   6.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   7.  Acknowledgment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   8.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     8.1   Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     8.2   Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
       Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   A.  Change Log . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
       Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . 17






























Vogt & Kempf            Expires February 22, 2007               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft         Security Threats to NETLMM            August 2006


1.  Introduction

   The network-based localized mobility management (NETLMM) architecture
   [1] supports movement of IPv6 mobile nodes locally within a domain
   without requiring mobility support in the mobile nodes' network
   stacks.  A mobile node can keep its IP address constant as it moves
   from link to link, avoiding the signaling overhead and latency
   associated with changing the IP address.  While software specifically
   for localized mobility management is not required on the mobile node,
   IP-layer movement detection software may be necessary, and driver
   software for link-layer mobility is prerequisite.

   The IP addresses of mobile nodes have a prefix that routes to a
   localized mobility anchor (LMA).  The LMA maintains an individual
   route for each registered mobile node.  Any particular mobile node's
   route terminates at a mobile access gateway (MAG) which the mobile
   node uses as a default router on its current access link.  MAGs are
   responsible for updating the mobile node's route on the LMA as the
   mobile node moves.  A MAG detects the arrival of a mobile node on its
   local access link based on handoff signaling that the mobile node
   pursues.  The MAG may additionally monitor connectivity of the mobile
   node in order to recognize when the mobile node has left the local
   access link.  The localized mobility management architecture
   therefore has two interfaces:

   1.  The interface between a MAG and an LMA where route update
       signaling occurs.

   2.  The interface between a mobile node and its current MAG where
       handoff signaling and other link maintenance signaling occurs.

   The localized mobility management architecture specifies no
   standardized protocol for a MAG to detect the arrival or departure of
   mobile nodes on its local link and accordingly initiate route update
   signaling with the LMA.  An appropriate mechanism may be entirely
   implemented at the link layer, such as is common for cellular
   networks.  In that case, the IP layer never detects any movement,
   even when a mobile node moves from one link to another handled by a
   different MAG.  If the link layer does not provide the necessary
   functionality, the mobile node must perform active IP-layer movement
   detection signaling so as to trigger route update signaling at the
   MAG.  In either case, the decisive handoff signaling is bound to a
   mobile node identity, which is established when the mobile node
   initially connects to the domain.  For some wireless access
   technologies, the mobile node identity may have to be re-established
   on every link-layer handoff.

   Vulnerabilities in either interface of the localized mobility



Vogt & Kempf            Expires February 22, 2007               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft         Security Threats to NETLMM            August 2006


   management architecture may entail new security threats which go
   beyond those that already exist in IPv6.  Potential attack objectives
   may be to roam at the cost of a legitimate mobile node, interpose in
   a mobile node's communications from a position off link, or cause
   denial of service to a mobile node or to the localized mobility
   management domain as a whole.  This document identifies and discusses
   security threats on both interfaces of the localized mobility
   management architecture.  It is limited to threats which are peculiar
   to localized mobility management; threats to IPv6 in general are
   documented in [3].


1.1  Terminology

   The terminology in this document follows the definitions in [2], with
   those revisions and additions from [1].  In addition, the following
   definition is used:

   Mobile node identity

      An identity established for the mobile node when initially
      connecting to the domain.  It allows the localized mobility
      management domain to definitively and unambiguously identify the
      mobile node upon handoff for route update signaling purposes.  The
      mobile node identity is conceptually independent of the mobile
      node's IP or link-layer addresses, but it must be securely bound
      to the mobile node's handoff signaling.




2.  Threats to Interface between LMA and MAG

   The localized mobility management protocol executed on the interface
   between an LMA and a MAG serves to establish, update, and tear down
   routes for data plane traffic of mobile nodes.  Threats to this
   interface can be separated into compromise or impersonation of a
   legitimate LMA, compromise or impersonation of a legitimate MAG, and
   man-in-the-middle attacks.


2.1  LMA Compromise or Impersonation

   A compromised LMA can ignore routing updates from a legitimate MAG,
   or forge routing updates for a victim mobile node in order to
   redirect or deny the mobile node's traffic.  Since data plane traffic
   for mobile nodes routes through the LMA, a compromised LMA can also
   intercept, inspect, modify, redirect, or drop such traffic on a MAG



Vogt & Kempf            Expires February 22, 2007               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft         Security Threats to NETLMM            August 2006


   supported by the LMA.  The attack can be conducted transiently, to
   selectively disable traffic for any particular mobile node or MAG at
   particular times.

   Moreover, a compromised LMA may manipulate its routing table such
   that all packets are directed towards a single MAG.  This may result
   in a DoS attack against that MAG and its attached link.

   These threats also emanate from an attacker which tricks a MAG into
   believing that it is a legitimate LMA.  This attacker can cause the
   MAG to conduct route update signaling with the attacker instead of
   with the legitimate LMA, enabling it to ignore route updates from the
   MAG, or forge route updates in order to redirect or deny a victim
   mobile node's traffic.  The attacker does not necessarily have to be
   on the original control plane path between the legitimate LMA and the
   MAG, provided that it can somehow make its presence known to the MAG.
   E.g., the IP address of a mobility anchor point in hierarchical
   Mobile IPv6 mobility management [4] may be proliferated across a
   domain hop by hop in Router Advertisement messages.  Failure to
   properly authenticate a comparable mechanism for localized mobility
   management would allow an attacker to establish itself as a rogue
   LMA.

   The attacker may further be able to intercept, inspect, modify,
   redirect, or drop data plane traffic to and from a mobile node.  This
   is obvious if the attacker is on the original data plane path between
   the legitimate LMA and the mobile node's current MAG, which may
   happen independent of whether or not the attacker is on the original
   control plane path.  If the attacker is not on this path, it may be
   able to leverage the localized mobility management protocol to
   redefine the prefix that the mobile node uses in IP address
   configuration.  The attacker can then specify a prefix that routes to
   itself.  Whether or not outgoing data plane packets sourced by the
   mobile node can be interfered with by an attacker off the original
   data plane path depends on the specific data plane forwarding
   mechanism within the localized mobility management domain.  E.g., if
   IP-in-IP encapsulation or an equivalent per-mobile-node approach is
   used for outbound data plane packets, the packets will route through
   the attacker.  On the other hand, standard IP routing may cause the
   packets to be relayed via the legitimate LMA and hence to circumvent
   the attacker.


2.2  MAG Compromise or Impersonation

   A compromised MAG can redirect a victim mobile node's traffic onto
   its local access link arbitrarily, without authorization from the
   mobile node.  This threat is similar to an attack on a typical



Vogt & Kempf            Expires February 22, 2007               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft         Security Threats to NETLMM            August 2006


   routing protocol where a malicious stub router injects a bogus host
   route for the mobile node.  In general, forgery of a subnet prefix in
   link state or distance vector routing protocols requires support of
   multiple routers in order to obtain a meaningful change in forwarding
   behavior.  But a bogus host route is likely to take precedence over
   the routing information advertised by legitimate routers, which is
   usually less specific, hence the attack should succeed even if the
   attacker is not supported by other routers.  A difference between
   redirection in a routing protocol and redirection in localized
   mobility management is that the former impacts the routing tables of
   multiple routers, whereas the latter involves only the compromised
   MAG and an LMA.

   Moreover, a compromised MAG can ignore the presence of a mobile node
   on its local access link and refrain from registering the mobile node
   at an LMA.  The mobile node then loses its traffic.  The compromised
   MAG may further be able to cause interruption to a mobile node by
   deregistering the mobile node at the LMA, pretending that the mobile
   node has powered down.  The mobile node then needs to reinitiate the
   network access authentication procedure, which the compromised MAG
   may prevent repeatedly until the mobile node moves to a different
   MAG.  The mobile node should be able to handle this situation, but
   the recovery process may be lengthy and hence impair ongoing
   communication sessions to a significant extent.

   Attacks that the MAG can mount on its access link interface are
   common for any regular IPv6 access router [3].

   Denial of service against an LMA is another threat of MAG subversion.
   The compromised MAG can trick the LMA into believing that a high
   number of mobile nodes have attached to the MAG.  The LMA will then
   establish a routing table entry for each of the non-existing mobile
   nodes.  The unexpected growth of the routing table may eventually
   cause the LMA to reject legitimate route update requests.  It may
   also decrease the forwarding speed for data plane packets due to
   higher route lookup latencies, and it may for the same reason slow
   down the responsiveness to control plane packets.  Another adverse
   side effect of a high number of routing table entries is that the
   LMA, and hence the localized mobility management domain as a whole,
   becomes more susceptible to flooding packets from external attackers
   (see Section 4).  The high number of superfluous routes increases the
   probability that a flooding packet, sent to a random IP address
   within the localized mobility management domain, matches an existing
   routing table entry at the LMA and gets tunneled to a MAG, which in
   turn performs address resolution [5] on the local access link.  At
   the same time, fewer flooding packets can be dropped directly at the
   LMA due to a nonexistent routing table entry.




Vogt & Kempf            Expires February 22, 2007               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft         Security Threats to NETLMM            August 2006


   All of these threats apply not just to a MAG that is compromised, but
   also to an attacker that manages to counterfeit the identity of an
   authorized MAG in interacting with both mobile nodes and an LMA.
   Such an attacker can behave towards mobile nodes like a legitimate
   MAG and engage an LMA in route update signaling.  In a related
   attack, the perpetrator eavesdrops on signaling packets exchanged
   between an authorized MAG and an LMA and replays these packets at a
   later time.  These attacks may be conducted transiently, to
   selectively disable traffic for any particular mobile node at
   particular times.


2.3  Man in the Middle Attack

   An attacker that manages to interject itself between a legitimate LMA
   and a legitimate MAG can act as a man in the middle with respect to
   both control plane signaling and data plane traffic.  If the attacker
   is on the original control plane path, it can forge, modify, or drop
   route update packets so as to cause the establishment of incorrect
   routes or the removal of routes that are in active use.  Similarly,
   an attacker on the original data plane path can intercept, inspect,
   modify, redirect, and drop data plane packets sourced by or destined
   to a victim mobile node.

   A compromised router located between an LMA and a MAG may cause
   similar damage.  Any router on the control plane path can forge,
   modify, or drop control plane packets, and thereby interfere with
   route establishment.  Any router on the data plane path can
   intercept, inspect, modify, and drop data plane packets, or rewrite
   IP headers so as to divert the packets from their original path.

   An attacker between an LMA and a MAG may further impersonate the MAG
   towards the LMA and vice versa in route update signaling.  The
   attacker can so interfere with route establishment even if it is not
   on the original control plane path between the LMA and the MAG.  An
   attacker off the original data plane path may undertake the same to
   cause inbound data plane packets destined to the mobile node to be
   routed first from the LMA to the attacker, and from there to the
   mobile node's MAG and finally to the mobile node itself.  As
   explained in Section 2.1, here, too, it depends on the specific data
   plane forwarding mechanism within the localized mobility management
   domain whether or not the attacker can influence the route of
   outgoing data plane packets sourced by the mobile node.








Vogt & Kempf            Expires February 22, 2007               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft         Security Threats to NETLMM            August 2006


3.  Threats to Interface between MAG and Mobile Node

   A MAG monitors the mobile nodes' link-layer handoff signaling or IP-
   layer movement detection signaling in order to detect the arrival and
   departure of mobile nodes and accordingly initiate route updates with
   the LMA.  Cellular access technologies utilize only the signaling at
   the wireless link layer, and the IP stack never sees any change when
   the mobile node moves from one MAG to a MAG on a different link.  For
   non-cellular access technologies, such as IEEE 802.11 or wired
   Ethernet, the link-layer signaling may not hide a handoff from the IP
   layer.  Instead, IP-layer movement detection signaling may have to be
   performed in response to a notification from the link layer that a
   change in link-layer attachment has occurred.  This signaling may
   involve extensions [6] for IPv6 Neighbor Discovery [5], DHCPv6 [7],
   or additional technology-specific functionality at the IP layer.

   Although the mobile node identity is conceptually independent of the
   mobile node's IP or link-layer addresses in either case, it must be
   securely bound to whatever handoff signaling of the mobile node is
   decisive for route updates on the MAG-LMA interface, be it via an
   address or otherwise.  A MAG uses this binding to deduce when the
   mobile node has handed over onto the MAG's local access link, and
   possibly when the mobile node leaves the local access link again,
   thereby providing the trigger for route update signaling to an LMA.
   The binding must be robust to spoofing because it would otherwise
   facilitate impersonation of the mobile node by a third party, denial
   of service, or man-in-the-middle attacks.


3.1  Mobile Node Compromise or Impersonation

   An attacker that is able to forge the mobile node identity of a
   neighboring victim mobile node may be able to trick its MAG into
   redirecting the mobile node's packets to itself.  Such an on-link
   attack is common for any regular IPv6 network [3].  However, if
   handoff signaling cannot definitively and unambiguously be linked
   back to the legitimate mobile node identity, an attacker may further
   be capable of fabricating handoff signaling of a victim mobile node
   that currently attaches to a different link.  The attacker can thus
   trick its MAG into believing that the mobile node has handed over
   onto the MAG's access link.  The MAG will then initiate route update
   signaling to an LMA, causing the LMA to redirect inbound data plane
   packets for the mobile node to the attacker's MAG and finally to the
   attacker itself.  The attacker can so examine the packets that
   legitimately belong to the mobile node, or discard the packets in
   order to deny the mobile node service.  The same can happen if a MAG
   accepts from the attacker replayed handoff signaling packets which
   the attacker has previously recorded from the legitimate mobile node.



Vogt & Kempf            Expires February 22, 2007               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft         Security Threats to NETLMM            August 2006


   The above attack is conceivable both if the attacker and the mobile
   node are on links that connect to different MAGs, as well as if they
   are on separate links connecting to the same MAG.  In the former
   case, two MAGs would think they see the mobile node and both would
   independently perform route update signaling with the LMA.  In the
   latter case, route update signaling is likely to be performed only
   once, and the redirection of packets from the mobile node to the
   attacker is internal to the MAG.  The mobile node can always
   recapture its traffic back from the attacker through another run of
   handoff signaling.  But standard mobile nodes are generally not
   prepared to counteract this kind of attack, and even where network
   stacks include suitable functionality, the attack may not be
   noticeable early enough at the link or IP layer to quickly institute
   countermeasures.  The attack is therefore disruptive at a minimum,
   and may potentially persist until the mobile node initiates signaling
   again upon a subsequent handoff.

   Off-link impersonation attacks can be prevented at the link layer.
   E.g., they are not possible with cellular access technologies, where
   the handoff signaling is completely controlled by the wireless link
   layer.  Here, an attacker must be on the same link as the victim
   mobile node in order to disrupt the negotiation between the mobile
   node and the network.  Cellular access technologies also provide
   other cryptographic and non-cryptographic attack barriers at the link
   layer, which make mounting an impersonation attack, both on-link and
   off-link, very difficult.  For non-cellular access technologies,
   however, off-link impersonation attacks may be possible.

   An attacker which can forge handoff signaling messages may also cause
   denial of service against the localized mobility management domain.
   The attacker can trick a MAG into believing that a large number of
   mobile nodes have attached to the local access link and thus induce
   it to initiate route update signaling with an LMA for each mobile
   node assumed on link.  The result of such an attack is both
   superfluous signaling overhead on the control plane as well as a high
   number of needless entries in the LMA's and MAG's routing tables.
   The unexpected growth of the routing tables may eventually cause the
   LMA to reject legitimate route update requests, and it may cause the
   MAG to ignore handoffs of legitimate mobile nodes on its local access
   link.  It may also decrease the LMA's and MAG's forwarding speed for
   inbound and outbound data plane packets due to higher route lookup
   latencies, and it may for the same reason slow down their
   responsiveness to control plane packets.  An adverse side effect of
   this attack is that the LMA, and hence the localized mobility
   management domain as a whole, becomes more susceptible to flooding
   packets from external attackers (see Section 4).  The high number of
   superfluous routes increases the probability that a flooding packet,
   sent to a random IP address within the localized mobility management



Vogt & Kempf            Expires February 22, 2007               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft         Security Threats to NETLMM            August 2006


   domain, matches an existing routing table entry at the LMA and gets
   tunneled to a MAG, which in turn performs address resolution [5] on
   the local access link.  At the same time, fewer flooding packets can
   be dropped directly at the LMA due to a nonexistent routing table
   entry.

   A threat related to the ones identified above, but not limited to
   handoff signaling, is IP spoofing [8][9].  Attackers use IP spoofing
   mostly for reflection attacks or to hide their identities.  The
   threat can be reasonably contained by a wide deployment of network
   ingress filtering [10] in access network routers.  This technique
   prevents IP spoofing to the extent that it ensures topological
   correctness of IP source address prefixes in to-be-forwarded packets.
   Where the technique is deployed in an access router, packets are
   forwarded only if the prefix of their IP source address is valid on
   the router's local access link.  An attacker can still use a false
   interface identifier in combination with an on-link prefix.  But
   since reflection attacks typically aim at off-link targets, and the
   enforcement of topologically correct IP address prefixes also limits
   the effectiveness of identity concealment, network ingress filtering
   has proven adequate so far.  On the other hand, prefixes are not
   limited to a specific link in a localized mobility management domain,
   so an attacker may be able to send packets with an off-link IP source
   address despite the presence of network ingress filtering.  This
   could make IP spoofing again more attractive.


3.2  Man in the Middle Attack

   An attacker which can interpose between a victim mobile node and a
   MAG during handoff signaling, router discovery, and IP address
   configuration can mount a man-in-the-middle attack on the mobile
   node, spoofing the mobile node into believing that it has a
   legitimate connection with the localized mobility management domain.
   The attacker can thus intercept, inspect, modify, or selectively drop
   packets sourced by or destined to the mobile node.



4.  Threats from the Internet

   A localized mobility management domain uses host routes for data
   plane traffic and hence deviates from the standard IPv6 longest-
   prefix-match routing.  Creation, maintenance, and deletion of tese
   host routes in addition cause control traffic within the localized
   mobility management domain.  These characteristics are transparent to
   mobile nodes as well as external correspondent nodes, but the
   functional differences within the domain may influence the impact



Vogt & Kempf            Expires February 22, 2007              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft         Security Threats to NETLMM            August 2006


   that a denial-of-service attack from the outside world can have on
   the domain.

   A denial-of-service attack on an LMA may be launched by sending
   packets to arbitrary IP addresses which are potentially in use by
   mobile nodes within the localized mobility management domain.  Like a
   border router, the LMA is in a topological position through which a
   substantial amount of data plane traffic goes, so it must process the
   flooding packets and perform a routing table lookup for each of them.
   The LMA can discard packets for which the IP destination address is
   not registered in its routing table.  But other packets must be
   encapsulated and forwarded.  A target MAG as well as any mobile nodes
   attached to the MAG's local access link are also likely to suffer
   damage because the unrequested packets must be decapsulated and
   consume link bandwidth as well as processing capacities on the
   receivers.  This threat is in principle the same as for denial of
   service on a regular IPv6 border router, but because either the
   routing table lookup enables the LMA to drop a flooding packet early
   on or, on the contrary, additional tunneling workload is required,
   the impact of an attack against localized mobility management may be
   different.

   In a related attack, the villain manages to obtain a globally
   routable IP address of an LMA or a different network entity within
   the localized mobility management domain and perpetrates a denial-of-
   service attack against that IP address.  Localized mobility
   management is in general somewhat resistant to such an attack because
   mobile nodes need never obtain a globally routable IP address of any
   entity within the localized mobility management domain.  A
   compromised mobile node hence cannot pass such an IP address off to a
   remote attacker, limiting the feasibility of extracting information
   on the topology of the localized mobility management domain.  It is
   still possible for an attacker to perform IP address scanning if MAGs
   and LMAs have globally routable IP addresses, but the much larger
   IPv6 address space makes scanning considerably more time consuming.



5.  Security Considerations

   This document describes threats to network-based localized mobility
   management.  These may either occur on the interface between an LMA
   and a MAG, or on the interface between a MAG and a mobile node.
   Mitigation measures for the threats, as well as the security
   considerations associated with those measures, are described in the
   respective protocol specifications [11][12] for the two interfaces.





Vogt & Kempf            Expires February 22, 2007              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft         Security Threats to NETLMM            August 2006


6.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no actions for IANA.



7.  Acknowledgment

   The authors would like to thank the NETLMM working group, especially
   Jari Arkko, Gregory Daley, Vijay Devarapalli, Lakshminath Dondeti,
   Gerardo Giaretta, Wassim Haddad, Andy, Huang, Dirk von Hugo, Julien
   Laganier, Henrik Levkowetz, Vidya Narayanan, Phil Roberts, and Pekka
   Savola (in alphabetical order) for valuable comments and suggestions
   regarding this document.





































Vogt & Kempf            Expires February 22, 2007              [Page 12]

Internet-Draft         Security Threats to NETLMM            August 2006


8.  References

8.1  Normative References

   [1]  Kempf, J., "Problem Statement for Network-based Localized
        Mobility Management", IETF Internet Draft
        draft-ietf-netlmm-nohost-ps-04.txt (work in progress),
        June 2006.

   [2]  Manner, J. and M. Kojo, "Mobility Related Terminology",
        IETF Request for Comments 3753, June 2004.

8.2  Informative References

   [3]   Nikander, P., Kempf, J., and E. Nordmark, "IPv6 Neighbor
         Discovery (ND) Trust Models and Threats", IETF Request for
         Comments 3756, May 2004.

   [4]   Soliman, H., Castelluccia, C., El Malki, K., and L. Bellier,
         "Hierarchical Mobile IPv6 Mobility Management (HMIPv6)",
         IETF Request for Comments 4140, August 2005.

   [5]   Narten, T., "Neighbor Discovery for IP version 6 (IPv6)",
         IETF Internet Draft draft-ietf-ipv6-2461bis-07.txt (work in
         progress), May 2006.

   [6]   Kempf, J., Narayanan, S., Nordmark, E., Pentland, B., and JH.
         Choi, "Detecting Network Attachment in IPv6 Networks (DNAv6)",
         IETF Internet Draft draft-ietf-dna-protocol-01.txt (work in
         progress), June 2006.

   [7]   Droms, R., Bound, J., Volz, B., Lemon, T., E., C., and M.
         Carney, "Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol for IPv6
         (DHCPv6)", IETF Request for Comments 3315, July 2003.

   [8]   CERT Coordination Center, "CERT Advisory CA-1996-21 TCP SYN
         Flooding and IP Spoofing Attacks", September 1996.

   [9]   CERT Coordination Center, "CERT Advisory CA-1998-01 Smurf IP
         Denial-of-Service Attacks", January 1998.

   [10]  Ferguson, P. and D. Senie, "Network Ingress Filtering:
         Defeating Denial of Service Attacks which employ IP Source
         Address Spoofing", IETF Request for Comments 2827, May 2000.

   [11]  Giaretta, G., "NetLMM Protocol", IETF Internet Draft
         draft-giaretta-netlmm-dt-protocol-00.txt (work in progress),
         June 2006.



Vogt & Kempf            Expires February 22, 2007              [Page 13]

Internet-Draft         Security Threats to NETLMM            August 2006


   [12]  Laganier, J., Narayanan, S., and F. Templin, "Network-based
         Localized Mobility Management Interface between Mobile Node and
         Access Router", IETF Internet Draft
         draft-ietf-netlmm-mn-ar-if-01.txt (work in progress),
         June 2006.

   [13]  Aura, T., "Cryptographically Generated Addresses (CGA)",
         IETF Request for Comments 3972, March 2005.

   [14]  Aboba, B., Beadles, M., Arkko, J., and P. Eronen, "The Network
         Access Identifier", IETF Request for Comments 4282,
         December 2005.


Authors' Addresses

   Christian Vogt
   Institute of Telematics
   Universitaet Karlsruhe (TH)
   P.O. Box 6980
   76128 Karlsruhe
   Germany

   Email: chvogt@tm.uka.de


   James Kempf
   DoCoMo USA Labs
   181 Metro Drive, Suite 300
   San Jose, CA 95110
   USA

   Phone: +1 408 451 4711
   Email: kempf@docomolabs-usa.com





Appendix A.  Change Log

   The following is a list of technical changes that were made from
   version 02 to version 03 of the document.  Editorial revisions are
   not explicitly mentioned.

   o  Changed the terminology from "network access identity" to "mobile
      node identity" as the previous term was frequently confused with
      the different "network access identifier" (NAI).  Removed the



Vogt & Kempf            Expires February 22, 2007              [Page 14]

Internet-Draft         Security Threats to NETLMM            August 2006


      special "Network Access Identity" subsection in Section 3.  The
      mobile node identity is now first mentioned in Section 1, which
      fits well with the nutshell description of the NETLMM
      architecture.  The security requirements of the mobile node
      identifier are discussed in the introductory text of Section 3.
      This makes more sense than a special subsection because the text,
      on one hand, provides the necessary basis to understand the
      following subsections, while on the other hand, it does not really
      explain an attack itself.

   o  Section 1:  Extended the description of conceptual actors in the
      localized mobility management architecture and added a summary of
      potential attack objectives and attack targets.

   o  Section 3.1:  Granularity of ingress filtering may be coarser in a
      localized mobility mangement domain.  It may also allow off-link
      IP spoofing since prefixes are not limited to a specific link.

   o  Section 2.2:  The threat of replay attacks was not mentioned in
      this section.  It was added.

   o  Section 3.1: The threat of replay attacks was not mentioned in
      this section.  It was added.

   o  Section 2.2:  Causing spurious route updates may lead to DoS
      against the localized mobility management domain.  This threat was
      missing in the discussion of this section and it was added.

   o  Section 3.1:  Causing spurious route updates may lead to DoS
      against the localized mobility management domain.  This threat was
      missing in the discussion of this section and it was added.

   o  Section 4:  Moved DoS attack against a localized mobility
      management domain from the Internet to a separate section because
      it is not specific to either interface within the domain.

   o  Revised the document with respect to the recent agreement the
      addressing model.

   o  Revised the document with respect to the the possibility that
      there may be more than one LMA.  The text was initially written
      under the assumption that the LMA is unique.

   o  References split into normative and informative references.

   The following is a list of technical changes that were made from
   version 01 to version 02 of the document.  Editorial revisions are
   not explicitly mentioned.



Vogt & Kempf            Expires February 22, 2007              [Page 15]

Internet-Draft         Security Threats to NETLMM            August 2006


   o  Section 2.1:  Included DoS/flooding attack against MAG.  Also
      clarified how a malicious node off the control plane path between
      the authorized LMA and one or multiple target MAGs could
      impersonate the authorized LMA against the MAGs.  Such an attacker
      could use various means to interfere with data plane traffic even
      if it is off the original data plane path between the legitimate
      LMA and the MAGs.

   o  Section 2.2:  Malicious MAG may deregister an actively
      communicating mobile node, without consent of the mobile node.

   o  Section 2.3:  Included related threats pertaining to MITM between
      LMA and MAG, which were formerly described in other sections.

   o  Section 4:  Included description of DoS/flooding attack against
      LMA, including its impact on the target MAGs, their links, and the
      target mobile nodes.

   o  Section 3:  Revised the structure of this section.  Threats are
      now divided into attacks against a mobile node's network access
      identity; impersonation of a mobile node, both from the mobile
      node's link and from off link; as well as man-in-the-middle
      attacks.

   o  Section 1:  The binding with the network access identity may be
      with the authentication keys associated with the mobile node's IP
      address, not necessarily with the IP addresses themselves.

   o  Section 3.1:  Off-link attack may be mounted from a link that
      connects to a different MAG than the victim mobile node's MAG.





















Vogt & Kempf            Expires February 22, 2007              [Page 16]

Internet-Draft         Security Threats to NETLMM            August 2006


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.

   The IETF has been notified of intellectual property rights claimed in
   regard to some or all of the specification contained in this
   document.  For more information consult the online list of claimed
   rights.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.





Vogt & Kempf            Expires February 22, 2007              [Page 17]

Internet-Draft         Security Threats to NETLMM            August 2006


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.















































Vogt & Kempf            Expires February 22, 2007              [Page 18]

