



Network Working Group                                         K. Grizzle
Internet-Draft                                                 SailPoint
Intended status: Standards Track                            P. Hunt, Ed.
Expires: December 25, 2014                                        Oracle
                                                           E. Wahlstroem
                                                        Technology Nexus
                                                            C. Mortimore
                                                              Salesforce
                                                           June 23, 2014


        System for Cross-Domain Identity Management: Core Schema
                     draft-ietf-scim-core-schema-06

Abstract

   The System for Cross-Domain Identity Management (SCIM) specification
   is designed to make managing user identity in cloud based
   applications and services easier.  The specification suite builds
   upon experience with existing schemas and deployments, placing
   specific emphasis on simplicity of development and integration, while
   applying existing authentication, authorization, and privacy models.
   Its intent is to reduce the cost and complexity of user management
   operations by providing a common user schema and extension model, as
   well as binding documents to provide patterns for exchanging this
   schema using standard protocols.  In essence, make it fast, cheap,
   and easy to move identity in to, out of, and around the cloud.

   This document provides a platform neutral schema and extension model
   for representing users and groups in JSON format.  This schema is
   intended for exchange and use with cloud service providers.  An HTTP
   protocol binding document is also provided.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."




Grizzle, et al.         Expires December 25, 2014               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft          draft-scim-core-schema-06              June 2014


   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 25, 2014.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2014 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction and Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     1.1.  Requirements Notation and Conventions . . . . . . . . . .   4
     1.2.  Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   2.  SCIM Schema Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     2.1.  Attribute Data Types  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
       2.1.1.  String  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
       2.1.2.  Boolean . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
       2.1.3.  Decimal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
       2.1.4.  Integer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
       2.1.5.  DateTime  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
       2.1.6.  Binary  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
       2.1.7.  Reference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
       2.1.8.  Complex . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     2.2.  Multi-valued Attributes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   3.  Schema Extension Model  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   4.  SCIM Core Schema  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     4.1.  Common Schema Attributes  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     4.2.  "schemas" Attribute . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   5.  SCIM User Schema  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
     5.1.  Singular Attributes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
     5.2.  Multi-valued Attributes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
   6.  SCIM Enterprise User Schema Extension . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
   7.  SCIM Group Schema . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
   8.  Service Provider Configuration Schema . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
   9.  ResourceType Schema . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  18
   10. Schema Schema . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
   11. JSON Representation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  23
     11.1.  Minimal User Representation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  23
     11.2.  Full User Representation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  24



Grizzle, et al.         Expires December 25, 2014               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft          draft-scim-core-schema-06              June 2014


     11.3.  Enterprise User Extension Representation . . . . . . . .  27
     11.4.  Group Representation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  30
     11.5.  Service Provider Configuration Representation  . . . . .  31
     11.6.  Resource Type Representation . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  32
     11.7.  Schema Representation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  32
   12. Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  54
   13. IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  54
     13.1.  URN Sub-Namespace for SCIM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  54
       13.1.1.  Specification Template . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  55
       13.1.2.  Pre-Registered SCIM Schema Identifiers . . . . . . .  57
     13.2.  Registering SCIM Schemas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  57
       13.2.1.  Registration Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  57
       13.2.2.  Schema Registration Template . . . . . . . . . . . .  58
     13.3.  Initial SCIM Schema Registry . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  59
   14. References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  59
     14.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  59
     14.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  60
   Appendix A.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  61
   Appendix B.  Change Log . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  61
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  63

1.  Introduction and Overview

   While there are existing standards for describing and exchanging user
   information, many of these standards can be difficult to implement
   and/or use; e.g., their wire protocols do not easily traverse
   firewalls and/or are not easily layered onto existing web protocols.
   As a result, many cloud providers implement non-standard APIs for
   managing users within their services.  This increases both the cost
   and complexity associated with organizations adopting products and
   services from multiple cloud providers as they must perform redundant
   integration development.  Similarly, cloud services providers seeking
   to inter-operate with multiple application marketplaces or cloud
   identity providers must be redundantly integrated.

   SCIM seeks to simplify this problem through a simple to implement
   specification suite that provides a common user schema and extension
   model, as well as binding documents to provide patterns for
   exchanging this schema via an HTTP API.  It draws inspiration and
   best practice, building upon existing user APIs and schemas from a
   wide variety of sources including, but not limited to, existing APIs
   exposed by cloud providers, PortableContacts, vCards, and LDAP
   directory services.

   This document provides a JSON based schema and extension model for
   representing users and groups, as well as service provider
   configuration.  This schema is intended for exchange and use with




Grizzle, et al.         Expires December 25, 2014               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft          draft-scim-core-schema-06              June 2014


   cloud service providers and other cross-domain scenarios.  An HTTP
   protocol binding document is provided separately.

1.1.  Requirements Notation and Conventions

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].

   Throughout this document, values are quoted to indicate that they are
   to be taken literally.  When using these values in protocol messages,
   the quotes MUST NOT be used as part of the value.

1.2.  Definitions

   Service Provider:  An HTTP web application that provides identity
      information via the SCIM protocol.

   Client:  A website or application that uses the SCIM protocol to
      manage identity data maintained by the service provider.  The
      client initiates SCIM HTTP requests to a target service provider.

   Resource:  The service provider managed artifact containing one or
      more attributes; e.g., "User" or "Group".

   Resource Type:  A type of a resource that is managed by a service
      provider.  The resource type defines the resource name, endpoint
      URL, Schemas, and other meta-data which indicate where a resource
      is managed and how it is composed; e.g., "User" or "Group".

   Schema:  A collection of Attribute Definitions that describe the
      contents of an entire or partial resource; e.g.,
      "urn:scim:schemas:core:2.0:User".

   Singular Attribute:  A resource attribute that contains 0..1 values;
      e.g., "displayName".

   Multi-valued Attribute:  A resource attribute that contains 0..n
      values; e.g., "emails".

   Simple Attribute:  A singular or multi-valued attribute whose value
      is a primitive; e.g., "String".

   Complex Attribute:  A singular or multi-valued attribute whose value
      is a composition of one or more simple attributes; e.g.,
      "addresses".





Grizzle, et al.         Expires December 25, 2014               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft          draft-scim-core-schema-06              June 2014


   Sub-Attribute:  A simple attribute contained within a complex
      attribute.

2.  SCIM Schema Structure

   SCIM schema provides a minimal core schema for representing users and
   groups (resources), encompassing common attributes found in many
   existing deployments and schemas.

   A resource is a collection of attributes identified by one or more
   schemas.  Minimally, an attribute consists of the attribute name and
   at least one simple or complex value either of which may be multi-
   valued.  SCIM schema defines the data type, plurality and other
   distinguishing features of an attribute.  Unless otherwise specified
   all attributes are modifiable by consumers.

   Attribute names SHOULD be camelCased.  SCIM resources are represented
   in JSON [RFC7159] and MUST specify schema via the "schemas" attribute
   per Section 4.2.

   Attribute names MUST conform to the following ABNF [RFC5234] rules:

                  ATTRNAME   = ALPHA *(nameChar)
                  nameChar   = "-" / "_" / DIGIT / ALPHA

                    Figure 1: ABNF for Attribute Names

2.1.  Attribute Data Types

   Attribute data types are derived from JSON [RFC7159] and unless
   otherwise specified have the following characteristics (see
   Section 10 for attribute characteristic definitions):

      are optional (is not required).

      are case insensitive (caseExact=false),

      are modifiable (mutability is readWrite),

      are returned in response to queries (returned by default),

      are not unique (uniqueness=none), and,

      of type String (Section 2.1.1).

   The JSON format defines a limited set of data types, hence, where
   appropriate, alternate JSON representations derived from XML Schema




Grizzle, et al.         Expires December 25, 2014               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft          draft-scim-core-schema-06              June 2014


   [XML-Schema] are defined below.  SCIM extensions SHOULD NOT introduce
   new data types.

2.1.1.  String

   A sequence of zero or more Unicode characters encoded using UTF-8 as
   per [RFC2277] and [RFC3629].  The JSON format is defined in Section 7
   [RFC7159].  A "String" attribute MAY specify a required data format.
   Additionally, when canonical values are specified service providers
   SHOULD conform to those values if appropriate, but MAY provide
   alternate "String" values to represent additional values.

2.1.2.  Boolean

   The literal "true" or "false".  The JSON format is defined in
   Section 3 [RFC7159].

2.1.3.  Decimal

   A real number with at least one digit to the left and right of the
   period.  The JSON format is defined in Section 6 [RFC7159].

2.1.4.  Integer

   A decimal number with no fractional digits.  The JSON format is
   defined in Section 6 [RFC7159] with the additional constraint that
   the value MUST NOT contain fractional or exponent parts.

2.1.5.  DateTime

   A DateTime value (e.g. 2008-01-23T04:56:22Z).  The attribute value
   MUST be encoded as a valid xsd:dateTime as specified in Section 3.2.7
   [XML-Schema].

   Values represented in JSON MUST conform to the XML constraints above
   and are represented as a JSON String per Section 7 [RFC7159].

2.1.6.  Binary

   Arbitrary binary data.  The attribute value MUST be encoded as a
   valid xsd:base64Binary as specified in Section 3.2.16 [XML-Schema].

   Values represented in JSON MUST conform to the XML constraints above
   and are represented as a JSON String per Section 2.7 [RFC7159].







Grizzle, et al.         Expires December 25, 2014               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft          draft-scim-core-schema-06              June 2014


2.1.7.  Reference

   A reference to a SCIM resource.  The value MUST be the absolute or
   relative URI of the target resource.  Relative URIs should be
   resolved as specified in Section 5.2 [RFC3986].  The base URI for
   relative URI resolution MUST include all URI components and path
   segments up to but not including the Endpoint URI; e.g., the base URI
   for a request to "https://example.com/v2/Users/2819c223-7f76-453a-
   919d-413861904646" would be "https://example.com/v2/" and the
   relative URI for this resource would be "Users/2819c223-7f76-453a-
   919d-413861904646".

   Performing a GET operation on a reference URI MUST return the target
   resource or an appropriate HTTP response code.  The service provider
   MAY optionally choose to enforce referential integrity for
   references.

   By convention, a reference is commonly represented as a "$ref" sub-
   attribute in complex or multi-valued attributes, however this is
   OPTIONAL.

2.1.8.  Complex

   A singular or multi-valued attribute whose value is a composition of
   one or more simple Attributes.  The JSON format is defined in
   Section 4 [RFC7159].

2.2.  Multi-valued Attributes

   Multi-valued attributes are unordered lists of attributes.  Each
   attribute MAY contain Sub-Attributes and therefore multi-valued
   attributes may contain complex attributes.  The sub-attributes below
   are considered normative and when specified SHOULD be used as
   defined.

   type  A label indicating the attribute's function; e.g., "work" or
      "home".

   primary  A boolean value indicating the 'primary' or preferred
      attribute value for this attribute, e.g. the preferred mailing
      address or primary e-mail address.  The primary attribute value
      "true" MUST appear no more than once.

   display  A human readable name, primarily used for display purposes
      and has a mutability of "immutable".






Grizzle, et al.         Expires December 25, 2014               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft          draft-scim-core-schema-06              June 2014


   operation  The operation to perform on the multi-valued attribute
      during a PATCH request.  The only valid value is "delete", which
      signifies that this instance should be removed from the resource.

   value  The attribute's significant value; e.g., the e-mail address,
      phone number, etc.

   $ref  The reference URI of the target resource, if the attribute is a
      reference.

   When returning multi-valued attributes, service providers SHOULD
   canonicalize the value returned, if appropriate (e.g. for e-mail
   addresses and URLs).  Service providers MAY return the same value
   more than once with different types (e.g. the same e-mail address may
   used for work and home), but SHOULD NOT return the same (type, value)
   combination more than once per Attribute, as this complicates
   processing by the Consumer.

3.  Schema Extension Model

   SCIM schema follows an object extension model similar to
   ObjectClasses used in LDAP.  Unlike LDAP there is no inheritance
   model; all extensions are additive (similar to LDAP Auxiliary Object
   Class [RFC4512] ).  Each "schemas" value indicates additive schema
   that may exist in a SCIM resource representation.  The "schemas"
   attribute MUST contain at least one value which SHALL be the base
   schema for the resource.  The "schemas" attribute MAY contain
   additional values indicating extended schemas that are in use.
   Schema extensions SHOULD NOT redefine any attributes defined in this
   specification and SHOULD follow conventions defined in this
   specification.  Except for the base object schema, the schema
   extension URI SHALL be used as a JSON container to distinguish
   attributes belonging to the extension namespace from base schema
   attributes.  See Figure 4 for an example JSON representation of an
   extended User.

   In order to determine which "schemas" URI value is the base schema
   and which is extended schema for any given resource, the resource's
   "resourceType" attribute value MAY be used to retrieve the resource's
   "ResourceType" schema ( Section 9 ).  See example "ResourceType"
   representation in Figure 7.

4.  SCIM Core Schema








Grizzle, et al.         Expires December 25, 2014               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft          draft-scim-core-schema-06              June 2014


4.1.  Common Schema Attributes

   Each SCIM resource (Users, Groups, etc.) includes the following
   common attributes.  These attributes MUST be included in all
   resources, including any extended resource types.  Common attributes
   are considered to be part of every base resource schema and do not
   use their own schemas URI and SHALL not be considered schema
   extensions.

   id A unique identifier for a SCIM resource as defined by the service
      provider.  Each representation of the resource MUST include a non-
      empty "id" value.  This identifier MUST be unique across the
      service provider's entire set of resources.  It MUST be a stable,
      non-reassignable identifier that does not change when the same
      resource is returned in subsequent requests.  The value of the
      "id" attribute is always issued by the service provider and MUST
      NOT be specified by the client.  The string "bullkId" is a
      reserved keyword and MUST NOT be used within any unique identifier
      value.  REQUIRED and has a mutability of "readOnly".

   externalId  An identifier for the resource as defined by the client.
      The "externalId" may simplify identification of the resource
      between client and service provider by allowing the client to use
      a filter to locate the resource with its own identifier, obviating
      the need to store a local mapping between the local identifier of
      the resource and the identifier used by the service provider.
      Each resource MAY include a non-empty externalId value.  The value
      of the "externalId" attribute is always issued by the client and
      can never be specified by the service provider.  The service
      provider MUST always interpret the externalId as scoped to the
      client's tenant.

   meta  A complex attribute containing resource metadata.  All sub-
      attributes are OPTIONAL

      resourceType  The name of the resource type of the resource.  This
         attribute has mutability of "readOnly".

      created  The DateTime the resource was added to the service
         provider.  The attribute MUST be a DateTime.  This attribute
         has mutability of "readOnly".

      lastModified  The most recent DateTime the details of this
         resource were updated at the service provider.  If this
         resource has never been modified since its initial creation,
         the value MUST be the same as the value of created.  The
         attribute MUST be a DateTime and has mutability of "readOnly".




Grizzle, et al.         Expires December 25, 2014               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft          draft-scim-core-schema-06              June 2014


      location  The URI of the resource being returned.  This value MUST
         be the same as the Location HTTP response header.  The
         attribute has mutability of "readOnly".

      version  The version of the resource being returned.  This value
         must be the same as the ETag HTTP response header.  The
         attribute has mutability of "readOnly".

4.2.  "schemas" Attribute

   SCIM supports resources of different types, with extensible schemas.
   Each resource MUST be indicated using fully qualified URLs.

   A "schemas" attribute contains URIs which are used to indicate the
   namespace and version of SCIM schema as well as any schema
   extensions.  The first value SHALL indicate the base schema for the
   resource.

   schemas  The schemas attribute is an array of Strings which allows
      introspection of the supported schema version for a SCIM
      representation as well any schema extensions supported by that
      representation.  Each String value must be a unique URI.  This
      specification defines URIs for User, Group, and a standard
      enterprise-user extension.  All representations of SCIM schema
      MUST include a non-zero value array with value(s) of the URIs
      supported by that representation.  The schemas attribute for a
      resource MUST only contain values defined as "schema" and
      "schemaExtensions" for the resource's resource type.  Duplicate
      values MUST NOT be included.  Value order is not specified and
      MUST not impact behavior.  REQUIRED.

5.  SCIM User Schema

   SCIM provides a schema for representing Users, identified using the
   following URI: "urn:scim:schemas:core:2.0:User".  The following
   attributes are defined in addition to those attributes defined in
   SCIM Core Schema:

5.1.  Singular Attributes

   userName  Unique identifier for the user, typically used by the user
      to directly authenticate to the service provider.  Often displayed
      to the user as their unique identifier within the system (as
      opposed to id or externalId, which are generally opaque and not
      user-friendly identifiers).  Each User MUST include a non-empty
      userName value.  This identifier MUST be unique across the
      client's entire set of Users.  RECOMMENDED.




Grizzle, et al.         Expires December 25, 2014              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft          draft-scim-core-schema-06              June 2014


   name  The components of the user's real name.  Service providers MAY
      return just the full name as a single string in the formatted sub-
      attribute, or they MAY return just the individual component
      attributes using the other sub-attributes, or they MAY return
      both.  If both variants are returned, they SHOULD be describing
      the same name, with the formatted name indicating how the
      component attributes should be combined.

      formatted  The full name, including all middle names, titles, and
         suffixes as appropriate, formatted for display (e.g.  "Ms.
         Barbara Jane Jensen, III." ).

      familyName  The family name of the User, or last name in most
         Western languages (e.g.  "Jensen" given the full name "Ms.
         Barbara Jane Jensen, III." ).

      givenName  The given name of the User, or first name in most
         Western languages (e.g.  "Barbara" given the full name "Ms.
         Barbara Jane Jensen, III." ).

      middleName  The middle name(s) of the User (e.g.  "Jane" given the
         full name "Ms.  Barbara Jane Jensen, III." ).

      honorificPrefix  The honorific prefix(es) of the User, or title in
         most Western languages (e.g.  "Ms." given the full name "Ms.
         Barbara Jane Jensen, III." ).

      honorificSuffix  The honorific suffix(es) of the User, or suffix
         in most Western languages (e.g.  "III." given the full name
         "Ms.  Barbara Jane Jensen, III." ).

   displayName  The name of the user, suitable for display to end-users.
      Each user returned MAY include a non-empty displayName value.  The
      name SHOULD be the full name of the User being described if known
      (e.g.  "Babs Jensen" or "Ms.  Barbara J Jensen, III" ), but MAY be
      a username or handle, if that is all that is available (e.g.
      "bjensen" ).  The value provided SHOULD be the primary textual
      label by which this User is normally displayed by the service
      provider when presenting it to end-users.

   nickName  The casual way to address the user in real life, e.g.
      "Bob" or "Bobby" instead of "Robert".  This attribute SHOULD NOT
      be used to represent a User's username (e.g. bjensen or
      mpepperidge).

   profileUrl  A fully qualified URL to a page representing the user's
      online profile.




Grizzle, et al.         Expires December 25, 2014              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft          draft-scim-core-schema-06              June 2014


   title  The user's title, such as "Vice President".

   userType  Used to identify the organization to user relationship.
      Typical values used might be "Contractor", "Employee", "Intern",
      "Temp", "External", and "Unknown" but any value may be used.

   preferredLanguage  Indicates the user's preferred written or spoken
      languages and is generally used for selecting a localized User
      interface.  The value indicates the set of natural languages that
      are preferred.  The format of the value is same as the Accept-
      Language header field (not including "Accept-Language:") of HTTP
      and is specified in Section 5.3.5 of [RFC7231].  The intent of
      this value is to enable cloud applications to perform matching of
      language tags [RFC4647] to the user's language preferences
      regardless of what may be indicated by a user agent (which might
      be shared), or in a non-user present interaction (such as in a
      delegated OAuth2 [RFC6749] style interaction) where normal HTTP
      Accept-Language header negotiation cannot take place.

   locale  Used to indicate the User's default location for purposes of
      localizing items such as currency, date time format, numerical
      representations, etc.  A valid value is a language tag as defined
      in [RFC5646].  Computer languages are explicitly excluded.

      A language tag is a sequence of one or more case-insensitive sub-
      tags, each separated by a hyphen character ("-", %x2D).  For
      backwards compatibility reasons, servers MAY accept tags separated
      by an underscore character ("_", %5F).  In most cases, a language
      tag consists of a primary language sub-tag that identifies a broad
      family of related languages (e.g., "en" = English) which is
      optionally followed by a series of sub-tags that refine or narrow
      that language's range (e.g., "en-CA" = the variety of English as
      communicated in Canada).  Whitespace is not allowed within a
      language tag.  Example tags include:

           fr, en-US, es-419, az-Arab, x-pig-latin, man-Nkoo-GN

      See [RFC5646] for further information.

   timezone  The User's time zone in IANA Time Zone database format
      [RFC6557], also known as "Olson" timezone database format
      [Olson-TZ] ; For example: "America/Los_Angeles".

   active  A Boolean value indicating the user's administrative status.
      The definitive meaning of this attribute is determined by the
      service provider.  As a typical example, a value of true infers
      the user is able to login while a value of false implies the
      user's account has been suspended.



Grizzle, et al.         Expires December 25, 2014              [Page 12]

Internet-Draft          draft-scim-core-schema-06              June 2014


   password  The user's clear text password.  This attribute is intended
      to be used as a means to specify an initial password when creating
      a new User or to reset an existing User's password.  Password
      policies and the ability to update or set passwords are out of
      scope of this document.  The mutability of this attribute is
      "writeOnly" indicating the value MUST NOT be returned by a service
      provider in any form.

5.2.  Multi-valued Attributes

   The following multi-valued attributes are defined.

   emails  E-mail addresses for the User.  The value SHOULD be
      canonicalized by the service provider, e.g. "bjensen@example.com"
      instead of "bjensen@EXAMPLE.COM".  Canonical type values of
      "work", "home", and "other".

   phoneNumbers  Phone numbers for the user.  The value SHOULD be
      canonicalized by the service provider according to format in
      [RFC3966] e.g. 'tel:+1-201-555-0123'.  Canonical type values of
      "work", "home", "mobile", "fax", "pager", and "other".

   ims  Instant messaging address for the user.  No official
      canonicalization rules exist for all instant messaging addresses,
      but service providers SHOULD, when appropriate, remove all
      whitespace and convert the address to lowercase.  Instead of the
      standard canonical values for type, this attribute defines the
      following canonical values to represent currently popular IM
      services: "aim", "gtalk", "icq", "xmpp", "msn", "skype", "qq",
      "yahoo", and "other".

   photos  URL of a photo of the User.  The value SHOULD be a
      canonicalized URL, and MUST point to an image file (e.g. a GIF,
      JPEG, or PNG image file) rather than to a web page containing an
      image.  Service providers MAY return the same image at different
      sizes, though it is recognized that no standard for describing
      images of various sizes currently exists.  Note that this
      attribute SHOULD NOT be used to send down arbitrary photos taken
      by this user, but specifically profile photos of the user suitable
      for display when describing the user.  Instead of the standard
      canonical values for type, this attribute defines the following
      canonical values to represent popular photo sizes: "photo",
      "thumbnail".

   addresses  A physical mailing address for this user.  Canonical type
      values of "work", "home", and "other".  The value attribute is a
      complex type with the following sub-attributes.  All sub-
      attributes are OPTIONAL.



Grizzle, et al.         Expires December 25, 2014              [Page 13]

Internet-Draft          draft-scim-core-schema-06              June 2014


      formatted  The full mailing address, formatted for display or use
         with a mailing label.  This attribute MAY contain newlines.

      streetAddress  The full street address component, which may
         include house number, street name, P.O. box, and multi-line
         extended street address information.  This attribute MAY
         contain newlines.

      locality  The city or locality component.

      region  The state or region component.

      postalCode  The zipcode or postal code component.

      country  The country name component.  When specified the value
         MUST be in ISO 3166-1 alpha 2 "short" code format [ISO3166] ;
         e.g., the United States and Sweden are "US" and "SE",
         respectively.

   groups  A list of groups that the user belongs to, either thorough
      direct membership, nested groups, or dynamically calculated.  The
      values are meant to enable expression of common group or role
      based access control models, although no explicit authorization
      model is defined.  It is intended that the semantics of group
      membership and any behavior or authorization granted as a result
      of membership are defined by the service provider.  The canonical
      types "direct" and "indirect" are defined to describe how the
      group membership was derived.  Direct group membership indicates
      the user is directly associated with the group and SHOULD indicate
      that clients may modify membership through the "Group" resource.
      Indirect membership indicates user membership is transitive or
      dynamic and implies that clients cannot modify indirect group
      membership through the "Group" resource but MAY modify direct
      group membership through the "Group" resource which MAY influence
      indirect memberships.  If the SCIM service provider exposes a
      Group resource, the "value" sub-attribute MUST be the "id" and the
      "$ref" sub-attribute must be the URI of the corresponding "Group"
      resources to which the user belongs.  Since this attribute has a
      mutability of "readOnly", group membership changes MUST be applied
      via the Group Resource (Section 7).  The attribute has a
      mutability of "readOnly".

   entitlements  A list of entitlements for the user that represent a
      thing the user has.  An entitlement MAY be an additional right to
      a thing, object, or service.  No vocabulary or syntax is specified
      and service providers and clients are expected to encode
      sufficient information in the value so as to accurately and
      without ambiguity determine what the user has access to.  This



Grizzle, et al.         Expires December 25, 2014              [Page 14]

Internet-Draft          draft-scim-core-schema-06              June 2014


      value has NO canonical types though type may be useful as a means
      to scope entitlements.

   roles  A list of roles for the user that collectively represent who
      the user is; e.g., "Student, Faculty".  No vocabulary or syntax is
      specified though it is expected that a role value is a String or
      label representing a collection of entitlements.  This value has
      NO canonical types.

   x509Certificates  A list of certificates issued to the User.  Values
      are Binary (Section 2.1.6) and DER encoded x509.  This value has
      NO canonical types.

6.  SCIM Enterprise User Schema Extension

   The following SCIM extension defines attributes commonly used in
   representing users that belong to, or act on behalf of a business or
   enterprise.  The enterprise user extension is identified using the
   following schema URI:
   "urn:scim:schemas:extension:enterprise:2.0:User".

   The following Singular Attributes are defined:

   employeeNumber  Numeric or alphanumeric identifier assigned to a
      person, typically based on order of hire or association with an
      organization.

   costCenter  Identifies the name of a cost center.

   organization  Identifies the name of an organization.

   division  Identifies the name of a division.

   department  Identifies the name of a department.

   manager  The user's manager.  A complex type that optionally allows
      service providers to represent organizational hierarchy by
      referencing the "id" attribute of another User.

      value  The "id" of the SCIM resource representing the user's
         manager.  RECOMMENDED.

      $ref  The URI of the SCIM resource representing the User's
         manager.  RECOMMENDED.

      displayName  The displayName of the user's manager.  This
         attribute is OPTIONAL and mutability is "readOnly".




Grizzle, et al.         Expires December 25, 2014              [Page 15]

Internet-Draft          draft-scim-core-schema-06              June 2014


7.  SCIM Group Schema

   SCIM provides a schema for representing groups, identified using the
   following schema URI: "urn:scim:schemas:core:2.0:Group".

   Group resources are meant to enable expression of common group or
   role based access control models, although no explicit authorization
   model is defined.  It is intended that the semantics of group
   membership and any behavior or authorization granted as a result of
   membership are defined by the service provider are considered out of
   scope for this specification.

   The following singular attribute is defined in addition to the common
   attributes defined in SCIM core schema:

   displayName  A human readable name for the Group.  REQUIRED.

   The following multi-valued attribute is defined in addition to the
   common attributes defined in SCIM Core Schema:

   members  A list of members of the Group.  While values MAY be added
      or removed, sub-attributes of members are "immutable".  The
      "value" sub-attribute must be the "id" and the "$ref" sub-
      attribute must be the URI of a SCIM resource, either a "User", or
      a "Group".  The intention of the "Group" type is to allow the
      service provider to support nested groups.  Service providers MAY
      require clients to provide a non-empty members value based on the
      "required" sub attribute of the "members" attribute in the "Group"
      resource schema.

8.  Service Provider Configuration Schema

   SCIM provides a schema for representing the service provider's
   configuration identified using the following schema URI:
   "urn:scim:schemas:core:2.0:ServiceProviderConfig"

   The service provider configuration resource enables a service
   provider to discovery of SCIM specification features in a
   standardized form as well as provide additional implementation
   details to clients.  All attributes are READ-ONLY (a mutability of
   "readOnly" ).  Unlike other core resources, the "id" attribute is not
   required for the service provider configuration resource.

   The following Singular Attributes are defined in addition to the
   common attributes defined in Core Schema:

   documentationUrl  An HTTP addressable URL pointing to the service
      provider's human consumable help documentation.



Grizzle, et al.         Expires December 25, 2014              [Page 16]

Internet-Draft          draft-scim-core-schema-06              June 2014


   patch  A complex type that specifies PATCH configuration options.
      REQUIRED.

      supported  Boolean value specifying whether the operation is
         supported.  REQUIRED.

   bulk  A complex type that specifies BULK configuration options.
      REQUIRED

      supported  Boolean value specifying whether the operation is
         supported.  REQUIRED.

      maxOperations  An integer value specifying the maximum number of
         operations.  REQUIRED.

      maxPayloadSize  An integer value specifying the maximum payload
         size in bytes.  REQUIRED.

   filter  A complex type that specifies FILTER options.  REQUIRED.

      supported  Boolean value specifying whether the operation is
         supported.  REQUIRED.

      maxResults  Integer value specifying the maximum number of
         resources returned in a response.  REQUIRED.

   changePassword  A complex type that specifies Change Password
      configuration options.  REQUIRED.

      supported  Boolean value specifying whether the operation is
         supported.  REQUIRED.

   sort  A complex type that specifies Sort configuration options.
      REQUIRED.

      supported  Boolean value specifying whether sorting is supported.
         REQUIRED.

   etag  A complex type that specifies Etag configuration options.
      REQUIRED.

      supported  Boolean value specifying whether the operation is
         supported.  REQUIRED.

   The following multi-valued attribute is defined in addition to the
   common attributes defined in core schema:





Grizzle, et al.         Expires December 25, 2014              [Page 17]

Internet-Draft          draft-scim-core-schema-06              June 2014


   authenticationSchemes  A complex type that specifies supported
      Authentication Scheme properties.  This attribute defines the
      following canonical values to represent common schemes: "oauth",
      "oauth2", "oauthbearertoken", "httpbasic", and "httpdigest".  To
      enable seamless discovery of configuration, the service provider
      SHOULD, with the appropriate security considerations, make the
      authenticationSchemes attribute publicly accessible without prior
      authentication.  REQUIRED.

      name  The common authentication scheme name; e.g., HTTP Basic.
         REQUIRED.

      description  A description of the Authentication Scheme.
         REQUIRED.

      specUrl  A HTTP addressable URL pointing to the Authentication
         Scheme's specification.  OPTIONAL.

      documentationUrl  A HTTP addressable URL pointing to the
         Authentication Scheme's usage documentation.  OPTIONAL.

9.  ResourceType Schema

   The "ResourceType" schema specifies the meta-data about a resource
   type.  Resource type resources are READ-ONLY and identified using the
   following schema URI: "urn:scim:schemas:core:2.0:ResourceType".
   Unlike other core resources, all attributes are REQUIRED unless
   otherwise specified.  The "id" attribute is not required for the
   resource type resource.

   The following Singular Attributes are defined:

   id The resource type's server unique id.  Often this is the same
      value as the "name" attribute.  OPTIONAL

   name  The resource type name.  When applicable service providers MUST
      specify the name specified in the core schema specification; e.g.,
      "User" or "Group".  This name is referenced by the
      "meta.resourceType" attribute in all resources.

   description  The resource type's human readable description.  When
      applicable service providers MUST specify the description
      specified in the core schema specification.

   endpoint  The resource type's HTTP addressable endpoint relative to
      the Base URL; e.g., "/Users".





Grizzle, et al.         Expires December 25, 2014              [Page 18]

Internet-Draft          draft-scim-core-schema-06              June 2014


   schema  The resource type's primary schema URI; e.g.,
      "urn:scim:schemas:core:2.0:User".  This MUST be equal to the "id"
      attribute of the associated "Schema" resource.

   schemaExtensions  A list of URIs of the resource type's schema
      extensions.  OPTIONAL.

      schema  The URI of an extended schema; e.g., "urn:edu:2.0:Staff".
         This MUST be equal to the "id" attribute of a "Schema"
         resource.  REQUIRED.

      required  A Boolean value that specifies whether the schema
         extension is required for the resource type.  If true, a
         resource of this type MUST include this schema extension and
         include any attributes declared as required in this schema
         extension.  If false, a resource of this type MAY omit this
         schema extension.  REQUIRED.

10.  Schema Schema

   The "Schema" schema specifies the attribute(s) and meta-data that
   constitute a "Schema" resource.  Schema resources have mutability of
   "readOnly" and identified using the following URI:
   "urn:scim:schemas:core:2.0:Schema".  Unlike other core resources the
   "Schema" resource MAY contain a complex object within a sub-attribute
   and all attributes are REQUIRED unless otherwise specified.

   The following Singular Attributes are defined:

   id The unique URI of the schema.  When applicable service providers
      MUST specify the URI specified in the core schema specification;
      e.g., "urn:scim:schemas:core:2.0:User".  Unlike most other
      schemas, which use some sort of a GUID for the "id", the schema
      "id" is a URI so that it can be registered and is portable between
      different service providers and clients.

   name  The schema's human readable name.  When applicable service
      providers MUST specify the name specified in the core schema
      specification; e.g., "User" or "Group".  OPTIONAL.

   description  The schema's human readable description.  When
      applicable service providers MUST specify the description
      specified in the core schema specification.  OPTIONAL.

   The following multi-valued attribute is defined:

   attributes  A complex type that specifies the set of resource
      attributes.



Grizzle, et al.         Expires December 25, 2014              [Page 19]

Internet-Draft          draft-scim-core-schema-06              June 2014


      name  The attribute's name.

      type  The attribute's data type; e.g., "String".

      multiValued  Boolean value indicating the attribute's plurality.

      description  The attribute's human readable description.  When
         applicable service providers MUST specify the description
         specified in the core schema specification.

      required  A Boolean value that specifies if the attribute is
         required.

      caseExact  A Boolean value that specifies if the String attribute
         is case sensitive.  The server SHALL use case sensitivity when
         evaluating filters.  For attributes that are case exact, the
         server SHALL preserve case for any value submitted.  If the
         attribute is case insensitive, the server MAY alter case for a
         submitted value.

      mutability  A single keyword indicating what types of
         modifications an attribute MAY accept as follows:

         readOnly  The attribute SHALL NOT be modified.

         readWrite  The attribute MAY be updated and read at any time.
            DEFAULT.

         immutable  The attribute MAY be defined at resource creation
            (e.g.  POST) or at record replacement via request (e.g. a
            PUT).  The attribute SHALL NOT be updated.

         writeOnly  The attribute MAY be updated at any time.  Attribute
            values SHALL NOT be returned (e.g. because the value is a
            stored hash).  Note: an attribute with mutability of
            "writeOnly" usually also has a returned setting of "never".

      returned  A single keyword that indicates when an attribute and
         associated values are returned in response to a GET request or
         in response to a PUT, POST, or PATCH request.  Valid keywords
         are:

         always  The attribute is always returned regardless of the
            contents of the "attributes" parameter.  For example, "id"
            is always returned to identify a SCIM resource.

         never  The attribute is never returned.  This may occur because
            the original attribute value is not retained by the service



Grizzle, et al.         Expires December 25, 2014              [Page 20]

Internet-Draft          draft-scim-core-schema-06              June 2014


            provider (e.g. such as with a hashed value).  A service
            provider MAY allow attributes to be used in a search filter.

         default  The attribute is returned by default in all SCIM
            operation responses where attribute values are returned.  If
            the GET request "attributes" parameter is specified,
            attribute values are only returned if the attribute is named
            in the attributes parameter.  DEFAULT.

         request  The attribute is returned in response to any PUT,
            POST, or PATCH operations if the attribute was specified by
            the client (for example, the attribute was modified).  The
            attribute is returned in a SCIM query operation only if
            specified in the "attributes" parameter.

      uniqueness  A single keyword value that specifies how the service
         provider enforces uniqueness of attribute values.  A server MAY
         reject an invalid value based on uniqueness by returning HTTP
         Response code 400 (Bad Request).  A client MAY enforce
         uniqueness on the client-side to a greater degree than the
         service provider enforces.  For example, a client could make a
         value unique while the server has uniqueness of "none".  Valid
         keywords are:

         none  The values are not intended to be unique in any way.
            DEFAULT.

         server  The value SHOULD be unique within the context of the
            current SCIM endpoint (or tenancy) but MAY not be globally
            unique (e.g. a "username", email address, or other server
            generated key or counter).  No two resources on the same
            server SHOULD possess the same value.

         global  The value SHOULD be globally unique (e.g. an email
            address, a GUID, or other value).  No two resources on any
            server SHOULD possess the same value.

      referenceTypes  The names of the resource types that may be
         referenced; e.g., "User".  This is only applicable for
         attributes that are of the "reference" Section 2.1.7 data type.

         The following multi-valued attributes are defined.  There are
         no canonical type values defined and the primary value serves
         no useful purpose.

         name  The attribute's name.

         type  The attribute's data type; e.g., String.



Grizzle, et al.         Expires December 25, 2014              [Page 21]

Internet-Draft          draft-scim-core-schema-06              June 2014


         description  The attribute's human readable description.  When
            applicable service providers MUST specify the description
            specified in the core schema specification.

         required  A Boolean value that specifies if the attribute is
            required.

         caseExact  A Boolean value that specifies if the String
            attribute is case sensitive.

         referenceTypes  The names of the resource types that may be
            referenced; e.g., User.  This is only applicable for
            attributes that are of the "reference" Section 2.1.7 data
            type.

         canonicalValues  A collection of canonical values.  When
            applicable service providers MUST specify the canonical
            types specified in the core schema specification; e.g.,
            "work", "home".  OPTIONAL.

         mutability  A single keyword indicating what types of
            modifications an attribute MAY accept as follows:

            readOnly  The attribute MAY NOT be modified.

            readWrite  The attribute MAY be updated and read at any
               time.  DEFAULT.

            immutable  The attribute MAY be defined at resource creation
               (e.g.  POST) or at record replacement via request (e.g. a
               PUT).  The attribute MAY NOT be updated.

            writeOnly  The attribute MAY be updated at any time.
               Attribute values MAY NOT be returned (e.g.  because the
               value is a stored hash).  Note: an attribute with
               mutability of "writeOnly" usually also has a returned
               setting of "never".

         returned  A single keyword that indicates when an attribute and
            associated values are returned in response to a GET request
            or in response to a PUT, POST, or PATCH request.  Valid
            keywords are:

            always  The attribute is always returned regardless of the
               contents of the "attributes" parameter.  For example,
               "id" is always returned to identify a SCIM resource.





Grizzle, et al.         Expires December 25, 2014              [Page 22]

Internet-Draft          draft-scim-core-schema-06              June 2014


            never  The attribute is never returned.  This may occur
               because the original attribute value is not retained by
               the service provider (e.g. such as with a hashed value).
               A service provider MAY allow attributes to be used in a
               search filter.

            default  The attribute is returned by default in all SCIM
               operation responses where attribute values are returned.
               If the GET request "attributes" parameter is specified,
               attribute values are only returned if the attribute is
               named in the attributes parameter.  DEFAULT.

            request  The attribute is returned in response to any PUT,
               POST, or PATCH operations if the attribute was specified
               by the client (for example, the attribute was modified).
               The attribute is returned in a SCIM query operation only
               if specified in the "attributes" parameter.

         uniqueness  A single keyword value that specifies how the
            service provider enforces uniqueness of attribute values.  A
            server MAY reject an invalid value based on uniqueness by
            returning HTTP Response code 400 (Bad Request).  A client
            MAY enforce uniqueness on the client-side to a greater
            degree than the service provider enforces.  For example, a
            client could make a value unique while the server has
            uniqueness of "none".  Valid keywords are:

            none  The values are not intended to be unique in any way.
               DEFAULT.

            server  The value SHOULD be unique within the context of the
               current SCIM endpoint (or tenancy) but MAY not be
               globally unique (e.g. a "username", email address, or
               other server generated key or counter).  No two resources
               on the same server SHOULD possess the same value.

            global  The value SHOULD be globally unique (e.g. an email
               address, a GUID, or other value).  No two resources on
               any server SHOULD possess the same value.

11.  JSON Representation

11.1.  Minimal User Representation

   The following is a non-normative example of the minimal required SCIM
   representation in JSON format.





Grizzle, et al.         Expires December 25, 2014              [Page 23]

Internet-Draft          draft-scim-core-schema-06              June 2014


{
  "schemas": ["urn:scim:schemas:core:2.0:User"],
  "id": "2819c223-7f76-453a-919d-413861904646",
  "userName": "bjensen@example.com",
  "meta": {
    "resourceType": "User",
    "created": "2010-01-23T04:56:22Z",
    "lastModified": "2011-05-13T04:42:34Z",
    "version": "W\/\"3694e05e9dff590\"",
    "location": "https://example.com/v2/Users/2819c223-7f76-453a-919d-413861904646"
  }
}

            Figure 2: Example Minimal User JSON Representation

11.2.  Full User Representation

   The following is a non-normative example of the fully populated SCIM
   representation in JSON format.

{
  "schemas": ["urn:scim:schemas:core:2.0:User"],
  "id": "2819c223-7f76-453a-919d-413861904646",
  "externalId": "701984",
  "userName": "bjensen@example.com",
  "name": {
    "formatted": "Ms. Barbara J Jensen III",
    "familyName": "Jensen",
    "givenName": "Barbara",
    "middleName": "Jane",
    "honorificPrefix": "Ms.",
    "honorificSuffix": "III"
  },
  "displayName": "Babs Jensen",
  "nickName": "Babs",
  "profileUrl": "https://login.example.com/bjensen",
  "emails": [
    {
      "value": "bjensen@example.com",
      "type": "work",
      "primary": true
    },
    {
      "value": "babs@jensen.org",
      "type": "home"
    }
  ],
  "addresses": [



Grizzle, et al.         Expires December 25, 2014              [Page 24]

Internet-Draft          draft-scim-core-schema-06              June 2014


    {
      "type": "work",
      "streetAddress": "100 Universal City Plaza",
      "locality": "Hollywood",
      "region": "CA",
      "postalCode": "91608",
      "country": "USA",
      "formatted": "100 Universal City Plaza\nHollywood, CA 91608 USA",
      "primary": true
    },
    {
      "type": "home",
      "streetAddress": "456 Hollywood Blvd",
      "locality": "Hollywood",
      "region": "CA",
      "postalCode": "91608",
      "country": "USA",
      "formatted": "456 Hollywood Blvd\nHollywood, CA 91608 USA"
    }
  ],
  "phoneNumbers": [
    {
      "value": "555-555-5555",
      "type": "work"
    },
    {
      "value": "555-555-4444",
      "type": "mobile"
    }
  ],
  "ims": [
    {
      "value": "someaimhandle",
      "type": "aim"
    }
  ],
  "photos": [
    {
      "value": "https://photos.example.com/profilephoto/72930000000Ccne/F",
      "type": "photo"
    },
    {
      "value": "https://photos.example.com/profilephoto/72930000000Ccne/T",
      "type": "thumbnail"
    }
  ],
  "userType": "Employee",
  "title": "Tour Guide",



Grizzle, et al.         Expires December 25, 2014              [Page 25]

Internet-Draft          draft-scim-core-schema-06              June 2014


  "preferredLanguage":"en-US",
  "locale": "en-US",
  "timezone": "America/Los_Angeles",
  "active":true,
  "password":"t1meMa$heen",
  "groups": [
    {
      "value": "e9e30dba-f08f-4109-8486-d5c6a331660a",
      "$ref": "https://example.com/v2/Groups/e9e30dba-f08f-4109-8486-d5c6a331660a",
      "display": "Tour Guides"
    },
    {
      "value": "fc348aa8-3835-40eb-a20b-c726e15c55b5",
      "$ref": "https://example.com/v2/Groups/fc348aa8-3835-40eb-a20b-c726e15c55b5",
      "display": "Employees"
    },
    {
      "value": "71ddacd2-a8e7-49b8-a5db-ae50d0a5bfd7",
      "$ref": "https://example.com/v2/Groups/71ddacd2-a8e7-49b8-a5db-ae50d0a5bfd7",
      "display": "US Employees"
    }
  ],
  "x509Certificates": [
    {
      "value": "MIIDQzCCAqygAwIBAgICEAAwDQYJKoZIhvcNAQEFBQAwTjELMAkGA1UEBhMCVVMx
                EzARBgNVBAgMCkNhbGlmb3JuaWExFDASBgNVBAoMC2V4YW1wbGUuY29tMRQwEgYD
                VQQDDAtleGFtcGxlLmNvbTAeFw0xMTEwMjIwNjI0MzFaFw0xMjEwMDQwNjI0MzFa
                MH8xCzAJBgNVBAYTAlVTMRMwEQYDVQQIDApDYWxpZm9ybmlhMRQwEgYDVQQKDAtl
                eGFtcGxlLmNvbTEhMB8GA1UEAwwYTXMuIEJhcmJhcmEgSiBKZW5zZW4gSUlJMSIw
                IAYJKoZIhvcNAQkBFhNiamVuc2VuQGV4YW1wbGUuY29tMIIBIjANBgkqhkiG9w0B
                AQEFAAOCAQ8AMIIBCgKCAQEA7Kr+Dcds/JQ5GwejJFcBIP682X3xpjis56AK02bc
                1FLgzdLI8auoR+cC9/Vrh5t66HkQIOdA4unHh0AaZ4xL5PhVbXIPMB5vAPKpzz5i
                PSi8xO8SL7I7SDhcBVJhqVqr3HgllEG6UClDdHO7nkLuwXq8HcISKkbT5WFTVfFZ
                zidPl8HZ7DhXkZIRtJwBweq4bvm3hM1Os7UQH05ZS6cVDgweKNwdLLrT51ikSQG3
                DYrl+ft781UQRIqxgwqCfXEuDiinPh0kkvIi5jivVu1Z9QiwlYEdRbLJ4zJQBmDr
                SGTMYn4lRc2HgHO4DqB/bnMVorHB0CC6AV1QoFK4GPe1LwIDAQABo3sweTAJBgNV
                HRMEAjAAMCwGCWCGSAGG+EIBDQQfFh1PcGVuU1NMIEdlbmVyYXRlZCBDZXJ0aWZp
                Y2F0ZTAdBgNVHQ4EFgQU8pD0U0vsZIsaA16lL8En8bx0F/gwHwYDVR0jBBgwFoAU
                dGeKitcaF7gnzsNwDx708kqaVt0wDQYJKoZIhvcNAQEFBQADgYEAA81SsFnOdYJt
                Ng5Tcq+/ByEDrBgnusx0jloUhByPMEVkoMZ3J7j1ZgI8rAbOkNngX8+pKfTiDz1R
                C4+dx8oU6Za+4NJXUjlL5CvV6BEYb1+QAEJwitTVvxB/A67g42/vzgAtoRUeDov1
                +GFiBZ+GNF/cAYKcMtGcrs2i97ZkJMo="
    }
  ],
  "meta": {
    "resourceType": "User",
    "created": "2010-01-23T04:56:22Z",
    "lastModified": "2011-05-13T04:42:34Z",



Grizzle, et al.         Expires December 25, 2014              [Page 26]

Internet-Draft          draft-scim-core-schema-06              June 2014


    "version": "W\/\"a330bc54f0671c9\"",
    "location": "https://example.com/v2/Users/2819c223-7f76-453a-919d-413861904646"
  }
}

              Figure 3: Example Full User JSON Representation

11.3.  Enterprise User Extension Representation

   The following is a non-normative example of the fully populated User
   using the enterprise User extension in JSON format.

{
  "schemas":
    [ "urn:scim:schemas:core:2.0:User",
      "urn:scim:schemas:extension:enterprise:2.0:User"],
  "id": "2819c223-7f76-453a-919d-413861904646",
  "externalId": "701984",
  "userName": "bjensen@example.com",
  "name": {
    "formatted": "Ms. Barbara J Jensen III",
    "familyName": "Jensen",
    "givenName": "Barbara",
    "middleName": "Jane",
    "honorificPrefix": "Ms.",
    "honorificSuffix": "III"
  },
  "displayName": "Babs Jensen",
  "nickName": "Babs",
  "profileUrl": "https://login.example.com/bjensen",
  "emails": [
    {
      "value": "bjensen@example.com",
      "type": "work",
      "primary": true
    },
    {
      "value": "babs@jensen.org",
      "type": "home"
    }
  ],
  "addresses": [
    {
      "streetAddress": "100 Universal City Plaza",
      "locality": "Hollywood",
      "region": "CA",
      "postalCode": "91608",
      "country": "USA",



Grizzle, et al.         Expires December 25, 2014              [Page 27]

Internet-Draft          draft-scim-core-schema-06              June 2014


      "formatted": "100 Universal City Plaza\nHollywood, CA 91608 USA",
      "type": "work",
      "primary": true
    },
    {
      "streetAddress": "456 Hollywood Blvd",
      "locality": "Hollywood",
      "region": "CA",
      "postalCode": "91608",
      "country": "USA",
      "formatted": "456 Hollywood Blvd\nHollywood, CA 91608 USA",
      "type": "home"
     }
  ],
  "phoneNumbers": [
    {
      "value": "555-555-5555",
      "type": "work"
    },
    {
      "value": "555-555-4444",
      "type": "mobile"
    }
  ],
  "ims": [
    {
      "value": "someaimhandle",
      "type": "aim"
    }
  ],
  "photos": [
    {
      "value": "https://photos.example.com/profilephoto/72930000000Ccne/F",
      "type": "photo"
    },
    {
      "value": "https://photos.example.com/profilephoto/72930000000Ccne/T",
      "type": "thumbnail"
    }
  ],
  "userType": "Employee",
  "title": "Tour Guide",
  "preferredLanguage":"en-US",
  "locale": "en-US",
  "timezone": "America/Los_Angeles",
  "active":true,
  "password":"t1meMa$heen",
  "groups": [



Grizzle, et al.         Expires December 25, 2014              [Page 28]

Internet-Draft          draft-scim-core-schema-06              June 2014


    {
      "value": "e9e30dba-f08f-4109-8486-d5c6a331660a",
      "$ref": "/Groups/e9e30dba-f08f-4109-8486-d5c6a331660a",
      "display": "Tour Guides"
    },
    {
      "value": "fc348aa8-3835-40eb-a20b-c726e15c55b5",
      "$ref": "/Groups/fc348aa8-3835-40eb-a20b-c726e15c55b5",
      "display": "Employees"
    },
    {
      "value": "71ddacd2-a8e7-49b8-a5db-ae50d0a5bfd7",
      "$ref": "/Groups/71ddacd2-a8e7-49b8-a5db-ae50d0a5bfd7",
      "display": "US Employees"
    }
  ],
  "x509Certificates": [
    {
      "value": "MIIDQzCCAqygAwIBAgICEAAwDQYJKoZIhvcNAQEFBQAwTjELMAkGA1UEBhMCVVMx
                EzARBgNVBAgMCkNhbGlmb3JuaWExFDASBgNVBAoMC2V4YW1wbGUuY29tMRQwEgYD
                VQQDDAtleGFtcGxlLmNvbTAeFw0xMTEwMjIwNjI0MzFaFw0xMjEwMDQwNjI0MzFa
                MH8xCzAJBgNVBAYTAlVTMRMwEQYDVQQIDApDYWxpZm9ybmlhMRQwEgYDVQQKDAtl
                eGFtcGxlLmNvbTEhMB8GA1UEAwwYTXMuIEJhcmJhcmEgSiBKZW5zZW4gSUlJMSIw
                IAYJKoZIhvcNAQkBFhNiamVuc2VuQGV4YW1wbGUuY29tMIIBIjANBgkqhkiG9w0B
                AQEFAAOCAQ8AMIIBCgKCAQEA7Kr+Dcds/JQ5GwejJFcBIP682X3xpjis56AK02bc
                1FLgzdLI8auoR+cC9/Vrh5t66HkQIOdA4unHh0AaZ4xL5PhVbXIPMB5vAPKpzz5i
                PSi8xO8SL7I7SDhcBVJhqVqr3HgllEG6UClDdHO7nkLuwXq8HcISKkbT5WFTVfFZ
                zidPl8HZ7DhXkZIRtJwBweq4bvm3hM1Os7UQH05ZS6cVDgweKNwdLLrT51ikSQG3
                DYrl+ft781UQRIqxgwqCfXEuDiinPh0kkvIi5jivVu1Z9QiwlYEdRbLJ4zJQBmDr
                SGTMYn4lRc2HgHO4DqB/bnMVorHB0CC6AV1QoFK4GPe1LwIDAQABo3sweTAJBgNV
                HRMEAjAAMCwGCWCGSAGG+EIBDQQfFh1PcGVuU1NMIEdlbmVyYXRlZCBDZXJ0aWZp
                Y2F0ZTAdBgNVHQ4EFgQU8pD0U0vsZIsaA16lL8En8bx0F/gwHwYDVR0jBBgwFoAU
                dGeKitcaF7gnzsNwDx708kqaVt0wDQYJKoZIhvcNAQEFBQADgYEAA81SsFnOdYJt
                Ng5Tcq+/ByEDrBgnusx0jloUhByPMEVkoMZ3J7j1ZgI8rAbOkNngX8+pKfTiDz1R
                C4+dx8oU6Za+4NJXUjlL5CvV6BEYb1+QAEJwitTVvxB/A67g42/vzgAtoRUeDov1
                +GFiBZ+GNF/cAYKcMtGcrs2i97ZkJMo="
    }
  ],
  "urn:scim:schemas:extension:enterprise:2.0:User": {
    "employeeNumber": "701984",
    "costCenter": "4130",
    "organization": "Universal Studios",
    "division": "Theme Park",
    "department": "Tour Operations",
    "manager": {
      "managerId": "26118915-6090-4610-87e4-49d8ca9f808d",
      "$ref": "/Users/26118915-6090-4610-87e4-49d8ca9f808d",
      "displayName": "John Smith"



Grizzle, et al.         Expires December 25, 2014              [Page 29]

Internet-Draft          draft-scim-core-schema-06              June 2014


    }
  },
  "meta": {
    "resourceType": "User",
    "created": "2010-01-23T04:56:22Z",
    "lastModified": "2011-05-13T04:42:34Z",
    "version": "W\/\"3694e05e9dff591\"",
    "location": "https://example.com/v2/Users/2819c223-7f76-453a-919d-413861904646"
  }
}

           Figure 4: Example Enterprise User JSON Representation

11.4.  Group Representation

   The following is a non-normative example of SCIM Group representation
   in JSON format.

{
  "schemas": ["urn:scim:schemas:core:2.0:Group"],
  "id": "e9e30dba-f08f-4109-8486-d5c6a331660a",
  "displayName": "Tour Guides",
  "members": [
    {
      "value": "2819c223-7f76-453a-919d-413861904646",
      "$ref": "https://example.com/v2/Users/2819c223-7f76-453a-919d-413861904646",
      "display": "Babs Jensen"
    },
    {
      "value": "902c246b-6245-4190-8e05-00816be7344a",
      "$ref": "https://example.com/v2/Users/902c246b-6245-4190-8e05-00816be7344a",
      "display": "Mandy Pepperidge"
    }
  ],
  "meta": {
    "resourceType": "Group",
    "created": "2010-01-23T04:56:22Z",
    "lastModified": "2011-05-13T04:42:34Z",
    "version": "W\/\"3694e05e9dff592\"",
    "location": "https://example.com/v2/Groups/e9e30dba-f08f-4109-8486-d5c6a331660a"
  }
}

                Figure 5: Example Group JSON Representation







Grizzle, et al.         Expires December 25, 2014              [Page 30]

Internet-Draft          draft-scim-core-schema-06              June 2014


11.5.  Service Provider Configuration Representation

   The following is a non-normative example of the SCIM service provider
   configuration representation in JSON format.

{
  "schemas": ["urn:scim:schemas:core:2.0:ServiceProviderConfig"],
  "documentationUrl":"http://example.com/help/scim.html",
  "patch": {
    "supported":true
  },
  "bulk": {
    "supported":true,
    "maxOperations":1000,
    "maxPayloadSize":1048576
  },
  "filter": {
    "supported":true,
    "maxResults": 200
  },
  "changePassword" : {
    "supported":true
  },
  "sort": {
    "supported":true
  },
  "etag": {
    "supported":true
  },
  "authenticationSchemes": [
    {
      "name": "OAuth Bearer Token",
      "description": "Authentication Scheme using the OAuth Bearer Token Standard",
      "specUrl":"http://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-ietf-oauth-v2-bearer-01",
      "documentationUrl":"http://example.com/help/oauth.html",
      "type":"oauthbearertoken",
      "primary": true
    },
    {
      "name": "HTTP Basic",
      "description": "Authentication Scheme using the Http Basic Standard",
      "specUrl":"http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2617.txt",
      "documentationUrl":"http://example.com/help/httpBasic.html",
      "type":"httpbasic"
     }
  ],
  "meta": {
    "location":"https://example.com/v2/ServiceProviderConfig",



Grizzle, et al.         Expires December 25, 2014              [Page 31]

Internet-Draft          draft-scim-core-schema-06              June 2014


    "resourceType": "ServiceProviderConfig",
    "created": "2010-01-23T04:56:22Z",
    "lastModified": "2011-05-13T04:42:34Z",
    "version": "W\/\"3694e05e9dff594\""
  }
}

       Figure 6: Example Service Provider Config JSON Representation

11.6.  Resource Type Representation

   The following is a non-normative example of the SCIM resource type
   representation in JSON format.

   {
     "schemas": ["urn:scim:schemas:core:2.0:ResourceType"],
     "id":"User",
     "name":"User",
     "endpoint": "/Users",
     "description": "Core User",
     "schema": "urn:scim:schemas:core:2.0:User",
     "schemaExtensions": [
       {
         "schema": "urn:scim:schemas:extension:enterprise:2.0:User",
         "required": true
       }
     ],
     "meta": {
       "location":"https://example.com/v2/ResourceTypes/User",
       "resourceType": "ResourceType",
       "created": "2010-01-23T04:56:22Z",
       "lastModified": "2011-05-13T04:42:34Z",
       "version": "W\/\"3694e05e9dff595\""
     }
   }

            Figure 7: Example Resource Type JSON Representation

11.7.  Schema Representation

   The following is intended as normative example of the SCIM Schema
   representation in JSON format.  Where permitted individual values and
   schema MAY change.  Included but not limited to, are schemas for
   User, Group, and enterprise user.

{[
  {
    "id" : "urn:scim:schemas:core:2.0:User",



Grizzle, et al.         Expires December 25, 2014              [Page 32]

Internet-Draft          draft-scim-core-schema-06              June 2014


    "name" : "User",
    "description" : "Core User",
    "attributes" : [
      {
        "name" : "id",
        "type" : "string",
        "multiValued" : false,
        "description" : "Unique identifier for the SCIM resource as defined by the Service Provider. Each representation of the resource MUST include a non-empty id value. This identifier MUST be unique across the Service Provider's entire set of resources. It MUST be a stable, non-reassignable identifier that does not change when the same resource is returned in subsequent requests. The value of the id attribute is always issued by the Service Provider and MUST never be specified by the Service Consumer. REQUIRED.",
        "required" : true,
        "caseExact" : false,
        "mutability" : "readOnly",
        "returned" : "always",
        "uniqueness" : "server"
      },
      {
        "name" : "externalId",
        "type" : "string",
        "multiValued" : false,
        "description" : "An identifier for the Resource as defined by the Service Consumer.",
        "required" : true,
        "caseExact" : false,
        "mutability" : "readWrite",
        "returned" : "default",
        "uniqueness" : "none"
      },
      {
        "name" : "userName",
        "type" : "string",
        "multiValued" : false,
        "description" : "Unique identifier for the User typically used by the user to directly authenticate to the service provider. Each User MUST include a non-empty userName value.  This identifier MUST be unique across the Service Consumer's entire set of Users.  REQUIRED",
        "required" : true,
        "caseExact" : false,
        "mutability" : "readWrite",
        "returned" : "default",
        "uniqueness" : "server"
      },
      {
        "name" : "name",
        "type" : "complex",
        "multiValued" : false,
        "description" : "The components of the user's real name. Providers MAY return just the full name as a single string in the formatted sub-attribute, or they MAY return just the individual component attributes using the other sub-attributes, or they MAY return both. If both variants are returned, they SHOULD be describing the same name, with the formatted name indicating how the component attributes should be combined.",
        "required" : false,
        "caseExact" : false,
        "subAttributes" : [
          {
            "name" : "formatted",
            "type" : "string",
            "multiValued" : false,



Grizzle, et al.         Expires December 25, 2014              [Page 33]

Internet-Draft          draft-scim-core-schema-06              June 2014


            "description" : "The full name, including all middle names, titles, and suffixes as appropriate, formatted for display (e.g. Ms. Barbara J Jensen, III.).",
            "required" : false,
            "caseExact" : false,
            "mutability" : "readWrite",
            "returned" : "default",
            "uniqueness" : "none"
          },
          {
            "name" : "familyName",
            "type" : "string",
            "multiValued" : false,
            "description" : "The family name of the User, or Last Name in most Western languages (e.g. Jensen given the full name Ms. Barbara J Jensen, III.).",
            "required" : false,
            "caseExact" : false,
            "mutability" : "readWrite",
            "returned" : "default",
            "uniqueness" : "none"
          },
          {
            "name" : "givenName",
            "type" : "string",
            "multiValued" : false,
            "description" : "The given name of the User, or First Name in most Western languages (e.g. Barbara given the full name Ms. Barbara J Jensen, III.).",
            "required" : false,
            "caseExact" : false,
            "mutability" : "readWrite",
            "returned" : "default",
            "uniqueness" : "none"
          },
          {
            "name" : "middleName",
            "type" : "string",
            "multiValued" : false,
            "description" : "The middle name(s) of the User (e.g. Robert given the full name Ms. Barbara J Jensen, III.).",
            "required" : false,
            "caseExact" : false,
            "mutability" : "readWrite",
            "returned" : "default",
            "uniqueness" : "none"
          },
          {
            "name" : "honorificPrefix",
            "type" : "string",
            "multiValued" : false,
            "description" : "The honorific prefix(es) of the User, or Title in most Western languages (e.g. Ms. given the full name Ms. Barbara J Jensen, III.).",
            "required" : false,
            "caseExact" : false,
            "mutability" : "readWrite",



Grizzle, et al.         Expires December 25, 2014              [Page 34]

Internet-Draft          draft-scim-core-schema-06              June 2014


            "returned" : "default",
            "uniqueness" : "none"
          },
          {
            "name" : "honorificSuffix",
            "type" : "string",
            "multiValued" : false,
            "description" : "The honorific suffix(es) of the User, or Suffix in most Western languages (e.g. III. given the full name Ms. Barbara J Jensen, III.).",
            "required" : false,
            "caseExact" : false,
            "mutability" : "readWrite",
            "returned" : "default",
            "uniqueness" : "none"
          }
        ],
        "mutability" : "readWrite",
        "returned" : "default",
        "uniqueness" : "none"
      },
      {
        "name" : "displayName",
        "type" : "string",
        "multiValued" : false,
        "description" : "The name of the User, suitable for display to end-users. The name SHOULD be the full name of the User being described if known",
        "required" : false,
        "caseExact" : false,
        "mutability" : "readWrite",
        "returned" : "default",
        "uniqueness" : "none"
      },
      {
        "name" : "nickName",
        "type" : "string",
        "multiValued" : false,
        "description" : "The casual way to address the user in real life, e.g. \"Bob\" or \"Bobby\" instead of \"Robert\".  This attribute SHOULD NOT be used to represent a User's username (e.g. bjensen or mpepperidge)",
        "required" : false,
        "caseExact" : false,
        "mutability" : "readWrite",
        "returned" : "default",
        "uniqueness" : "none"
      },
      {
        "name" : "profileUrl",
        "type" : "string",
        "multiValued" : false,
        "description" : "A fully qualified URL to a page representing the User's online profile",
        "required" : false,
        "caseExact" : false,



Grizzle, et al.         Expires December 25, 2014              [Page 35]

Internet-Draft          draft-scim-core-schema-06              June 2014


        "mutability" : "readWrite",
        "returned" : "default",
        "uniqueness" : "none"
      },
      {
        "name" : "title",
        "type" : "string",
        "multiValued" : false,
        "description" : "The user's title, such as \"Vice President.\"",
        "required" : false,
        "caseExact" : false,
        "mutability" : "readWrite",
        "returned" : "default",
        "uniqueness" : "none"
      },
      {
        "name" : "userType",
        "type" : "string",
        "multiValued" : false,
        "description" : "Used to identify the organization to user relationship. Typical values used might be \"Contractor\", \"Employee\", \"Intern\", \"Temp\", \"External\", and \"Unknown\" but any value may be used ",
        "required" : false,
        "caseExact" : false,
        "mutability" : "readWrite",
        "returned" : "default",
        "uniqueness" : "none"
      },
      {
        "name" : "preferredLanguage",
        "type" : "string",
        "multiValued" : false,
        "description" : "Indicates the User's preferred written or spoken language.  Generally used for selecting a localized User interface. e.g., 'en_US' specifies the language English and country US.",
        "required" : false,
        "caseExact" : false,
        "mutability" : "readWrite",
        "returned" : "default",
        "uniqueness" : "none"
      },
      {
        "name" : "locale",
        "type" : "string",
        "multiValued" : false,
        "description" : "Used to indicate the User's default location for purposes of localizing items such as currency, date time format, numerical representations, etc.",
        "required" : false,
        "caseExact" : false,
        "mutability" : "readWrite",
        "returned" : "default",
        "uniqueness" : "none"
      },



Grizzle, et al.         Expires December 25, 2014              [Page 36]

Internet-Draft          draft-scim-core-schema-06              June 2014


      {
        "name" : "timezone",
        "type" : "string",
        "multiValued" : false,
        "description" : "The User's time zone in the \"Olson\" timezone database format [19]; e.g.,'America/Los_Angeles'",
        "required" : false,
        "caseExact" : false,
        "mutability" : "readWrite",
        "returned" : "default",
        "uniqueness" : "none"
      },
      {
        "name" : "active",
        "type" : "boolean",
        "multiValued" : false,
        "description" : "A Boolean value indicating the User's administrative status.",
        "required" : false,
        "caseExact" : false,
        "mutability" : "readWrite",
        "returned" : "default",
        "uniqueness" : "none"
      },
      {
        "name" : "password",
        "type" : "string",
        "multiValued" : false,
        "description" : "The User's clear text password.  This attribute is intended to be used as a means to specify an initial password when creating a new User or to reset an existing User's password.",
        "required" : false,
        "caseExact" : false,
        "mutability" : "writeOnly",
        "returned" : "never",
        "uniqueness" : "none"
      },
      {
        "name" : "emails",
        "type" : "complex",
        "multiValued" : true,
        "description" : "E-mail addresses for the user. The value SHOULD be canonicalized by the Service Provider, e.g. bjensen@example.com instead of bjensen@EXAMPLE.COM. Canonical Type values of work, home, and other.",
        "required" : false,
        "caseExact" : false,
        "subAttributes" : [
          {
            "name" : "value",
            "type" : "string",
            "multiValued" : false,
            "description" : "E-mail addresses for the user. The value SHOULD be canonicalized by the Service Provider, e.g. bjensen@example.com instead of bjensen@EXAMPLE.COM. Canonical Type values of work, home, and other.",
            "required" : false,
            "caseExact" : false,



Grizzle, et al.         Expires December 25, 2014              [Page 37]

Internet-Draft          draft-scim-core-schema-06              June 2014


            "mutability" : "readWrite",
            "returned" : "default",
            "uniqueness" : "none"
          },
          {
            "name" : "display",
            "type" : "string",
            "multiValued" : false,
            "description" : "A human readable name, primarily used for display purposes. READ-ONLY.",
            "required" : false,
            "caseExact" : false,
            "mutability" : "readWrite",
            "returned" : "default",
            "uniqueness" : "none"
          },
          {
            "name" : "type",
            "type" : "string",
            "multiValued" : false,
            "description" : "A label indicating the attribute's function; e.g., 'work' or 'home'.",
            "required" : false,
            "caseExact" : false,
            "canonicalValues" : [
              "work",
              "home",
              "other"
            ],
            "mutability" : "readWrite",
            "returned" : "default",
            "uniqueness" : "none"
          },
          {
            "name" : "primary",
            "type" : "boolean",
            "multiValued" : false,
            "description" : "A Boolean value indicating the 'primary' or preferred attribute value for this attribute, e.g. the preferred mailing address or primary e-mail address. The primary attribute value 'true' MUST appear no more than once.",
            "required" : false,
            "caseExact" : false,
            "mutability" : "readWrite",
            "returned" : "default",
            "uniqueness" : "none"
          }
        ],
        "mutability" : "readWrite",
        "returned" : "default",
        "uniqueness" : "none"
      },
      {



Grizzle, et al.         Expires December 25, 2014              [Page 38]

Internet-Draft          draft-scim-core-schema-06              June 2014


        "name" : "phoneNumbers",
        "type" : "complex",
        "multiValued" : true,
        "description" : "Phone numbers for the User.  The value SHOULD be canonicalized by the Service Provider according to format in RFC3966 [20] e.g. 'tel:+1-201-555-0123'.  Canonical Type values of work, home, mobile, fax, pager and other.",
        "required" : false,
        "caseExact" : false,
        "subAttributes" : [
          {
            "name" : "value",
            "type" : "string",
            "multiValued" : false,
            "description" : "Phone number of the User",
            "required" : false,
            "caseExact" : false,
            "mutability" : "readWrite",
            "returned" : "default",
            "uniqueness" : "none"
          },
          {
            "name" : "display",
            "type" : "string",
            "multiValued" : false,
            "description" : "A human readable name, primarily used for display purposes. READ-ONLY.",
            "required" : false,
            "caseExact" : false,
            "mutability" : "readWrite",
            "returned" : "default",
            "uniqueness" : "none"
          },
          {
            "name" : "type",
            "type" : "string",
            "multiValued" : false,
            "description" : "A label indicating the attribute's function; e.g., 'work' or 'home' or 'mobile' etc.",
            "required" : false,
            "caseExact" : false,
            "canonicalValues" : [
              "work",
              "home",
              "mobile",
              "fax",
              "pager",
              "other"
            ],
            "mutability" : "readWrite",
            "returned" : "default",
            "uniqueness" : "none"
          },



Grizzle, et al.         Expires December 25, 2014              [Page 39]

Internet-Draft          draft-scim-core-schema-06              June 2014


          {
            "name" : "primary",
            "type" : "boolean",
            "multiValued" : false,
            "description" : "A Boolean value indicating the 'primary' or preferred attribute value for this attribute, e.g. the preferred phone number or primary phone number. The primary attribute value 'true' MUST appear no more than once.",
            "required" : false,
            "caseExact" : false,
            "mutability" : "readWrite",
            "returned" : "default",
            "uniqueness" : "none"
          }
        ],
        "mutability" : "readWrite",
        "returned" : "default",
        "uniqueness" : "none"
      },
      {
        "name" : "ims",
        "type" : "complex",
        "multiValued" : true,
        "description" : "Instant messaging addresses for the User.",
        "required" : false,
        "caseExact" : false,
        "subAttributes" : [
          {
            "name" : "value",
            "type" : "string",
            "multiValued" : false,
            "description" : "Instant messaging address for the User.",
            "required" : false,
            "caseExact" : false,
            "mutability" : "readWrite",
            "returned" : "default",
            "uniqueness" : "none"
          },
          {
            "name" : "display",
            "type" : "string",
            "multiValued" : false,
            "description" : "A human readable name, primarily used for display purposes. READ-ONLY.",
            "required" : false,
            "caseExact" : false,
            "mutability" : "readWrite",
            "returned" : "default",
            "uniqueness" : "none"
          },
          {
            "name" : "type",



Grizzle, et al.         Expires December 25, 2014              [Page 40]

Internet-Draft          draft-scim-core-schema-06              June 2014


            "type" : "string",
            "multiValued" : false,
            "description" : "A label indicating the attribute's function; e.g., 'aim', 'gtalk', 'mobile' etc.",
            "required" : false,
            "caseExact" : false,
            "canonicalValues" : [
              "aim",
              "gtalk",
              "icq",
              "xmpp",
              "msn",
              "skype",
              "qq",
              "yahoo"
            ],
            "mutability" : "readWrite",
            "returned" : "default",
            "uniqueness" : "none"
          },
          {
            "name" : "primary",
            "type" : "boolean",
            "multiValued" : false,
            "description" : "A Boolean value indicating the 'primary' or preferred attribute value for this attribute, e.g. the preferred messenger or primary messenger. The primary attribute value 'true' MUST appear no more than once.",
            "required" : false,
            "caseExact" : false,
            "mutability" : "readWrite",
            "returned" : "default",
            "uniqueness" : "none"
          }
        ],
        "mutability" : "readWrite",
        "returned" : "default",
        "uniqueness" : "none"
      },
      {
        "name" : "photos",
        "type" : "complex",
        "multiValued" : true,
        "description" : "URLs of photos of the User.",
        "required" : false,
        "caseExact" : false,
        "subAttributes" : [
          {
            "name" : "value",
            "type" : "string",
            "multiValued" : false,
            "description" : "URL of a photo of the User.",



Grizzle, et al.         Expires December 25, 2014              [Page 41]

Internet-Draft          draft-scim-core-schema-06              June 2014


            "required" : false,
            "caseExact" : false,
            "mutability" : "readWrite",
            "returned" : "default",
            "uniqueness" : "none"
          },
          {
            "name" : "display",
            "type" : "string",
            "multiValued" : false,
            "description" : "A human readable name, primarily used for display purposes. READ-ONLY.",
            "required" : false,
            "caseExact" : false,
            "mutability" : "readWrite",
            "returned" : "default",
            "uniqueness" : "none"
          },
          {
            "name" : "type",
            "type" : "string",
            "multiValued" : false,
            "description" : "A label indicating the attribute's function; e.g., 'photo' or 'thumbnail'.",
            "required" : false,
            "caseExact" : false,
            "canonicalValues" : [
              "photo",
              "thumbnail"
            ],
            "mutability" : "readWrite",
            "returned" : "default",
            "uniqueness" : "none"
          },
          {
            "name" : "primary",
            "type" : "boolean",
            "multiValued" : false,
            "description" : "A Boolean value indicating the 'primary' or preferred attribute value for this attribute, e.g. the preferred photo or thumbnail. The primary attribute value 'true' MUST appear no more than once.",
            "required" : false,
            "caseExact" : false,
            "mutability" : "readWrite",
            "returned" : "default",
            "uniqueness" : "none"
          }
        ],
        "mutability" : "readWrite",
        "returned" : "default",
        "uniqueness" : "none"
      },



Grizzle, et al.         Expires December 25, 2014              [Page 42]

Internet-Draft          draft-scim-core-schema-06              June 2014


      {
        "name" : "addresses",
        "type" : "complex",
        "multiValued" : true,
        "description" : "A physical mailing address for this User, as described in (address Element). Canonical Type Values of work, home, and other. The value attribute is a complex type with the following sub-attributes.",
        "required" : false,
        "caseExact" : false,
        "subAttributes" : [
          {
            "name" : "formatted",
            "type" : "string",
            "multiValued" : false,
            "description" : "The full mailing address, formatted for display or use with a mailing label. This attribute MAY contain newlines.",
            "required" : false,
            "caseExact" : false,
            "mutability" : "readWrite",
            "returned" : "default",
            "uniqueness" : "none"
          },
          {
            "name" : "streetAddress",
            "type" : "string",
            "multiValued" : false,
            "description" : "The full street address component, which may include house number, street name, PO BOX, and multi-line extended street address information. This attribute MAY contain newlines.",
            "required" : false,
            "caseExact" : false,
            "mutability" : "readWrite",
            "returned" : "default",
            "uniqueness" : "none"
          },
          {
            "name" : "locality",
            "type" : "string",
            "multiValued" : false,
            "description" : "The city or locality component.",
            "required" : false,
            "caseExact" : false,
            "mutability" : "readWrite",
            "returned" : "default",
            "uniqueness" : "none"
          },
          {
            "name" : "region",
            "type" : "string",
            "multiValued" : false,
            "description" : "The state or region component.",
            "required" : false,
            "caseExact" : false,



Grizzle, et al.         Expires December 25, 2014              [Page 43]

Internet-Draft          draft-scim-core-schema-06              June 2014


            "mutability" : "readWrite",
            "returned" : "default",
            "uniqueness" : "none"
          },
          {
            "name" : "postalCode",
            "type" : "string",
            "multiValued" : false,
            "description" : "The zipcode or postal code component.",
            "required" : false,
            "caseExact" : false,
            "mutability" : "readWrite",
            "returned" : "default",
            "uniqueness" : "none"
          },
          {
            "name" : "country",
            "type" : "string",
            "multiValued" : false,
            "description" : "The country name component.",
            "required" : false,
            "caseExact" : false,
            "mutability" : "readWrite",
            "returned" : "default",
            "uniqueness" : "none"
          },
          {
            "name" : "type",
            "type" : "string",
            "multiValued" : false,
            "description" : "A label indicating the attribute's function; e.g., 'work' or 'home'.",
            "required" : false,
            "caseExact" : false,
            "canonicalValues" : [
              "work",
              "home",
              "other"
            ],
            "mutability" : "readWrite",
            "returned" : "default",
            "uniqueness" : "none"
          }
        ],
        "mutability" : "readWrite",
        "returned" : "default",
        "uniqueness" : "none"
      },
      {



Grizzle, et al.         Expires December 25, 2014              [Page 44]

Internet-Draft          draft-scim-core-schema-06              June 2014


        "name" : "groups",
        "type" : "complex",
        "multiValued" : true,
        "description" : "A list of groups that the user belongs to, either thorough direct membership, nested groups, or dynamically calculated",
        "required" : false,
        "caseExact" : false,
        "subAttributes" : [
          {
            "name" : "value",
            "type" : "string",
            "multiValued" : false,
            "description" : "The identifier of the User's group.",
            "readOnly" : false,
            "required" : false,
            "caseExact" : false,
            "mutability" : "readOnly",
            "returned" : "default",
            "uniqueness" : "none"
          },
          {
            "name" : "$ref",
            "type" : "string",
            "multiValued" : false,
            "description" : "The URI of the corresponding Group resource to which the user belongs",
            "readOnly" : false,
            "required" : false,
            "caseExact" : false,
            "mutability" : "readOnly",
            "returned" : "default",
            "uniqueness" : "none"
          },
          {
            "name" : "display",
            "type" : "string",
            "multiValued" : false,
            "description" : "A human readable name, primarily used for display purposes. READ-ONLY.",
            "readOnly" : true,
            "required" : false,
            "caseExact" : false,
            "mutability" : "readOnly",
            "returned" : "default",
            "uniqueness" : "none"
          },
          {
            "name" : "type",
            "type" : "string",
            "multiValued" : false,
            "description" : "A label indicating the attribute's function; e.g., 'direct' or 'indirect'.",



Grizzle, et al.         Expires December 25, 2014              [Page 45]

Internet-Draft          draft-scim-core-schema-06              June 2014


            "readOnly" : false,
            "required" : false,
            "caseExact" : false,
            "canonicalValues" : [
              "direct",
              "indirect"
            ],
            "mutability" : "readOnly",
            "returned" : "default",
            "uniqueness" : "none"
          }
        ],
        "mutability" : "readOnly",
        "returned" : "default",
        "uniqueness" : "none"
      },
      {
        "name" : "entitlements",
        "type" : "complex",
        "multiValued" : true,
        "description" : "A list of entitlements for the User that represent a thing the User has.",
        "required" : false,
        "caseExact" : false,
        "subAttributes" : [
          {
            "name" : "value",
            "type" : "string",
            "multiValued" : false,
            "description" : "The value of an entitlement.",
            "required" : false,
            "caseExact" : false,
            "mutability" : "readWrite",
            "returned" : "default",
            "uniqueness" : "none"
          },
          {
            "name" : "display",
            "type" : "string",
            "multiValued" : false,
            "description" : "A human readable name, primarily used for display purposes. READ-ONLY.",
            "required" : false,
            "caseExact" : false,
            "mutability" : "readWrite",
            "returned" : "default",
            "uniqueness" : "none"
          },
          {
            "name" : "type",



Grizzle, et al.         Expires December 25, 2014              [Page 46]

Internet-Draft          draft-scim-core-schema-06              June 2014


            "type" : "string",
            "multiValued" : false,
            "description" : "A label indicating the attribute's function.",
            "required" : false,
            "caseExact" : false,
            "canonicalValues" : [],
            "mutability" : "readWrite",
            "returned" : "default",
            "uniqueness" : "none"
          },
          {
            "name" : "primary",
            "type" : "boolean",
            "multiValued" : false,
            "description" : "A Boolean value indicating the 'primary' or preferred attribute value for this attribute. The primary attribute value 'true' MUST appear no more than once.",
            "required" : false,
            "caseExact" : false,
            "mutability" : "readWrite",
            "returned" : "default",
            "uniqueness" : "none"
          }
        ],
        "mutability" : "readWrite",
        "returned" : "default",
        "uniqueness" : "none"
      },
      {
        "name" : "roles",
        "type" : "complex",
        "multiValued" : true,
        "description" : "A list of roles for the User that collectively represent who the User is; e.g., 'Student', 'Faculty'.",
        "required" : false,
        "caseExact" : false,
        "subAttributes" : [
          {
            "name" : "value",
            "type" : "string",
            "multiValued" : false,
            "description" : "The value of a role.",
            "required" : false,
            "caseExact" : false,
            "mutability" : "readWrite",
            "returned" : "default",
            "uniqueness" : "none"
          },
          {
            "name" : "display",
            "type" : "string",



Grizzle, et al.         Expires December 25, 2014              [Page 47]

Internet-Draft          draft-scim-core-schema-06              June 2014


            "multiValued" : false,
            "description" : "A human readable name, primarily used for display purposes. READ-ONLY.",
            "required" : false,
            "caseExact" : false,
            "mutability" : "readWrite",
            "returned" : "default",
            "uniqueness" : "none"
          },
          {
            "name" : "type",
            "type" : "string",
            "multiValued" : false,
            "description" : "A label indicating the attribute's function.",
            "required" : false,
            "caseExact" : false,
            "canonicalValues" : [],
            "mutability" : "readWrite",
            "returned" : "default",
            "uniqueness" : "none"
          },
          {
            "name" : "primary",
            "type" : "boolean",
            "multiValued" : false,
            "description" : "A Boolean value indicating the 'primary' or preferred attribute value for this attribute. The primary attribute value 'true' MUST appear no more than once.",
            "required" : false,
            "caseExact" : false,
            "mutability" : "readWrite",
            "returned" : "default",
            "uniqueness" : "none"
          }
        ],
        "mutability" : "readWrite",
        "returned" : "default",
        "uniqueness" : "none"
      },
      {
        "name" : "x509Certificates",
        "type" : "complex",
        "multiValued" : true,
        "description" : "A list of certificates issued to the User.",
        "required" : false,
        "caseExact" : false,
        "subAttributes" : [
          {
            "name" : "value",
            "type" : "string",
            "multiValued" : false,



Grizzle, et al.         Expires December 25, 2014              [Page 48]

Internet-Draft          draft-scim-core-schema-06              June 2014


            "description" : "The value of a X509 certificate.",
            "required" : false,
            "caseExact" : false,
            "mutability" : "readWrite",
            "returned" : "default",
            "uniqueness" : "none"
          },
          {
            "name" : "display",
            "type" : "string",
            "multiValued" : false,
            "description" : "A human readable name, primarily used for display purposes. READ-ONLY.",
            "required" : false,
            "caseExact" : false,
            "mutability" : "readWrite",
            "returned" : "default",
            "uniqueness" : "none"
          },
          {
            "name" : "type",
            "type" : "string",
            "multiValued" : false,
            "description" : "A label indicating the attribute's function.",
            "required" : false,
            "caseExact" : false,
            "canonicalValues" : [],
            "mutability" : "readWrite",
            "returned" : "default",
            "uniqueness" : "none"
          },
          {
            "name" : "primary",
            "type" : "boolean",
            "multiValued" : false,
            "description" : "A Boolean value indicating the 'primary' or preferred attribute value for this attribute. The primary attribute value 'true' MUST appear no more than once.",
            "required" : false,
            "caseExact" : false,
            "mutability" : "readWrite",
            "returned" : "default",
            "uniqueness" : "none"
          }
        ],
        "mutability" : "readWrite",
        "returned" : "default",
        "uniqueness" : "none"
      }
    ],
    "meta" : {



Grizzle, et al.         Expires December 25, 2014              [Page 49]

Internet-Draft          draft-scim-core-schema-06              June 2014


      "resourceType" : "Schema",
      "created" : "2010-01-23T04:56:22Z",
      "lastModified" : "2014-02-04T00:00:00Z",
      "version" : "W/\"3694e05e9dff596\"",
      "location" : "https://example.com/v2/Schemas/urn:scim:schemas:core:2.0:User"
    }
  },
  {
    "id" : "urn:scim:schemas:core:2.0:Group",
    "name" : "Group",
    "description" : "Core Group",
    "attributes" : [
      {
        "name" : "id",
        "type" : "string",
        "multiValued" : false,
        "description" : "Unique identifier for the SCIM resource as defined by the Service Provider. Each representation of the resource MUST include a non-empty id value. This identifier MUST be unique across the Service Provider's entire set of resources. It MUST be a stable, non-reassignable identifier that does not change when the same resource is returned in subsequent requests. The value of the id attribute is always issued by the Service Provider and MUST never be specified by the Service Consumer. REQUIRED.",
        "required" : true,
        "caseExact" : false,
        "mutability" : "readWrite",
        "returned" : "always",
        "uniqueness" : "server"
      },
      {
        "name" : "externalId",
        "type" : "string",
        "multiValued" : false,
        "description" : "An identifier for the Resource as defined by the Service Consumer.",
        "required" : true,
        "caseExact" : false,
        "mutability" : "readWrite",
        "returned" : "default",
        "uniqueness" : "none"
      },
      {
        "name" : "displayName",
        "type" : "string",
        "multiValued" : false,
        "description" : "A human readable name for the Group.  REQUIRED.",
        "required" : false,
        "caseExact" : false,
        "mutability" : "readWrite",
        "returned" : "default",
        "uniqueness" : "none"
      },
      {
        "name" : "members",
        "type" : "complex",



Grizzle, et al.         Expires December 25, 2014              [Page 50]

Internet-Draft          draft-scim-core-schema-06              June 2014


        "multiValued" : false,
        "description" : "A list of members of the Group.",
        "required" : false,
        "caseExact" : false,
        "subAttributes" : [
          {
            "name" : "value",
            "type" : "string",
            "multiValued" : false,
            "description" : "The identifier of the member of this Group.",
            "required" : false,
            "caseExact" : false,
            "mutability" : "immutable",
            "returned" : "default",
            "uniqueness" : "none"
          },
          {
            "name" : "$ref",
            "type" : "string",
            "multiValued" : false,
            "description" : "The URI of the corresponding to the member resource of this Group.",
            "required" : false,
            "caseExact" : false,
            "mutability" : "immutable",
            "returned" : "default",
            "uniqueness" : "none"
          },
          {
            "name" : "type",
            "type" : "string",
            "multiValued" : false,
            "description" : "A label indicating the type of resource; e.g., 'User' or 'Group'.",
            "required" : false,
            "caseExact" : false,
            "canonicalValues" : [
              "User",
              "Group"
            ],
            "mutability" : "immutable",
            "returned" : "default",
            "uniqueness" : "none"
          }
        ],
        "mutability" : "readWrite",
        "returned" : "default",
        "uniqueness" : "none"
      }
    ],



Grizzle, et al.         Expires December 25, 2014              [Page 51]

Internet-Draft          draft-scim-core-schema-06              June 2014


    "meta" : {
      "resourceType" : "Schema",
      "created" : "2010-01-23T04:56:22Z",
      "lastModified" : "2014-02-04T00:00:00Z",
      "version" : "W/\"3694e05e9dff596\"",
      "location" : "https://example.com/v2/Schemas/urn:scim:schemas:core:2.0:Group"
    }
  },
  {
    "id" : "urn:scim:schemas:extension:enterprise:2.0:User",
    "name" : "EnterpriseUser",
    "description" : "Enterprise User",
    "attributes" : [
      {
        "name" : "employeeNumber",
        "type" : "string",
        "multiValued" : false,
        "description" : "Numeric or alphanumeric identifier assigned to a person, typically based on order of hire or association with an organization.",
        "required" : false,
        "caseExact" : false,
        "mutability" : "readWrite",
        "returned" : "default",
        "uniqueness" : "none"
      },
      {
        "name" : "costCenter",
        "type" : "string",
        "multiValued" : false,
        "description" : "Identifies the name of a cost center.",
        "required" : false,
        "caseExact" : false,
        "mutability" : "readWrite",
        "returned" : "default",
        "uniqueness" : "none"
      },
      {
        "name" : "organization",
        "type" : "string",
        "multiValued" : false,
        "description" : "Identifies the name of an organization.",
        "required" : false,
        "caseExact" : false,
        "mutability" : "readWrite",
        "returned" : "default",
        "uniqueness" : "none"
      },
      {
        "name" : "division",



Grizzle, et al.         Expires December 25, 2014              [Page 52]

Internet-Draft          draft-scim-core-schema-06              June 2014


        "type" : "string",
        "multiValued" : false,
        "description" : "Identifies the name of a division.",
        "required" : false,
        "caseExact" : false,
        "mutability" : "readWrite",
        "returned" : "default",
        "uniqueness" : "none"
      },
      {
        "name" : "department",
        "type" : "string",
        "multiValued" : false,
        "description" : "Identifies the name of a department.",
        "required" : false,
        "caseExact" : false,
        "mutability" : "readWrite",
        "returned" : "default",
        "uniqueness" : "none"
      },
      {
        "name" : "manager",
        "type" : "complex",
        "multiValued" : false,
        "description" : "The User's manager. A complex type that optionally allows Service Providers to represent organizational hierarchy by referencing the \"id\" attribute of another User.",
        "required" : false,
        "caseExact" : false,
        "subAttributes" : [
          {
            "name" : "managerId",
            "type" : "string",
            "multiValued" : false,
            "description" : "The id of the SCIM resource representing the User's  manager.  REQUIRED.",
            "required" : false,
            "caseExact" : false,
            "mutability" : "readWrite",
            "returned" : "default",
            "uniqueness" : "none"
          },
          {
            "name" : "$ref",
            "type" : "string",
            "multiValued" : false,
            "description" : "The URI of the SCIM resource representing the User's manager.  REQUIRED.",
            "required" : false,
            "caseExact" : false,
            "mutability" : "readWrite",
            "returned" : "default",



Grizzle, et al.         Expires December 25, 2014              [Page 53]

Internet-Draft          draft-scim-core-schema-06              June 2014


            "uniqueness" : "none"
          },
          {
            "name" : "displayName",
            "type" : "string",
            "multiValued" : false,
            "description" : "The displayName of the User's manager.  OPTIONAL and READ-ONLY.",
            "required" : false,
            "caseExact" : false,
            "mutability" : "readOnly",
            "returned" : "default",
            "uniqueness" : "none"
          }
        ],
        "mutability" : "readWrite",
        "returned" : "default",
        "uniqueness" : "none"
      }
    ],
    "meta" : {
      "resourceType" : "Schema",
      "created" : "2010-01-23T04:56:22Z",
      "lastModified" : "2014-02-04T00:00:00Z",
      "version" : "W/\"3694e05e9dff596\"",
      "location" : "https://example.com/v2/Schemas/urn:scim:schemas:extension:enterprise:2.0:User"
    }
  }
]}

                Figure 8: Eample Schema JSON Representation

12.  Security Considerations

   The SCIM Core schema contains personally identifiable information as
   well as other sensitive data.  Aside from prohibiting password values
   in a SCIM response this specification does not provide any means or
   guarantee of confidentiality.

13.  IANA Considerations

13.1.  URN Sub-Namespace for SCIM

   SCIM schemas and SCIM messages utilize URIs to identify the schema in
   use or other relevant context.  This section creates and registers an
   IETF URN Sub-namespace for use in the SCIM specifications and future
   extensions.





Grizzle, et al.         Expires December 25, 2014              [Page 54]

Internet-Draft          draft-scim-core-schema-06              June 2014


13.1.1.  Specification Template

   Namespace ID:

      The Namespace ID "scim" is requested.

   Registration Information:

      Version: 1

      Date: [[insert final submission date]]

   Declared registrant of the namespace:

      Registering organization
         The Internet Engineering Task Force

      Designated contact
         A designated expert will monitor the SCIM public mailing list,
         "scim@ietf.org".

   Declaration of Syntactic Structure:

      The Namespace Specific String (NSS) of all URNs that use the
      "scim" NID shall have the following structure:

   urn:scim:{type}:{name}{:subName}:{version}{:className}{:resourceType}

      The keywords have the following meaning:

      type
         An entity type (e.g. "schemas", "api", or "param" ).

      name
         A required US-ASCII string that conforms to the URN syntax
         requirements (see [RFC2141] ) and defines a major namespace of
         object used within SCIM (e.g. "core", "extension" ).  The name
         "extension" MUST be used when the registered schema it refers
         to is intended to be used as an extension to another schema.


         An optional US-ASCII string that conforms to the URN syntax
         requirements (see [RFC2141] ) and defines a sub-class of object
         used within SCIM (e.g. "enterprise", "extension" ).

      version
         The first SCIM API version number where the URN is valid (e.g.
         "2.0" ).



Grizzle, et al.         Expires December 25, 2014              [Page 55]

Internet-Draft          draft-scim-core-schema-06              June 2014


      className
         An optional US-ASCII string that conforms to the URN syntax
         requirements (see [RFC2141] ) and defines a major class of
         object used within SCIM.

      resourceType
         An optional US-ASCII string that conforms to the URN syntax
         requirements (see [RFC2141] ) and typically is used when
         referring to a resource type within SCIM (e.g.  User).

   Relevant Ancillary Documentation:

      None

   Identifier Uniqueness Considerations:

      The designated contact shall be responsible for reviewing and
      enforcing uniqueness.

   Identifier Persistence Considerations:

      Once a name has been allocated it MUST NOT be re-allocated for a
      different purpose.  The rules provided for assignments of values
      within a sub-namespace MUST be constructed so that the meaning of
      values cannot change.  This registration mechanism is not
      appropriate for naming values whose meaning may change over time.

      As the SCIM specifications are updated and the SCIM API version is
      adjusted, a new registration will be made when significant changes
      are made.  Example, "urn:scim:schemas:core:1.0" and
      "urn:scim:schemas:core:2.0".

   Process of Identifier Assignment:

      Identifiers with namespace type "schema" (e.g.  "urn:scim:schemas"
      ) are assigned after the review of the assigned contact via the
      SCIM public mailing list, "scim@ietf.org" as documented in
      Section 13.2.

      Namespaces with type "api" (e.g. "urn:scim:api" ) are reserved for
      IETF approved SCIM specifications.  Namespaces with type "param"
      are reserved for future use.

   Process of Identifier Resolution:

      The namespace is not currently listed with a Resolution Discovery
      System (RDS), but nothing about the namespace prohibits the future




Grizzle, et al.         Expires December 25, 2014              [Page 56]

Internet-Draft          draft-scim-core-schema-06              June 2014


      definition of appropriate resolution methods or listing with an
      RDS.

   Rules for Lexical Equivalence:

      No special considerations; the rules for lexical equivalence
      specified in [RFC2141] apply.

   Conformance with URN Syntax:

      No special considerations.

   Validation Mechanism:

      None specified.

   Scope:

      Global.

13.1.2.  Pre-Registered SCIM Schema Identifiers

   The following SCIM Identifiers are defined:

   urn:scim:schemas:core:2.0

      SCIM Core Schema as specified in Section 4 and Section 13.3.

   urn:scim:schemas:extension:enterprise:2.0

      Enterprise schema extensions as defined in Section 6 and
      Section 13.3.

13.2.  Registering SCIM Schemas

   This section defines the process for registering new SCIM schemas
   with IANA.  A schema URI is used as a value in the schemas attribute
   ( Section 4.2 ) for the purpose of distinguishing extensions used in
   a SCIM resource.

13.2.1.  Registration Procedure

   The IETF has created a mailing list, scim@ietf.org, which can be used
   for public discussion of SCIM schema proposals prior to registration.
   Use of the mailing list is strongly encouraged.  The IESG has
   appointed a designated expert who will monitor the scim@ietf.org
   mailing list and review registrations.




Grizzle, et al.         Expires December 25, 2014              [Page 57]

Internet-Draft          draft-scim-core-schema-06              June 2014


   Registration of new schemas MUST be reviewed by the designated expert
   and published in an RFC.  A Standards Track RFC is REQUIRED for the
   registration of new value data types that modify existing properties.
   A Standards Track RFC is also REQUIRED for registration of SCIM
   schema URIs that modify SCIM schema previously documented in a
   Standards Track RFC.

   The registration procedure begins when a completed registration
   template, defined in the sections below, is sent to scim@ietf.org and
   iana@iana.org.  Within two weeks, the designated expert is expected
   to tell IANA and the submitter of the registration whether the
   registration is approved, approved with minor changes, or rejected
   with cause.  When a registration is rejected with cause, it can be
   re-submitted if the concerns listed in the cause are addressed.
   Decisions made by the designated expert can be appealed to the IESG
   Applications Area Director, then to the IESG.  They follow the normal
   appeals procedure for IESG decisions.

   Once the registration procedure concludes successfully, IANA creates
   or modifies the corresponding record in the SCIM schema registry.
   The completed registration template is discarded.

   An RFC specifying new schema URI MUST include the completed
   registration templates, which MAY be expanded with additional
   information.  These completed templates are intended to go in the
   body of the document, not in the IANA Considerations section.  The
   RFC SHOULD include any attributes defined.

13.2.2.  Schema Registration Template

   A SCIM schema URI is defined by completing the following template:

   Schema URI:  Schema URI: A unique URI for the SCIM schema extension.

   Schema Name:  A descriptive name of the schema extension (e.g.
      Generic Device)

   Intended or Associated Resource Type:  A value defining the resource
      type (e.g.  "Device").

   Purpose:  A description of the purpose of the extension and/or its
      intended use.

   Single-value Attributes:  A list and description of single-valued
      attributes defined including complex attributes.

   Multi-valued Attributes:  A list and description of multi-valued
      attributes defined including complex attributes.



Grizzle, et al.         Expires December 25, 2014              [Page 58]

Internet-Draft          draft-scim-core-schema-06              June 2014


13.3.  Initial SCIM Schema Registry

   The IANA has created and will maintain the following registries for
   SCIM schema URIs with pointers to appropriate reference documents.

   +-------------------------------------------+-----------+-----------+
   | Schema URI                                | Name      | Reference |
   +-------------------------------------------+-----------+-----------+
   | urn:scim:schemas:core:2.0:User            | User      | See       |
   |                                           | Resource  | Section 5 |
   | urn:scim:schemas:extension:enterprise:2.0 | Enterpris | See       |
   | :User                                     | e User    | Section 6 |
   |                                           | Extension |           |
   | urn:scim:schemas:core:2.0:Group           | Group     | See       |
   |                                           | Resource  | Section 7 |
   +-------------------------------------------+-----------+-----------+

                    SCIM Schema URIs for Data Resources

   +-----------------------------------------+-------------+-----------+
   | Schema URI                              | Name        | Reference |
   +-----------------------------------------+-------------+-----------+
   | urn:scim:schemas:core:2.0:ServiceProvid | Service     | See       |
   | erConfig                                | Provider Co | Section 8 |
   |                                         | nfiguration |           |
   |                                         | Schema      |           |
   | urn:scim:schemas:core:2.0:ResourceType  | Resource    | See       |
   |                                         | Type Config | Section 9 |
   | urn:scim:schemas:core:2.0:Schema        | Schema      | See       |
   |                                         | Definitions | Section   |
   |                                         | Schema      | 10        |
   +-----------------------------------------+-------------+-----------+

                      SCIM Server Related Schema URIs

14.  References

14.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC2141]  Moats, R., "URN Syntax", RFC 2141, May 1997.

   [RFC3629]  Yergeau, F., "UTF-8, a transformation format of ISO
              10646", STD 63, RFC 3629, November 2003.





Grizzle, et al.         Expires December 25, 2014              [Page 59]

Internet-Draft          draft-scim-core-schema-06              June 2014


   [RFC3966]  Schulzrinne, H., "The tel URI for Telephone Numbers", RFC
              3966, December 2004.

   [RFC3986]  Berners-Lee, T., Fielding, R., and L. Masinter, "Uniform
              Resource Identifier (URI): Generic Syntax", STD 66, RFC
              3986, January 2005.

   [RFC4647]  Phillips, A. and M. Davis, "Matching of Language Tags",
              BCP 47, RFC 4647, September 2006.

   [RFC5234]  Crocker, D. and P. Overell, "Augmented BNF for Syntax
              Specifications: ABNF", STD 68, RFC 5234, January 2008.

   [RFC5646]  Phillips, A. and M. Davis, "Tags for Identifying
              Languages", BCP 47, RFC 5646, September 2009.

   [RFC6557]  Lear, E. and P. Eggert, "Procedures for Maintaining the
              Time Zone Database", BCP 175, RFC 6557, February 2012.

   [RFC7159]  Bray, T., "The JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) Data
              Interchange Format", RFC 7159, March 2014.

   [RFC7231]  Fielding, R. and J. Reschke, "Hypertext Transfer Protocol
              (HTTP/1.1): Semantics and Content", RFC 7231, June 2014.

   [XML-Schema]
              Biron, P. and A. Malhotra, "XML Schema Part 2: Datatypes
              Second Edition", October 2004.

14.2.  Informative References

   [ISO3166]  "ISO 3166:1988 (E/F) - Codes for the representation of
              names of countries - The International Organization for
              Standardization, 3rd edition", 08 1988.

   [ISO639-2]
              ISO 639.2 Registration Authority, "ISO639-2: Codes for the
              Representation of Names of Languages", July 2013.

   [Olson-TZ]
              "Sources for Time Zone and Daylight Saving Time Data", .

   [PortableContacts]
              Smarr, J., "Portable Contacts 1.0 Draft C - Schema Only",
              August 2008.

   [RFC2277]  Alvestrand, H., "IETF Policy on Character Sets and
              Languages", BCP 18, RFC 2277, January 1998.



Grizzle, et al.         Expires December 25, 2014              [Page 60]

Internet-Draft          draft-scim-core-schema-06              June 2014


   [RFC4512]  Zeilenga, K., "Lightweight Directory Access Protocol
              (LDAP): Directory Information Models", RFC 4512, June
              2006.

   [RFC6749]  Hardt, D., "The OAuth 2.0 Authorization Framework", RFC
              6749, October 2012.

Appendix A.  Acknowledgements

   The editors would like to acknowledge the contribution and work of
   the past draft editors:

      Chuck Mortimore, Salesforce

      Patrick Harding, Ping

      Paul Madsen, Ping

      Trey Drake, UnboundID

   The SCIM Community would like to thank the following people for the
   work they've done in the research, formulation, drafting, editing,
   and support of this specification.

      Morteza Ansari (morteza.ansari@cisco.com)

      Sidharth Choudhury (schoudhury@salesforce.com)

      Samuel Erdtman (samuel@erdtman.se)

      Kelly Grizzle (kelly.grizzle@sailpoint.com)

      Chris Phillips (cjphillips@gmail.com)

      Erik Wahlstroem (erik.wahlstrom@nexussafe.com)

      Phil Hunt (phil.hunt@yahoo.com)

   Special thanks to Joeseph Smarr, who's excellent work on the Portable
   Contacts Specification [PortableContacts] provided a basis for the
   SCIM schema structure and text.

Appendix B.  Change Log

   [[This section to be removed prior to publication as an RFC]]

   Draft 02 - KG - Addition of schema extensibility




Grizzle, et al.         Expires December 25, 2014              [Page 61]

Internet-Draft          draft-scim-core-schema-06              June 2014


   Draft 03 - PH - Revisions based on following tickets:

      09 - Attribute uniquenes

      10 - Returnability of attributes

      35 - Attribute mutability (replaces readOnly)

      52 - Minor textual changes

      53 - Standard use of term client (some was consumer)

      56 - Make manager attribute consistent with other $ref attrs

      58 - Add optional id to ResourceType objects for consistency

      59 - Fix capitalization per IETF editor practices

      60 - Changed <eref> tags to normal <xref> and <reference> tags

   Draft 04 - PH - Revisions based on the following tickets:

      43 - Drop short-hand notation for complex multi-valued attributes

      61 - Specify attribute name limitations

      62 - Fix 'mutability' normative language

      63 - Fix incorrect EnterpriseUser schema reference

      68 - Update JSON references from RFC4627 to RFC7159

      71 - Made corrections to language tags in compliance with BCP47 /
      RFC5646

   Draft 05 - PH - Revisions based on the following tickets

      23 - Clarified that the server is not required to preserve case
      for case insensitive strings

      41 - Add IANA considerations

      72 - Added text to indicate UTF-8 is default and mandatory
      encoding format per BCP18

      - Typo corrections and removed some redundant text

   Draft 06 - PH - Revisions based on the following tickets



Grizzle, et al.         Expires December 25, 2014              [Page 62]

Internet-Draft          draft-scim-core-schema-06              June 2014


      63 - Corrected enterprise user URI in 14.2 and section 7, URI
      namespace changes due to ticket #41

      66 - Updated reference to final HTTP/1.1 drafts (RFC 7230)

      41 - Add IANA considerations

      - Removed redundant text (e.g.  SAML binding, replaced REST with
      HTTP)

      - Reordered introduction, definitions and notation sections to
      follow typical format

      - meta.attributes removed due to new PURGE command in draft 04 (no
      longer used)

Authors' Addresses

   Kelly Grizzle
   SailPoint

   Email: kelly.grizzle@sailpoint.com


   Phil Hunt (editor)
   Oracle Corporation

   Email: phil.hunt@yahoo.com


   Erik Wahlstroem
   Technology Nexus

   Email: erik.wahlstrom@nexussafe.com


   Chuck Mortimore
   Salesforce.com

   Email: cmortimore@salesforce.com











Grizzle, et al.         Expires December 25, 2014              [Page 63]
