                                                               WANG Hui
                                                            LI Jinsheng
Internet Draft	                                           HONG Peiling
Document: draft-hwang-gmpls-signaling-parallel-00.txt       InfoNet Lab
Expires: July 1,2002	                                           USTC
                                                        February 1,2002


 Add a 'parallel resource allocation style object' to GMPLS signaling -
                         RSVP-TE and CR-LDP


Status of this Memo


   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of
   six months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
   documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts
   as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in
   progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

1. Abstract
   
   The Internet transport infrastructure is moving towards a model of 
   high-speed routers interconnected by optical core networks. At the   
   same time, a consensus has emerged in the industry on utilizing IP-
   based protocols for the optical control plane. GMPLS is assumed to
   be the most possible control plane for the future all optical    
   transport network.  There are two major sets of signaling with GMPLS
   to maintain LSP, which are RSVP-TE and CR-LDP.  But both of the  
   singalings cannot do fast lightpath establishing according to their 
   setup strategies.  In this draft, we present a fast lightpath  
   establishing scheme by adding a 'parallel resource allocation style
   object' to GMPLS signaling sets - RSVP-TE and CR-LDP. 

   
2. Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",  
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in   
   this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119.


Wang Hui et. al.    Internet-Draft February 2002                      1

 draft-hwang-gmpls-signaling-parallel-00.txt              February 2002


3. Backgroud

   The early deployment of WDM technology was in a point-to-point manner
   to ease fiber exhaustion.  As more advanced systems, such as optical 
   add/drop multiplexers(OADMs) and optical cross-connects(OXCs) have 
   matured, and because that both OADMs and OXCs are capable of routing 
   and switching wavelength,DWDM has become a network-level technology 
   [1].  GMPLS [2] protocol is known as a its most possible control 
   plane.  GMPLS supports light wavelength switching and can do 
   lightpath provisioning, protection and restoration.  GMPLS is an
   effective control plane and with GMPLS merged to optical nodes,we can 
   get an automatic switched optical network (ASON)[3].
   
   ASON is generally used as the backbone of transport networks.  So 
   there is a restrict requirement for the speed of lightpath provision- 
   ing, establishing, fault protection and traffic restoration.  And 
   these requirements are all challenges to the control plane.  The 
   control plane should fit these requirements.

   GMPLS is assumed to be the control plane for this intelligent all
   optical network, which includes two major signaling sets : RSVP-TE[4] 
   and CR-LDP[5].  Both of the two signaling sets can do lightpath 
   provisoning, establishing and management jobs.  The two signaling 
   sets are independent and we may only implement either RSVP-TE or CR- 
   LDP in a given system . But as to the current protocol of RSVP-TE and 
   CR-LDP, there are problems when the network use either of them to  
   establish a lightpath because both protocols can cause a big delay 
   when do lightpath setup and may not fit the restrict requirements of
   path establishing speed especailly when the network size is  
   considerably big.
   
   
4. Problems with RSVP-TE or CR-LDP when establishing the lightpath 

   Both of RSVP-TE and CR-LDP's strategies of doing resource allocation
   (more specifically, wavelengh assignment and optical cross-connects
   making) for setting up a new lightpath are in serial style.  That is 
   to say, the nodes along a lightpath will do their local resource 
   allocation one by one. One node won't do its local wavelengh 
   assignment and optical cross-connect operations unless it receives 
   the indication message from it downstream neighbor node.  When this  
   node finishes its own local resource allocation successfully, it will 
   send out a message to its upstream neighbor node to indicating the 
   upper node's action of resource allocation.  For example, in RSVP-TE 
   protocol stack, one node wont's allocate local resource untill it 
   receives the RESV message from downstream neighbor node, and when it 
   succeeds in its own local resource  allocation, it will send out a 
   RESV message to its upstream neighbor node.  So we see that the 
   resource reservation and allocation, or say,  wavelength assignment 
   and optical cross-connects operations, are all done serially along 
   the lightpath from downstream nodes to upstream nodes.
   
   This serial operation will bring a big delay to the process of 


Wang Hui et. al.    Internet-Draft February 2002                      2

 draft-hwang-gmpls-signaling-parallel-00.txt              February 2002


   establishing a new lightpath, especially when the network size  
   becomes considerably big and the number of an average lightpath 
   becomes big. What's more, the wavelength assignment and optical cross- 
   connects making are all time-consuming operations.  Compared with the 
   signaling  message transport delay, these serial resource allocation 
   operations contribute a big delay to the whole lightpath setup 
   process.  For example, if we assume the delay caused by a single 
   optical cross-connect operation is C milliseconds, and if there are 
   totally N nodes at average along a lightpath in a given network, 
   these serial optical cross-connects operations will cost N*C 
   milliseconds in sum.  If the N is considerably big, this delay will 
   be unacceptable when we need a fast lightpath provision.  
   
   This problem is originally from the serial resource allocation
   operations carried with RSVP-TE or CR-LDP.   What if we do parallel 
   resource allocation operations? 
    

5. Do parallel resource allocation with a new indication object 

   In this draft we proposed a new strategy to setup the lightpath in 
   the way of doing parallel resource allocation operation along the 
   nodes in the path.  In order to notify the nodes to do parallel
   resource allocation, we suggest that we may implement a new object   
   within the path initial message.  We name this object as 'Parallel 
   Resource Allocation style Object'(PRAO).
   
   For example, when we use RSVP-TE to setup a lightpath, the source
   node will firstly send out a PATH message, if it want to use the
   strategy of parallel resource allocation it must include a PRAO    
   object to indicate the nodes along the path to do parallel resource 
   allocation operations.  Here is the rough process of using this 
   strategy.  First the source node sends out a message with a PRAO 
   object, and at the same time the source node begin to do its local 
   resouce allocation (wavelength assignment and optical cross-connect 
   making).  When the middle nodes along the path receive this PATH 
   message and find a PRAO object within it,  they will firstly relay 
   the PATH message to their downstream neighbor nodes (of cource, they  
   will do some needed modification to the PATH message according to 
   the standard GMPLS/RSVP-TE protocol), and at the same time they 
   will do their own local resource allocation operations.  In this 
   way, the PATH message is relayed to the egress node and the egress 
   node begin to do its local resource allocation operations.  After
   the egress node's succeeding in its resource allocation, the egress 
   node will send back the RESV message which will act as an acknowledg-
   ing message to PATH message.  Of couse, the RESV message will contain
   some needed standard GMPLS/RSVP-TE objects.   The RESV message is 
   relayed by the middle nodes and finally arrive at the source node.   
   When the source node gets this RESV message, the whole lightpath is 
   successfully established.   
   
   In the process described above, the 'Parallel Resource Allocation 
   style Object'(PRAO) is used to indicate the nodes along the path to 
   do parallel wavelength assignment and optical cross-connects making 
   operations.  All the nodes will do their own local resource  

   

Wang Hui et. al.    Internet-Draft February 2002                      3

 draft-hwang-gmpls-signaling-parallel-00.txt              February 2002


   allocation right after they receive the PATH message. Because the 
   delay of transporting the RSVP-TE signalling messages (such as 
   PATH message and RESV message) is much smaller than the delay 
   caused by optical node's cross-connects  operations, all the 
   optical cross-connect operations can be considered to be done 
   parallelly. This parallel operations will save a lot of time 
   compared with the current serial operations.  In fact,  we can 
   model the whole optical crocss-connects operations along all the 
   nodes to be a single node's operation at the egress node. 

   The basic process of using PRAO in RSVP-TE can be changed to CR-LDP
   process.  The idea is the same.

   So we suggest to add a new object named as 'Parallel Resource
   Allocation style Object'(PRAO) to the signalling sets.  This new 
   object can be chosen as an option on the occasion when we want to do 
   fast, parallel lightpath setup. Where there is critical for the path 
   setup  speed, the source node can apply this object. 


6. Benefits from the PARO object 

   With the PRAO object, we can do fast lightpath provision. And what's 
   more, on occasion where there is a failure and reroute is needed to 
   perform, we can use this strategy to do fast traffic restoration 
   based on dynamic protection path setup.   The latter path protection 
   scheme will increase resource utilization because capacity or 
   bandwidth is not reserved beforehand and because it is available for 
   use by other (possible lower priority) traffic,  when the protection 
   path dose not require this capacity. 
 

7. Some considerations 

   The reason to do serial resource allocation as current RSVP-TE does,
   is that the node need to make sure the downstream nodes have succeed-
   ing in resource allocation.   Because if one of the nodes along a 
   path fails to do its local resouce allocation will cause the failure  
   of establishing the whole lightpath.  But as to our parallel resouce 
   allocation scheme,  the node doesn't verify if the the other node 
   succeeds in its resouce allocation, what if a request is rejected by 
   a node?   If this kind of failure occurs, the souce node has to 
   reroute the whole path.  If this kind of failure occurs frequently, 
   this strategy is useless. 
   
   So how to avoid this kind of failure?  We should consider the actual  
   running environment.  Generally speaking, this kind of all optical 
   transport networks is used as big transport backbone in the network.  
   And the topology of this backbone may be known beforehand.  So we 
   can use a good wavelength assignment and optical routing algorithm 
   to pre- compute all the lightpaths and distribute this path infor-
   mation to  all the edge nodes.  And when the edge nodes want to setup 
   new light- path, they will simply pickup a right pre-comupted path to  
   follow from the local database.  So there will be no resource     


Wang Hui et. al.    Internet-Draft February 2002                      4

 draft-hwang-gmpls-signaling-parallel-00.txt              February 2002


   allocation failures if the path computation algorithm is good enough. 
   In fact, this is a famous problem known as 'routing and wavelength 
   assignment (RWA) problem', and there are already a lot of mature  
   algorithms to compute the path for a given network and by use of 
   these RWA alogrithms we can achieve every effective routing and 
   wavelength assignment[6]. 
   
   Because the source node will use a computed path to setup the light-
   path, we cannot use the traditional hop-by-hop routing scheme, 
   instead we must use explict routing.  So if the source node sends 
   out a message containing the PRAO object,  it must include a Explict 
   Routing Object (ERO), too.
      

8. Conclusion and further discussion 

   This draft presented a basic idea of applying parallel resouce  
   allocation scheme to lightpath establishing.  And a new object, 
   known as 'Parallel Resource Allocation style Object'(PRAO), is 
   suggested to add to the GMPLS signalling sets ( RSVP-TE or CR-LDP).
   
   But the specific format of this PRAO object and its interaction 
   within the optical nodes are not included in this draft.  This work 
   is not done currently, and still needs further discussion. 
   

9. References

   1. Nasir Ghani,Sudhir Dixit, Ti-Shiang Wang: "On IP-over-DWDM 
      Integration", IEEECommunication Magazine, March 2000 
   
   2. Eric Mannie, et. al. : "Generalized Multi-Protocol Label Switching  
      (GMPLS) Architecture", draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-architecture-00.txt, 
      Expiration date: May 2002, work in progress.
   
   3. O. Aboul-Magd, et. al. : "Automatic Switched Optical Network  
     (ASON) Architecture and Its Related Protocols", draft-ietf-ipo- 
     ason-01.txt,June 2002, work in progress.
   
   4. Peter Ashwood-Smith, et. al : "GMPLS Generalized MPLS Signaling -  
      RSVP-TE Extensions", draft-ietf-mpls-generalized-rsvp-te-06.txt, 
      Expiration Date: May 2002, work in progress.
   
   5. Peter Ashwood-Smith, et. al: "GMPLS Generalized MPLS Signaling - 
      CR-LDP Extensions", draft-ietf-mpls-generalized-cr-ldp-05.txt, 
      Expiration Date: May 2002, work in progress.
        
   6. H. Zang, J.P. Jue and B. Mukherjeee, "A review of routing and 
      wavelength assignment approaches for wavelength-routed optical WDM 
      etworks,"  Optical Networks Magazine, January 2000.
      
   7. Bala Rajagopalan, et. al: "IP over Optical Networks: A Framework",  
      draft-ietf-ipo-framework-00.txt, Expires on: 1/13/2002,work in 
      progress. 


Wang Hui et. al.    Internet-Draft February 2002                      5

 draft-hwang-gmpls-signaling-parallel-00.txt              February 2002

      
10. Author's Addresses

    Wang Hui 
    Infonet Lab,EEIS 
    Univ.  of Sci. & Tech. of China 
    P.O. Box 4
    Hefei, Anhui, China, 230027
    Phone: +86-551-3603634
    Email: whui@mail.ustc.edu.cn
    WWW: http://mail.ustc.edu.cn/~whui
    

Full Copyright Statement 
    
   "Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002). All Rights Reserved. This 
   document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to others, and 
   derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it or assist in its 
   implementation may be prepared, copied, published and distributed, in whole 
   or in part, without restriction of any kind, provided that the above 
   copyright notice and this paragraph are included on all such copies and 
   derivative works. However, this document itself may not be modified in any 
   way, such as by removing the copyright notice or references to the Internet 
   Society or other Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of 
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for copyrights 
   defined in the Internet Standards process must be followed, or as required to 
   translate it into languages other than English. 
   
   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be 
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns. 
    
   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an 
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING 
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING 
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION 
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF 
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE."  


Wang Hui et. al.    Internet-Draft February 2002                      6