
IP-Optical Working Group                                Darren Freeland
                                                          Neil Harrison
                                                         Sergio Inglima
                                                            Keith James
                                                           Alan McGuire
                                                          Shehzad Mirza
                                                        Stewart Ritchie
                                                           Mel Robinson
                                                             Ali Salman
                                                           Peter Willis

Internet Draft                                                       BT
Document: draft-freeland-octrl-cons-01.txt                November 2000



       Considerations on the development of an Optical Control Plane


Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.  Internet-Drafts are working
   documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas,
   and its working groups. Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.





Abstract

   Work on extensions to IP control protocols for reuse in the control
   plane of optical transport networks has now been underway for around
   a year in the MPLS and IPO groups.  Recent discussions have however
   highlighted a lack of defined requirements that should be met by
   candidate protocols being considered for the optical control plane.
   Indeed, there have been several requests for carriers to submit
   their requirements.  This draft provides one view of some (but by no
   means all) of these requirements.  A protocol independent approach
   is taken, and the authors recommend that the design of any
   particular facet of an optical control plane should take into
   account the considerations made in this document.



Freeland et al                                                       1
    Considerations on the Development of an Optical Control Plane
                            November 2000



   CONTENTS

   1. INTRODUCTION
   2. CURRENT STANDARDS WORK
      2.1 Nature of the OTN User Plane
   3. TYPES OF CONNECTION
   4. CARRIER OPERATING MODELS
   5. OPTICAL CONTROL REQUIREMENTS
      5.1 Addressing
      5.2 Signalling
      5.3 Routing
      5.4 Other Issues
   6. CONCLUSIONS
   7. SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS
   8. REFERENCES
   9. Author's Contact Details



1. INTRODUCTION

   This draft gives consideration to some of the requirements that must
   be met by an optical control plane for various operating models.  A
   brief summary of current standards activities with respect to
   optical control is also given, including a discussion on the nature
   of the optical layer user plane.  A protocol independent approach is
   taken throughout the document, and the authors recommend that any
   particular control plane facet being considered for an optical
   transport network should take into account the requirements defined
   in this document.



2. CURRENT STANDARDS WORK

   A framework for IP over optical networks has been considered in the
   IETF [1].  Work is also underway on the extension of existing
   protocols developed for the MPLS traffic engineering control plane
   for application to the design of an optical network control plane as
   discussed [2].  Specifically, this work is known as MPL(ambda)S or
   O-MPLS and is a subset of G-MPLS or Generalised MPLS - the extension
   of MPLS signalling to encompass a number of possible layer 1 network
   technologies [3].

   This implies extensions to CR-LDP and RSVP for signalling, OSPF and
   IS-IS for resource discovery and routing, and the use of IP
   addressing.  It has been assumed that IP control protocols will be
   suitable for the control plane of layer 1 networks, given that IP
   traffic volumes will dominate these networks.  The authors of this
   draft argue that this assumption has not yet been proved to be the
   right choice, given the nature of the optical transport network



Freeland et al                                                       2
    Considerations on the Development of an Optical Control Plane
                            November 2000


   (OTN) and the requirements of carriers.  Indeed there are counter
   marketing opinions and statistics which compel us to consider the
   existence of other client networks for a number of years to come.
   For example, some operators will use ATM to carry traffic from third
   generation mobile networks, and there is little, if any, slowing
   down of the demand for ATM and leased-line services.

   2.1 Nature of the OTN user-plane

   User plane connections are separable entities from the control plane
   in the OTN.  In particular, user plane and control plane traffic
   need not be congruently routed.  This is one distinguishing feature
   that does not apply to traditional IP connectionless (CNLS)
   networks.  More importantly however, the user-plane is transparent,
   connection-oriented (CO) and has no practical buffering.  In
   essence, the OTN user-plane is completely agnostic regarding the
   type of traffic it carries (indeed this is also true of other layer
   1 technologies such as SDH/SONET, which can support ATM, IP, PDH
   etc, encapsulated within fixed length frames).

   A key feature of a layer 1 user plane is its ability to accommodate
   large administrative bandwidth entities and have the flexibility to
   accommodate new client layer networks as they are introduced.  These
   client layer networks may or may not be customer application
   interfacing.

   Given the CO and client-agnostic nature of the OTN, one cannot
   logically draw the conclusion that a set of control-plane protocols
   which were originally developed to suit a CNLS environment are the
   'right choice' for the control plane of an OTN.  Indeed, the only
   valid justification for this is the re-use of an existing set of
   protocols, which can save development effort.  Based on this
   argument, one would then have to ask why other control plane
   protocols developed for a CO environment should not be used?

   We have not seen any evidence that such an analysis has been carried
   out.

   Aside from the IETF, work is underway on optical control issues in
   the ITU-T with the development of G.ason [4], and the OIF Carriers
   Group have recently produced a requirements capture for the optical
   UNI or User-Network Interface [5].  Both of these bodies are
   generally taking a protocol independent approach of requirements
   capture, with the goal of producing an architectural framework that
   any suitable control protocols should be able to meet.  As such,
   this work is a useful foundation for work in the IETF.



3. TYPES OF CONNECTION



Freeland et al                                                       3
    Considerations on the Development of an Optical Control Plane
                            November 2000


   The OTN must ultimately be able to support the following types of
   connections:

   A permanent optical channel set up by the network management system
   via network management protocols (requires access to a database
   model of the network topology.  This approach has traditionally been
   centralised, but need not be for the OTN).
   A soft permanent optical channel set up by the network management
   system, using network generated signalling and routing protocols to
   establish connections (this requires a defined NNI - note that these
   connections cannot be set up by a user, and in particular, do not
   require a UNI).
   A switched optical channel, which can be set up by the customer on
   demand using signalling and routing protocols (requires naming and
   addressing schemes and a UNI/NNI).

   The OTN may support one or more of the above types of connection at
   any given time in its evolution.  The types of connection required
   will initially be permanent optical channels, with a migration over
   time towards switched optical channels (although both may coexist).
   The intent is therefore to reuse features that are common to more
   than one type of connection - minimising the impact on existing
   networks and their operational procedures and support systems.



4. CARRIER OPERATING MODELS

   The development of a control plane will ultimately be set within the
   context of an operator's business model.  Four main operating models
   can be envisaged for an optical transport network.  These are:

   (a) ISP owning all of its own infrastructure (i.e including fibre
       and duct to the customer premises).
   (b) ISP leasing some or all of its capacity from a third party.
   (c) Carriers carrier providing layer 1 services.
   (d) Service provider offering multiple layer 1, 2 and 3 services
       over a common infrastructure.

   For some of these models the concept of a unified, single control
   plane may seem attractive (especially for option (a)).  However, it
   is unlikely that just one of these models will apply to any
   operator, and the model that is appropriate will change depending on
   the application.

   It should also be noted that very few, if any, ISP's own all of
   their own infrastructure - most have to lease.  Further, unless they
   lease they will have a very restricted market, since no operator has
   total global coverage 'to the duct'.  Furthermore, as one considers
   the SME/mass-markets then peering across NNI's with other operators
   will be the normal mode of working, and NOT the exception.



Freeland et al                                                       4
    Considerations on the Development of an Optical Control Plane
                            November 2000


   One aspect of concern when inter-working is the type of information
   that may be conveyed between operators.  Generally this will be
   restricted to requests for service.  This also suggests a clear
   distinction between types of NNI - for example an NNI between
   operators, and an NNI within a particular operator's administrative
   domain.

   A carrier's carrier at layer 1 only provides support for layer 1
   services and its topology/resource is invisible to users of the
   network at higher layers.  In such a network all-optical cross-
   connects with optical drop and insert but no access to client layers
   are not visible to the client.

   Finally, the need for an optical network to support multiple types
   of client layer networks introduces a number of considerations.
   Different types of client layer networks may have completely
   different control planes.  If more than one client layer network is
   transported, it possible that each client will use a different
   addressing scheme.  De-coupling the client layer control plane from
   the OTN control plane ensures that different client addressing
   schemes can be supported.  Furthermore, this will ensure that future
   client layers need not be hampered by legacy technology.

   The development of a control plane for the optical network that is
   separate and distinct from any client layer(s) allows for the
   existence of all of these business models.  The authors therefore
   recommend that the optical layer control plane should be independent
   of any particular client layer.

   Note that none of the above discussion places any restrictions on
   the particular protocols that may be used for the OTN control-plane
   implementation.  It merely suggests separate instances of client and
   server layer control planes, and as such does not preclude the re-
   use of existing protocols.



5. OPTICAL CONTROL REQUIREMENTS

   A control plane consists of four main facets:

   - an addressing scheme;
   - a signalling network that provides communication between entities
     requesting service and entities that provision those services;
   - a signalling protocol for the set-up, maintenance and tear-down of
     trails;
   - a routing process to handle topology/resource usage and route
     calculation (this does not necessarily imply that an automated
     routing protocol is the right approach in all cases however).


   5.1 Addressing



Freeland et al                                                       5
    Considerations on the Development of an Optical Control Plane
                            November 2000



   The number of trails per second that are set up in the OTN (indeed
   traffic volumes in general) is likely to be at least equivalent to
   what carriers currently have with SONET/SDH.  The optical control
   plane can therefore initially be expected to receive requests to set
   up hundreds of trails per day per domain, with the potential to
   scale to many more in the future.  The OTN control pane should
   therefore be designed to support in the region of tens of thousands
   of connection requests per day.  It follows that the OTN must have a
   scalable naming and addressing scheme, capable of meeting expected
   demand for new names and addresses over decades to come.

   The benefits of the above cannot be achieved unless lead
   times/provisioning for delivery of capacity are dramatically reduced
   however.  It is therefore essential that such a network provides
   tools for capacity management, utilisation, statistics on failed
   call attempts, plan and build facilities, providing ordering
   triggers, and dealing with long term localised congestion.

   A large proportion of carriers will require their OTN's to be multi-
   client environments.  This is evidenced through a number of carrier
   contributions to various standards forums.  The reasoning is that,
   despite the fact traffic forecasts for the next few years do indeed
   show IP traffic continuing to dominate networks worldwide, non-IP
   traffic will not be inconsequential and therefore cannot be ignored.

   One of the most important issues therefore relates to the addressing
   scheme used in the server OTN and the various client networks.
   Multiple client (e.g. ATM, PSTN, IP) layer addressing schemes must
   be supported, therefore server OTN layer addressing should be
   disjoint from any client layer addressing to ensure a true multi-
   client server network.

   This does not imply that the same type of addressing cannot be used
   in both client and optical layer control planes - it simply means
   that both schemes must be disjoint from one another.  This would
   also be in conformance to RFC 1958 [6], which mandates exactly the
   same principle by requiring that "the internet level protocol must
   be independent of the hardware medium and hardware addressing" and
   that "this approach allows the internet to .. decouple it's
   addressing mechanisms from the hardware".


   5.2 Signalling

   The design of a signalling network and its associated interfaces are
   important issues for the optical control plane.  The choice of
   channel and transmission media for the network must be appropriate
   to optical networks, and indeed any other layer 1 networks.  If
   signalling is always carried along the same physical link as the
   actual traffic, a failure in that physical link will usually take
   out the control plane as well as the user plane between the



Freeland et al                                                       6
    Considerations on the Development of an Optical Control Plane
                            November 2000


   particular nodes.  However, the signalling network does not have to
   have the same physical topology as the traffic network - and indeed
   a separate diverse topology has both functional advantages and can
   be made more reliable (as a function of its own topological design
   and its failure behaviour).  In general, the control plane network
   must always be more reliable than the user plane traffic network.

   Signalling can either be carried in a channel associated or common
   channel fashion.  Channel associated signalling is a very simple
   method used for early digital transmission systems, where a limited
   number of signalling bits were added to the frame structure (which
   also contained the associated traffic channel - i.e. the user-plane
   and the control-plane share a common routing).  This simplicity
   meant the technique could not be extended to signalling for advanced
   service features such as CLI, call waiting, etc (which are found in
   the PSTN/ISDN).

   On the other hand, it is desirable for common channel signalling to
   use message-based structures within a channel that is usually not
   congruently routed with the associated user-plane traffic.  Although
   slightly more complex to design, common channel signalling has
   proven to be easier to update and modify as new service requirements
   emerge.  Common channel signalling is therefore the universal choice
   for new systems.  Common channel, channel associated, or a
   combination of both should be used where appropriate in the OTN.

   Interfaces within a control plane fall into two categories - client
   to server (known as the User-Network Interface (UNI)) and server to
   server (known as the Network-Network Interface (NNI)).  There will
   be different flavours of UNI and NNI, however for the purpose of
   this section we will focus on the general requirements of the UNI
   and NNI.

   Common channel signalling is usually carried out-band, while channel
   associated signalling is not.  For an optical transmission system,
   in-band signalling would result in a network where every signalling
   node would have to examine all of the data passing through it in
   order to find any signalling destined for it.  This would be fine if
   every optical network element was opaque to the user plane (and this
   should be the case at a UNI), however there will be an increasing
   (over time) number of occasions where all-optical network elements
   (i.e. transparent to the user plane) are used within the OTN.
   Transparent optical nodes that cannot access in-band signalling
   information will therefore require an out-band data communications
   network (sometimes known as a dedicated optical supervisory
   channel).

   This certainly applies to nodes within the OTN (i.e. NNI's), however
   it will be possible to ensure that network elements at the ingress
   and egress points of the network are opaque to the user plane (i.e.
   perform optical-electronic-optical conversions, and can therefore



Freeland et al                                                       7
    Considerations on the Development of an Optical Control Plane
                            November 2000


   easily access in-band signalling).  Signalling for a UNI may
   therefore be out-band or in-band.

   Both UNIs and NNIs should be capable of supporting dynamic `dial up'
   wavelength requests.  For the UNI these requests will be client
   initiated (for example from an IP router, ATM switch, or a client
   layer network within the same network element), and for the NNI
   these requests will be OTN initiated (for example from another
   carriers' optical network element).  The requesting party must first
   specify the optical trail parameters required (e.g. protection
   level, bandwidth, availability).  It should be noted these service
   level parameters require further study.  The optical control
   interface should support CAC (Connection Admission Control).  CAC
   should include authentication and permissibility of the user, and
   verification of service level parameters.  It should also support
   billing systems as necessary, and provide a secure interface between
   the OTN and it's various clients.

   Every ingress node to the optical transport network should therefore
   support CAC functionality, and inform the requesting party of
   whether or not the circuit request has been successful.  In the
   event of an unsuccessful attempt, the requesting party should be
   informed of the particular reasons why the request was rejected
   (i.e. network busy, fault, etc).  Signalling shall be achieved using
   a message-based protocol rather than a bit-based protocol with
   framing (as in SONET/SDH), since this allows for simple extensions.
   The interfaces should support a number of typical signalling
   messages such as requests for the set-up of connections, requests
   for the removal of connections, accept or reject particular
   requests, query connection attributes, etc (though as noted above
   these service request parameters require further study).  It is
   important to note that any new service requests should not affect
   existing user plane traffic connections.

   All of the signalling requirements discussed in this section should
   be supported by a candidate signalling protocol and should be
   capable of being implemented in both a point-to-point fashion for
   simple client-server communications, and a point to multi-point
   fashion in order to support multicast client-server applications.


   5.3 Routing

   The OTN will consist of a number of administrative domains, owned by
   different carriers.  Here we must make a distinction over NNI's
   between different optical entities in different administrative
   domains, and NNI's between optical entities within an administrative
   domain.

   It should be noted that an automatic routing protocol may not always
   be needed.  For the purposes of this paper, we will however assume
   that an automatic routing protocol is to be used.



Freeland et al                                                       8
    Considerations on the Development of an Optical Control Plane
                            November 2000



   As well as the basic ability of route computation (e.g. finding the
   'shortest' or 'constrained shortest' path to a particular
   destination), dynamic routing protocols can have the additional
   functionality of resource discovery.  This has the advantages of
   allowing the control plane to react dynamically to changes in
   network state/loading, maintain up to date routing tables, and (in
   certain scenarios) give a particular node full visibility of network
   topology and available resource within it's domain.

   In contrast to higher layer networks, the OTN will consist of
   elements that will grow to the order of a thousand or more ports
   (either in the wavelength domain or as physical interfaces).  This
   implies a larger number of links between neighbouring network
   elements, and a greater number of adjacencies.  Routing and topology
   discovery protocols must therefore be able to scale in order to
   support such network elements.

   In the context of the OTN, resource discovery would only be
   supported at NNI's within a carrier's administrative domain.
   Carriers will not allow another carrier or private domain visibility
   of either topology or resource (and certainly not resource control).
   Therefore topology/resource discovery is unlikely to be supported
   between different administrative domains.  There may of course be
   instances where there is high degree of trust between carriers, but
   this would be a rare exception rather than the rule.  In this
   situation, the two parties may choose to use a standard NNI, or a
   specific 'friendly' and proprietary NNI (which is outside the scope
   of standardisation activities).

   As well as not being supported at an NNI between different
   administrative domains, topology/resource discovery is unlikely to
   find favour between an optical network element and a particular
   client of the OTN (unless the carrier owns ALL of its clients as
   well).  Along with the justification given in section 4.1 for
   disjoint addressing across client and server layers, this reinforces
   the requirement that the control plane for the optical layer should
   be independent of any particular client.


   5.4 Other issues

   The basic and first to be standardised service for the optical
   control plane should be a simple bi-directional point to point
   connection - with a fixed grade of service and fixed bandwidth.
   This service is the simplest to provision and initial development
   should therefore focus on it.  In the absence of
   protection/restoration mechanisms, once a connection is dropped it
   will only be re-established by means of a further connection
   attempt.  This may or may not be automated.



Freeland et al                                                       9
    Considerations on the Development of an Optical Control Plane
                            November 2000


   Resilience issues must also be considered.  The optical control
   plane will be required to handle error detection/correction, and
   flow control mechanisms for restricting the transmission of
   signalling packets where appropriate (in other words, the OTN
   control plane will need its own OAM).  Focus here should initially
   be restricted to the control plane, however there will be
   requirements to develop these mechanisms for the user plane.  As
   discussed previously, the network for the control plane need not be
   co-incident with that of the user plane.  Indeed this would improve
   resilience in the signalling network.  The optical control plane
   should in general be as robust and reliable as possible.  In the
   event of a signalling failure, the connection in the user plane must
   not be affected.

   The ability to change the topology of the client layer network both
   quickly and flexibly (i.e. client layer links = server layer trails)
   will bring a new dimension to traffic engineering (TE).  Perhaps
   even obviating much of the need for TE within a client layer
   network.  Topology distribution information must include sufficient
   parameters to enable traffic to be balanced across available links
   in the OTN (for example, percentage loading on the link).

   Finally, the optical control plane must be secure enough to ensure
   that the integrity of the OTN is not compromised, and that 'illegal'
   service requests are dealt with in the appropriate manner.  This
   should be implemented by an appropriate CAC function.



6. CONCLUSIONS

   In this paper we have covered some general requirements for the
   control plane of an OTN.  The following is a summarised list of
   protocol independent requirements that any candidate control plane
   for the OTN should be capable of supporting.  This list is by no
   means exhaustive, and as well as reserving the right to add to or
   modify these recommendations, the authors encourage both open
   discussion of them and suggested additions to the list.

   - The OTN must allow a multi-client environment.
   - The OTN layer control plane should be independent of any particular
     client layer control plane.
   - A naming and addressing scheme for the OTN control plane must be
     scalable for decades to come.
   - Addressing must be disjoint across client and optical layers.
   - The OTN control network must be as robust and reliable as possible.
   - Message based signalling should be used for OTN control.
   - 'Modify' signalling messages must be non-traffic affecting.
   - Signalling failures must be non-traffic affecting.
   - NNI's must use out-band signalling.
   - UNI's may use in-band or out-band signalling.
   - Desirable connection parameters should be specified by the client



Freeland et al                                                       10
    Considerations on the Development of an Optical Control Plane
                            November 2000


     at the UNI (e.g. protection level, availability, etc).  These
     require further study.
   - Ingress optical nodes must support CAC functionality.
   - CAC functionality should include user authentication &
     permissibility, billing, security, and verification of service
     level parameters.
   - Ingress optical nodes must inform the client of whether the
     connection request has been successful.
   - Ingress optical node should inform the client of the reason(s)
     behind an unsuccessful connection attempt.
   - Point to point and point to multi-point client dial-up should be
     supported across a UNI.
   - The optical control plane should handle error detection/correction
     and flow control (i.e have its own OAM).
   - OAM focus should initially be restricted to the OTN control plane
     (however there will be requirements to develop OAM for the OTN user
     plane).
   - Routing & topology discovery protocols must be able to scale to
     support optical network elements with the order of a thousand or
     more ports.
   - Resource/topology discovery should not be supported between
     administrative domains.
   - Resource/topology discovery should not be supported at an UNI (i.e.
     the client should not have direct visibility/control over the OTN
     resources).
   - Resource/topology discovery may be supported at an internal NNI
     (i.e. within an administrative domain).
   - Topology distribution parameters should support TE for the optical
     layer.
   - Simple bi-directional point to point connection should be the first
     service to be standardised (fixed bandwidth & fixed grade of
     service).
   - Control plane requirements should be supported regardless of
     whether optical network elements are transparent or opaque to the
     user plane.



7. SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS

   A key security consideration has been discussed in this draft
   regarding routing protocols with topology/resource discovery
   capabilities running at the boundaries of operator's administrative
   domains.  This would be unacceptable to the vast majority of
   operators.  To alleviate security issues, it has therefore been
   recommended that resource discovery must not be supported at the
   boundaries of administrative domains, and additionally that separate
   control planes are implemented for both the client layer and OTN
   server layer.  Future revisions of the document may consider other
   security issues.



Freeland et al                                                       11
    Considerations on the Development of an Optical Control Plane
                            November 2000



8. REFERENCES

   [1] IP over Optical Networks: A Framework, Bala Rajagopolan et al,
   Internet Draft, draft-many-ip-optical-framework-01.txt, Work in
   Progress, July 2000.

   [2] Multi-Protocol Lambda Switching: Combining MPLS Traffic
   Engineering Control With Optical Crossconnects, Dan Awduche
   et al, Internet Draft, draft-awduche-mpls-te-optical-02.txt, Work in
   Progress, July 2000.

   [3] Generalized MPLS: Signaling Functional Description, Peter
   Ashwood-Smith et al, Internet Draft, draft-ietf-mpls-generalized-
   signaling-01.txt, Work in Progress, November 2000.

   [4] Architecture for the Automatic Switched Optical Network (ASON),
   First draft of G.ason, ITU-T Study Group 13, Work in Progress, March
   2000.

   [5] Carrier Optical Services Framework and Associated Requirements
   for UNI, OIF Carrier Group, T1X1.5 liason document, Work in
   Progress, October 2000.

   [6] Architectural Principles of the Internet, RFC 1958, B.Carpenter,
   IAB, June 1996.



9. Author's Contact Details

   Darren Freeland
   BTexaCT
   Email: darren.freeland@bt.com

   Neil Harrison
   BT/Ignite
   Email: neil.2.harrison@bt.com

   Sergio Inglima
   BTexaCT
   Email: sergio.inglima@bt.com

   Keith James
   BTexaCT
   Email: keith.a.james@bt.com

   Alan McGuire
   BTexaCT
   Email: alan.mcguire@bt.com

   Shehzad Mirza



Freeland et al                                                       12
    Considerations on the Development of an Optical Control Plane
                            November 2000


   BTexaCT
   Email: shehzad.mirza@bt.com

   Stewart Ritchie
   BTexaCT
   Email: stewart.ritchie@bt.com

   Mel Robinson
   BT/Ignite
   Email: mel.robinson@bt.com

   Ali Salman
   BTexaCT
   Email: ali.salman@bt.com

   Peter Willis
   BT CTO
   Email: peter.j.willis@bt.com






































Freeland et al                                                       13
