


Network Working Group                                          E. Tacsik
Internet-Draft                                                     Nokia
Expires: March 10, 2004                               September 10, 2003


        PPP Authentication for deploying Mobile IPv6 in cdma2000
                draft-tacsik-mipv6pppauth-cdma2k-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at http://
   www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on March 10, 2004.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   Network access authentication is performed via various protocols. It
   is in most cases a function of the link layer protocol. Packet data
   network access authentication in cdma2000 networks is currently
   performed either by PPP or using Mobile IPv4). Support for Mobile
   IPv6 is planned for Revision D of "cdma2000 Wireless IP Network
   Standard [1]. This document proposes that the access authentication
   for Mobile IPv6 service in cdma2000 networks be performed using PPP.









Tacsik                   Expires March 10, 2004                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft             PPP Auth in cdma2k             September 2003


Table of Contents

   1. Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   2. Authentication in cdma2000 networks  . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   3. Deploying Mobile IPv6 in cdma2000  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   4. Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
      Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
      References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   A. Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
      Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . .  10









































Tacsik                   Expires March 10, 2004                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft             PPP Auth in cdma2k             September 2003


1. Introduction

   cdma2000 networks deployed today offer packet data services that are
   classified as:

   o  Simple IPv4

   o  Simple IPv6

   o  Mobile IPv4

   Simple IPv4 and Simple IPv6 service is similar to dial up network
   service offered by most ISPs. Mobile IPv4 service enables IP mobility
   and is based on RFC2002 [2] defined by the Mobile IP working group.
   Network access authentication for these services is performed by the
   Packet Data Serving Node (PDSN) which is the PPP termination
   end-point from the client.

   Authentication for Simple IPv4 and Simple IPv6 is based on PPP
   authentication. Mobile IPv4 service authentication utilizes the
   Mobile IP registration request and response messages. This document
   proposes the use of PPP authentication when Mobile IPv6 service is
   incorporated into cdma2000 networks.




























Tacsik                   Expires March 10, 2004                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft             PPP Auth in cdma2k             September 2003


2. Authentication in cdma2000 networks

   cdma2000 networks can be simplistically viewed as a set of three
   primary entities. These include:

      The radio network, which consists of the Base Station (BS) and the
      Packet Control Function(PCF)

      The circuit switched core network which includes the MSCs (Mobile
      Switching Center), VLRs (Visited Location Register) and HLRs (Home
      Location Register).

      The packet data core network which consists of the PDSN, Home
      Agent (HA) and AAA infrastructure.

   Network access authentication in cdma2000 networks is be a two step
   process. The Mobile Node (MN) is first authenticated by the MSC/VLR .
   Authentication to the MSC/VLR is required for both access to the
   circuit switched network (voice service support) and access to the
   packet data network. The second step involves authentication to the
   packet data network via the PDSN and Radius based AAA infrastructure
   or Home Agent. This authentication allows the MN to access the packet
   data network.

   Currently PPP authentication (using PAP or CHAP) is used for
   authenticating users accessing Simple IP (v4 or v6) service. If the
   user is configured to use Mobile IPv4, authentication is not
   performed during PPP setup, but instead the PDSN (which includes the
   Foreign Agent (FA) functionality) relies on Mobile IP signaling,
   Registration Request and Response, for authenticating the MN. Mobile
   IPv4 service, authentication is based on a challenge response scheme
   defined in RFC3012 [3]. HMAC-MD5 is the algorithm used for computing
   the authenticator in the case of Mobile IPv4 service. In all cases
   the PDSN relies on a Radius backend AAA infrastructure for packet
   data network authentication.
















Tacsik                   Expires March 10, 2004                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft             PPP Auth in cdma2k             September 2003


3. Deploying Mobile IPv6 in cdma2000

   3GPP2 is targeting the inclusion of Mobile IPv6 service in Revision D
   of TIA835. Appling the access authentication mechanism used in MIPv4
   presents a problem  since Mobile IPv6 does not have the concept of a
   FA. Without FA functionality, the PDSN does not have a mechanism to
   request the Mobile IPv6 MN to authenticate itself (with the PDSN)
   prior to authentication with its HA . The PDSN can be considered as
   the access router in the home or visited network.

   Mobile IPv6 clients (MNs) have an IPsec based security association
   with their HA and this security association is the basis for
   authenticating a binding update sent by the MN to the HA. The MN
   relies on the access router only to obtain a Care-Of-Address (COA).
   As the COA, in the case of Mobile IPv6, is co-located, the role of
   the PDSN in offering IP mobility service is diminished. The fact that
   IPv6 mobility is enabled by the MN and the HA (not the PDSN) raises
   an issue for cdma2000 operators. Cdma2000 operators require the
   access network (radio network and the PDSN) to authenticate (and
   authorize) the MN (user) before accessing Mobile IPv6 service. Hence
   the MN should authenticate with the PDSN prior to initiating Mobile
   IPv6 signaling.

   PPP is the link-layer protocol for IP connectivity between the MN and
   the PDSN. In addition to CHAP and PAP, PPP supports other
   authentication schemes including EAP [4] through the
   authentication-protocol Configuration Option [5]. Hence cdma2000
   networks can utilize the capability built into PPP to carry EAP in
   order to authenticate a MN which is requesting Mobile IPv6 service.
   The implication of this is the following two step authentication
   within the packet data network:

   1.  The MN authenticates via PPP with the PDSN using an EAP scheme

   2.  The MN sends the binding update to its HA and authenticates
       itself via the IPsec SA that exists between the MN and HA

   This accomplishes the requirement of the access network
   authenticating the Mobile IPv6 capable node. A succesful
   authentication of the MN during PPP setup (using the AAA backend)
   allows the access network to create the necessary charging
   identifiers in the PDSN and subsequently allow Mobile IPv6 service.
   The MN which configures an IPv6 COA as part of the IPCP phase of PPP
   then sends the binding update to its HA.

   One added advantage of using the EAP architecture is its flexibility.
   The EAP protocol can support multiple authentication mechanisms
   without having to pre-negotiate a particular one. Although EAP Type 4



Tacsik                   Expires March 10, 2004                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft             PPP Auth in cdma2k             September 2003


   (MD5-Challange) is analogous to using Chap (as used with Simple IP
   service), stronger authentications can easily be specified in the
   future. EAP also provides the capability for key derivation.
















































Tacsik                   Expires March 10, 2004                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft             PPP Auth in cdma2k             September 2003


4. Security Considerations

   This draft proposes the use of PPP and EAP for authenticating a MN
   requesting Mobile IPv6 service with the PDSN in cdma2000 networks.
   PPP and EAP specifications have already analysed the various threats
   associated with authentication at the link layer.

   Mobile IPv6 authentication is based on an IPsec SA between the MN and
   HA and the Mobile IPv6 specification has done an extensive analysis
   of the threats associated with this.

   No new threats are introduced by this proposal.







































Tacsik                   Expires March 10, 2004                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft             PPP Auth in cdma2k             September 2003


References

   [1]  "cdma2000 Wireless IP Network Standard", TIA 835, 2003.

   [2]  Perkins, C., "IPv4 Mobility", RFC 2002, May 1995.

   [3]  Perkins, C., "Mobile IPv4 Challenge/Response Extensions", RFC
        3012, November 2000.

   [4]  Vollbrecht, J., "PPP Extensible Authentication Protocol (EAP)",
        RFC 2284, March 1998.

   [5]  Simpson, W., "The Point-to-Point Protocol", RFC 1661, July 1994.

   [6]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
        levels", RFC 2119, March 1997.


Author's Address

   Ernie Tacsik
   Nokia
   6000 Connection Drive
   Irving, TX  75039

   Phone: +1(972)894-4044
   EMail: ernie.tacsik@nokia.com
























Tacsik                   Expires March 10, 2004                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft             PPP Auth in cdma2k             September 2003


Appendix A. Acknowledgements

   The author gratefully acknowledges the contribution of Basavaraj
   Patil (Nokia)















































Tacsik                   Expires March 10, 2004                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft             PPP Auth in cdma2k             September 2003


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it
   has made any effort to identify any such rights. Information on the
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11. Copies of
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of
   licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to
   obtain a general license or permission for the use of such
   proprietary rights by implementors or users of this specification can
   be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice
   this standard. Please address the information to the IETF Executive
   Director.


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assignees.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION



Tacsik                   Expires March 10, 2004                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft             PPP Auth in cdma2k             September 2003


   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.











































Tacsik                   Expires March 10, 2004                [Page 11]


