


Network Working Group                                           N. Walsh
Internet-Draft                                           No organization
Expires: December 30, 2000                                     July 2000


                    A URN Namespace for Norman Walsh
                        draft-nwalsh-urn-ndw-01

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents
   at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 30, 2000.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2000). All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   This document describes a URN namespace that is engineered by Norman
   Walsh for naming personal resources such as XML Schema Namespaces,
   Schemas, Stylesheets, and other documents. 

1. Introduction

   For some years, the author has been producing internet resources:
   documents, schemas, stylesheets, etc. In addition to providing URLs
   for these resources, the author wishes to provide
   location-independent names. In the past, this has been accomplised
   with Formal Public Identifiers (FPIs). FPIs provided the author with
   a mechanism for assigning unique, permanent location-independent
   names to resources. 


Walsh                  Expires December 30, 2000                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft      A URN Namespace for Norman Walsh           July 2000


   The Extensible Markup Language (XML) requires that all resources
   provide a system identifier which must be a URI and XML Namespaces
   require authors to identify namespaces by URI alone (it is not
   possible to provide an FPI for an XML Namespace identifier). 

   Motivated by these observations, the author would like to assign
   URNs to some resources in order to retain unique, permanent
   location-independent names for them. 

   This namespace specification is for a formal namespace. 

2. Specification Template

   Namespace ID: 

       "ndw" requested.

   Registration Information: 

       Registration Version Number: 2
       Registration Date: 2000-08-25

   Declared registrant of the namespace: 

       Norman Walsh
       ndw@nwalsh.com

   Declaration of structure: 

       Opaque. The URNs assigned by the author will have internal
         structure, but the structure is not expected to be manifestly
         obvious to an outside observer.

   Relevant ancillary documentation: 

       None

   Identifier uniqueness considerations: 

       The versioned and distinct nature of the resources themselves
         makes duplication unlikely, but in the interest of providing
         concrete assurances, the owner agrees to maintain a table of
         assigned URNs and to absolutely avoid duplication by
         consulting that table before each new URN is published.

   Identifier persistence considerations: 

       To the best of the namespace owner's ability, the usability of
         URNs will last as long as the resources they identify are


Walsh                  Expires December 30, 2000                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft      A URN Namespace for Norman Walsh           July 2000


         reasonably useful.

   Process of identifier assignment: 

       Assignment is limited to the owner and those authorities that
         are specifically designated by the owner.

   Process of identifier resolution: 

       The owner will distribute catalogs (e.g., OASIS Open TR9401
         Catalogs) that map the subset of URNs considered useful to
         resource identifiers (e.g., URLs). In addition, the owner will
         provide an online resolution service based on RFC2483.
       The owner will authorize additional resolution services as
         appropriate.

   Rules for Lexical Equivalence: 

       URNs are lexically equivalent if they are lexically identical.

   Conformance with URN Syntax: 

       No special considerations.

   Validation mechanism: 

       None specified. The owner will publish the table of assigned
         URNs online.

   Scope: 

       Global


3. Examples

   The following examples are not guaranteed to be real. They are
   listed for pedagogical reasons only. 

      urn:ndw:stylesheets:xsl:docbook:1.15
      urn:ndw:doctypes:slides:1.25
      urn:ndw:xsl:documentation:1.0

4. Security Considerations

   There are no additional security considerations other than those
   normally associated with the use and resolution of URNs in general. 

References


Walsh                  Expires December 30, 2000                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft      A URN Namespace for Norman Walsh           July 2000


   [1]  Goldfarb, C. F., "ISO (International Organization for
        Standardization) ISO 8879:1986(E) Information Processing --
        Text and Office Systems -- Standard Generalized Markup Language
        (SGML)", 1986.

   [2]  W3C, XML WG, "Extensible Markup Language (XML) 1.0", February
        1998, <http://www.w3.org/TR/REC-xml>.

   [3]  W3C, Namespaces WG, "Namespaces in XML", January 1999,
        <http://www.w3.org/TR/REC-xml-names>.

   [4]  OASIS, Entity Mgmt. TC, "Entity Management: OASIS Technical
        Resolution 9401:1997 (Amendment 2 to TR 9401)", January 1994,
        <http://www.oasis-open.org/html/a401.htm>.

   [5]  Moats, R., "URN Syntax", RFC 2141, May 1997.

   [6]  Mealling, M. and R. Daniel, "URI Resolution Services Necessary
        for URN Resolution", RFC 2483, January 1999.


Author's Address

   Norman Walsh
   No organization

   EMail: ndw@nwalsh.com
   URI:   http://nwalsh.com/~ndw/























Walsh                  Expires December 30, 2000                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft      A URN Namespace for Norman Walsh           July 2000


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2000). All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph
   are included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Acknowledgement

   Funding for the RFC editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.



















Walsh                  Expires December 30, 2000                [Page 5]


