


Anti-Spam Research Group - IRTF                                 C. Lewis
Internet-Draft                                           Nortel Networks
Intended status: Best Current                                M. Sergeant
Practice                                                MessageLabs, Inc
Expires: September 25, 2008                               March 24, 2008


         Guidelines for Management of DNS Blacklists for Email
                   draft-irtf-asrg-bcp-blacklists-01

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 25, 2008.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

Abstract

   The rise of spam and other anti-social behavior on the Internet has
   led to the creation of shared blacklists and whitelists of IP
   addresses or domains.  This memo discusses guidelines for management
   of public DNS blacklists (DNSBLs).

   The document will seek BCP status.  Comments and discussion of this
   document should be addressed to the asrg@ietf.org mailing list.



Lewis & Sergeant       Expires September 25, 2008               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                  DNSBL BCP                     March 2008


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.1.  DNS-Based Reputation Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.2.  Guidance for DNSBL Users . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     1.3.  Requirements Language  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   2.  Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     2.1.  Transparency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
       2.1.1.  Listing/Delisting Criteria SHOULD Be Easily
               Available  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
       2.1.2.  Audit Trail SHOULD be maintained . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     2.2.  Listings and Removals  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
       2.2.1.  Listings SHOULD Be Temporary . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
       2.2.2.  A Direct Non-Public Way to Request Removal SHOULD
               Be Available . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
       2.2.3.  Removals SHOULD Be Prompt  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
       2.2.4.  SHOULD Have Similar Criteria for Listing and
               Delisting  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
       2.2.5.  Removals SHOULD Be Possible in Absence of the List
               Administrator  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   3.  Operational Issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     3.1.  DNSBL Query Root Domain SHOULD be a Subdomain  . . . . . .  8
     3.2.  DNSBLs SHOULD be Adequately Provisioned  . . . . . . . . .  9
     3.3.  DNSBLs SHOULD Provide Operational Flags  . . . . . . . . .  9
     3.4.  Shutdowns MUST Be Done in a Graceful Fashion . . . . . . .  9
     3.5.  Listing of Special and Reserved IP Addresses MUST be
           disclosed  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     3.6.  Use of Collateral Damage MUST Be Disclosed . . . . . . . . 11
     3.7.  Considerations for DNSBLs Listing Insecure Hosts . . . . . 11
       3.7.1.  MUST NOT scan without provocation  . . . . . . . . . . 11
       3.7.2.  Re-scan Periods SHOULD be Reasonable . . . . . . . . . 11
   4.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   5.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     5.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     5.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   Appendix A.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 14













Lewis & Sergeant       Expires September 25, 2008               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                  DNSBL BCP                     March 2008


1.  Introduction

1.1.  DNS-Based Reputation Systems

   Due to the rising amount of spam and other forms of network abuse on
   the Internet, many community members and companies began to create
   and maintain DNS-based reputation systems ("DNSBL") of IP addresses
   and domains identified as problem sources of email.  These lists also
   have been known as blocklists and blacklists.  These lists are used
   for filtering email.  DNSBLs are either public or private.  A public
   DNSBL makes its data available to any party seeking information about
   data on the list, but a private DNSBL is used solely by an
   organization for its own use and the data is not made available
   publicly.  There are also commercial DNSBLs.

   The first publicly available DNSBL using the Domain Name System (DNS)
   for distributing reputation data about email senders emerged in 1997,
   shortly after spam became a problem for network operators and email
   administrators.  This pioneer DNSBL focused on identifying known spam
   sources situated at static IP addresses.  Due to the broad adoption
   of this DNSBL, it had a devastating impact on static spam sources.
   Consequently, abusers found other methods for distributing their spam
   such as relaying messages through unsecured email servers or flawed
   formmail scripts on web pages.  Additional DNSBLs were developed by
   others in order to address these changing tactics, and today more
   than 700 DNSBLs are in operation.

   These DNSBLs vary widely in integrity, strategy, methodology and
   stability.  While listing criteria can sometimes be quite
   controversial, this document deliberately does not discuss the
   rightness or wrongness of any criteria.  We assert that DNSBL
   operators are free to choose whatever listing criteria they wish, as
   long as they're clear to their users what they are.  It is the
   responsibility of the DNSBL user to ensure that the listing criteria
   and other aspects of a DNSBL meets their needs.

   This document is also intended to provide guidance to DNSBL
   administrators so that they may be able to identify what features
   users would be interested in seeing as part of a high-quality, well-
   managed DNSBL, e.g., a clear listing and delisting policy to which
   the DNSBL administrator adheres strictly.  This document is intended
   to be normative rather than prescriptive: it seeks to characterize
   the features of a well-managed DNSBL rather than setting out rules
   for how DNSBLs should be operated.

   This document is not intended as a protocol specification of DNSBL
   queries.  See [DNSBL-EMAIL].




Lewis & Sergeant       Expires September 25, 2008               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                  DNSBL BCP                     March 2008


1.2.  Guidance for DNSBL Users

   When choosing to adopt a DNSBL, an administrator should keep the
   following questions in mind:

   1.   What is the intended use of the list?

   2.   Does the list have a web site?

   3.   Are the list's policies stated on the web site?

   4.   Are the policies stated clearly and understandably?

   5.   Does the web site function properly, e.g., hyperlinks?

   6.   Are web pages for removal requirements accessible and working
        properly?

   7.   How long has the list been in operation?

   8.   What are the demographics and quantity of the list's user base?
        In other words, do other sites like my own use this DNSBL?

   9.   Are comparative evaluations of the list available?

   10.  What do your peers or members of the Internet community say
        about the list?

   It is the responsibility of the system administrators who adopt one
   or more DNSBLs to evaluate, understand, and make a determination of
   which DNSBLs are appropriate for the sites they administer.  If you
   are going to allow a third party to make blocking decisions for you,
   you MUST understand the policies and practices of those third parties
   because responsibility for blocking decisions remain ultimately with
   you, the system administrator.  A DNSBL does not prevent anyone from
   receiving email or any other Internet service.  A DNSBL *user*
   prevents service by means of a DNSBL.

   DNSBL administrators are merely expressing an opinion through the
   publication of a DNSBL, and it is their absolute right to do so free
   of legal encumbrance, even in violation of this BCP.  However, it is
   through abiding by the guidelines set forth in this BCP that the
   administrators of a DNSBL may gain the trust of their users.

   These guidelines only address public DNSBLs and do not apply to
   private access DNSBLs.





Lewis & Sergeant       Expires September 25, 2008               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                  DNSBL BCP                     March 2008


1.3.  Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].


2.  Background

   The Anti Spam Research Group (ASRG) was chartered to address the spam
   problem.  The ASRG charter includes:

   "codification of best current practices in spam management"

   This note falls within that category by listing guidelines for
   management of public blacklists.  This document will seek BCP status.

   NOTE:  This document is a product of the Anti-Spam Research Group
      (ASRG) of the IRTF.  As per section 3 of RFC 2014 [RFC2014]IRTF
      groups do not require consensus to publish documents.  Therefore
      readers should be aware that this document does not necessarily
      represent the consensus of the entire ASRG.

   NOTE:  This document is intended to evolve, based on comments from
      the Anti-Spam Research Group (ASRG) mailing list.  It is certain
      that the current draft is incomplete and entirely possible that it
      is inaccurate.  Hence, comments are eagerly sought, preferably in
      the form of suggested text changes, and preferably on the ASRG
      mailing list, at <asrg@ietf.org>.

2.1.  Transparency

   A DNSBL SHOULD carefully describe the criteria which are the cause
   for adding, and the criteria for removing an IP address or domain
   name on the list.  Such listing and delisting criteria SHOULD be
   presented in a clear and readable manner easily accessible to the
   public on the DNSBL's web site.  A DNSBL MUST abide by its stated
   listing and delisting criteria.  Entries that do not meet the
   published criteria MUST NOT be added to the DNSBL.

   In other words, be direct and honest and clear about the listing
   criteria, and make certain that only entries meeting the published
   criteria are added to the list.  For example, some DNSBL operators
   have been known to include spite listings in the lists they
   administer.  There is nothing inherently wrong with this practice so
   long as it is clearly disclosed.  For example, a DNSBL described as
   listing open relays only MUST NOT include IP addresses for any other
   reason.  This transparency principle does not require DNSBL



Lewis & Sergeant       Expires September 25, 2008               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                  DNSBL BCP                     March 2008


   administrators to disclose the precise algorithms and data involved
   in a listing.

   Availability of documentation concerning a DNSBL SHOULD NOT be
   dependent on the continued operation of DNS for DNSBL queries.

   In other words, if the DNSBL documentation is at
   "http://dnsbl.example.com", the documentation for the web site should
   not become unavailable if the DNSBL query name servers are not
   available (or shutdown).  See Section 3.1.

2.1.1.  Listing/Delisting Criteria SHOULD Be Easily Available

   Listing and delisting criteria for DNSBLs SHOULD be easily available
   and SHOULD be located in a place clearly marked in its own section of
   the web site affiliated with the DNSBL.

   DNSBLs often publish their listing criteria along with additional
   technical information about using the blacklist.  This additional
   technical information can confuse end users, so a separate page or
   section on its own SHOULD be dedicated to detailing why a specific
   entry appears in the DNSBL.

2.1.2.  Audit Trail SHOULD be maintained

   A DNSBL SHOULD maintain an audit trail for all listings and it is
   RECOMMENDED that it is made publicly available in an easy to find
   location, preferably on the DNSBL's web site.  Please note that
   making audit trail data public does not entail revealing all
   information in the DNSBL administrator's possession relating to the
   listing; e.g., a DNSBL administrator MAY make the audit trail data
   selectively accessible in such a way as to not disclose information
   that might assist spammers, such as the contents of an email received
   by a DNSBL's spam trap.

2.2.  Listings and Removals

2.2.1.  Listings SHOULD Be Temporary

   With the exception of DNSBLs that are based on data that does not
   change, such as those that list the IP addresses associated with a
   specific country or geographic region, all listings SHOULD be
   temporary so that an entry will time out at some point in the future.
   In most cases it is appropriate to expire in days or a few weeks, and
   6 months is a sensible maximum (absent additional detections).

   Note that all listings being temporary does not mean that some
   listings will not remain after the initial timeout period.  If the



Lewis & Sergeant       Expires September 25, 2008               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                  DNSBL BCP                     March 2008


   DNSBL administrator determines that the conditions for listing still
   exists, then the timer for determining timeouts can be renewed.

2.2.2.  A Direct Non-Public Way to Request Removal SHOULD Be Available

   Discussions about whether a DNSBL should remove an entry MAY include
   activity in a public forum.  Methods for processing removal requests
   through private, direct exchanges, such as person-to-person email or
   a combination of web page requests and email responses, SHOULD be
   available.  As a minimum, the DNSBL SHOULD have a web page that has a
   removal request function (separate from the page describing listing
   criteria as per Section 2.1.1).  The DNSBL SHOULD also make available
   an email address to handle issues other than blocking issues.

   The DNSBL administrator MUST NOT use the list in question in such a
   way that removal requests would be blocked, and, moreover, SHOULD
   make unfiltered mailboxes available in order to allow affected users
   to submit their requests.  In some cases it is impractical not to
   filter email to role accounts due to the amount of spam those
   mailboxes receive.  If filtering should be necessary in such
   circumstances, filtering methods with virtually non- existent false
   positive rates SHOULD be chosen.

2.2.3.  Removals SHOULD Be Prompt

   Requests for removal SHOULD be honored without question.  Although
   this approach allows people to submit a request and have any listed
   IP address removed immediately, it does not prevent the DNSBL
   administrator from re-listing the IP address at a later time (for
   example: subject to seeing more spam, or re-checking the IP address
   security).  A re-listing MAY result in a longer timeout until the
   listing expires before it is eligible for removal.  Bounded
   exponentially extended periods is a good choice for listing timeout.

   Assuming the above is not possible and no listing reasons remain,
   removal at anyone's request SHOULD be prompt.  Removal requests
   SHOULD be acted upon within a period of 24 hours, and SHOULD be
   handled within three (3) days.

   Most DNSBLs can effectively use a "no questions asked" removal policy
   because by their very nature they will redetect or relist problems
   almost immediately.  They can mitigate more organized attempts to
   "game" the system by elementary checking and rate- limiting
   procedures, increasing lockout periods, rescans etc.  Furthermore, a
   few IP addresses more or less do not make a significant difference in
   the overall effectiveness of a DNSBL.  Moreover, a "no questions
   asked" removal policy provides the huge benefit of a swift reaction
   to incorrect listings.



Lewis & Sergeant       Expires September 25, 2008               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                  DNSBL BCP                     March 2008


   As an example, one popular DNSBL uses a "no questions asked" removal
   policy, but does perform rate-limiting and malicious removal
   detection.

   Another important consideration supporting a "no questions asked"
   self-removal policy is that it forestalls conflicts between DNSBL
   administrators and organizations whose IP addresses have been listed.
   Such a policy also can be an effective deterrent to legal problems.

2.2.4.  SHOULD Have Similar Criteria for Listing and Delisting

   The criteria for being removed from a DNSBL SHOULD bear a reasonable
   relationship to the factors which were the cause of the addition to
   the DNSBL.  If a listed entity fulfills all published requirements
   for removal from a DNSBL, then the DNSBL administrator SHOULD NOT
   impose any additional obstacles to remove a given entry from the
   DNSBL.  There SHOULD NOT be any extra rules for de-listing other than
   the ones listed in the published listing criteria.

   In addition, it is RECOMMENDED that all listings SHOULD be temporary
   as described in Section 2.2.1.  For temporary listings, it is not
   necessary to correct the causes of the listing in order to be removed
   from the DNSBL.

2.2.5.  Removals SHOULD Be Possible in Absence of the List Administrator

   If removals cannot be automated (e.g., via robot re-testing) then the
   DNSBL SHOULD have multiple administrators so that a removal request
   can be processed if the principal list administrator is on vacation
   or otherwise unavailable.


3.  Operational Issues

3.1.  DNSBL Query Root Domain SHOULD be a Subdomain

   By virtue of using domain names, a DNSBL is a hierarchy with a root
   anchored in the global Internet.  The DNSBL "query root" SHOULD be
   below the registered domain, so that the DNSBL information is not
   conflated with domain housekeeping information (e.g., name server or
   MX records) for the domain.  By using this approach, DNSBL queries
   would take the form of "<query>.dnsbl.example.com" rather than
   "<query>.example.com".  Further, this sub-tree should have its own
   name servers.  Thus, the DNSBL query root has its own zone file
   containing the DNSBL information, and the registered domain has its
   own name servers containing the information (MX records etc.) for the
   domain.  This approach facilitates clear delineation of function as
   well as orderly DNSBL shutdown because the DNSBL nameserver records



Lewis & Sergeant       Expires September 25, 2008               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                  DNSBL BCP                     March 2008


   can be specified separately from the domain's principal nameservers.

3.2.  DNSBLs SHOULD be Adequately Provisioned

   The DNSBL should have sufficient name server capacity to handle the
   expected loading, and have sufficient redundancy to handle normal
   outages.

   If the DNSBL offers zone transfers (in addition to or instead of
   standard DNSBL query mechanisms), it should be sufficiently
   provisioned to handle the expected loading.

   Note that some DNSBLs have been subject to distributed denial of
   service attacks.  Provisioning should take the likelyhood of this
   into account.

3.3.  DNSBLs SHOULD Provide Operational Flags

   Most DNSBLs follow a convention of entries for IPs in 127.0.0.0/8 to
   provide online indication of whether the DNSBL is operational.  Many
   DNSBLs arrange to have a query of 127.0.0.2 return an A record
   indicating that the IP is listed, and a query of 127.0.0.1 return no
   A record (NXDOMAIN).  When both of these indicators are present, this
   indicates that the DNSBL is functioning normally.  See [DNSBL-EMAIL].

   Operational flag usage and meaning SHOULD be published on the DNSBL's
   web site.

3.4.  Shutdowns MUST Be Done in a Graceful Fashion

   A number of DNSBLs have shut down operations in such a way as to list
   the entire Internet, sometimes without warning.  These were usually
   done this way to force DNSBL users (mail administrators) to adjust
   their DNSBL client configurations to omit the now inoperative DNSBL
   and to shed the DNS query load from the registered domain name
   servers.  Popular DNSBLs are in use by 10s of thousands of sites, are
   not well monitored, and often not compliant with DNSBL query
   conventions (e.g.: will treat any A record return as being "listed",
   instead of specific 127/8 A record returns) hence shutdowns can be
   quite destructive to all email flow if not done properly.

   The DNSBL operator MUST issue impending shutdown warnings (on the
   DNSBL web site, appropriate mailing lists, newsgroups, vendor
   newsletters etc), and indicate that the DNSBL is inoperative using
   the signalling given in Section 3.3.

   Only after these warnings have been issued for a significant period
   of time (RECOMMENDED: one or more months), should the DNSBL operator



Lewis & Sergeant       Expires September 25, 2008               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                  DNSBL BCP                     March 2008


   finally shutdown the DNSBL.

   The shutdown procedure should have the following properties:

   1.  MUST NOT list the entire Internet

   2.  SHOULD shed the DNSBL query load from the DNSBL name servers,
       permitting the registered domain name to continue being useable.

   3.  SHOULD, perhaps through increased delays, indicate to the Mail
       administrator that the DNSBL is no longer functional.

   4.  The base domain name SHOULD be registered indefinately, so as to
       ensure that the domain name doesn't represent a "booby trap" for
       future owners, and/or provide a means by which a new owner could
       list the entire Internet.

   One way of satisfying the points 1-3 above is to change the DNS name
   servers for the DNSBL to point at "TEST-NET" addresses (see RFC3330
   [RFC3330]).  The below suggested [BIND] declarations will cause a
   DNSBL query to query name servers in TEST-NET addresses, which will
   result in a significant delay, but not return any A records except in
   very unusual circumstances.

   BIND-equivalent DNS declarations for DNSBL shutdown.

   dnsbl.example.com.  604800  IN  NS  u1.example.com.
   dnsbl.example.com.  604800  IN  NS  u2.example.com.
   dnsbl.example.com.  604800  IN  NS  u3.example.com.

   ... [as many as you like]

   u1.example.com.     604800  IN  A   192.0.2.1
   u2.example.com.     604800  IN  A   192.0.2.2
   u3.example.com.     604800  IN  A   192.0.2.3

   ... [as many as you like]

   Assumes DNSBL is named "dnsbl.example.com".  Replace "example.com"
   and "dnsbl.example.com" as appropriate for the DNSBL

   NOTE:  Of course, the above shutdown procedure cannot be implemented
      if Section 3.1 is not followed.








Lewis & Sergeant       Expires September 25, 2008              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft                  DNSBL BCP                     March 2008


3.5.  Listing of Special and Reserved IP Addresses MUST be disclosed

   The DNSBL MAY list loopback, RFC 1918 [RFC1918], LINK-LOCAL class
   D/E, and any other permanently reserved or special-use IP addresses.
   Such use MUST be disclosed in the documentation related to the DNSBL.

   A functioning DNSBL MUST NOT list 127.0.0.1

3.6.  Use of Collateral Damage MUST Be Disclosed

   Some DNSBLs have adopted a policy of using "collateral damage" as an
   intentional element of the list's operation.  When collateral damage
   is applied, a DNSBL listing is expanded to include IP addresses under
   the control of a provider even though those IP addresses are not the
   source of abusive email.  The theory is that customers impacted by
   collateral damage will apply pressure to the provider to take action
   against the customer which is the cause of the original listing.

   Collateral damage as a DNSBL policy is highly controversial, and
   discussion of the appropriateness of this policy is beyond the scope
   of this document.  However, if a DNSBL has policies and practices
   that include the imposition of collateral damage, such policies MUST
   be disclosed.

3.7.  Considerations for DNSBLs Listing Insecure Hosts

   Some DNSBLs list IP addresses of hosts that are insecure in various
   ways (e.g. open relays, open proxies).  The following recommendations
   for such DNSBLs may not be relevant to other types of DNSBLs.

3.7.1.  MUST NOT scan without provocation

   DNSBLs MUST NOT automatically probe for insecure systems without
   provocation.  There is little agreement in the community as to
   whether or not such activity should be allowed, so this BCP errs on
   the side of caution.

   Therefore, scanning MUST be be targeted, rather than broad-based,
   where a given scan is motivated by a specific reason to have concern
   about the address being scanned.  Examples of such reasons include
   delivery to a spam trap address, receipt of a user complaint, or
   periodic testing of an address that is already listed.

3.7.2.  Re-scan Periods SHOULD be Reasonable

   If the DNSBL administrator re-scans a host in order to determine
   whether the listing SHOULD timeout or not, the re-scan period SHOULD
   be reasonable.  Automated scanning SHOULD NOT occur more often than



Lewis & Sergeant       Expires September 25, 2008              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft                  DNSBL BCP                     March 2008


   once every 24 hours.


4.  Security Considerations

   Any system manager that uses DNSBLs is entrusting part of his or her
   server management to the parties that run the lists.  A DNSBL manager
   that decided to list 0/0 (which has actually happened) could cause
   every server that uses the DNSBL to reject all mail.  Conversely, if
   a DNSBL manager removes all of the entries (which has also happened),
   systems that depend on the DNSBL will find that their filtering
   doesn't work as they want it to.

   If a registered domain used for a DNSBL is allowed to lapse, or the
   DNSBL user spells the DNSBL domain name incorrectly, the system
   manager's server management is now subject to an entirely different
   party than was intended.  Further, even if there is no malicious
   intent, some DNSBL query clients will interpret any A record being
   returned as being listed.

   Like all DNS-based mechanisms, DNSBLs are subject to various threats
   outlined in RFC 3833 [RFC3833]


5.  References

5.1.  Normative References

   [RFC1918]  Rekhter, Y., Moskowitz, R., Karrenberg, D., Groot, G., and
              E. Lear, "Address Allocation for Private Internets",
              BCP 5, RFC 1918, February 1996.

   [RFC2014]  Weinrib, A. and J. Postel, "IRTF Research Group Guidelines
              and Procedures", BCP 8, RFC 2014, October 1996.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC3330]  IANA, "Special-Use IPv4 Addresses", RFC 3330,
              September 2002.

   [RFC3833]  Atkins, D. and R. Austein, "Threat Analysis of the Domain
              Name System (DNS)", RFC 3833, August 2004.

5.2.  Informative References

   [BIND]     Internet Systems Corporation, "ISC BIND",
              <http://www.isc.org/index.pl?/sw/bind/index.php>.



Lewis & Sergeant       Expires September 25, 2008              [Page 12]

Internet-Draft                  DNSBL BCP                     March 2008


   [DNSBL-EMAIL]
              Levine, J., "DNS-based Blacklists and Whitelists for
              E-Mail", November 2005, <http://www.ietf.org/
              internet-drafts/draft-irtf-asrg-dnsbl-04.txt>.

   [RFC2026]  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision
              3", BCP 9, RFC 2026, October 1996.


Appendix A.  Acknowledgements

   We would like to thank John R. Levine, Alan Murphy and Dave Crocker
   for their insightful comments.

   We would also like to thank Yakov Shafranovich and Nick Nicholas for
   editing previous versions of this document.


Authors' Addresses

   Chris Lewis
   Nortel Networks

   Email: clewis@nortel.com


   Matt Sergeant
   MessageLabs, Inc

   Email: msergeant@messagelabs.com





















Lewis & Sergeant       Expires September 25, 2008              [Page 13]

Internet-Draft                  DNSBL BCP                     March 2008


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Lewis & Sergeant       Expires September 25, 2008              [Page 14]

