

CCAMP Working Group                                    Martin Vigoureux
Internet Draft                                          Emmanuel Dotaro
Expires: December 2002                            Dimitri Papadimitriou
                                                                Alcatel

                                                               Eiji Oki
                                                         Wataru Imajuku
                                                        Naoaki Yamanaka
                                                                    NTT

                                                              June 2002


   GMPLS Architectural Considerations for (Hybrid) Photonic Networks

            draft-vigoureux-ccamp-gmpls-architecture-hpn-00.txt


Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of
   six months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
   documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts
   as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in
   progress".

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

1. Abstract

   Optical networks could have been reduced to point-to-point links but
   technology evolution led the way to an evolution trend. The concept
   of optical transparency first took shape through the development of
   photonic switching fabrics and is now being reinforced by the
   continuous efforts produced to increase transmission distances.
   Optical networking obviously can not be left aside of such
   evolutions and so it is for the (in particular, GMPLS-based)
   protocols that control these photonic networks. This document
   highlights the enhancements that seem to be necessary for GMPLS to
   cover these emerging trends (transparency, hybrid nodes) and fulfil
   its role of a generalized control plane.




Vigoureux et al.            December 2002                           1

draft-vigoureux-ccamp-gmpls-architecture-hpn-00.txt          June 2002


2. Summary for Sub-IP Area

2.1. Summary

   See the Abstract above.

2.2. Where does it fit in the Picture of the Sub-IP Work

   This work fits the CCAMP box.

2.3. Why is it Targeted at this WG

   This draft is targeted at the CCAMP WG because it proposes a first
   input on common signaling and routing protocol considerations
   in multi-service environments.

2.4. Justification of Work

   The WG should consider this document as it provides an architectural
   framework for GMPLS-capable multi-service (with shared regeneration)
   environments, topic that attracts increasing attention over past
   years from the engineering community.

3. Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119.

4. Introduction

   Optical networks could have been reduced to point-to-point links but
   technology evolution led the way to an evolution trend.

   The concept of optical transparency first took shape through the
   development of photonic switching fabrics and is now being
   reinforced by the continuous efforts produced to increase
   transmission distances. Matching these evolutions, are the efforts
   made at the CCAMP WG for the definition a generalized control plane
   architecture to encompass the networking issues that arise in such
   networks.

   In parallel to the introduction of heterogeneous networks with
   limited conversion/regeneration functions, optical networks are
   going beyond the restrictive transport function they first proposed.
   Nodes are evolving to integrate multiple switching capabilities
   jointly controlled in order to propose enhanced inter-working,
   leading to resource utilization optimization. Such multi-level
   switching architectures can be composed, for example, of a photonic
   switch fabric topped by an opaque one offering regeneration function
   and switching at another granularity. These architectures will be
   referred in this document to as Hybrid Photonic Architectures (HPAs)


Vigoureux et al.            December 2002                           2

draft-vigoureux-ccamp-gmpls-architecture-hpn-00.txt          June 2002


   and the corresponding networks to as Hybrid Photonic Networks
   (HPNs).

   Optical networking obviously can not be left aside of such
   fundamental evolutions and so it is for the (in particular, GMPLS-
   based) protocols that control these photonic networks. Work ongoing
   at the IPO working group reflects the need to consider topological
   as well as physical constraints of photonic networks (see [IPO-
   IMP]).

   Unique aspect of hybrid photonic networks
   -----------------------------------------

   In hybrid photonic environments, constraints such as resource
   availability are of utmost importance where regeneration/conversion
   functions are limited and shared. In HPNs, resources are no longer
   symmetrical with respect to regeneration/conversion functions. This
   feature deeply impacts wavelength selection schemes (i.e. spectral
   path computation) as well as wavelength continuity that will be
   harder to achieve. This, in addition to the selection of
   regeneration points conditioned by resource availability and signal
   degradation.

   This document highlights the enhancements that seem to be necessary
   for GMPLS to cover these emerging trends (transparency, hybrid
   nodes) and fulfil its role of a generalized control plane.

   The first part of the document gives an overview of the impact of
   optical transparency issues on signaling and how can they be
   addressed. The second part is dedicated to routing considerations
   while the third focuses on signaling.

5. Different Approaches

   Establishing a connection throughout an optical network is achieved
   in two steps: determination of an explicit spatial route followed by
   a signaling phase selecting network resources (e.g. sequence of
   wavelengths) to be used by the LSP. In this document, these two
   phases are respectively referred to as spatial routing and spectral
   routing.

   The different schemes (see also [ONM-1]) listed below tend to
   address the issues arising from the introduction of transparency in
   optical networks. The impact of each scheme on the protocol
   architecture is detailed afterwards.

5.1. First Scheme

   The ingress node performs spatial and spectral routing decision.
   Due to link-state scalability issues (and if the spectral routing
   related information is not fed through the backward signaling flow),
   this scheme is not considered in the current context.


Vigoureux et al.            December 2002                           3

draft-vigoureux-ccamp-gmpls-architecture-hpn-00.txt          June 2002


5.2. Second Scheme

   The ingress node performs spatial routing, while the intermediate
   nodes perform spectral routing (hop-by-hop label selection is part
   of spectral routing).

   As currently specified, the GMPLS protocol suite definition reflects
   this scheme. Per [GMPLS-SIG], the Label Set selection works
   according to an AND scheme (see also [OKI-IPO]). Each hop restricts
   the Label Set sent to the next hop from the one received from the
   previous hop by performing an AND operation between the wavelength
   referred by the labels it includes with the one available on the
   ongoing interface. The constraint to perform this AND operation is
   up to the node local policy (even if one expects a consistent policy
   configuration throughout a given transparency domain).

   When wavelength conversion is performed at an intermediate node, a
   new Label Set is generated. The egress nodes selects one label in
   the Label Set received at the node. According to the selected label
   for the incoming link at the egress node, each label on the route is
   determined in a hop-by-hop manner.

5.3. Third Scheme

   The ingress node performs spatial routing while the egress node
   performs spectral routing. Here, intermediate nodes may be allowed
   performing some local processing.

   Spectral related information is fed through signaling downward to
   the egress node according to an ALL scheme (see also [OKI-IPO]). For
   this purpose, at each hop, a Label Set object/TLV may be appended to
   the global Label Set (more precisely to the list of Label Set
   objects defining an end-to-end significant Label Set). Additional
   processing may be performed at intermediate nodes depending on local
   constraints.

   At the end of the process and according to the collected spectral
   information, the egress node determines all the labels on the route
   considering the (individual) local constraints.

6. Routing Enhancements

   All the previously listed schemes share the common approach of
   performing spatial routing at ingress.

   The computation of the spatial route is done upon information
   flooded by an IGP such as OSPF or ISIS (see for OSPF [OSPF-TE], and
   [GMPLS-OSPF] and for IS-IS [ISIS-TE] and [GMPLS-ISIS]). Obviously,
   the more precise the information is, the more deterministic the
   result is. However, assumption is made that periodical flooding and
   link state information processing is not scalable if performed at
   component link level. This statement might also depend on the
   frequency of the update. Moreover, maintaining a routing adjacency

Vigoureux et al.            December 2002                           4

draft-vigoureux-ccamp-gmpls-architecture-hpn-00.txt          June 2002


   for each component link seems not realistic also for the same
   scalability reasons. Therefore, the use of TE Links with stochastic
   resource selection may be thus retained in this context.

   Several constraints have already been envisaged to be taken into
   account for constraint based spatial path computation. Bandwidth
   availability and switching capability are, for example, information
   available via TE Link Sub-TLVs (see [GMPLS-RTG]). However, it may be
   appropriate to complete this information in order to reflect
   enhanced link characteristics but also hybrid photonic network
   features.

6.1.1. Physical Constraints

   Due to the limited number of (shared) regeneration capability in
   HPNs, physical constraints have to be considered during spatial
   routing.

   Since physical impairments (see for instance [IPO-IMP]) may be
   relevant at the wavelength granularity, the latter requirement is
   confronted to the same scalability problem if this information is to
   be flooded by a link state routing protocol. A solution would be to
   appropriately aggregate physical impairment information at the TE
   Link level. This would enable providing a summarized information on
   signal degradation enabling TE Link selection during the LSP path
   computation.

   However, if the considered physical impairments are nearly static or
   have long variation period they may not be flooded and just made
   available for path selection by using another mechanism such as
   using the management plane. Otherwise means to aggregate physical
   impairments information and to disseminate this information will be
   needed.

6.1.2. Shared Resources Availability

   In photonic networks, taking into account physical impairments
   during spatial routing without any information about regeneration is
   of little relevance. It is considered that the regeneration
   capability information will be flooded by a link state routing
   protocol such as OSPF or ISIS.

   In HPNs, regeneration resources are distributed between optical
   nodes and thus limited in terms of number of sharable entities. The
   information relative to regeneration resources availability is thus
   of a statistical nature if given at the TE link level. Thus one
   expects to be capable to apply a stochastic approach for the
   regeneration resource availability (defining implicitly their
   status).

6.1.3. Waveband Switching



Vigoureux et al.            December 2002                           5

draft-vigoureux-ccamp-gmpls-architecture-hpn-00.txt          June 2002


   GMPLS protocol suite, as currently defined, supports waveband
   switching through inverse multiplexing or switching of individual
   (contiguous) wavelength components. It may be thus appropriate to
   integrate wavebands in the switching hierarchy in order to reflect,
   at the control plane level, waveband physical components
   (multiplexer/demultiplexer) availability at the data plane. Detailed
   extensions are described in [GMPLS-WBEXT].

   Depending on the (passive/active) components used in an optical
   network, wavelength spacing in the optical multiplex can vary. Some
   components like multiplexer/demultiplexer impose or depend on that
   spacing. It may be thus appropriate to detail the component
   capability with respect to spacing, or to indicate the number of
   supported wavelengths per waveband. Moreover, one may also expect in
   case of (standardized) waveband nominal frequency values some
   simplification during the corresponding wavelength assignment.

7. Signaling Considerations

   The previous section highlighted the considerations with respect to
   the routing protocols for enabling constraint based spatial routing
   in hybrid photonic environments.

   The current section focuses on the impact of HPNs on signaling
   architecture by detailing spectral routing schemes mentioned above.

7.1. Schemes Comparison

   In case of the second scheme (see Section 5.2.), the Label Set
   reduction works according to an AND scheme. Each hop restricts the
   label set sent to the next hop from the one received from the
   previous hop by performing an AND operation between the wavelengths
   referred by the Labels it includes the one available on the ongoing
   interface.

   This method generates a strong issue with regards to the probability
   of having the Label Set reduced to an empty set of labels before
   reaching the egress node (if each hop only proposes Labels referring
   to wavelengths that are neither converted nor regenerated).

   Note that using crank-back procedure can help reducing blocking
   probability. A node may initiate a crank-back procedure if all
   wavelengths referred in the Label Set coming from the upstream node
   are not usable on the outgoing links to the downstream node.
   - If conversion capabilities are available at this node and
   accessible by the wavelengths referred in the Label Set coming from
   the upstream node, the node may propose a new Label Set including
   Labels accessible through conversion.
   - If conversion functions are either not available in the node
   or/nor accessible by the wavelengths referred in the Label Set
   coming from the upstream node, the node may send a message
   (including the Acceptable Label Set) to the upstream nodes in order
   for the latter to propose new Labels (via conversion).

Vigoureux et al.            December 2002                           6

draft-vigoureux-ccamp-gmpls-architecture-hpn-00.txt          June 2002



   This message should contain an Acceptable Label Set (used as
   feedback) for upstream nodes to intelligently propose new Labels.

   Crank-back may reduce blocking probability but generates an issue
   concerning signaling messages that may go back to the source and
   forth many times before spectral path is found. Consequently, an
   additional improvement should target intermediate Label Set
   initialization point as (intermediate) destination of such messages
   in order to avoid that the source (located behind the initialization
   point) takes a contradictory decision based on the Acceptable Label
   Set information. Moreover, it can be demonstrated that Label Set
   utilization according to the AND scheme with crank-back feature is
   sub-optimal with regards to the minimization of the number of
   conversion/ regeneration points along the path. Nevertheless, in the
   same context, only a global knowledge of spectral resources
   availability along the spatial path enables optimal spectral path
   computation.

   It may be thus proposed to feed this information through signaling
   using Label Set combined with an ALL scheme (i.e. also referred to
   as ôexhaustive schemeö) and do spectral path computation at the
   egress node. This refers to third scheme. Note that the exhaustive
   property may be relaxed according to a local policy in order to
   reduce the amount of information exchange from the source to the
   destination (i.e. over the entire LSP).

   At each hop, the local Label Set object/TLV is appended to the Label
   Set (more precisely to the list of Label Let objects). Additional
   processing might be done at intermediate nodes depending on local
   constraints and policy. The egress node receives the spectral
   information collected along at least one spatial path. It can then
   compute, using this spectral information, the optimal combination or
   transparent sub-paths.

   The third scheme has an added value compared to the second one. It
   enables ensuring (a better) wavelength continuity while jointly
   addressing regeneration needs along the path, though it requires
   having the knowledge (at egress) of the ability a node to access
   regeneration for a given wavelength.

   The issue here is to make a clear differentiation between a Path
   message with resource reservation and a so-called probing message,
   defined as a message only probing for the resource availability. For
   that purpose an additional status of the request can be defined in
   the signaling protocol (for instance a specific Administrative
   status flag, other solutions may also be considered).

   So the following method can be considered:
       - Path/Label Request message(s), along several but at least one
       spatial explicit routes computed at ingress.



Vigoureux et al.            December 2002                           7

draft-vigoureux-ccamp-gmpls-architecture-hpn-00.txt          June 2002


       - Computation at the egress of the best combination of
       transparent sub-paths. (Wavelength Labels containing the
       necessary information for this purposes)
       - Resv/Label Mapping message through the selected path
       - PathErr/Notification messages to the non-selected path (if one
       considers that releasing the reserved resources must be
       performed)

   Note: Wavelength Selection and Reservation

   Downstream Wavelength Selection and Reservation can only be
   considered with Selective AND scheme. The ALL Scheme with forward
   (downstream) reservation is precluded since it would generate an
   overwhelming blocking probability, so this method can only be used
   with a backward (upstream) reservation. Nevertheless, Soft Selection
   (control plane only) can be considered either with a Selective AND
   and Exhaustive ALL scheme.

7.2. Wavelength Label Space and Values

   As specified in [GMPLS-SIG], the Wavelength label space may include
   either absolute values (channel identifiers (Channel ID) also
   referred to as wavelength identifiers) or relative values (channel
   spacing also referred to as inter-wavelength spacing). The latter is
   strictly confined to a per-port label space while the former could
   be defined as a local or a global (per node) label space.

   However, both wavelength selection schemes listed above require the
   knowledge of the mapping between collected Labels and the wavelength
   spectral-related information they locally refer. Therefore, in this
   context, it is proposed to define an association between the Label
   value and the wavelength spectral information.

   In the second scheme, upstream nodes receiving an Acceptable Label
   Set message, due to the crank-back procedure, must be able to
   understand which wavelengths these Labels refer to. In third scheme,
   the egress node must also know which wavelengths the Labels refer to
   in order to achieve the expected wavelength continuity.

   In order to decide where regeneration/conversion should be ideally
   performed because of signal degradation/blocking probabilities,
   knowledge of the capability of a wavelength to be regenerated is
   also important.

   The definition of the association between the Label value and the
   wavelength spectral information is achieved by specifying semantic-
   full and dedicated fields in the 32 bits Label. This specification
   simply corresponds to a Label value assignment rule and still
   ensures backward compatibility for nodes not able to understand the
   hereafter defined semantic.




Vigoureux et al.            December 2002                           8

draft-vigoureux-ccamp-gmpls-architecture-hpn-00.txt          June 2002


   This Label may for instance include the following information
   reflecting the spectral capabilities and attributes of the selected
   Label:

   R : set by the node proposing the Label. Informs whether the
   corresponding wavelength can be regenerated or not.

   C : set by the node proposing the Label. Informs whether the
   corresponding wavelength can be converted or not.

   A : set by the next downstream node receiving the proposed Labels.
   Informs whether wavelengths can have access to regeneration
   functionality in this node. This indication is primarily used by
   nodes presenting blocking architectures with respect to their
   amplification capabilities. For instance, amplification can be
   performed in the C-Band, L-Band, S-Band, etc.

   Wavelength Index : Identifies the wavelength in the Amplification
   Band by considering minimum spacing.

   Wavelength Identifier : Used to differentiate Labels (proposed for
   example in a Label Set) that would have same values of the fields
   listed above.

   Other definitions not detailed here may also be used for the same
   purpose. It should be also noticed that such label space definition
   does not in the absolute sense bring any backward compatibility
   issue with respect to [GMPLS-SIG]. In particular one assumes here
   that local node may still convert these values into an internal one
   no specific procedures should be defined to achieve backward
   compatibility.

7.3. Comparison Example

   The following example illustrates the different results that may be
   obtained, for a spectral path computation, when using the second and
   third schemes.

   Consider a spatial path composed of nine wavelength switching nodes
   with shared converters (both in the optical domain). In this
   example, only available resources are mentioned and are described as
   follows:
   - Li-T means that interface i is transparent (neither going through
   a converter converted nor a regenerator)
   - Lj-C means that interface j is converted

   Note that in case of nodes having conversion on all interfaces, the
   second scheme is still compatible.

   Available wavelengths on the outgoing links and thus not requiring
   conversion (even though going through a converter) are considered as
   transparent and corresponding Labels can thus be proposed.


Vigoureux et al.            December 2002                           9

draft-vigoureux-ccamp-gmpls-architecture-hpn-00.txt          June 2002


   Node 1 has available L2-C and L4-C
   Node 2 has available L4-T and L6-C
   Node 3 has available L4-T and L6-T
   Node 4 has available L4-T, L6-T and L7-C
   Node 5 has available L4-T, L6-T and L7-T
   Node 6 has available L6-T and L7-T
   Node 7 has available L6-T and L7-T
   Node 8 has available L6-T and L8-C
   Node 9 has available L6-T and L8-C

   For second scheme (with crank-back) wavelength selection will go as
   follows: Node 1 proposes the Labels L2 and L4 that Node 2 restricts
   to L4 (only transparent wavelength). Reaching Node 5, the Label L4
   is sent towards Node 6, which has free output interfaces but no
   available conversion function.

   Message is thus sent back upstream (maybe with an Acceptable Label
   Set, L6 and L7 in this case) until a node can perform conversion.
   Therefore, the feedback (i.e. the Acceptable Label Set) is used by
   Nodes having enough free resources to perform wavelength conversion.
   Here, the message arrives back to Node 4 which can perform
   conversion from L4 to L7. Node 4 sends Label Set L7 which is
   propagated down to Node 8. L7 is not available at Node 8 output but
   can be converted to L8 (Node 8 does crank-back on itself).

   The resulting spectral path can be represented as:

       L4      L4      L4      L7      L7      L7      L7      L8
   N1------N2------N3------N4------N5------N6------N7------N8------N9

   Using the third scheme, each node, proposing all of its free output
   Labels, the result would have been:

       L4      L6      L6      L6      L6      L6      L6      L6
   N1------N2------N3------N4------N5------N6------N7------N8------N9

   Therefore, the second scheme will result in using two conversion
   points (at Node 4 and Node 8) along the path, while third scheme
   will result in using only one (at Node 2).

8. Other issues

   This section details other GMPLS architectural issues in the scope
   of the hybrid photonic networks:

8.1 Bi-directional LSPs

   When using the second selection scheme, two mechanisms must be
   considered depending on the directionality of the LSP:

   1) Unidirectional LSP: (downstream) label set
   2) Bi-directional LSP: (downstream) label set and upstream label


Vigoureux et al.            December 2002                          10

draft-vigoureux-ccamp-gmpls-architecture-hpn-00.txt          June 2002


   The first improvement that may be provided is to extend the upstream
   label to an upstream label set, thus one would have the following
   symmetric approach when using an AND label selection scheme:

   1) Unidirectional selection scheme: (downstream) label set
   2) Bi-directional selection scheme: (downstream) label set and
   upstream label set

   The Resv/Label mapping message will then either include the
   downstream label in addition to the upstream label, in case of bi-
   directional LSP. Notice that here both labels are selected at the
   egress. Detailed extensions concerning the upstream label set are
   described in [OKI-UPSTREAM].

   The same applies in case of exhaustive label selection scheme. The
   ALL scheme when used for bi-directional path setup must take into
   account not only outgoing spectral routing information but also
   incoming spectral routing information and perform the selection at
   the destination based on a correlation basis for both upstream and
   downstream flows.

8.2 Prioritized Label Sets

   Signaling extensions may be also considered to ease forward-link
   label unavailability when the downstream label selection is
   restricted by the upstream node using the Label Set (see [GMPLS-
   SIG]). [OZU-FLAGS] allows relaxing backward-link label collision by
   introducing a Flagged Label Set object/TLV in order to prioritize
   the reservation of the labels included in the Label Set and enabling
   to decrease the forward- and backward-link blocking probability.

   In order to prioritize the label reservation, each set of labels is
   inserted by each hop along the path into the Flagged Label Set with
   a certain priority. Each node keeps track of each label by using a
   local timestamp indicating when the label has been reserved but not
   selected yet with respect to any other previous label set. A pool
   points to these labels and provides a gray area for the labels,
   which are subject to collision. It may be seen as an intermediate
   state between the labels belonging to the used pool of labels
   (reserved and selected) and the ones belonging to the available pool
   of labels (neither reserved nor selected).

   Other prioritization methods may be considered in future releases of
   this document.

8.3 Branching and K-(C)SPF

   TBD.

9. Security Considerations

   This memo does not introduce new security consideration from the
   ones already detailed in the GMPLS protocol suite.

Vigoureux et al.            December 2002                          11

draft-vigoureux-ccamp-gmpls-architecture-hpn-00.txt          June 2002



10. References

   [GMPLS-ARCH] E.Mannie (Editor) et al.,
                "Generalized Multi-Protocol Label Switching (GMPLS)
                Architecture", Work in progress,
                draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-architecture-02.txt

   [GMPLS-ISIS] Kompella, K., Rekhter, Y., Banerjee, A. et al.,
                "IS-IS Extensions in Support of Generalized MPLS", Work
                in progress,
                draft-ietf-isis-gmpls-extensions-12.txt

   [GMPLS-OSPF] Kompella, K., Rekhter, Y., Banerjee, A. et al.,
                "OSPF Extensions in Support of Generalized MPLS", Work
                in progress,
                draft-ietf-ccamp-ospf-gmpls-extensions-07.txt

   [GMPLS-SIG]  Ashwood-Smith, P. et al.,
                "Generalized MPLS-Signaling Functional Description",
                Work in progress,
                draft-ietf-mpls-generalized-signaling-08.txt

   [GMPLS-RTG]  Kompella, K., Rekhter, Y., Banerjee, A. et al.,
                "Routing Extensions in Support of Generalized MPLS",
                Work in progress,
                draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-routing-04.txt

   [GMPLS-WBEXT] Douville R. et al.,
                "Extensions to Generalized MPLS for Waveband
                Switching", Work in progress,
                draft-douville-ccamp-gmpls-waveband-extensions-01.txt

   [IPO-IMP]    A. Chiu et al.,
                "Impairments And Other Constraints On Optical Layer
                Routing", Work in progress,
                draft-ietf-ipo-impairments-02.txt.

   [ISIS-TE]    Smit, H., Li, T.,
                "IS-IS Extensions for Traffic Engineering", Work in
                progress,
                draft-ietf-isis-traffic-04.txt

   [OKI-IPO]    E. Oki et al.,
                ôRequirements of optical link-state information for
                traffic engineeringö, Work in progress,
                draft-oki-ipo-optlink-req-00.txt

   [OKI-UPSTREAM] E. Oki et al.,
                ôUpstream Label Set Support in RSVP-TE extensionsö,
                Work in progress,
                draft-oki-ccamp-upstream-labelset-00.txt


Vigoureux et al.            December 2002                          12

draft-vigoureux-ccamp-gmpls-architecture-hpn-00.txt          June 2002


   [OZU-FLAGS]  T.Ozugur et al.,
                ôLabel Set Priority and Flagging Operationsö, Work in
                progress,
                draft-ozugur-ccamp-gmpls-label-flag-00.txt

   [ONM-1]      ôA comparative study of distributed protocols for
                wavelength reservation in WDM Optical networks, Optical
                Network Magazine, January 2002.

   [OSPF-TE]    Katz, D., Yeung, D.,
                "Traffic Engineering Extensions to OSPF", Work in
                progress,
                draft-katz-yeung-ospf-traffic-06.txt


11. Acknowledgments

   We would like, here, to thank Richard Douville, Olivier Audouin,
   Emmanuel Desmet as well as Amaury Jourdan and Bernard Sales.

   The authors would like also to thank Kohei Shiomoto and Nobuaki
   Matsuura of NTT for their contribution to this memo.

12. Author's Addresses

   Eiji Oki (NTT)
   3-9-11 Midori
   Musashino, Tokyo 180-8585, Japan
   Email: oki.eiji@lab.ntt.co.jp

   Wataru Imajuku (NTT)
   1-1 Hikari-no-oka
   Yokosuka, Kanagawa 239-0847, Japan
   Email: imajuku@exa.onlab.ntt.co.jp

   Naoaki Yamanaka (NTT)
   3-9-11 Midori-cho
   Musashino-shi, Tokyo 180-8585, Japan
   Email: yamanaka.naoaki@lab.ntt.co.jp

   Emmanuel Dotaro (Alcatel)
   Route de Nozay, 91460 Marcoussis, France
   Phone: +33 1 6963-4723
   Email: emmanuel.dotaro@alcatel.fr

   Dimitri Papadimitriou (Alcatel)
   Francis Wellesplein 1, B-2018 Antwerpen, Belgium
   Phone: +32 3 240-8491
   Email: dimitri.papadimitriou@alcatel.be

   Martin Vigoureux (Alcatel)
   Route de Nozay, 91460 Marcoussis, France
   Phone: +33 1 6963-1852

Vigoureux et al.            December 2002                          13

draft-vigoureux-ccamp-gmpls-architecture-hpn-00.txt          June 2002


   Email: martin.vigoureux@alcatel.fr





















































Vigoureux et al.            December 2002                          14

draft-vigoureux-ccamp-gmpls-architecture-hpn-00.txt          June 2002


Full Copyright Statement


   "Copyright (C) The Internet Society (date). All Rights Reserved.
   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph
   are included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE."




























Vigoureux et al.            December 2002                          15
