



Network Working Group                                      H. Alvestrand
Internet-Draft                                             Cisco Systems
Expires: February 2, 2006                                   B. Carpenter
                                                                     IBM
                                                            R. Pelletier
                                                                    IASA
                                                             August 2005


                   Subpoenas in the IETF: Procedures
                    draft-alvestrand-subpoena-01.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on February 2, 2006.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).

Abstract

   This document describes the IETF's procedures for handling subpoenas
   served on the IETF.  This is an adaptation of the ad-hoc procedures
   that the IESG has applied for recent such events, taking account of
   the creation of the IETF Administrative Support Activity (IASA).




Alvestrand, et al.      Expires February 2, 2006                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft              Subpoena handling                August 2005


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.1.  Responsibility issues  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Legal basis for subpoena . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3.  Procedure  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   4.  Normal procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   5.  Strategies for Responding to Subpoenas . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   6.  Costs  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   7.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   8.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   Appendix A.  Change Log  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   9.  Normative references . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 10




































Alvestrand, et al.      Expires February 2, 2006                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft              Subpoena handling                August 2005


1.  Introduction

   Sometimes, people engaged in lawsuits write subpoena letters to the
   IETF requesting information.  The IETF has good reason to come up
   with that information when it happens.  This document describes how
   the IETF deals with providing that information.

   This procedure deals with subpoenas brought in US courts, because
   that is the only type the IETF so far has to deal with.  If the IETF
   ever has to deal with similar issues in other jurisdictions, this
   document will have to be updated.

   While this document is related to certain IETF process rules, it is
   not intended to change any of the underlying principles.  The authors
   would welcome comments on this document, which is expected to end up
   as an informational web page (and therefore doesn't contain all the
   required sections for RFCs).

1.1.  Responsibility issues

   o  This procedure was last used before the introduction of the
      IASA[4] and the IETF Trust.  The persons primarily responsible for
      action have been updated to include the IETF Adminstrative
      Director (IAD) rather than the IETF Secretariat.
   o  It is assumed that, once notified, the IETF's legal counsel is in
      charge of the process.


2.  Legal basis for subpoena

   Sometimes when companies are engaged in U.S. litigation relating to
   technologies that use or incorporate IETF standards, one or more of
   the litigants will wish to obtain information directly from the IETF.
   This is likely to occur when the litigant believes that some activity
   that occurred within the IETF process[1], or some intellectual
   property relating to an IETF standard[2][3], is directly related to
   the case.

   To obtain this information, the litigant will request that a state or
   federal court issue a "third party" subpoena to IETF seeking this
   information, either in the form of existing documents or witness
   testimony.  A "third party" subpoena should be distinguished from a
   "direct" subpoena, which would be issued if IETF were involved in
   litigation directly, as a party to the litigation rather than as a
   witness.  Subpoenas may also be issued by the government in matters
   in which the prosecutor or agency official believes that an IETF
   activity or standard may have relevance to a criminal prosecution or
   agency investigation.



Alvestrand, et al.      Expires February 2, 2006                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft              Subpoena handling                August 2005


   Subpoenas carry the authority of the court that issued them, and
   failure to comply with any type of subpoena could subject the IETF to
   charges of contempt of court and other civil and/or criminal
   penalties.  Thus, no matter what type of subpoena is issued to IETF,
   all should be addressed seriously and in accordance with the
   procedures outlined in this document.

   In order to be effective, a subpoena must be "served" on the party to
   which it is directed.  "Service of process" is a somewhat arcane
   legal doctrine that requires legal papers to be delivered in person
   by an authorized "process server" to an authorized representative of
   the subpoenaed party.  Because the IETF operates in a distributed,
   decentralized manner, the preferred recipient of all subpoenas is the
   IETF's current legal counsel, who would be authorized to accept
   service on behalf of the IETF.  If a subpoena intended for the IETF
   is received by any member of the IETF community, it should be
   provided as quickly as possible to the IETF legal counsel, currently:


                   Wilmer Cutler Pickering Hale and Dorr LLP
                   1899 Pennsylvania Ave. N.W.
                   Washington, D.C. 20006 USA
                   Fax: 202-663-6712
                   Attention:  Jorge L. Contreras
                   E-mail: jorge.contreras@wilmerhale.com


   This contact information should be visible on the IETF web pages (at
   the time of this writing, it is not), and also be provided to any
   person who inquires where an IETF subpoena should be issued.  A later
   version of this document may replace this address with the URL to the
   page.


3.  Procedure

   Dealing with a subpoena is complex, because you require multiple
   fields of knowledge - you need legal assistance, you need someone who
   knows the technology in question (so that you can figure out what the
   hell is being asked about), and you need someone who knows how the
   IETF works, and where information is likely to be found.

   The IETF lawyer (currently Jorge Contreras) is the proper recipient
   of the subpoena.  He will contact the IETF Chair to get the
   identification of the technology area.  They will together supervise
   the formation of a team.

   The procedure here creates a team for every subpoena, consisting of:



Alvestrand, et al.      Expires February 2, 2006                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft              Subpoena handling                August 2005


   o  A legal advisor, picked by the IETF lawyer
   o  A technology expert, picked by the Area Director (AD) responsible
      for the technology for which information is being sought.  It may
      be the AD.
   o  A procedure expert, picked by the IETF Chair (or, if the IETF
      Chair is somehow involved in the case, by the IAB Chair)
   o  The IAD, responsible for searches in data held by the IETF Trust
      or the Secretariat that are not publicly available
      *  The IAD will identify a Secretariat contact person, to do
         searches in IETF data held by the Secretariat that are not
         publicly available, but this person is not a primary member of
         the team.

   The legal advisor will be the leader of the team, and tell the other
   members when the material required to satisfy the subpoena is
   complete.

   The procedure expert will help identify records that are kept by the
   IETF, either publicly or privately, that may satisfy the material.
   This is likely to be an AD or ex-AD.  (This role has been filled in
   the past by Scott Bradner.)

   The technology expert will help identify from the identifiers in the
   subpoena what documents, working groups and mailing lists the
   information is likely to be found in.


4.  Normal procedure

   The section above identifies the actors, and what they are
   responsible for.  This section describes an example set of actions
   that are taken while dealing with the subpoena.

   o  The subpoena is sent to the IETF Lawyer by the Questioner.
   o  The IETF Lawyer informs the IETF Chair that it has arrived, and
      transfers a copy.
   o  The IETF Lawyer and the IETF Chair determine what the technology
      area is, the IETF Lawyer sends a request for extended time to the
      Questioner, and they start selecting the team - this includes
      informing the IAD that the subpoena has arrived.
   o  The Legal Advisor gathers the team for a teleconference to go
      through the material requested, and, with the assistance of the
      team, sorts it into 4 types: Available from public sources,
      available from the Secretariat or Trust archives, not easily
      accessible from the Secretariat or Trust archives, and not
      available from the Secretariat or Trust archives.





Alvestrand, et al.      Expires February 2, 2006                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft              Subpoena handling                August 2005


   o  The Legal Advisor informs the Questioner about the existence of
      the publicly available material, sends a list to the IAD asking
      him or her to produce the available archival material, questions
      whether requesting the not-easily-available material is
      appropriate, and denies the existence of the unavailable material.
   o  The list provided to the IAD will give the identity, the requested
      format and the deadline for the material requested.
   o  The Legal Advisor will negotiate extended deadlines and reductions
      in the requested information as appropriate.
   o  Once the full collection of non-public material is collected, the
      Legal Advisor will forward this to the Questioner.


5.  Strategies for Responding to Subpoenas

   The responsibility of the IETF in responding to a subpoena issued to
   it is limited to producing those paper or electronic documents in its
   possession, custody or control.  It is under no duty to make a
   request to others for documents not subject to IETF's control at the
   time it received the subpoena.  The strategy for responding to a
   subpoena will be developed by the team with the guidance of the legal
   advisor.

   Many subpoenas are initially drafted broadly and request information
   that may be unnecessary or beyond the scope of the litigation, or the
   production of which would cause undue hardship on IETF.  If this
   occurs (as it often does), the legal advisor will work with the team
   to narrow the scope of the request, either through informal
   discussions with the litigants' counsel or through service of formal
   objections and eventual motion practice in court.

   The legal advisor will also work with the team to identify which
   documents and types of documents should be provided in response to a
   subpoena.  If documents are generally available from public online
   sources, a pointer to the archive may be a sufficient response.  If,
   however, there is correspondence between IETF officers and counsel,
   or which has been prepared by IETF's counsel in anticipation of
   litigation, these documents may be covered by a formal legal
   privilege, and should not be disclosed.  Also, any documents that are
   eventually produced must be numbered and marked for confidentiality.
   Thus, it is critical that no documents or information be provided to
   any third party in response to a subpoena without the guidance and
   approval of the legal advisor.

   Subpoenas sometimes request that IETF make witnesses available for
   depositions or direct testimony in court.  Such requests may place a
   burden on the persons requested to appear, and the legal advisor will
   work with the team to determine whether and to what extent such



Alvestrand, et al.      Expires February 2, 2006                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft              Subpoena handling                August 2005


   requests should be opposed or limited.


6.  Costs

   This procedure assumes that the procedure and technology experts will
   volunteer their time as IETF participants, unless they are required
   to appear at witnesses and incur travel or other expenses, the
   reimbursement of which will be discussed with the IAD prior to being
   incurred.  The IAD will participate in this process as part of his or
   her duties.  The legal advisor will agree in advance with the IAD
   whether any charges will be required, or whether the work required
   can be handled on a pro-bono basis.  Any other costs must be approved
   by the IAD before they are incurred.


7.  Security Considerations

   The process described in this memo has no direct bearing on the
   security of the Internet.

   It is conceivable that someone might use the subpoena mechanism to
   try to get at material that would reveal private keys, passwords and
   other security-sensitive material, which could concievably compromise
   IETF operations.  Such subpoenas should be resisted on the ground
   that they are not reasonable.


8.  Acknowledgements

   Jorge Contreras and Barbara Fuller gave extensive comments on an
   earlier, internal version of this draft, and in particular Jorge
   Contreras contributed significant text to this memo.  All errors are,
   of course, the authors' responsibility.


Appendix A.  Change Log

   This section should be removed by the RFC Editor.

   Version -01: New co-authors, updated to allow for IASA and Trust.

9.  Normative references

   [1]  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3",
        BCP 9, RFC 2026, October 1996.

   [2]  Bradner, S., "IETF Rights in Contributions", BCP 78, RFC 3978,



Alvestrand, et al.      Expires February 2, 2006                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft              Subpoena handling                August 2005


        March 2005.

   [3]  Bradner, S., "Intellectual Property Rights in IETF Technology",
        BCP 79, RFC 3979, March 2005.

   [4]  Austein, R. and B. Wijnen, "Structure of the IETF Administrative
        Support Activity (IASA)", BCP 101, RFC 4071, April 2005.












































Alvestrand, et al.      Expires February 2, 2006                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft              Subpoena handling                August 2005


Authors' Addresses

   Harald Alvestrand
   Cisco Systems

   Email: harald@alvestrand.no


   Brian Carpenter
   IBM
   48 Avenue Giuseppe Motta
   1211 Geneva 2,
   Switzerland

   Email: brc@zurich.ibm.com


   Ray Pelletier
   IETF Administrative Support Activity
   1775 Wiehle Ave., Suite 102
   Reston, VA,   20190-5108
   USA

   Email: iad@ietf.org



























Alvestrand, et al.      Expires February 2, 2006                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft              Subpoena handling                August 2005


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Alvestrand, et al.      Expires February 2, 2006               [Page 10]


