 

                                  - 1 -



Network Working Group                                 Susan Hares
Request for Comments: DRAFT                          NSFNET/MERIT
Version 2                                              March 1993



                              IDRP for SIP


Status of this memo


   This memo  specifies the  adaptation of the ISO  Inter-Domain Routing
   Protocol  ([1]) that enables it to be used as an inter-domain routing
   protocol in the Internet that supports SIP/IPAE ([6], [8]). IDRP with
   this adaptation will be  called "IDRP for SIP" in this  document.
   Multiprotocol IDRP, that is, a single instance of IDRP that can
   simultaneously support Inter-Domain/Inter-Autonomous System routing
   for multiple network layer protocols (e.g. SIP, IP, CLNP) Internets
   is outside the scope of this document.

   This document is an Internet Draft. Internet Drafts are working
   documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its Areas,
   and its Working Groups. Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet Drafts.

   Internet Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months. Internet Drafts may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by
   other documents at any time. It is not appropriate to use Internet
   Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as a "working
   draft" or "work in progress."



1. Overview


   IDRP  ([1])  is   defined  as  the   protocol  for  exchange   of
   Inter-Domain  routing  information  between routers  to  support
   forwarding  of  ISO  8473 (Connectionless   Network  Layer Protocol
   (CLNP))[3] PDUs.

   The network reachability information exchanged via IDRP provides
   sufficient information to detect routing loops and enforce routing
   decisions based on performance preference and policy constraints as
   outlined in RFC 1104 [7]. In particular, IDRP exchanges routing
   information containing full domain-level paths and enforces routing
   policies based on configuration information.

   IDRP may be viewed as an extension of BGP-4 [12] that provides (among
   other things) much better scaling with respect to support for routing





Expiration Date September 1993                                  [Page 1]

                           - 2 -



   information aggregation and reduction based on CIDR, as well as
   stronger capabilities for policy based routeing (e.g. ability to
   impose control over transit traffic). IDRP also provides capability
   to carry reachability and forwarding information associated with
   multiple network layer protocols (e.g. SIP, IP, CLNP).

   This  document  contains the  appropriate adaptation of the IDRP
   protocol definition that enables it to be used as a protocol for the
   exchange of inter-domain system routing information among routers to
   support the forwarding of SIP packets across multiple domains.

   The adaptation is defined  is such a way that a Multiprotocol IDRP
   will be able to fully interoperate with IDRP for SIP.


2. Terminology


   This  document  assumes  that the   reader  is  familiar with the
   following documents:


       - SIP protocol specification [6], and

       - IDRP specification (IS 10747).

   A few definitions are in order to aid the reader:

      BIS - a Boundary Intermediate System (or border router)

      BISPDU - an IDRP message exchanged between a pair of BISs

      FIB - Forwarding Information Base (IP forwarding table)

      IS - Intermediate System (router)

      NET - Network Entity Title - an ISO network         address for a
      router

      NLRI - Network Layer Reachability Information (set of reachable
      destinations)

      NPDU - an SIP packet

      PDU - a packet

      SNPA - subnetwork point of attachment (MAC address)









Expiration Date September 1993                                  [Page 2]

                           - 3 -



3. Assumptions


   The IDRP for SIP protocol assumes that within a single connected
   internet network addresses are unique.  The uniqueness of SIP
   addresses is assumed to be provided by means outside of the protocol.
   The IDRP for SIP protocol cannot be guaranteed to work in an
   environment where network addresses within a single connected
   internet are not unique.

   All of the discussions in this document are based on the assumption
   that the Internet is a collection of arbitrarily connected domains.
   That is, the Internet will be modeled as a general graph whose nodes
   are domains and whose edges are connections between pairs of domains.

   The classic definition of a domain is a set of routers under a single
   technical administration, using an interior gateway protocol and
   common metrics to route packets within the domain and using an
   exterior gateway protocol to route packets to other domains. Since
   this classic definition was developed, it has become common for a
   single domain to use several interior gateway protocols and sometimes
   several sets of metrics within a domain. The use of the term domain
   here stresses the fact that, even when multiple IGPs and metrics are
   used, the administration of a domain appears to other domains to have
   a single coherent interior routing plan and presents a consistent
   picture of which networks are reachable through it.

   Domains are assumed to be administered by a single administrative
   entity, at least for the purposes of representation of routing
   information to systems outside of the domain.


4. The Adaptation Layer


   The Inter-Domain Routing Protocol (IDRP) or, more formally,

      "The Protocol for the Exchange of Inter-Domain Routeing
      information  among  Intermediate  Systems   to  support Forwarding
      of ISO 8473  PDUs (IDRP)"


   is the inter-domain routing protocol defined to support the
   forwarding of  Connectionless Network Layer Protocol (CLNP)  [ISO
   8473] packets that traverse multiple routing domains.

   While this protocol was developed within ISO, it make few, if any,
   ISO-specific assumptions. In particular, it does not require
   participating domains  to support any specific ISO Intra-Domain
   protocol, such as IS-IS (ISO IS 10589)[4], nor does it require
   participating routers to run ES-IS (ISO 9542) [5].  The only





Expiration Date September 1993                                  [Page 3]

                           - 4 -



   requirements imposed by the protocol on the participating routers is
   that the protocol information  can  be  exchanged between  them  over
   a connectionless network layer, which in the case of OSI is CLNP, and
   that the network  layer  connectivity  between  routers  within  a
   single routing  domain should be provided by means outside of IDRP
   (e.g., via some  intra-domain routing  protocol).   IDRP does not
   place any restrictions on the  structure of reachability information,
   as long  it can be  expressed as an arbitrary set of variable  length
   address prefixes.

   Since SIP can provide connectionless service between routers, and
   since reachable SIP destinations can be expressed as SIP address
   prefixes, IDRP can be  easily adapted to be an inter-domain routing
   protocol which can be used in the pure SIP Internet.

   Since the present definition of SIP carries no security or QoS
   parameters, the use of all the IDRP Distinguishing Attributes will
   not be defined in this document. Once security and/or ToS parameters
   will be defined by SIP, this document will be amended (in a backward
   compatible fashion) to describe how security and/or ToS shall be
   mapped into IDRP Distinguishing Attributes.


5. Implementor's Guide for SIP specific functions.


   In order to implement IDRP for SIP, only a subset of the features of
   the IDRP protocol must be implemented.


5.1 Features in IDRP which shall not be implemented


   The functions of the IDRP protocol which shall not  be implemented
   for IDRP for SIP are those functions which  deal with the following
   (all references are with respect to the IDRP document [1]):


       - Locally Defined QOS according to section 7.11.11

       - Security according to section 7.11.14

       - Priority according to section 7.11.16

       - Transit Delay according to section 7.11.8

       - Residual Error according to section 7.11.9

       - Expense according to section 7.11.10







Expiration Date September 1993                                  [Page 4]

                           - 5 -



       - Forwarding CLNP packets according to section 8

       - The interface to CLNP according to section 9

       - support of the Network Management information described in the
         IDRP GDMO according to section 11

   Therefore, with IDRP for SIP the following items dealing with CLNP in
   the  IDRP conformance clause (section 12.1 of [1]) shall not be
   implemented:


       - clause (d): Transit Delay, Residual Error, Expense, Locally
         Defined QOS, Security, Priority

       - clause (r)

       - clause (s)

       - clause (t)


5.1.1 PICS Table Information


   The PICS (Protocol Implementation Conformance Statement) provides a
   convenient and  concise mechanism  to define which function need and
   need not be implemented  for IDRP for SIP.  All references in this
   section  are with respect to [1].  All items with PICS  Status as
   Optional need not be implemented in IDRP for SIP.  Specifically, IDRP
   for SIP does  not require (and, indeed, does not need) support for
   the following items:

      A.4.3 Table 9:
         MGT

      A.4.8 (Table 14):
         PSRCRT, DATTS, MATCH

      A.4.11 (Table 17):
         TLDY, RERR, EXP, LQOSG, SECG, PRTY

      A.4.11 (Table 18):
         TLDYP, RERRP, EXPP, LQOSP, SECP, PRTYP

      A.4.11 (Table 19):
         TLDYR, ERRR, EXPR, LQOSR, SECR, PRTYR


   Implementation of all other items with Optional Status not listed in
   the previous paragraph is optional.





Expiration Date September 1993                                  [Page 5]

                           - 6 -



5.2 Features in IDRP which shall be implemented


   An implementation of IDRP for SIP  shall contain all mandatory
   features  of IDRP, except those  mentioned in Section 5.1 of this
   document. In addition, a BIS for IDRP for SIP shall implement:


       - an interface to the SIP protocol described in section 5.2.1 of
         this document

       - the ability to identify and extract SIP reachability and SIP
         forwarding information as described in section 5.2.2 of this
         document

       - SIP packet forwarding functions described in section 5.2.5 of
         this document

       - domain configuration information listed in section 5.2.4 of
         this document

       - the advertisement of SIP address information in NLRI as
         described in section 5.3 of this document



5.2.1 Exchanging IDRP information between SIP-only routers.


   IDRP  assumes pair-wise communication between participating BISs.
   IDRP information is carried  between a pair of  BISs in the form  of
   BISPDUs.  In the case of IDRP for SIP, these BISPDUs  are carried in
   the data field of SIP packets of protocol type TBD.

   If a domain doesn't support SIP internally (some of the routers
   within the domain are not SIP-capable), then SIP packets carrying
   BISPDU shall be carried accross the domain using IPAE [8].


5.2.2 Identifying SIP reachability and SIP forwarding information


   NLRI passed by the UPDATE PDU has an indication of the protocol
   family for the destinations depicted by the NLRI. The indication is
   encoded in the Proto_type, Proto_length and Protocol fields.  An
   implementation of IDRP for SIP shall have the following values in the
   NLRI:

      Proto_Type: 1 (ISO/IEC TR 9577 IPI/SPI)

      Proto_Length: 6





Expiration Date September 1993                                  [Page 6]

                           - 7 -



      Protocol: hexadecimal "80:00:00:00:86:DD"

      Addr_Length: variable (the value shall be between 2 and 64)

      Addr_Info: SIP address prefixes, encoded in binary

   An implementation of IDRP for SIP shall ignore any NLRI indicating a
   different protocol type.

   The NEXT_HOP attribute in the UPDATE PDU also has a Proto_type,
   Proto_Length and Protocol fields which indicate the protocol family
   for the address of the NEXT_HOP. An implementation of IDRP for SIP
   shall have the following values in the NEXT_HOP field:

      Proto_Type: 1 (ISO/IEC TR 9577 IPI/SPI)

      Proto_Length: 6

      Protocol: hexadecimal "80:00:00:00:86:DD"

      Length of NET: 8

      NET of Next Hop: a SIP address, encoded in binary

      SNPA information:  as appropriate for the subnetwork type in use

   An implementation of IDRP for SIP shall ignore any NEXT_HOP
   information indicating a different protocol type.

   Note that the Protocol component of the NLRI field and the NEXT_HOP
   field consists of the IPI/SPI indicating an IEEE 802.1a SNAP header
   followed by the IEEE 802.1a SNAP header itself.



5.2.3 Confederations of domains.


   IDRP supports the ability to group Routing Domains into a Routing
   Domain Confederation.  Likewise, IDRP for SIP supports the ability to
   group a collection of domains into a Confederation of domains.


5.2.4  Domain Configuration Information


   Correct Operation  of  IDRP described  in [1] assumes that a minimum
   amount of information  is  available to both the inter-domain  and
   intra-domain routing protocols. This information  is static in
   nature,  and is not expected to change frequently.  This document
   assumes that this information is supplied via IDRP MIB. While the





Expiration Date September 1993                                  [Page 7]

                           - 8 -



   following in phrased in terms of MIB, this document allows
   alternative mechanisms (e.g. configuration files) as well.

   The information required  by a BIS that implements the IDRP for SIP
   protocol is:

      a) Location and identity of adjacent Intra-Domain ISs (routers)

         The MIB  table INTRA-IS lists the SIP addresses of the routers
         to which the local BIS may deliver an inbound NPDU whose
         destination lies within  the BIS's routing domain. These
         routers listed in the  INTRA-IS  table support the intra-domain
         routing protocol of this  domain, and share at least one
         common subnet with the BIS.

         In  particular, if the local BIS participates in both  the
         inter-domain routing protocol (IDRP) and the intra-domain
         routing protocol, then the SIP address of the local BIS will be
         listed in the INTRA-IS table.

      b) Location and identity of BISs in the BIS's domain

         This information permits a BIS to identify all other BISs
         located within  its routing domain. This information is
         contained in the MIB  table INTERNAL-BIS, which contains  a set
         of SIP addresses which identify the BISs in the domain.

      c) Location and identity of BISs in adjacent domains:

         Each BIS needs  information to  identify the SIP  address of
         each BIS  located in  an  adjacent  RD  and  reachable  via  a
         single subnetwork hop.    This information is contained in  the
         IDRP MIB table EXTERNAL-BIS-NEIGHBORS, which is a table of SIP
         addresses.

      d) SIP network address information for all systems in the routing
      domain

         This  information  is used  by the BIS  to construct its
         network layer reachability information.  This information is
         contained in the  MIB  table  INTERNAL-SYSTEMS. The SIP network
         address information shall be expressed in terms of SIP address
         prefixes.

      e) LOCAL RDI

         This information  is contained in managed object LOCAL-RDI; it
         is the  RDI of the routing  domain in which the  BIS is
         located.  As specified  in section 7 of this document,  the RDI
         for an IDRP for SIP routing domain has  an NSAP Address format.
         This NSAP Address format is built out of a fixed "header" and





Expiration Date September 1993                                  [Page 8]

                           - 9 -



         the domain identifier of this routing domain.

      f) RIB-AttSet

         The  RIB-AttSet contains  information about  the QoS functions
         a BIS will  support.  As described in section 4, this shall be
         empty.

      g) RDC-Config:

         This    information   identifies   all    the   routing
         domain confederations (RDCs)  to which  the RD of the local BIS
         belongs, and  it describes  the  nesting relationships  that
         are  in force between them.  It is contained in the MIB table
         RDC-Config.

         Each RDC is identified by an RDI  which has the format
         described in section 7 of this document.

         Note that since a domain is not required to belong to a
         confederation this information is optional and needs to be
         present only at BISs of the domains that are part of one or
         more of RDCs.

      h) Local SIP addresses

         The LOCAL SIP MIB table contains a list of SIP addresses
         assigned to the interfaces of a BIS. This information is used
         to determine what interface should be used to forward outgoing
         NPDUs.


5.2.5 Forwarding of SIP packets


   This  section  is intended  to define  the  same function  for SIP
   packets as is defined for CLNP packets in the "Forwarding Process for
   CLNS"  (Section  8 in [1]).

   It is assumed that a BIS is capable of distinguishing between a FIB
   constructed by means of an intra-domain routing protocol and a FIB
   constructed by means of IDRP.

   After a BIS determines the packet's destination SIP address, the BIS
   shall proceed as follows:


      a) If the destination address depicts a system located within the
      domain of the receiving BIS, then the BIS shall forward the SIP
      packet to any of the ISs listed in the managed object INTRA-IS.
      That is, any further forwarding of the SIP packet is the





Expiration Date September 1993                                  [Page 9]

                           - 10 -



      responsibility of the intra-domain routing protocol; otherwise,

      b) the destination system is located in a different domain, and
      the local BIS shall perform the following actions:


         The incoming SIP packet shall be forwarded based on the FIB
         entry that has the longest SIP address prefix that matches the
         destination of the incoming SIP packet, as follows:

            1) If the  entry  in the  inter-domain FIB  that corresponds
            to the destination   address   of  an incoming SIP packet
            contains a NEXT_HOP that identifies an interface of a BIS
            such that the interface is attached to a subnet shared with
            the local BIS, then the SIP packet shall be forwarded
            directly to the  BIS indicated in the NEXT_HOP entry over
            that interface; otherwise,

            2) if the entry in the inter-domain FIB that corresponds to
            the destination address of the incoming  SIP packet contains
            a NEXT_HOP entry that identifies an interface of a BIS such
            that the interface is not attached to any of the subnets
            attached to the local BIS, then the local BIS has the
            following options:


               i) Encapsulate the SIP packet


                  The local BIS may encapsulate the SIP packet, using
                  IPAE with its own IP address as the source address and
                  the IP address of the next-hop BIS contained in the
                  NEXT_HOP entry as the destination address.


               ii) Use paths calculated by the intra-domain routing
               protocols


                  The local BIS may query the FIB constructed by the
                  intra-domain routing protocols to ascertain if that
                  FIB contains a route to the destination system. If
                  that is the case, and if the path constructed by the
                  intra-domain routing protocols delivers the SIP packet
                  to the appropriate next-hop BIS, then the SIP packet
                  may be forwarded using the FIB constructed by the
                  intra-domain routing protocols.









Expiration Date September 1993                                 [Page 10]

                           - 11 -



   ITEM       Questions/Features             Refer. Status Support

   ----------------------------------------------------------------

   IP_EXTFWD  Does the BIS correctly forward 5.3    M      Yes___

              SIP packets with destinations

              outside its routing domain?

   IP_INTFWD  Does the BIS correctly forward 5.3    M      Yes___

              SIP packets with destinations

              inside its routing domain?
   ---------------------------------------------------------------

   Table 1: PICS Proforma for IDRP: SIP packet forwarding


   The   "ITEM" column  describes  the feature in the  SIP forwarding
   function  that the    IDRP implementation  is  to provide.    The
   "Question/Feature"   section seeks to describe the  feature.  The
   Reference  is the section in  this document that  describes  this
   feature.    The status  gives an  indication  of "M"  - Mandatory
   feature for an IDRP  implementation or  "O" -  optional feature.  The
   "Support"   column is  a column for the  implementor to check whether
   this   feature    is   available   in   a    particular
   implementation.)


5.3 Advertising NLRI information for SIP addresses


   The NLRI field in  an UPDATE PDU contains SIP address information
   about systems that reside within a given routing domain or whose SIP
   address space is under the control of the administrator of the
   routing domain. It should not be used to convey information about
   the operational status of these  systems. The information in the
   NLRI field  is intended to  convey static  administrative information
   rather than dynamic transient information; for example, it is not
   necessary to report that a given system has changed from offline to
   online.

   End systems  (hosts) and Intermediate systems  (routers) within a RD
   using IDRP may  use any SIP  address that is  valid within  the SIP
   context.   Within the NLRI, the address information for a set of SIP
   addresses may  be represented by a SIP prefix.  A SIP prefix is the
   sequence of  bits in a  8 byte SIP address which are common between a
   set of SIP addresses.






Expiration Date September 1993                                 [Page 11]

                           - 12 -



   For example, the addresses   4005:0000:0000:0000 through
   4005:FFFF:FFFF:FFFF have the  first 16 bits of the address
   information in common.   These 16  bits of  the SIP  address may be
   called a SIP prefix   which represents the set of SIP addresses
   4005:0000:0000:0000 through 4005:FFFF:FFFF:FFFF.

   A SIP prefix must contain a contiguous set of bits starting at the
   most significant bit, but the bits may cover any  part of the 8 byte
   SIP address. The  following guidelines for inclusion of SIP address
   prefixes in the NLRI field of the UPDATE PDUs  originated within aa
   routing domain will provide efficient use of this protocol:

      a) Only SIP prefixes representing SIP addresses that are within
      the control of the  Administrator  of a  given routing domain  may
      be  reported in  the NLRI  field for a RD.  These SIP prefixes can
      represent SIP addresses for systems which are:

         - online,

         - offline, or

         - allocated to the network, but not yet allocated to a machine.


      b) SIP prefixes representing SIP addresses outside of the RD
      administrator's control shall not be included in the NLRI.

      c) For efficient use of the protocol, the WITHDRAW ROUTES field
      should not be used to report the NLRI of systems that are offline.
      This field should be used only to advertise SIP prefixes for SIP
      addresses  that are  no longer under the control of the
      administrator of the local routing domain, regardless  of whether
      the systems are online or offline.


   A conformant implementation is required to have the ability to
   specify when an aggregated route may be generated out of partial
   routing information. A BIS at the border of a domain (or group of
   domains) must be able to generate an aggregated route for a whole set
   of NLRIs over which is has administrative control, even when not all
   of them are reachable at the same time.




6  Determining the forwarding address (Next Hop)


   NEXT_HOP information associated with a particular route shall be
   derived from the NEXT_HOP attribute in the UPDATE BISPDU that carries
   the route. If that attribute is not present, it shall be derived from





Expiration Date September 1993                                 [Page 12]

                           - 13 -



   the source SIP address of the SIP packet that carries the UPDATE
   BISPDU containing the route.


7   Routing Domain Identifiers used for both SIP and OSI


   Routing  Domain  Identifiers (RDIs) are identifiers used  in  BISPDUs
   to uniquely identify individual routing domains and routing domain
   confederations.

   An RDI of a pure SIP domain should be constructed as a concatenation
   of a unique NSAP address prefix 47:00:05:c0:02  and the unique
   identifier taken out of the SIP address space.  While the unique
   identifier is just a number which identifies the routing domain, and
   need not bear any relationship to any reachable addresses within the
   domain, using the cluster identifier of one of the networks belonging
   to the routing domain may potentially offer some advantages.

   Alternatively an RDI of a SIP domain can be constructed by a
   concatenation of a unique NSAP address prefix assigned by a valid
   addressing authority and an appropriately assigned autonomous system
   number as follows:


      47:00:05:c0:01:aa:aa


   where 47:00:05:c0:01 is a unique NSAP prefix, and aa.aa is the
   autonomous system number.


8 Deployment Guidelines for IDRP for SIP


   The correct and efficient operation of the IDRP protocol requires
   that certain guidelines are used for deployment with ISO routing
   Domains. Some equivalent deployment guidelines for IDRP for SIP are
   required  within domains. These guidelines represent only the
   required deployment guidelines, and not details on the usage of IDRP
   for SIP in the Internet.



8.1 Minimum configuration of a domain


   A domain using IDRP for SIP must as a minimum contain:








Expiration Date September 1993                                 [Page 13]

                           - 14 -



       - one BIS, and

       - one BIS capable of delivering NPDUs to the intra-domain routing
         function if the domain contains hosts.


8.2 Multiple IDRP sessions between the same pair of routers


   A SIP router may have multiple SIP addresses,  one for each
   interface.  In contrast, an OSI Intermediate System has only one
   Network Entity Title (network address). An  OSI BIS thus may not have
   multiple IDRP sessions with another BIS, since the NET is unique and
   there is no mechanism for multiplexing sessions. However, a SIP
   router may potentially have multiple IDRP sessions with another
   router, since each BIS may have multiple SIP addresses, and one BIS
   may not be able to ascertain that those addresses correspond to the
   same BIS. Multiple IDRP sessions between SIP BISs may not be
   efficient, but they are not illegal, nor do they impact the
   robustness of the IDRP for SIP protocol; they will simply appear as
   multiple paths to the same neighboring domain. One possible way of
   avoiding multiple parallel IDRP sessions between a pair of BISs
   within a single domain is to bind all source addresses of outgoing
   BISPDUs to  the SIP address of a particular interface of the BIS.
   Likewise, for a pair of BISs located in adjacent domains, binding the
   source addresses to a single address of an interface attached to a
   common subnetwork allows for the elimination of multiple parallel
   sessions.

9. Required set of supported routing policies.


   Policies are provided to IDRP in the form of configuration
   information.  This information is not directly encoded in the
   protocol. Therefore, IDRP can provide support for very complex
   routing policies (an example of such policy is presented in Annex K
   of [1]). However, it is not required that all IDRP implementations
   support such policies.

   We are not attempting to standardize the routing policies that must
   be supported in every IDRP implementation; we strongly encourage all
   implementors to support the following set of routing policies:


     1.  IDRP implementations should allow a domain to control
         announcements of IDRP-learned routes to adjacent domains.
         Implementations should also support such control with at least
         the granularity of a single SIP address prefix.
         Implementations should also support such control with the
         granularity of a domain, where the domain may be either the
         domain that originated the route, or the domain that advertised





Expiration Date September 1993                                 [Page 14]

                           - 15 -



         the route to the local system (adjacent domain).  Care must be
         taken when a BIS selects a new route that can't be announced to
         a particular external peer, while the previously selected route
         was announced to that peer.  Specifically, the local system
         must explicitly indicate to the peer that the previous route is
         now infeasible.

     2.  IDRP implementations should allow a domain to prefer a
         particular path to a destination (when more than one path is
         available).  This function may be implemented by allowing
         system administrators to assign "weights" to domain
         identifiers, and by having the route selection process select a
         route with the lowest "weight" (where "weight" of a route is
         defined as a sum of "weights" of all domains in the RD_PATH
         path attribute associated with that route).

     3.  IDRP implementations should allow a domain to ignore routes
         with certain domains in the RD_PATH path attribute.  Such
         function can be implemented by using the technique outlined in
         [10], and by assigning "infinity" as "weights" for such
         domains. The route selection process must ignore routes that
         have "weight" equal to "infinity".


10   Security Considerations


   Security issues are not discussed in this document.


11. Acknowledgements


   We would like to acknowledge comments from Christian Huitema and
   Steve Deering.

   [ More to be added later ...]


13. References


   [1]   ISO/IEC IS 10747 - Information Processing Systems -
   Telecommunications and Information Exchange between Systems -
   Protocol for Exchange of Inter-domain Routeing Information among
   Intermediate Systems to Support Forwarding of ISO 8473 PDUs, 1993.

   [2]   RFC xxx - (Sue Hares) IDRP Document Family Tree

   [3]   ISO 8473 - Information  Processing Systems - Data
   Communications - Protocol for Providing the Connectionless-mode





Expiration Date September 1993                                 [Page 15]

                           - 16 -



   Network Service, 1988.

   [4]   ISO/IEC 10589 - Information Processing Systems -
   Telecommunications and Information Exchange between systems -
   Intermediate System to Intermediate System Intra-Domain routeing
   information exchange protocol for use in conjunction with the
   Protocol for providing the Connectionless-mode Network Service (ISO
   8473), 1992.

   [5]   ISO 9542  -  Information Processing Systems   -
   Telecommunications and information exchange between systems - End
   system to Intermediate system routeing exchange protocol for use in
   conjunction with the Protocol for providing the connectionless-mode
   network service (ISO 8473)

   [6]   Deering, S., "Simple Internet Protocol (SIP) Specification",
   Internet Draft November 1992

   [7] Braun, H-W., "Models of Policy Based Routing", RFC 1104,
   Merit/NSFNET, June 1989.

   [8] Crocker, D., Hinden, B., "IP Address Encapsulation (IPAE):  A
   Mechanism for Introducing a New IP", Internet Draft, November 1992

































Expiration Date September 1993                                 [Page 16]

