Network Working Group                                     G. Karagiannis
Internet-Draft                                                    W. Liu
Intended status: Informational                                   T. Tsou
Expires: March 25, 2015                              Huawei Technologies
                                                                  Q. Sun
                                                           China Telecom
                                                                D. Lopez
                                                              Telefonica
                                                               P. Yegani
                                                        Juniper Networks
                                                             JF Tremblay
                                                                Viagenie
                                                      September 25, 2014

   Problem Statement for Shared Unified Policy Automation (SUPA) 
           draft-karagiannis-supa-problem-statement-01

Abstract

   As modern network management applications grow in scale 
   and complexity, their demands and requirements on the supporting 
   communication network increase. 
   In particular, network operators are challenged to create a 
   simplified view of their network infrastructure and help service 
   developers on using and programming this simplified view rather than 
   manipulating individual devices. In this context, providing service 
   developers with a set of standard interfaces to configure and set 
   policies on the network is essential. 
   This document describes what has to be addressed in order to equip 
   service providers with  a vendor neutral standardized application-
   based interfaces used to expose and define policies and n abstract 
   view of network infrastructure. 


Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on March 25, 2015.




Karagiannis, et al.            Expires March 25, 2015       [Page 1] 

Internet-Draft          SUPA Problem Statement           September 2014


Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2014 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.



Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   3.  Use Cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   4.  Requirements/Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   5.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   6.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   7.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   8.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9


1.  Introduction

   Network operators are faced with networks of increasing size and 
   complexity while trying to improve their quality and availability, as 
   more and more services depend on them. Programmatic ways to configure 
   networks, often called software-defined, are considered by many 
   network operators in order to shift the balance in their favor.
 
   Currently, the separation of development and operation of network 
   technologies leads to slow deployment of network functions/devices 
   and poor user experiences. 

   Automating the way of exposing a view of the network to applications 
   may provide significant improvements in configuration agility, error 
   detection and uptime for operators. 

   However the real value behind central configuration schemes lies 
   within the possible simplification through abstract models  
   provided by such systems to applications and network zervices running 
   above them (on the so-called northbound side). Well-designed 
   simplified models are able to provide a wide range of granularity for 
   various applications and network services needs, from the lower-level 
   physical network to high-level application services.

Karagiannis, et al.            Expires March 25, 2015       [Page 2] 

Internet-Draft          SUPA Problem Statement           September 2014
   
   1.1 Motivation

   Although several organizations outside of the IETF have defined 
   various schemes for the configuration of network devices and specific 
   network controllers, none of them offer a vendor-neutral standardized 
   way for applications and network services to transmit their needs to 
   network controllers. The SUPA (Shared Unified Policy Automation) 
   working group will work on the definition of such as standardized 
   interface for applications and network services to communicate with 
   network controllers of all types. 

   Moreover, although some IETF working groups have started work 
   relating to the description of various topologies such as I2RS (L3and 
   routing topologies), ALTO (cost maps), SFC (service chain), none of 
   these groups aim none of these groups aim (1) at offering truly 
   generic topology models for the standard northbound interface, and 
   (2) that an application can communicate with network boxes, such as 
   network controllers, and NEs, developed by different vendors.

   SUPA will work on defining vendor-neutral standardized interfaces 
   based on the concept of network graph, an entity describing an 
   arbitrary topology of nodes and links at any level of granularity. 
   Such a network graph describes (1) topologies at different levels of 
   abstraction, (2) the relationships between the abstraction levels and 
   (3) applied service based policy, which are actions and constraints 
   applied on these topologies. SUPA may also define any mappings to any 
   other network topology data models defined within the IETF. 

   Examples of YANG based data models for network topologies are 
   provided in [ID.draft-contreras-supa-yang-network-topo].

   A YANG Data model for SUPA configuration is provided in 
   [ID.draft-zaalouk-supa-configuration-model].

   The document [ID.draft-pentikousis-supa-mapping] describes 
   guidelines for mapping configuration and policy into device-level 
   configuration.

   In particular, SUPA will focus on service specific models that allow 
   applications to request certain network services to be 
   created/deleted/modified. A network service can for example be a 
   virtual link between two endpoints that uses certain properties, 
   traffic engineering, implementation of IPv6 transition mechanism and 
   their enforcement to users.

   Each network service can be represented by a service based POLICY 

Karagiannis, et al.            Expires March 25, 2015       [Page 3] 

Internet-Draft          SUPA Problem Statement           September 2014

   model that can model a group of demands (i.e., actions and 
   constraints) that are being initiated by applications that impose 
   similar requirements on the communication network. The terms 
   "UNIFIED" and "SHARED" used in the SUPA abbreviation, relate to the 
   way of how the service policy model is generated, since it groups, 
   unifies and shares the similar requirements imposed by a bulk of 
   applications. SUPA will provide guidelines for mechanisms that can 
   dynamically and on an interoperable manner, AUTOMATICALLY map 
   services and policies defined on an abstract topology graph down to 
   more detailed network graphs and specific network management and 
   controlling policies.

   In this context, network services can be used to provide the required 
   configuration and application programming interfaces to such service 
   developers. Subsequently, a network service can use the service 
   based demands and possibly update its associated network service 
   attributes. 

   For each network service instance a network graph needs to be 
   generated and maintained up to date. 

   The up-to-date network graph needs to be communicated between 
   "Applications", see Figure 1, and the "Management and Control" 
   system. Applications" represent an entity that generates and 
   maintains network services and is administrated by a communication 
   service provider. The "Management and Control" represents a 
   controller that supports the management and control of a 
   communication network.
   The services and policies defined on an abstract topology 
   graph are automatically mapped down to more detailed network graphs 
   and specific network management and controlling policies.

   The main goal of SUPA is to provide service specific models that 
   allow applications to request network services to be 
   created/deleted/modified. This can be realized by:

     o) use YANG [RFC6020], [RFC6991] to model multiple topologies at 
        different levels of abstraction using a network graph, 

     o) use YANG to model the relationships between the abstraction 
        levels.
 
     o) transporting model instances using either NETCONF [RFC6241] or 
        RESTCONF [ID.draft-ietf-netconf-restconf].

   This document is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the 
   terminology. Section 3 provides a brief overview of the use cases 
   associated with SUPA. The requirements/objectives are provided in 
   Section 4. Section 5 provides the security considerations. The IANA 
   considerations are given in Section 6. Section 7 gives the 
   acknowledgements and Section 8 lists the used references.




Karagiannis, et al.            Expires March 25, 2015       [Page 4] 

Internet-Draft          SUPA Problem Statement           September 2014

      ---------------------------------------  
      |         Applications                |
      ---------------------------------------
                        |                       
                        |     <--------------    network service 
                        |                        YANG models /NETCONF       
                                                 northbound interface  
      --------------------------------------|                                         
      |                                     |                                         
      |          Controller                 |                                         
      |     (Management and Control)        | <---  mapping                           
      |                                     |       network services to 
      |                                     |       topology
      --------------------------------------
                 |       |        |           
                 |       |        |  <------------ device/feature 
                 |       |        |              specific YANG 
                 |       |        |              models / NETCONF 
                                                 southbound interface
                 NE1    NE2   NEn

          Figure 1: SUPA architecture

2.  Terminology

   Network graph: a graph that describes (1) topologies at different 
   levels of abstraction, (2) the relationships between the abstraction 
   levels and (3) applied service based policy, which are actions and 
   constraints applied on these topologies.

   Network Service: a service, that helps a communication service 
   provider to monitor, control, analyze and manage a communication 
   network. 

   Network topology model: describes the topology of a multi-layer   
   network.

   Network graph: entity describing an arbitrary topology of nodes and 
   links at any level of granularity. Such a network graph describes (1) 
   topologies at different levels of abstraction, (2) the relationships 
   between the abstraction levels and (3) applied service based policy, 
   which are actions and constraints applied on these topologies. 

   Network Element: a physical entity or a virtual entity that can be 
   locally managed and operated.


3.  Use Cases

   This section briefly describes the use cases that are associated with 
   different types of network services. The detailed description of 
   these use cases is provided in other Internet draft(s).


Karagiannis, et al.            Expires March 25, 2015       [Page 5] 

Internet-Draft          SUPA Problem Statement           September 2014


3.1 Distributed Data Center 

   A large-scale IDC (Inter Data Center) operator provides server 
   hosting, bandwidth, and value-added services to enterprises and ISPs,  
   and has more than 10 data centers and more than 1Tbs bandwidth in a 
   capital city. In current IDC network, traffic is routed by 
   configuring policy routes and adjusting routes prioritization to 
   choose an outgoing link. This type of static provisioning comes with 
   high costs and poor operability. Furthermore, the link bandwidth 
   resources in the data centers are not efficiently utilized.  

   Services usually do not have consistent bandwidth requirements at
   all times of a day, e.g. video ISP usually require more
   bandwidth at non-working hours but require less bandwidth at working
   hours.  Some customers have relative high QoS requirement for their
   services, e.g. IM (Instant Messaging).  Static bandwidth and QoS 
   provisioning for all the customers and services is not reasonable and 
   not a cost-effective solution.

   SUPA can be used to request the optimization of the traffic paths 
   dynamically and  have the ability to request the load balance between 
   data centers and links, and direct customer traffic via network 
   management policies (e.g., models, software programs routines) based 
   on customer grade and QoS requirements.  A detailed description of 
   this use case is provided in [ID.draft-cheng-supa-ddc-use-cases].

3.2 Mobile Networks

   GiLAN is another important application of network function 
   virtualization. In mobile core networks, it is preferable that QoS 
   provisioning and network function requirements are different for 
   subscribers with different profiles. In such scenarios, specialized 
   network services such as BSS/OSS can send application based demands 
   to a policy decision point, which further map these application based  
   demands to GiLAN specific policies, and realize 
   the required QoS and with appropriate network functions, for example, 
   for dynamic path reconfiguration.

   A detailed description of this use case is provided in 
   [ID.draft-huang-aponf-use-cases].

3.3 IPv6 transition 
 
   The IPv6 transition has been an ongoing process throughout the world
   due to the exhaustion of the IPv4 address space.  However, this
   transition leads to costly end-to-end network upgrades and poses new
   challenges of managing a large number of devices with a variety of
   transitioning protocols.  While IPv6 transition tools exist, there
   are still new challenges to be solved.  Operators may need various 
   types of IPv6 transition technologies depending on performance 
   requirements, deployment scenarios, etc.

   To address these difficulties, SUPA can be used as the software 

Karagiannis, et al.            Expires March 25, 2015       [Page 6] 

Internet-Draft          SUPA Problem Statement           September 2014

   defined unifying approach that can provide a unified way to deploy 
   IPv6 in a cost-effective, flexible manner. A detailed description of 
   this use case is provided in [ID.draft-sun-supa-openv6-use-cases].

   4. Requirements/Objectives

   The requirements/objectives that need to be supported by the SUPA 
   methods, models and protocol solutions are the following ones:

   Work items for SUPA include:
 
   o) The definition of a standardized model for a network graph, using 
      YANG. This model may be used to describe topologies at any 
      functional layer, from physical networks to network services. 
      Any network topology data models or policy models that have been 
      defined (or are being defined) within the IETF will be reused in 
      SUPA as much as possible.

   o) The definition and standardization of a number of basic policy and 
      data models using network graphs. These might include, but are not 
      limited to L3VPNs, datacenters, traffic engineering, 
      implementation of IPv6 transition mechanism and their enforcement 
      to users.  

   o) Guidelines on how to use NETCONF (or RESTCONF) authentication and 
      authorization mechanisms to achieve protection and isolation

     o) Guidelines for automatic mapping policies to attributes of the 
        network graphs.

   The following items are out of the SUPA scope:
   o) specification of the network management and controlling policies 
      and their associated device configuration models

5.  Security Considerations

   Security is a key aspect of any protocol that allows state
   installation and extracting of detailed configuration states.  More
   investigation remains to fully define the security requirements, such
   as authorization and authentication levels. SUPA document how to use 
   either the NETCONF or RESTCONF authentication and authorization 
   mechanisms to achieve necessary security protection and isolation

6.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no actions for IANA.

7.  Acknowledgements

   The authors of this draft would like to thank the following 
   persons for the provided valuable feedback and contributions: 
   Spencer Dawkins, Jun Bi, Xing Li, Chongfeng Xie, Benoit 
   Claise, Ian Farrer, Marc Blancet, Zhen Cao, Hosnieh Rafiee, Mehmet 


Karagiannis, et al.            Expires March 25, 2015       [Page 7] 

Internet-Draft          SUPA Problem Statement           September 2014

   Ersue, Simon Perreault, Fernando Gont, Jose Saldana, Tom Taylor, 
   Kostas Pentikousis, Juergen Schoenwaelder.

8.  References

8.1.  Normative References

8.2.  Informative References

   [ID.draft-cheng-supa-ddc-use-cases] Y. Cheng, C. Zhou, 
   G. Karagiannis, JF. Tremblay, "Use Cases for Distributed Data Center 
   Applicatinos in APONF", IETF Internet draft (Work in progress), 
   draft-cheng-supa-ddc-use-cases-00, September 17, 2014

   [ID.draft-contreras-supa-yang-network-topo] L.Contreras, Andrew Qu, 
   "A YANG Data Model for Network Topologies", IETF draft (work in 
   progress), draft-contreras-supa-yang-network-topo, September 18, 
   2004.

   [ID.draft-sun-supa-openv6-use-cases] C. Xie, Q. Sun, JF. Tremblay, 
   "Use case of IPv6 transition in SUPA", IETF draft, draft-sun-supa-
   openv6-use-cases-00, 25 September 2014.

   [ID. draft-pentikousis-supa-mapping] K. Pentikousis, Junru Lin, 
   Yiyong Zha, "SUPA Configuration and Policy Mapping", IETF Internet 
   draft, draft-pentikousis-supa-mapping-00, September 23, 2014

   [ID.draft-huang-aponf-use-cases] C. Huang, Jiafeng Zhu, Peng He, 
   Shucheng (Will) Liu, G. Karagiannis, "Use Cases on Application-
   centric Network Management and Service Provision" IETF Internet draft 
   (Work in progress), draft-huang-aponf-use-cases-01, Juy 2014

   [ID.draft-zaalouk-supa-configuration-model] A. Zaalouk,
   K. Pentikousis, W. Liu, "YANG Data Model for Configuration of Shared 
   Unified Policy Automation (SUPA)", IETF draft, draft-zaalouk-supa-
   configuration-model-00, 22 September, 2014

   [ID.draft-ietf-netconf-restconf] A. Bierman, M. Bjorklund, K. Watsen, 
   R. Fernando, "RESTCONF Protocol", IETF Internet draft (work in 
   progress), draft-ietf-netconf-restconf-01, July 2014

   [NIST SP 800-146] Badger et al.: "Draft Cloud Computing Synopsis and 
   recommendations", NIST specifications, May 2011.

   [RFC6020] M. Bjorklund, "YANG - A Data Modeling Language for the               
   Network Configuration Protocol (NETCONF)", RFC 6020,              
   October 2010.

   [RFC6241] R. Enns, M. Bjorklund, J. Schoenwaelder, A. Bierman,
   "Network Configuration Protocol (NETCONF)", RFC 6241, June 2011.

   [RFC6991]  J. Schoenwaelder, "Common YANG Data Types", RFC 6991,              
   July 2013.


Karagiannis, et al.            Expires March 25, 2015       [Page 8] 

Internet-Draft          SUPA Problem Statement           September 2014


Authors' Addresses

   Georgios Karagiannis
   Huawei Technologies
   Hansaallee 205,
   40549 Dusseldorf,
   Germany
   Email: Georgios.Karagiannis@huawei.com

   Will(Shucheng) Liu
   Huawei Technologies
   Bantian, Longgang District
   Shenzhen  518129
   P.R. China
   Email: liushucheng@huawei.com

   Tina Tsou
   Huawei Technologies
   Bantian, Longgang District
   Shenzhen  518129
   P.R. China
   Email: Tina.Tsou.Zouting@huawei.com

   Qiong Sun
   China Telecom
   No.118 Xizhimennei street, Xicheng District
   Beijing  100035
   P.R. China
   Email: sunqiong@ctbri.com.cn

   Diego Lopez
   Telefonica
   Email: diego@tid.es

   Parviz Yegani
   JUNIPER NETWORKS
   1133 Innovation Way
   Sunnyvale, CA 94089
   Email: pyegani@juniper.net

   Jean-Francois Tremblay
   Viagenie inc.
   Email: jean-francois.tremblay@viagenie.ca









Karagiannis, et al.           Expires March 25, 2015        [Page 9] 
