
Network Working Group                          Hal Woodward
Internet Draft                                 Safe-Tech Systems
					       December 1995



		  PEM Compression Encryption Module
              <draft-woodward-encryption-module-00.txt>











Status of this Memo

This document is a submission to the Privacy-Enhanced Electronic
Mail Working Group of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF).     
Comments can be sent to the author at Safetech@access.digex.net
or in writing at his address on last page.

Distribution of this memo is unlimited.

This document is an Internet Draft.  Internet Drafts are working
documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its
Areas, and its Working Groups.  Note that other groups may also
distribute working documents as Internet Drafts.

Internet Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
months, and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
documents at any time.  It is not appropriate to use Internet
Drafts as reference material, or to cite them other than as a
''working draft'' or ''work in progress.''

To learn the current status of any Internet Draft, please check
the ''lid-abstracts.txt'' listing contained in the Internet-
Drafts Shadow Directories on ftp.is.co.za (Africa), nic.nordu.net
(Europe), munnari.oz.au (Pacific Rim), ds.internic.net (US East
Coast), or ftp.isi.edu (US West Coast) to learn the current status 
of any Internet Draft.


Woodward           Expires in Six Months          [Page i]

Internet Draft     Compression Encryption Module    December 1995


Abstract

The Privacy-Enhanced Electronic Mail system (PEM) [1] provides an
inclusive standard as adopted by the Internet Architecture Board
(IAB) to provide secure electronic mail over the Internet.  The
PEM protocols [2] provide for encryption, authentication, message
integrity, and key management.  PEM's encryption [3] accomplishes
privacy of messages using DES in CBC mode; Integrity [4] via a
cryptographic hash algorithm called a Message Integrity Check
(MIC)using either MD2 or MD5; Symmetric key management [5] using
DES in ECB mode or triple-DES using two keys (EDE mode); and
supports [6] public-key certificates for key management, using
the RSA algorithm and X.509 standard for certificate structure.

This document describes the use of a Spiral Network Algorithm 
Compression routine integrated into the message-text encryption
routines to provide enhanced confidentiality and smaller message
size without impacting the throughput of the PEM system.  It is
the intention of the author to seek guidance from the readers
on methods of testing and certification other than those listed
herein.























Woodward              Expires in Six Months             [Page ii]


Internet Draft     Compression Encryption Module    December 1995

In June of 1995, while preparing for the November Radiological
Conference in Chicago and working within the area of x-ray film
digitization and enhancement, the author developed a new form of
compression based upon spiral geometry.  The compression achieved
compares very favorably with that achieved by commercial compression
packages, with the exception that it is as fast in software as CODAC
boards in performing compression and decompression and is Lossless
in nature.

Having just attended the annual security conference in Washington
DC, where we shared a booth with the TigerSafe folks, our thoughts
turned to a number of problems we discussed with IS and security
people from all over the world.  The use by major corporations of
LANs, WAN's, and Internet access providing two-way communications
has given rise to many security problems from Internet hackers.

Being a regular reader of the computer underground articles posted
for hackers, I was already aware of many of the success stories from
computer freaks, concerning breaks into Internet sites and stealing
the "secured" messages stored there.  As the Internet handles more
financial transactions the problems have continued to increase.

While considering the problems the author began a series of tests
and embedded his compression algorithm in-line within a software
package he has been developing called PEM+.  Taking the message
text and compressing the memory buffer before encrypting it.  The
result was a message block which successfully withstood some of
the best hacking and encodement breaking tools existing.

Following that test we experimented with triple CBC encryption,
following compression, of the message block and believe that we
may very well have a combination that will withstand NSA and an
N1 computer for a hundred years.  The author plans to test the 
compression algorithm using the Central Imaging Office (CIO-Pentagon) 
test suite and the ARPA Internet images.

It is the author's intention to incorporate the results into
his PEM+ development.  Any suggestions for further testing
would be gratefully accepted by the author.

Finally, for the developers out there, would there be any interest
in a Data Link Library (DLL) which could be integrated into Visual
Basic, Visual C, C++, or Delphi for compression and encryption.


Woodward              Expires in Six Months                [Page 1]


Internet Draft     Compression Encryption Module       December 1995


Chair's Address

    The working group can be contacted via the current chair:

       Stephen Kent

       Email:   kent@bbn.com



Author's Address

    Questions and responses about this memo can be directed to:

       Hal Woodward
       Safe-Tech Systems, Inc.
       45593 Shepard Drive
       Suite 201
       Sterling, VA  20164

       Email:   Safetech@access.digex.net























Woodward               Expires in Six Months                [Page 2]




