



IETF                                                           B. Jordan
Internet-Draft                                      Symantec Corporation
Intended status: Informational                                A. Thomson
Expires: August 1, 2019                               LookingGlass Cyber
                                                        January 28, 2019


 Collaborative Automated Course of Action Operations (CACAO) for Cyber
                                Security
                     draft-jordan-cacao-charter-02

Abstract

   This is the charter for the Working Group: Collaborative Automated
   Course of Action Operations (CACAO) for Cyber Security

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 1, 2019.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2019 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.




Jordan & Thomson         Expires August 1, 2019                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                    CACAO                     January 2019


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Goals and Deliverables  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4

1.  Introduction

   To defend against threat actors and advanced attacker toolkits known
   as intrusion sets, organizations need to manually identify, create,
   and document prevention, mitigation, and remediation steps.  These
   steps when grouped together into a course of action (COA) / playbook
   are used to protect systems, networks, data, and users.  The problem
   is, once these steps have been created there is no standardized and
   structured way to document them, monitor them for correct execution,
   or easily and dynamically share them across organizational boundaries
   and technology stacks.

   This working group will create a standard that implements the
   playbook model based on current industry best practices for
   cybersecurity, such as those defined in the IACD work from Johns
   Hopkins APL.

   This solution will:

   1.  enable the creation and documentation of COAs in a structured
       machine-readable format

   2.  enable organizations to collaborate on COAs

   3.  enable the sharing and distribution of COAs across organizational
       boundaries and technology stacks

   4.  enable the monitoring and verification of deployed COAs.

   This solution will contain at a minimum; a standard data model, a set
   of functional capabilities and associated interfaces, and a mandatory
   to implement protocol.

   Each collaborative course of action will consist of a sequence of
   cyber defense actions that can be executed by the various systems
   that those actions target.  Further, these COAs can be coordinated
   and deployed across heterogeneous cyber security systems such that
   both the actions requested and the resultant outcomes may be
   monitored and verified.  These actions will be referenceable in a
   connected data structure that provides support for connected data
   such as threat actors, campaigns, intrusion sets, malware, attack




Jordan & Thomson         Expires August 1, 2019                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                    CACAO                     January 2019


   patterns, and other adversarial techniques, tactics, and procedures
   (TTPs).

   Where possible the working group will leverage existing efforts, like
   OpenC2 that _may_ define the atomic actions to be included in a
   process or sequence.  The working group will not consider how shared
   actions are used/enforced, except where a response is expected for a
   specific action or step.

2.  Goals and Deliverables

   This working group has the following major goals and deliverables.
   Some of the deliverables may be published through the IETF RFC stream
   as informational or standards track documents.

   o  CACAO Use Cases and Requirements

      *  Document the use cases and requirements

   o  CACAO Functional Architecture: Roles and Interfaces

      *  Identify and document the system functions and roles that are
         needed to enable Collaborative Courses of Action.

   o  CACAO Protocol Specification

      *  Identify and document the configuration for a series of
         mandatory to implement protocols that can be used to distribute
         courses of action in both direct delivery and publish-subscribe
         methods

   o  CACAO Distribution and Response Application Layer Protocol

      *  Identify and document the requirements to effectively monitor,
         report, and alert on the distribution of CACAO actions and the
         potential threat response to those actions

   o  CACAO JSON Data Model

      *  Create a JSON data model (and possibly a general information
         model and CBOR model) that can capture and enable collaborative
         courses of action

   o  CACAO Interoperability Test Documents

      *  Define and create a series of tests and documents to assist
         with interoperability of the various systems involved.




Jordan & Thomson         Expires August 1, 2019                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                    CACAO                     January 2019


   The working group may decide to not publish the use cases and
   requirements as RFCs.  That decision will be made during the lifetime
   of the working group.

Authors' Addresses

   Bret Jordan
   Symantec Corporation
   350 Ellis Street
   Mountain View  CA 94043
   USA

   Email: bret_jordan@symantec.com


   Allan Thomson
   LookingGlass Cyber
   10740 Parkridge Blvd, Suite 200
   Reston  VA 20191
   USA

   Email: athomson@lookingglasscyber.com





























Jordan & Thomson         Expires August 1, 2019                 [Page 4]
