


Network Working Group                                        S. Krishnan
Internet-Draft                                                  Ericsson
Intended status: Informational                                 P. Eronen
Expires: January 14, 2009                                          Nokia
                                                                 E. Gray
                                                                Ericsson
                                                           July 13, 2008


 Guidelines to authors and reviewers regarding the IETF review process
                    draft-krishnan-review-process-01

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 14, 2009.

Abstract

   This document describes the authors' experiences with the IETF review
   process and provides guidelines to draft authors and reviewers on how
   to effectively participate in it.  This document does not define the
   IETF review process itself.








Krishnan, et al.        Expires January 14, 2009                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft           IETF Review Guidelines                July 2008


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Sources of reviews . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3.  Guidelines for authors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     3.1.  Who responds to reviews  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     3.2.  Before reading the review  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     3.3.  Responding to reviews  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
       3.3.1.  Timeframe for response . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
       3.3.2.  Contents of a response . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     3.4.  Keeping track of the issues  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     3.5.  New version of the draft . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   4.  Guidelines for reviewers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     4.1.  Level of review  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     4.2.  Recipients of the review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     4.3.  Classification of the issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     4.4.  Prioritization of the issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     4.5.  Reviewing changes  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   5.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   6.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   7.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   8.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 14



























Krishnan, et al.        Expires January 14, 2009                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft           IETF Review Guidelines                July 2008


1.  Introduction

   The Tao of the IETF [RFC4677] provides an informal overview of the
   inner workings of the IETF.  This document is intended to augment the
   information available in [RFC4677] and is mainly concerned about
   reviews.

   An Internet Draft's life cycle begins when the author(s) submit the
   document as a personal draft; it may become a Working Group draft,
   and usually ends when the draft is published as an RFC, or is
   abandoned and eventually expires.  During its lifetime, a draft is
   likely to receive review comments from a number people.

   In our experience, inefficient handling of review comments is one big
   source of delay and frustration in the IETF standards process.  The
   goal of this document is to help document authors in dealing with
   reviews in an effective manner.


2.  Sources of reviews

   An internet draft gets reviewed at different stages of its lifecycle
   by different sets of people.  When the draft is in the initial stages
   it gets reviewed mostly by the members of the working group that the
   draft targets.  But as the draft progresses, it gets reviewed by a
   much more varied set of people with differing fields of expertise.
   These reviews are performed with a very different point of view than
   the wg reviews and are likely to bring out cross-area issues.  The
   different sources from which the author can receive reviews are

   o  Working Group participants: Reviews from working group
      participants are not just reviews, but also an important method of
      participating in the working group.  This document deals primarily
      with late reviews though some of the concepts may be applicable to
      early reviews (such as reviews from WG participants) as well.
   o  Other IETF participants -- especially during IETF last call
   o  Review from the area specific review teams.  Some review teams try
      to review all documents -- these include Gen-ART (General Area
      Review Team) assisting the General Area Director, and SecDir
      (Security Directorate) assisting the Security Area Directors.
      Other review teams are more specialized: for example, MIB Doctors
      review only MIB documents.
   o  Reviews from IESG members: after IETF last call,
   o  Reviews from the IAB







Krishnan, et al.        Expires January 14, 2009                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft           IETF Review Guidelines                July 2008


3.  Guidelines for authors

3.1.  Who responds to reviews

   There are several persons who can respond to a received review.  If
   the document is an individual document, it is customary for the
   author to respond to the review.  If the document has several
   authors, they should co-ordinate among themselves before responding.
   Otherwise the reviewer may receive conflicting responses from
   different authors.  If the document is a working group document,
   ideally the WG chairs or the document shepherd should coordinate
   things, since the author and reviewer cannot unilaterally decide to
   make substantial changes.  The coordination effort (by WG chairs
   and/or document shepard) may be more or less active, depending on the
   working group.

3.2.  Before reading the review

   Receiving a long review, or a critical review for your favorite
   document can be disheartening.  Before reading the review -- or at
   the very least, before starting to reply -- it's good to remind
   yourself about a crucial difference between Internet Draft reviews,
   and say, reviews about books or movies.

   A good movie review attempts to give a balanced view: if the reviewer
   liked the movie, the review will say good things about it.  However,
   a typical review of an Internet Draft will comment only the parts
   that the reviewer did not like and wants to see changed.

   The reviewer may well think that your work is excellent quality, and
   a valuable contribution to Internet engineering -- but it is not
   common to say this in a review.  Thus, when you start reading a
   review, imagine that the review started with a positive comment --
   after all, the reviewer considered this important enough to review
   it!

   Hint for reviewers: it helps if you start your review with a positive
   overall opinion.  Although it may not seem so, there's a big
   difference between saying "The following things have to be fixed:"
   and "This is a well-written and valuable document; however, I'd like
   to propose some minor improvements for the following things:"

3.3.  Responding to reviews

   Reviewers spend a non-trivial amount of time in performing a review,
   and reviews also play an important part in how IETF determines
   consensus.  Thus, the single most important rule for handling reviews
   is the following: every review merits a response.



Krishnan, et al.        Expires January 14, 2009                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft           IETF Review Guidelines                July 2008


   Even if the review said "everything looks ok", saying "thank you for
   reviewing this" is part of common courtesy.  If the reviewer raised
   issues, a response is deserved, irrespective whether the authors
   agree with the reviewer or not.

3.3.1.  Timeframe for response

   The authors are expected to respond to the reviews within a
   reasonable amount of time.  What constitutes a reasonable amount of
   time is left to the judgement of the persons involved. e.g.  If a
   document is up for IESG review on a certain date, it may be useful to
   respond before that date.  It is possible that the authors may be
   unavailable to respond to a review within a given timeline since they
   may be sick/on vacation/busy with dayjob etc.  In this case, the
   document shepherd (if any) can respond to the review and follow up
   with the authors at a later time.  If the review is not responded to
   in a timely fashion, then other folks are likely to assume that there
   is a real problem that needs to be addressed, rather than finding out
   that the reviewer simply misread the document (reviewers make
   mistakes too).

3.3.2.  Contents of a response

3.3.2.1.  The initial response

   The initial response that the author sends might be as simple as a
   single mail that acknowledges the receipt of the review and the
   intent of the author to look into the contents of the review.  It is
   often helpful if the responding author(s) can also provide some
   indication of when a subsequent response will be provided to the
   comments/issues contained in the review -- assuming that a response
   cannot be provided at once.  This sort of response can be helpful in
   telling the difference between a review that has been forgotten, and
   one that is being actively worked on. e.g.  If the author is busy
   with his/her day job or on vacation, the document shepherd can ask
   some other working group member to evaluate the review.

3.3.2.2.  The substantial response

   In the substantial response the author tries to address the concerns
   raised in the review.  There are several ways to do this:

   o  Accept the concern as valid and propose a solution
   o  Accept the concern as valid and propose a timeline for a solution
   o  Accept the concern as valid and solicit text from the reviewer for
      a solution.





Krishnan, et al.        Expires January 14, 2009                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft           IETF Review Guidelines                July 2008


   o  Ask for clarifying information to better understand the concern
   o  Explain why the concern is invalid (out of scope, already covered
      in the document, misunderstanding, etc.)
   o  Other responses that may apply in special cases
   o  Any combination of the above

   The substantial response needs to be sent at least to the reviewer,
   the relevant working groups and the mailing list of the reviewing
   body(if any).  It can also be sent to the other recipients of the
   original review.

3.3.2.2.1.  Common issues with the substantial response

   This section tries to document some common mistakes that authors make
   while responding to a review.

   o  If the reviewer has not understood some part of the draft, a very
      common response is to explain the topic in email.  However, often
      that explanation should really be in the draft itself, not just in
      emails to the authors, so that future readers will also understand
      the text.
   o  Soliciting text from the reviewer should not be used as a default
      response.  It can be helpful, if the authors, even after asking
      for more information, do not understand the reviewer's concern.
      It can also be used as a technique for reducing the number of
      iterations required to arrive at text that is acceptable to the
      reviewer, or to help in producing review comments that are direct,
      with a specific focus toward some resolution.  Note that, if the
      author understands the concern, it may be best if an author
      proposes text -- since text proposed by an author may be less
      likely to introduce stylistic discontinuities, or result in other
      issues that an author (who is likely to be more familar with the
      history of the draft) might avoid.
   o  The reviewer should not be pushy while trying to suggest new text.
      Instead of writing "Here is the fix for my problem" that imposes
      the reviewer's will on the author, he or she might write "Here is
      my proposal for one way to fix this issue; there may of course be
      other ways to do so.  Please consult with the WG and decide on the
      text to adopt".
   o  Simply accepting the concern as valid is a response that is often
      seen, but is really good enough only when the solution is obvious
      (fixing a typo, etc.).  For complex comments, saying "I'll change
      this in the next draft version" may not be enough, since it it may
      make it difficult for the reviewer to verify the fix, or may
      result in a fix that is not acceptable to the reviewer.






Krishnan, et al.        Expires January 14, 2009                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft           IETF Review Guidelines                July 2008


3.4.  Keeping track of the issues

   When the author makes an attempt in good faith to resolve all the
   issues raised by the reviewer, it is possible that some of the issues
   are left unresolved in the revised version of the draft.  In order to
   prevent this from happening, it is useful to keep a systematic record
   of the issues and the associated resolutions.  One common way of
   doing this is by using an issue tracker.  The IETF tools team
   provides an issue tracker on request to any of the working groups and
   the chairs can add authorized users for the tracker.  When the issues
   are raised by the reviewer, the author can open the issue on the
   issue tracker and close it when it is resolved.  The author can also
   add the suggested resolution text into the tracker.  This way both
   the author and the reviewer can keep tabs on the change process
   without missing out any issues.

   For a document in Working Group Last Call or IETF wide Last Call it
   is considered good practice for the WG chair or the document shepherd
   to ensure that someone posts a summary of all the comments received
   during the last call, and current proposal for handling them.  If the
   WG chair or shepherd does not do this, the task of producing a
   summary falls to the author, or authors.  Note that - if no such
   summary is produced - it will be very difficult for working group
   members (or the IETF at large) to determine that the changes made
   were in line with the changes discussed and agreed to.  This summary
   could include links to mailing list archives, or if an issue tracker
   is used, issue numbers or links to "tickets".

3.5.  New version of the draft

   The details of dealing with response resolutions may vary slightly
   from working group to working group, but -- generally -- the
   following approaches are used at the indicated stages:

   o  Prior to acceptance as a WG draft, Author(s) are free to publish a
      new version with or without including specific resolutions -
      bearing in mind that acceptance by a WG is only likely if a) the
      text is essentially headed in the right direction and b) the WG is
      inclined to believe the current Author(s) are the right ones for
      the job.
   o  Once accepted as a WG draft, and through completion of a final WG
      Last Call, the Author(s) need confirmation (typically from
      discussions on the working group mailing list, or at meetings and
      subsequently confirmed on the mailing list) of all substantive
      changes prior to publishing a modified version.  Prior to last
      call, the necessary confirmation may simply be a general direction
      proposed and accepted at an IETF meeting and not refuted in
      minutes published.  Often prior to last call, the Author(s) may



Krishnan, et al.        Expires January 14, 2009                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft           IETF Review Guidelines                July 2008


      explicitly solicit help from WG members who've expressed concerns
      about specific portions of draft in an effort to reach convergence
      in a subsequent IETF WG meeting.  Once Last Call has started, each
      substantive change will typically require explicit confirmation on
      the WG mailing list.
   o  Once the document has entered IESG processing (post WG Last Call),
      new versions should not be posted unless the document shepherd or
      (responsible) AD explicitly says so.  Typically, this will occur
      only after the responsible individual is certain that the Authors
      have addressed all of the outstanding comments - both substantive
      and editorial.
   o  At any point after WG Last Call, the IESG may decide that all
      remaining comments may be addressed via a note to the RFC Editor.
      Typically, this would occur if all remaining comments are
      relatively minor, strictly editorial or of a type that would best
      be dealt with by the RFC Editor in any case.


4.  Guidelines for reviewers

4.1.  Level of review

   The level of review performed on the draft varies greatly based on
   the source of the review and on the stage of the document lifecycle.
   In the earlier stages of the lifecycle, the document is usually
   reviewed by the members of the relevant working group(s) only,
   although the working group chairs and (usually) ADs should take at
   least a brief look at the draft.  Let's call these reviews "early
   reviews".

   At this point the comments on the draft are deeply technical and
   mainly remove obvious errors from the draft.  It is also a good idea
   for working group members, working group chairs and/or ADs, to review
   early drafts for "meta issues" (such as Internet Architecture impact,
   special security exposures, manageablity, scale, consistency with
   chartered goals, etc.) that may be a problem later and result in
   potentially going back to the drawing board.  Reviewer(s) and
   author(s) are usually from similar backgrounds and are able to
   understand the underlying technologies and jargon in a consistent
   fashion.

   The reviews that occur after the draft has been progressed from the
   working group have a very different focus with respect to the
   contents of the draft.  They explore broader aspects of the draft
   (such as security, operations, readability, etc.) that are not
   usually on the top of the list of priorities of the authors and the
   early reviewers - at least during most reviews.  They also explore
   how the mechanisms proposed in the document fit into the Internet



Krishnan, et al.        Expires January 14, 2009                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft           IETF Review Guidelines                July 2008


   architecture as a whole and what detrimental effects they will have,
   if any.  Note that these reviews are where it will come out if the
   very earliest reviews did not consider where the drafts were going
   because it is at this point that a poorly directed draft is very
   likely to stall.  Let's call these "late reviews".

   The person performing the review should consider this when the review
   is being performed and concentrate their efforts on the right parts
   of the document.

4.2.  Recipients of the review

   The list of recipients of the review is tricky to get right.  The
   main idea is to make sure all the relevant people receive the review.
   The recipient list is determined mainly by the following factors.

   o  The timeframe of the review (early vs. late)
   o  The contents of the review (editorial vs. technical)

   Early reviews are usually performed by active participants of a
   working group.  The preferred destination for these reviews is the
   working group mailing list since it can be reasonably assumed that
   the persons interested in the document are subscribed to the mailing
   list.  This applies for both technical and editorial issues.
   Alternately editorial issues can be resolved using a private mail to
   the author(s).

   Late reviews are usually performed by persons who are not active
   participants of the working group and who usually review the draft
   from a different point of view than the working group.  If the
   contents of the review are mainly editorial in nature, the reviews
   can be sent just to the authors, the working group chair(s), the
   document shepherd(s).  If the review is of a more technical nature it
   is considered polite to include the working group mailing list and/or
   the IETF discussion list.  As it is not reasonable to assume that the
   reviewer will subscribe to the working group mailing list just for
   discussing this issue, the working group chair(s) need to make sure
   that this review will get past any moderation controls imposed on
   non-subscribers by the working group mailing list.












Krishnan, et al.        Expires January 14, 2009                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft           IETF Review Guidelines                July 2008


4.3.  Classification of the issues

   While writing a review, the reviewer needs to distinguish between
   different types of comments.  On a really high level review comments
   may be classified into two types

   o  Actionable comments: These comments contain statements that can be
      either proved or disproved. e.g.  "The protocol described in this
      document will not work in networks with lossy link layers".  This
      creates the opportunity for the reviewer and working group to
      discuss the issue in terms that can be tested.  In order to ask
      the working group to do so, a reviewer should be able to back his/
      her statement with a reasonably clear, worked set of reasons for
      the assertion.  A working group can go about disproving the
      statement, and if it fails to do so, it can either make the
      necessary technical changes or write up an applicability statement
      that documents the cases where the protocol works well enough to
      be useful.
   o  Observations: These comments are not testable statements but
      merely opinion/commentary of the reviewer. e.g. " I think this
      protocol should run on top of TCP rather than on top of UDP
      because it needs reliable transport".  This kind of comments may
      be very valuable as well, but they should not blindly overrule the
      consensus of the working group.  These should be treated as issues
      that the wg and the author need to evaluate carefully.

   Reviewers should be sensitive to the difference between their
   personal opinions (and preferences) and issues that will affect the
   correct operation or interoperation of the documents under review.

4.4.  Prioritization of the issues

   A review often results in a list of issues or requested
   clarifications.  The reviewer may choose to list them in the order
   they appear in the document.  For long drafts, where structure and
   content maturity is fairly well established, this approach is easier
   to follow.  Alternatively (and possibly preferably, depending on the
   maturity of the draft and other factors), the reviewer can use
   another classification scheme where the issues are grouped together
   by importance and/or potential impact on the draft.  This makes it
   easier for eventual recipients of the review to attach the
   appropriate priority for resolving the issues.  At early stages of
   draft maturity, this approach can be critical, because resolving some
   issues may impact on appropriate resoluton alternatives for other
   issues.  If a review is sent on behalf of a reviewing body (such as
   might be the case with a review reported by a liaison statement),
   this also helps the beneficiary of the review in taking a position on
   the document.  For example, A reviewer might classify issues into the



Krishnan, et al.        Expires January 14, 2009               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft           IETF Review Guidelines                July 2008


   following categories

   o  Major
   o  Minor
   o  Editorial
   o  Nits

   The purpose of such a prioritization scheme might be to indicate the
   level of discomfort the reviewing entity will feel with the results
   of any resolution that does not address the concerns at each level of
   priority.

   It is almost always a good idea to separate at least the editorial
   comments (and NITs) from those impacting on the substance of the
   draft at any stage of draft maturity.  A key reason for doing this is
   that this allows most people who will read the review to concentrate
   on the portions of the review that impact on the substance of the
   document, primarily to ensure that they do not have fundamental
   issues with the review comments or proposed resolutions.  Note that
   this is not a license to put forward omission of key words (such as
   "not") as minor editorial comments (or NITs).

   If comments are grouped in any way, however, the grouping may very
   well be "of the essence" of the comments.  In other words, if the
   responder does not agree with the distinctions made by the reviewer,
   they should be clear about this.  This is, in part, to ensure that
   something that a reviewer thought to be minor -- but which an author
   felt to be fundamental -- receives the right amount of attention on
   reading by others.

4.5.  Reviewing changes

   Once the authors submit a new revision of the draft, the reviewer can
   look over the new revision to see if the agreed changes have been
   made to the draft.  If the reviewer finds out that some changes have
   not been made, he/she can alert the authors of this fact.  There are
   tools available that can make the reviewer's life easier in this
   regard.  The rfcdiff tool can be used to identify the changes made in
   the latest version of the draft.  The reviewer can just look over
   these changes instead of rereading the entire draft.  The reviewers
   can also keep track of issues using the issue tracker used by the
   authors(if one was used).  If the reviewer is satisfied with the
   changes, he/she can send out a mail to the original recipients of the
   review mentioning this.  If not, a new generation of the review cycle
   is started and the steps described earlier are redone.






Krishnan, et al.        Expires January 14, 2009               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft           IETF Review Guidelines                July 2008


5.  Acknowledgements

   The authors would like to thank Bernard Aboba, Thomas Narten, Frank
   Ellermann, Ted Hardie, Paul Hoffman, Thomas Goldbeck-Lowe, Scott
   Brim, Joel Halpern, Brian Carpenter, Iain Calder, Dan Romascanu and
   SM for their contributions to this document.


6.  IANA Considerations

   This document does not require any action from the IANA.


7.  Security Considerations

   This document does not create any new security issues.


8.  Normative References

   [RFC4677]  Hoffman, P. and S. Harris, "The Tao of IETF - A Novice's
              Guide to the Internet Engineering Task Force", RFC 4677,
              September 2006.


Authors' Addresses

   Suresh Krishnan
   Ericsson
   8400 Decarie Blvd.
   Town of Mount Royal, QC
   Canada

   Phone: +1 514 345 7900 x42871
   Email: suresh.krishnan@ericsson.com


   Pasi Eronen
   Nokia Research Center
   P.O. Box 407
   FI-00045 Nokia Group
   Finland

   Email: pasi.eronen@nokia.com







Krishnan, et al.        Expires January 14, 2009               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft           IETF Review Guidelines                July 2008


   Eric Gray
   Ericsson
   900 Chelmsford Street
   Lowell, MA
   USA

   Email: Eric.Gray@Ericsson.com












































Krishnan, et al.        Expires January 14, 2009               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft           IETF Review Guidelines                July 2008


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.











Krishnan, et al.        Expires January 14, 2009               [Page 14]

