



CDNI                                                               K. Ma
Internet-Draft                                                  Ericsson
Intended status: Informational                          October 13, 2015
Expires: April 15, 2016


                      CDNI Media Type Registration
                     draft-ietf-cdni-media-type-06

Abstract

   This document defines the standard media type used by the Content
   Delivery Network Interconnection (CDNI) protocol suite, including the
   registration procedure and recommended usage of the required payload-
   type parameter .

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 15, 2016.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2015 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.




Ma                       Expires April 15, 2016                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft               CDNI Media Type                October 2015


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction and Scope  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
     2.1.  CDNI Media Type . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
     2.2.  CDNI Payload Type Parameter Registry  . . . . . . . . . .   4
   3.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     3.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     3.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   Appendix A.  Acknowledgment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6

1.  Introduction and Scope

   The Content Delivery Network Interconnection (CDNI) working group is
   developing a set of protocols to enable the interconnection of
   multiple content delivery networks (CDNs), as discussed in [RFC6770].
   The CDNI protocol suite consists of multiple HTTP-based interfaces,
   many of which transfer various JSON (JavaScript Object Notation)
   encoded payloads [RFC7159].  The main interfaces (i.e., CDNI Control
   interface, CDNI Footprint & Capabilities Advertisement interface,
   CDNI Request Routing Redirection interface, CDNI Metadata interface,
   and CDNI Logging interface) are described in [RFC7336].  It is
   desirable to be able to indicate the type of object carried in the
   HTTP entity-body without having to register separate media types for
   each CDNI object.  To accomplish this aim, this document defines a
   single new media type for CDNI that includes a required payload-type
   parameter.  A separate registry of CDNI payload-type parameters is
   also defined.  CDNI protocol specifications may register interface-
   specific payload-types, specifying the payload encoding and parsing
   semantics for that message (e.g., JSON serialization for a CDNI
   metadata object).  The same payload-type parameter may also be used
   as references for other purposes (e.g., referencing CDNI metadata
   objects from CDNI capability advertisement objects).

2.  IANA Considerations

   This section contains the CDNI media type registration request for
   IANA, as well as the payload-type parameter registry definition for
   IANA.

2.1.  CDNI Media Type

   Type name: application

   Subtype name: cdni

   Required parameters:



Ma                       Expires April 15, 2016                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft               CDNI Media Type                October 2015


      ptype

         The required parameter "ptype" describes the type of CDNI
         message contained in the message payload, as registered in the
         CDNI Payload Type Parameter Registry (Section 2.2) defined
         below.

   Optional parameters: none

   Encoding considerations:

      The CDNI protocol suite includes interfaces with encoded messages
      which may be 8bit or binary, as well as generic logging
      information which may be 7bit or binary.

   Security considerations:

      CDNI interfaces that return encoded data may be (mis)interpreted
      if parsed by non-CDNI or non-compliant CDNI implementations.  In
      addition, CDNI logging information is likely to transfer large
      amounts of data which may overload unexpecting clients.  The
      individual CDNI interface specifications provide more detailed
      analysis of security and privacy concerns, and define the
      requirements for authentication, authorization, confidentiality,
      integrity, and privacy for each interface.

      The application/cdni media type is a generic media type to be used
      by multiple CDNI interfaces for transporting different types of
      control and logging information.  Proper validation of message
      data requires parsing and understanding the ptype parameter and
      the associated data encoding.  Failure to properly validate
      payloads may allow data extrusion under the auspices of the
      application/cdni media type.

   Interoperability considerations:

      The required ptype field is intended to fully describe the
      structure and parsing of CDNI messages, as enforced by the ptype
      registry designated expert.

   Published specification: RFCthis [RFC Editor: Please replace this
   with the published RFC number for this document.]

   Applications that use this media type:

      CDNI is intended for use between interconnected CDNs for sharing
      configuration and logging data, as well as for issuing content
      management and redirection requests.



Ma                       Expires April 15, 2016                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft               CDNI Media Type                October 2015


   Fragment identifier considerations: N/A

   Additional information: N/A

      Deprecated alias names for this type: N/A

      Magic number(s): N/A

      File extension(s): N/A

      Macintosh file type code(s): N/A

   Person & email address to contact for further information:

      Kevin Ma <kevin.j.ma@ericsson.com>

   Intended usage: LIMITED USE

   Restrictions on usage:

      This media type is intended only for use in CDNI protocol message
      exchanges.

   Author: IETF CDNI working group

   Change controller: IETF CDNI working group

   Provisional registration: no

2.2.  CDNI Payload Type Parameter Registry

   The IANA is requested to create a new "CDNI Payload Type" registry,
   in a new category called "Content Delivery Networks Interconnection
   (CDNI) Parameters".  The "CDNI Payload Type" namespace defines the
   valid values for the required "ptype" parameter of the "application/
   cdni" media type.  The CDNI Payload Type is an ASCII string value,
   consisting of only visible (printing) characters, but excluding equal
   signs (=), double quotes ("), and semicolons (;), and not exceeding
   256 characters in length.

        ptype = 1*256(ptype-char)
        ptype-char = %x21 / %x23-3A / %x3C / %x3E-7E
          ; Includes ALPHA, DIGIT, and other printables
          ; Excludes equal signs (=), double quotes ("), semicolons (;)

   Additions to the CDNI Payload Type namespace will conform to the
   "Specification Required" policy as defined in [RFC5226].  The
   designated expert will verify that new type definitions do not



Ma                       Expires April 15, 2016                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft               CDNI Media Type                October 2015


   duplicate existing type definitions (in name or functionality),
   prevent gratuitous additions to the namespace, and prevent any
   additions to the namespace which would impair the interoperability of
   CDNI implementations.  The designated expert will review the
   specification, even if it is a Standards Track RFC, to verify that it
   contains the following information:

   o  The review will verify that the specification contains a
      reasonably defined purpose for the new payload type, where the
      purpose is related to an existing or proposed CDNI interface and
      does not duplicate the functionality of any existing CDNI protocol
      feature without specifying a rational reason (e.g., updating an
      obsolete feature), a method for detecting and handling conflicts
      (e.g., a versioning system with prioritization matrix), and a
      suggested migration path (e.g., deprecation of the overlapped
      feature, or justification for co-existence).

   o  The review will verify that the specification contains information
      as to which CDNI interface the new payload type pertains/affects.
      The payload type may be applicable to multiple CDNI interfaces,
      but the justification for the new payload type will include a
      reasonable relationship to at least one standards track CDNI
      interface.

   o  The review will verify that the specification contains sufficient
      detail about the data encoding (e.g., JSON serialization for new
      CDNI metadata or capability advertisement objects, or ABNF and
      description for new CDNI logging file formats) to allow senders
      and receivers of the new payload type to implement compliant and
      interoperable payload parsers.

   The registry contains the Payload Type, and the specification
   describing the Payload Type.  The registry will initially be
   unpopulated.

                     +--------------+---------------+
                     | Payload Type | Specification |
                     +--------------+---------------+
                     +--------------+---------------+

3.  References

3.1.  Normative References

   [RFC5226]  Narten, T. and H. Alvestrand, "Guidelines for Writing an
              IANA Considerations Section in RFCs", BCP 26, RFC 5226,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC5226, May 2008,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5226>.



Ma                       Expires April 15, 2016                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft               CDNI Media Type                October 2015


3.2.  Informative References

   [RFC6770]  Bertrand, G., Ed., Stephan, E., Burbridge, T., Eardley,
              P., Ma, K., and G. Watson, "Use Cases for Content Delivery
              Network Interconnection", RFC 6770, DOI 10.17487/RFC6770,
              November 2012, <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6770>.

   [RFC7159]  Bray, T., Ed., "The JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) Data
              Interchange Format", RFC 7159, DOI 10.17487/RFC7159, March
              2014, <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7159>.

   [RFC7336]  Peterson, L., Davie, B., and R. van Brandenburg, Ed.,
              "Framework for Content Distribution Network
              Interconnection (CDNI)", RFC 7336, DOI 10.17487/RFC7336,
              August 2014, <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7336>.

Appendix A.  Acknowledgment

   This document is the culmination of the efforts of many in the CDNI
   working group, including (in alphabetical order): Francois Le
   Faucheur, Daryl Malas, Rob Murray, Ben Niven-Jenkins, Iuniana
   Oprescu, Jon Peterson, and Jan Seedorf.

Author's Address

   Kevin J. Ma
   Ericsson
   43 Nagog Park
   Acton, MA  01720
   USA

   Phone: +1 978-844-5100
   Email: kevin.j.ma@ericsson.com


















Ma                       Expires April 15, 2016                 [Page 6]
