

Network Working Group                          Krisztian Kiss (ed.)
Internet-Draft                                                Nokia
Expires: April 19, 2003                            October 18, 2003





    Requirements for Presence Service in 3GPP Wireless Systems
            draft-kiss-simple-presence-wireless-reqs-03






Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance
   with all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 [1].

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet
   Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working
   groups. Note that other groups may also distribute working
   documents as Internet-Drafts. Internet-Drafts are draft
   documents valid for a maximum of six months and may be
   updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt
   
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed
   at http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   The distribution of this memo is unlimited.


Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003).  All Rights
   Reserved.


Abstract

   This Internet-Draft defines requirements for Presence Service
   in 3GPP wireless systems.







                                 
                                 
                                 
                                                                
                               
Internet-Draft             Expires: April 19, 2003              Page 1

Krisztian Kiss            3GPP Presence Requirements      October 2003
                                 

Table of contents

1. Introduction                                                    2
 1.1 Conventions used in this document                             3
2. General characteristics of Wireless Systems                     3
3. Requirements                                                    3
 3.1 Addressing Requirements                                       4
 3.2 Publishing requirements                                       4
 3.3 Subscription and notification requirements                    5
 3.4 Requirements for the content of the presence document         6
 3.5 Authorization requirements                                    7
 3.6 Watcher information requirements                              8
 3.7 Presencelist requirements                                     9
4. Security requirements                                           9
5. Charging Requirements                                           9
6. Proposal for next steps                                         9
Normative References                                               9
Informative References                                            10
Author's address                                                  12
Appendix A. Contributors                                          12
Full Copyright Statement                                          13


1.       Introduction

   This Internet-Draft lists the requirements for Presence
   Service in 3GPP wireless systems [24][25][26]. The 3GPP
   Presence Service requirements are defined in [27], the 3GPP
   Presence Service architecture is defined in [28], presence
   service information flows and protocol details are defined in
   [29]. The requirements on the Session Initiation Protocol
   (SIP) for the Release 5 of the 3GPP IP Multimedia Subsystem
   are described in [19]. Presence Service is referenced as
   defined in IMPP Working Group in documents [5] and [6].
   
   This document does not document requirements that have led to
   the creation and work in progress on a number of SIMPLE WG
   specifications, i.e. subscriptions and notifications of user
   presence [7], the SIP event notification extension for
   collections [9], the SIP Event Template-Package for Watcher
   Information documents [11][12], the content indirection
   mechanism [17] and the SIMPLE Presence Publication Mechanism
   [15]. Rather this document lists only requirements that are
   additional to those that have led to the mechanisms proposed
   in these documents.
   
   The document also assumes the usage of the Common Presence and
   Instant Messaging (CPIM) Presence Information Data Format
   (PIDF) defined in [8] as the default presence document data
   format, however some of the requirements presented here might
   require extensions to PIDF.







                               
                                 
Internet-Draft             Expires: April 19, 2003              Page 2

Krisztian Kiss            3GPP Presence Requirements      October 2003
                                 
   
   The requirements presented in this document are proposed to be
   evaluated by the SIMPLE Working Group. The result of this
   evaluation process would help to determine the work expected
   to be done in IETF and identify the work which might be done
   in other standardization bodies, such as 3GPP. Thus, a more
   precise work-share between standardization bodies could be
   worked out. The overall goal of these requirements is to allow
   the development of a fully standardized presence application
   for wireless terminals, utilizing existing IETF and 3GPP
   specifications.
   
   Note that some of the requirements herein may be already
   addressed in specific requirements documents, i.e. the data
   manipulation requirements of SIMPLE systems [10], the presence
   specific event notification filters requirements [14], the
   rate limiting of event notifications requirements [16], the
   watcher information filtering requirements [21], the SIMPLE
   Presence Publication Requirements [23], the Efficient Delivery 
   of Presence Information requirements [37].


1.1      Conventions used in this document

   This document does not specify any protocol of any kind.
   Therefore, the use of the key words "MUST", "MUST NOT",
   "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT",
   "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document, as
   described in RFC 2119 [2], does not apply.


2.       General characteristics of Wireless Systems

   The radio interface of wireless systems is often a scarce
   resource. As such, the message exchange over the radio
   interface and the size of the messages should be efficiently
   compact and kept to a minimum. All the mechanisms developed
   should make an efficient use of the radio interface.
   
   There are existing mechanisms to fulfill this requirement,
   such as signaling compression [31], partial publication,
   partial notification [20], content indirection [17]. These
   mechanisms must not be exclusive and must be capable to work
   together.

   As terminals could be rather small devices, the memory and
   power consumption requirements, requirements for processing
   power, and for screen size and rendering capabilities should
   be kept to a minimum. Mandating support for additional
   protocols and mechanisms in the wireless terminal must meet
   this criteria.
   

3.       Requirements

   This section lists the requirements for Presence Service in the
   3GPP IP Multimedia Subsystem wireless environment. Generally,
   these protocol requirements stem from the special characteristics
   of wireless systems, and the specific set of capabilities
   specified by the 3GPP. More information on these aspects can be
   found in 3GPP TS 23.228 [24].


Internet-Draft             Expires: April 19, 2003              Page 3

Krisztian Kiss            3GPP Presence Requirements      October 2003


3.1      Addressing Requirements

   ADDR-REQ1:  It must be possible to use a single address to
       identify the presentity and the watcher.

   ADDR-REQ2:  Use of E.164 numbers [32] in addressing presence
       service entities must be supported.

   
3.2      Publishing requirements

   Generic SIMPLE Presence Publication Requirements are listed in
   [23].
   
   PUBL-REQ1: Standardized mechanism to publish presence information
       There must be a standardized mechanism to publish the
       presence information.
   
   PUBL-REQ2: Partial publishing
       The publish mechanism must allow a PUA to change only part
       of the presentity's presence information. For example, a
       PUA must be able to publish one single <tuple> element of
       the presentity's PIDF document, while the document
       contains several <tuple> elements.
   
   PUBL-REQ3: Basic operations of publishing
       It must be possible for the PUA to add segments to the
       presence information as well as overwrite, modify or
       remove existing elements of the presence information.
   
   PUBL-REQ4: Mandatory-to-implement MIME type for presence document
       There must be one mandatory-to-implement MIME type for the
       publish mechanism.
   
   PUBL-REQ5: Inclusion of direct content in the presence document
       It must be possible for the presentity to include direct
       content in the presence document. If the direct content is
       part of the presence document, the signaling compression
       should be able to maintain the compression efficiency.
   
   PUBL-REQ6: Multiple PUAs
       The publication mechanism must allow simultaneous
       publishing from multiple distinct PUAs of a single
       presentity.
       
   PUBL-REQ7: Identifiers for PUAs
       It must be possible to allocate unique identifiers for
       every distinct PUAs of a particular presentity.
       
   PUBL-REQ8: Identification of segments
       The PUA must be able to publish to a specific segment of
       the presence document, shared among many PUAs (the number
       of sources must neither be limited nor pre-defined). This
       means that the published segments need to be identified
       across all of the PUAs of a particular presentity. The PUA
       must be able to generate identifiers for the published
       segments.
       
       
       
Internet-Draft             Expires: April 19, 2003              Page 4

Krisztian Kiss            3GPP Presence Requirements      October 2003
   
   
   PUBL-REQ9: Discovering existing segments
       It must be possible for the PUA to discover existing
       segment identifiers together with their content published
       by other PUAs belonging to the same presentity.
   
   PUBL-REQ10: Hard-state segments
       It must be possible to include hard-state segments in the
       presence documents. This means that in case the PUAs do
       not refresh presence information, the hard-state segments
       remain available for the watchers.
       
   PUBL-REQ11: Feedback on publishing
       The PUA must be able to receive feedback about the result
       of a publishing transaction, the feedback must contain
       enough information for the principal controlling the
       presentity to know that the published presence information
       was successfully composed into the presence document by
       the Presence Compositor.


3.3      Subscription and notification requirements

   SUBNOT-REQ1: Presence information filtering
       It must be possible for a watcher to select certain
       elements from the presence information that he wants (or
       does not want) to receive notifications for. As an
       example, the watcher may only want to be notified when the
       presentity becomes available for conferencing.
       The Presence Server must be able to construct the presence
       document to be delivered to the watcher according to the
       watcher's filtering preferences.
       Note that when determining the elements to be included in
       the presence document, authorization rules are also needed
       to be taken into account.
       Note that there are detailed presence event filtering
       requirements listed in [14].
   
   SUBNOT-REQ2: Limiting the rate of event notification
       The watcher must be able to limit the maximum rate at
       which the notifier can generate notifications in a
       subscription.
       Note that there are detailed requirements for the throttle
       mechanism listed in [16].
   
   SUBNOT-REQ3: Anonymous subscription
       It must be possible for the watcher to request an
       anonymous subscription (i.e. the watcher's identifier will
       not be revealed to the presentity). The anonymous request
       may be accepted or rejected, depending on the presentity's
       authorization rules as described by the AUTH-REQs.
       Note that this requirement may be met with the overall
       privacy solution for SIP.
       







Internet-Draft             Expires: April 19, 2003              Page 5

Krisztian Kiss            3GPP Presence Requirements      October 2003


   SUBNOT-REQ4: Gathering information on presence information
       It must be possible for the watcher to determine what presence
       information is available for a particular presentity before
       fetching or subscribing to the presence information elements 
       with actual values.
   
   SUBNOT-REQ5: Direct content inclusion in presence information
       It must be possible for the watcher to receive
       notifications including direct contents. The mechanism
       selected for notifying large size content must make
       efficient use of the network resources and satisfy generic
       wireless requirements as described in section 2.

   SUBNOT-REQ6: Content indirection
       Generic requirements for content indirection are listed in
       [13]. In connection to presence the following requirements
       have been identified: the Presence Server should be able
       to perform content indirection. Watchers should have the
       capability to indicate the support of content indirection.
       The Presence Server must honor watcher's preferences
       whether to perform content indirection or not when it
       detects a situation where content indirection should be
       performed.
       
   SUBNOT-REQ7: Subscription on behalf of another user
       It must be possible for a watcher to subscribe to the
       presentity∆s presence information on behalf of another
       user. As an example, an Application Server may act as a
       network-based watcher to provide presence based call
       control, or a Resource List Server may collect
       notifications from the individual resources of the
       presentity collection on behalf of the watcher.
   
   
3.4      Requirements for the content of the presence document

   CONT-REQ1: Unique identifiers for presence segments
       The presence document contains presence segments. Each
       presence segment must contain a unique identity which
       makes it distinguishable from other presence segments
       inside the presence document.
       
   CONT-REQ2: Application specific identifiers
       It must be possible to include application specific
       identifiers in a presence tuple. This means that a
       publishing application running in a PUA is able to address
       a specific presence tuple to its peer watcher application
       running in the watcher user agent.
       
   CONT-REQ3: Rich content of the presence segments
       RFC 2778 [6] defines the presence information element to
       consist of a STATUS marker, an optional COMMUNICATION
       ADDRESS, and optional OTHER PRESENCE MARKUP. A
       COMMUNICATION ADDRESS includes a COMMUNICATION MEANS and a
       CONTACT ADDRESS.




Internet-Draft             Expires: April 19, 2003              Page 6

Krisztian Kiss            3GPP Presence Requirements      October 2003
       
       
       As a further requirement for this definition, it must be
       possible to define rich content for a presence information
       element (e.g. for the communication means: voice, video,
       instant messaging, application). One possible solution to
       fulfill this requirement is defined in [30], [35] and [36].
       
   CONT-REQ4: Multivalue concept
       It must be possible to include multiple instances of the
       semantically same presence information in the presence
       document. The different instances should contain different
       values of the same presence information and used to be
       shown for different watchers. The different watchers must
       only receive those instances of the presence information
       they are authorized to by the presentity. As an example,
       one group of watchers is shown a different value for the
       status of presentity than the other.
       The Presence Server must be able to distinguish whether
       two presence information elements contain semantically
       different presence information or they are different
       instances of the semantically same presence information.
       
   CONT-REQ5: Geographic location information
       There must be a standardized attribute for the geographic
       location information within the presence document.
       
   CONT-REQ6: Presentity∆s status
       There must be a standardized attribute for the
       presentity∆s status within the presence document.
       
       
3.5      Authorization requirements

   This section defines the requirements for how presentity is
   able to authorize the presence subscriptions. Generic SIMPLE
   data manipulation requirements are listed in [10].
       
   AUTH-REQ1: Standardized setting of authorization policy
       There must be a standardized mechanism for the presentity
       to control the authorization policy related to his own
       presence information.
       This means that the authorization policy document format
       and a set of manipulation operations upon that format must
       be standardized.
       
   AUTH-REQ2: Extensibility of authorization policy
       It should be possible for network operators to extend the
       format of the authorization policy document and the
       operations upon that format based on local policy.
       
   AUTH-REQ3: Expressiveness of authorization rules
       It must be possible for the presentity to set separate
       authorization rules for different watchers and groups of
       watchers. With these rules the presentity must be able to
       override the default behaviour of the presence server for
       the generation of notifications and content of the
       notifications. As an example, only watchers belonging to a
       particular group are allowed to receive information
       related to presentity's location.
             
       



Internet-Draft             Expires: April 19, 2003              Page 7

Krisztian Kiss            3GPP Presence Requirements      October 2003
       
       
   AUTH-REQ4: Managing the authorization policy from multiple sources
       It must be possible for the presentity to manage the
       authorization rules from multiple sources (e.g. from
       different terminals of the presentity or by the service
       provider on behalf of the presentity). It must be possible
       for the presentity from one source to learn the changes in
       the authorization rules changed by other sources belonging
       to the same presentity.
   
   AUTH-REQ5: Granularity of access rights
       It must be possible for the presentity to grant access
       rights separately for all elements of the presence
       information.
       RFC 2778 [6] defines a model for presence information.
       Based on this model more specific requirements can be
       stated:
       It must be possible for the Presence Server to decide
       based on authorization rules whether to include a certain
       tuple in the notification. It must be possible to base
       that decision on any element in the tuple. In the default
       case these must include at least TUPLE ID, CONTACT
       ADDRESS, COMMUNICATION MEANS and STATUS attributes. As a
       special case, it must be possible for the Presence Server
       to provide different status values for same COMMUNICATION
       ADDRESS or combination of COMMUNICATION ADDRESS and OTHER
       PRESENCE MARKUPs.
       
   AUTH-REQ6: Expiry of access rights
       It must be possible to grant access rights with an expiry
       time to a particular watcher or group.
       
   AUTH-REQ7: Presence authorization policy manipulation alignment 
              with conferencing
       The solution for authorization policy manipulation should
       be aligned with other data manipulation operations used
       for similar purposes (such as conferencing).
       
   AUTH-REQ8: Authorization of subscriptions generated on behalf
              of another user
       It must be possible for the Presence Server to authorize
       subscriptions to presentity∆s presence information which
       are generated on behalf of another user. It should be
       possible for the presentity to set authorization rules
       taking into account both the identity of the watcher and
       the identity of the user on whose behalf the subscription
       is made.
   

3.6      Watcher information requirements

   WATCHINF-REQ1: Pending watcher notification
       It must be possible for a presentity to be informed of a
       pending watcher subscription from a currently unauthorized
       and/or unknown watcher.
       
   WATCHINF-REQ2: Watcher information filtering
       It must be possible for the presentity to monitor the
       watcher status of certain watchers.
       Note that there are detailed watcher information filtering
       requirements listed in [21].
       

Internet-Draft             Expires: April 19, 2003              Page 8

Krisztian Kiss            3GPP Presence Requirements      October 2003


   WATCHINF-REQ3: Watcher history
       It must be possible for the presentity to fetch the list
       of the watchers who have accessed (by subscription or
       fetch) his presence information during a well-defined time-
       period (e.g. last 7 days).
       

3.7      Presencelist requirements

   PRLIST-REQ1: Filtering for presentity collection
       It must be possible for the Resource List Server [9] to
       construct and store appropriate filtering rules for every
       URI in the presencelist based on the watcher's filtering
       preferences.
       
   PRLIST-REQ2: Management of presentity collection data element
       Requirements for creating a presentity collection, adding
       new URIs to an existing presentity collection, modifying
       or removing existing URIs from an existing presentity
       collection, or deleting a presentity collection are listed
       in [10].


4.       Security requirements

   Presence specifications must not preclude authentication on
   behalf of presence entities by other entities within a trust
   domain, and communication as defined by RFC 3325 [33].
   
   Security requirements assume requirements that have led to
   existing security mechanism described in [18]. Further
   security requirements over and above this have not yet been
   identified.
   
   
5.       Charging Requirements

   This document refers to the charging requirements of [19], and
   does not list any additional charging requirements at this
   time.


6.       Proposal for next steps

   It is proposed that SIMPLE Working Group evaluates the
   requirements presented in this document and incorporates the
   relevant ones in its current work items. Those requirements
   possibly falling out of the scope of the SIMPLE WG should find
   a more suitable home, possibly also in other standardization
   bodies.

   It is not expected that this document be published as an RFC by the
   IETF, but rather serve as a reference to various working group
   requirements documents. It is also expected that this document is
   used as a check list as requirements get included to other documents.

   


Internet-Draft             Expires: April 19, 2003              Page 9

Krisztian Kiss            3GPP Presence Requirements      October 2003


Normative References

   1. S. Bradner, "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3",
   BCP 9, RFC 2026, October 1996.

   2. S. Bradner, "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
   Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.


Informative References

   3. J. Rosenberg, H. Schulzrinne, G. Camarillo, A. Johnston, J.
   Peterson, R. Sparks, M. Handley, E. Schooler: "SIP, Session
   Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261, June 2002
   
   4. A. Roach, "ession Initiation Protocol (SIP)-Specific Event
   Notification", RFC 3265, June 2002
   
   5. M. Day, S. Aggarwal, G. Mohr, J. Vincent "Instant Messaging
   / Presence Protocol Requirements", RFC 2779
   
   6. M. Day, J. Rosenberg, H. Sugano, "A Model for Presence and
   Instant Messaging", RFC 2778
   
   7. J. Rosenberg et al., "SIP Extensions for Presence", draft-
   ietf-simple-presence-10.txt, January 2003, work in progress
   
   8. H. Sugano, S. Fujimoto, G. Klyne, A. Bateman: "CPIM
   Presence Information Data Format", draft-ietf-impp-cpim-pidf-
   08.txt, May 2003, work in progress
   
   9. A. Roach, J. Rosenberg, B. Campbell, "A Session Initiation
   Protocol (SIP) Event Notification Extension for Collections",
   draft-ietf-simple-event-list-04.txt, June 2003, work in
   progress
   
   10. J. Rosenberg, M. Isomaki, "Requirements for Manipulation
   of Data Elements in SIMPLE Systems", draft-ietf-simple-data-
   req-03.txt, June 2003, work in progress
   
   11. J. Rosenberg, "A Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) Event
   Template-Package for Watcher Information", draft-ietf-simple-
   winfo-package-05.txt, January 2003, work in progress
   
   12. J. Rosenberg, "An Extensible Markup Language (XML) Based
   Format for Watcher Information", draft-ietf-simple-winfo-
   format-04.txt, January 2003, work in progress
   
   13. S. Olson, "Requirements for Content Indirection in SIP
   Messages", draft-ietf-sipping-content-indirect-03.txt,
   February 2003, work in progress
   
   14. E. Leppanen, et al, "Requirements for Presence
   specific Event Notification Filtering", draft-ietf-simple-
   pres-filter-reqs-02, August 2003, work in progress
   
   
   

Internet-Draft             Expires: April 19, 2003             Page 10

Krisztian Kiss            3GPP Presence Requirements      October 2003
   
   
   15. A. Niemi, et al, "Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) 
   Extension for Event State Publication", draft-ietf-sip-
   publish-00, September 2003, work in progress
   
   16. A. Niemi, "Requirements for Limiting the Rate of Event
   Notifications", draft-niemi-sipping-event-throttle-reqs-02,
   June 2003, work in progress
   
   17. S. Olson, "A Mechanism for Content Indirection in SIP
   Messages", draft-olson-sip-content-indirect-mech-02, 
   February 2003, work in progress
   
   18. J. Arkko, V. Torvinen, G. Camarillo, T. Haukka, S. Sen,
   "Security Mechanism Agreement for SIP Sessions", RFC 3329,
   January 2003
   
   19. M. Garcia-Martin, "3rd-Generation Partnership Project
   (3GPP) Release 5 requirements on the Session Initiation
   Protocol (SIP), draft-ietf-sipping-3gpp-r5-requirements-
   00.txt, October 2002, work in progress
   
   20. J. Costa-Requena, E. Leppanen, H. Khartabil, M. Lonnfors,
   "Partial Notification of Presence Information", draft-
   ietf-simple-partial-notify-00.txt, September 2003, work in
   progress
   
   21. K. Kiss, E. Leppanen, H. Khartabil, "Requirements for
   Filtering of Watcher Information", draft-ietf-simple-winfo-
   filter-reqs-00.txt, May 2003, work in progress
   
   22. J. Costa-Requena, E. Leppanen, H. Khartabil, M. Lonnfors,
   "Functional Description of Event Notification Filtering", 
   draft-khartabil-simple-presence-filter-funct-00.txt, 
   May 2003, work in progress
   
   23. B. Campbell, S. Olson, J. Peterson, J. Rosenberg, B.
   Stucker, "SIMPLE Presence Publication Requirements", draft-
   ietf-simple-publish-reqs-00, February 2003, work in progress
   
   24. 3GPP TS 23.228 "IP Multimedia Subsystem (IMS) (Stage 2) -
   Release 5", Version 6.3.0 available at
   ftp://ftp.3gpp.org/specs/latest/Rel-5/23_series/
   
   25. 3GPP TS 24.228: "Signaling flows for the IP Multimedia
   call control based on SIP and SDP", Version 5.6.0 available at
   ftp://ftp.3gpp.org/specs/archive/24_series/24.228/
   
   26. 3GPP TS 24.229: "IP Multimedia Call Control Protocol based
   on SIP and SDP, stage 3", Version 6.0.0 available at
   ftp://ftp.3gpp.org/specs/archive/24_series/24.229/
   
   27. 3GPP TS 22.141: "Presence Service, Stage 1", Version 6.2.0
   available at
   ftp://ftp.3gpp.org/specs/archive/22_series/22.141/
      
   
   
         
   
Internet-Draft             Expires: April 19, 2003             Page 11

Krisztian Kiss            3GPP Presence Requirements      October 2003
   
   
   28. 3GPP TS 23.141: "Presence Service, Architecture and
   Functional Description, Stage 2", Version 6.4.0 available at
   ftp://ftp.3gpp.org/specs/archive/23_series/23.141/
   
   29. 3GPP TS 24.841: "Presence service based on Session
   Initiation Protocol (SIP); Functional models, information
   flows and protocol details", Version 1.1.0 available at
   ftp://ftp.3gpp.org/specs/latest-drafts
   
   30. H. Schulzrinne, et al, "RPID -- Rich Presence Information
   Data Format", draft-ietf-simple-rpid-00.txt, July 2003, 
   work in progress
   
   31. R. Price, C. Bormann, J. Christoffersson, H. Hannu, Z.
   Liu, J. Rosenberg, "Signaling Compression (SigComp)", RFC
   3320, January 2003
   
   32. International Telecommunications Union, "The International
   Public Telecommunication Numbering Plan", ITU-T Recommendation
   E.164, 1991.
   
   33. C. Jennings, J. Peterson, M. Watson, "Private Extensions
   to the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) for Asserted Identity
   within Trusted Networks", RFC 3325, November 2002

   34. J. Costa-Requena, E. Leppanen, H. Khartabil, M. Lonnfors,
   "An Extensible Markup Language (XML) Based Format for Event 
   Notification Filtering", draft-khartabil-simple-presence-
   format-00.txt, April 2003, work in progress
   
   35. H. Schulzrinne, et al, "CIPID -- Contact Information in 
   Presence Information Data Format", draft-ietf-simple-
   cipid-00.txt, August 2003, work in progress
   
   36. M. Lonnfors, K. Kiss, "Device capability PIDF status 
   extension", draft-lonnfors-simple-prescaps-ext-02, October 
   2003, work in progress

   37. M. Lonnfors, et al, "Requirements for Efficient Delivery 
   of Presence Information ", draft-ietf-simple-presinfo-deliv-
   reg-00.txt, May 2003, work in progress


Author's address

       Krisztian Kiss
       Nokia
       12278 Scripps Summit Drive
       San Diego, CA 92131, USA
       Phone: +1 858 2049141
       Email: krisztian.kiss@nokia.com




   
       
Internet-Draft             Expires: April 19, 2003             Page 12

Krisztian Kiss            3GPP Presence Requirements      October 2003                                 
                                 

Appendix A. Contributors

   The author would like to thank the following people for their
   interest, support and efforts when writing this Internet-
   Draft:

       Gabor Bajko (Nokia), Markus Isomaki (Nokia), Mikko
       Lonnfors (Nokia), Juha Kalliokulju (Nokia), Eva-Maria
       Leppanen (Nokia), Georg Mayer (Nokia), Mark Beckmann
       (Siemens), Sonia Garapaty (Nortel), Jayshree Bharatia
       (Nortel), Keith Drage (Lucent), Andrew Allen, Kevan Hobbis
       (3), Alexandre Harmand (O2), Duncan Mills (Vodafone),
       Miguel A. Garcia (Ericsson), Milo Orsic (Lucent), Hugh 
       Shieh (AWS), Aki Niemi (Nokia).

   Although not an official communication of the 3GPP, this
   document has been discussed and commented by a number of
   delegates in the relevant 3GPP working groups.


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003).  All Rights
   Reserved.
   
   This document and translations of it may be copied and
   furnished to others, and derivative works that comment on or
   otherwise explain it or assist in its implementation may be
   prepared, copied, published and distributed, in whole or in
   part, without restriction of any kind, provided that the above
   copyright notice and this paragraph are included on all such
   copies and derivative works.  However, this document itself
   may not be modified in any way, such as by removing the
   copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or
   other Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose
   of developing Internet standards in which case the procedures
   for copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must
   be followed, or as required to translate it into languages
   other than English.
   
   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will
   not be revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or
   assigns.
   
   This document and the information contained herein is provided
   on an "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR
   IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE
   USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR
   ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
   PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Acknowledgement

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by
   the Internet Society.










Internet-Draft             Expires: April 19, 2003             Page 13