

IPv6 Operations                                                E. Davies
Internet-Draft                                           Nortel Networks
Expires: April 25, 2005                                      S. Krishnan
                                                                Ericsson
                                                               P. Savola
                                                               CSC/Funet
                                                        October 25, 2004


          IPv6 Transition/Co-existence Security Considerations
              draft-savola-v6ops-security-overview-03.txt

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is subject to all provisions
   of section 3 of RFC 3667.  By submitting this Internet-Draft, each
   author represents that any applicable patent or other IPR claims of
   which he or she is aware have been or will be disclosed, and any of
   which he or she become aware will be disclosed, in accordance with
   RFC 3668.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 25, 2005.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).

Abstract

   The transition from a pure IPv4 network to a network where IPv4 and
   IPv6 co-exist brings a number of extra security considerations that
   need to be taken into account when deploying IPv6 and operating the
   dual-protocol network and the associated transition mechanisms.  This



Davies, et al.           Expires April 25, 2005                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft           IPv6 Security Overview             October 2004


   document attempts to give an overview of the various issues grouped
   into three categories: Issues due to the IPv6 protocol itself, due to
   transition mechanisms, and due to the way in which IPv6 is being
   deployed.

Table of Contents

   1.   Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   2.   Issues Due to IPv6 Protocol  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     2.1  IPv6 Protocol-specific Issues  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
       2.1.1  Routing Headers and Hosts  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
       2.1.2  Routing Headers for Mobile IPv6 and Other Purposes . .   5
       2.1.3  Obsolete Home Address Option in Mobile IPv6  . . . . .   5
       2.1.4  Site(and Larger)-scope Multicast Addresses . . . . . .   5
       2.1.5  ICMPv6 and Multicast . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
       2.1.6  Anycast traffic Identification and Security  . . . . .   7
       2.1.7  Address Privacy Extensions Interact with DDoS
              Defenses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
       2.1.8  Dynamic DNS, Stateless Address Auto-Configuration
              and Privacy Extensions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
       2.1.9  Extension Headers  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
       2.1.10   Fragmentation: Reassembly and Deep Packet
                Inspection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
       2.1.11   Fragmentation Related DoS Attacks  . . . . . . . . .  11
       2.1.12   Areas of Improved Security in IPv6 . . . . . . . . .  11
     2.2  IPv4-mapped IPv6 Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
     2.3  Increased End-to-End Transparency  . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   3.   Issues Due to Transition Mechanisms  . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
     3.1  IPv6 Transition/Co-existence Mechanism-specific Issues . .  13
     3.2  Automatic Tunneling and Relays . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
     3.3  Tunneling May Break Security Assumptions . . . . . . . . .  14
   4.   Issues Due to IPv6 Deployment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
     4.1  IPv6 Service Piloting Done Insecurely  . . . . . . . . . .  15
     4.2  Enabling IPv6 by Default Brings the Usability Down . . . .  16
     4.3  Addressing Schemes and Securing Routers  . . . . . . . . .  16
     4.4  Consequences of Multiple Addresses in IPv6 . . . . . . . .  17
     4.5  Deploying ICMPv6 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17
     4.6  Operational Factors when Enabling IPv6 in the Network  . .  18
   5.   Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
   6.   Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
   7.   References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
   7.1  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
   7.2  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
        Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  22
   A.   IPv6 Probing/Mapping Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . .  22
   B.   IPv6 Privacy Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  23
     B.1  Exposing MAC Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  23
     B.2  Exposing Multiple Devices  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  24



Davies, et al.           Expires April 25, 2005                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft           IPv6 Security Overview             October 2004


        Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . .  25


















































Davies, et al.           Expires April 25, 2005                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft           IPv6 Security Overview             October 2004


1.  Introduction

   The transition from a pure IPv4 network to a network where IPv4 and
   IPv6 co-exist brings a number of extra security considerations that
   need to be taken into account when deploying IPv6 and operating the
   dual-protocol network with its associated transition mechanisms.
   This document attempts to give an overview of the various issues
   grouped into three categories:
   o  issues due to the IPv6 protocol itself,
   o  issues due to transition mechanisms, and
   o  issues due to IPv6 deployment.

   An architectural view of the transition has been presented in a
   separate document [I-D.savola-v6ops-transarch]; it is important to
   read it at least cursorily to understand that we have to be concerned
   not about replacing IPv4 with IPv6 (in the short term), but with
   adding IPv6 to be operated in parallel with IPv4.

   This document also (at the moment, may be removed in future versions)
   describes two "non-issues", in Appendix A and Appendix B:
   considerations about probing/mapping IPv6 addresses, and
   considerations with respect to privacy in IPv6.

2.  Issues Due to IPv6 Protocol

2.1  IPv6 Protocol-specific Issues

   There are significant differences between the features of IPv6 and
   IPv4: some of these specification changes may result in potential
   security issues.  Several of these issues have been discussed in
   separate drafts but are summarised here to avoid normative references
   which may not become RFCs.  The following specification-related
   problems have been identified, but this is not necessarily a complete
   list:

2.1.1  Routing Headers and Hosts

   All IPv6 nodes must be able to process Routing Headers [RFC2460].
   This RFC can be interpreted, although it is not clearly stated, to
   mean that all nodes (including hosts) must have this processing
   enabled.  This can result in hosts forwarding received traffic if
   there are segments left in the Routing Header when it arrives at the
   host.

   A number of potential security issues associated with this behavior
   were documented in [I-D.savola-ipv6-rh-hosts].  Some of these issues
   have been resolved (a separate routing header type is now used for
   Mobile IPv6 [RFC3775] and ICMP Traceback has not been standardized),



Davies, et al.           Expires April 25, 2005                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft           IPv6 Security Overview             October 2004


   but two issues remain:
   o  Routing headers can be used to evade access controls based on
      destination addresses.  This could be achieved by sending a packet
      ostensibly to a publically accessible host address but with a
      routing header which will cause the publically accessible host to
      forward the packet to a destination which would have been
      forbidden by the packet filters if the address had been in the
      destination field when the packet was checked.
   o  If the packet source address in the previous case can be spoofed,
      any host could be used to mediate an anonymous reflection
      denial-of-service attack by having any publically accessible host
      redirect the attack packets.

2.1.2  Routing Headers for Mobile IPv6 and Other Purposes

   A new type of Routing Header (type 2) has been defined  in [RFC3775]
   to handle 'interface local' forwarding needed when packets are sent
   to the care-of address of a mobile node which is away from its home
   address.

   It is important that nodes treat the different types of routing
   header appropriately.  It should be possible to apply separate
   filtering rules to the different types of Routing Header.  By design
   hosts must process Type 2 Routing Headers to support Mobile IPv6 but
   routers should not:  to avoid the issues in Section 2.1.1 it may be
   desirable to forbid or limit the processing of Type 0 Routing Headers
   in hosts and some routers.

   Routing Headers are an extremely powerful and general capability.
   Alternative uses of Routing Headers need to be carefully assessed to
   ensure that they do not open new avenues of attack that can be
   exploited.

2.1.3  Obsolete Home Address Option in Mobile IPv6

   The Home Address option specified in early drafts of Mobile IPv6
   would have allowed a trivial source spoofing attack as discussed in
   [I-D.savola-ipv6-rh-ha-security].  The version of Mobile IPv6 as
   standardised in [RFC3775] has removed this issue by ensuring that the
   Home Address destination option is only processed if there is a
   corresponding binding cache entry and securing Binding Update
   messages.

2.1.4  Site(and Larger)-scope Multicast Addresses

   IPv6 supports multicast addresses with site scope which can
   potentially allow an attacker to identify certain important resources
   on the site if misused.  In principle these addresses also have



Davies, et al.           Expires April 25, 2005                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft           IPv6 Security Overview             October 2004


   equivalents for organization-scope and global-scope which could also
   be misused.

   Particular examples are the 'all routers' (FF05::2) and 'all DHCP
   servers' (FF05::1:3) addresses defined in [RFC2375]: an attacker that
   is able to infiltrate a message destined for these addresses on to
   the site will potentially receive in return information identifying
   key resources on the site.  This information can then be the target
   of directed attacks ranging from simple flooding to more specific
   mechanisms designed to subvert the device.

   Some of these addresses have current legitimate uses within a site.
   The risk from external sources can be minimised by ensuring that all
   firewalls and site boundary routers are configured to drop packets
   with site-scope and organization-scope destination addresses.  Also
   nodes should not join multicast groups for which there is no
   legitimate use on the site and site routers should be configured to
   drop packets directed to these unused addresses.

   An attacker internal to the site could potentially use these
   addresses as part of a scanning attack.

   TBD: There needs to be more discussion of possible defences against
   these attacks and ways that they could be carried out from outside
   the site (use of source-specific join).  Also consideration of the
   difficulties of applying appropriate filtering for multicast
   addresses at site boundaries.

2.1.5  ICMPv6 and Multicast

   It is possible to launch a denial-of-service (DoS) attack using IPv6
   which could be amplified by the multicast infrastructure.

   Unlike ICMP for IPv4, ICMPv6 [RFC2463] allows error notification
   responses to be sent when certain unprocessable packets are sent to
   multicast addresses.

   The cases in which responses are sent are:
   o  The received packet is longer than the next link MTU: 'Packet Too
      Big' responses are needed to support Path MTU Discovery for
      multicast traffic.
   o  The received packet contains an unrecognised option in a
      hop-by-hop or destination options extension header with the first
      two bits of the option type set to binary '10': 'Parameter
      Problem' responses are intended to inform the source that some or
      all of the recipients cannot handle the option in question.

   If an attacker can craft a suitable packet sent to a multicast



Davies, et al.           Expires April 25, 2005                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft           IPv6 Security Overview             October 2004


   destination, it may be possible to elicit multiple responses directed
   at the victim (the spoofed source of the multicast packet).

   In practice an attack using oversize packets is unlikely to cause
   much amplification unless the attacker is able to carefully tune the
   packet size to exploit a network with smaller MTU in the edge than
   the core.  Similarly a packet with an unrecognised hop-by-hop option
   would be dropped by the first router.  However a packet with an
   unrecognised destination option could generate multiple responses.
   On the other hand, the use of 'reverse path forwarding' checks to
   eliminate loops in multicast forwarding limits the range of addresses
   which can be spoofed, except where unicast-encapsulated register
   messages are used.

   In addition to amplification, this kind of attack would potentially
   consume large amounts of forwarding state resources in routers on
   multicast-enabled networks.  See [I-D.savola-v6ops-firewalling].

2.1.6  Anycast traffic Identification and Security

   IPv6 introduces the notion of anycast addresses and services.  A
   request to an anycast service will return the global unicast address
   of the server that actually implements the service thereby exposing
   some knowledge about the internal structure of the network.  It may
   be desirable to consider using specialised addresses for anycast
   servers which are not used for any other part of the network to
   restrict the information exposed.  Alternatively operators may wish
   to restrict the use of anycast services from outside the domain, thus
   requiring firewalls to filter anycast requests.  For this purpose,
   firewalls need to know which addresses are being used for anycast
   services: these addresses are arbitrary and look just like any other
   IPv6 unicast address.

   It is also difficult to secure anycast communications using IPsec and
   IKE.

2.1.7  Address Privacy Extensions Interact with DDoS Defenses

   The purpose of the privacy extensions for stateless address
   auto-configuration [RFC3041] is to change the interface identifier
   (and hence the global scope addresses generated from it) from time to
   time in order to make it more difficult for eavesdroppers and other
   information collectors to identify when different addresses used in
   different transactions actually correspond to the same node.

   The security issue resulting from this is that if the frequency of
   change of the addresses used by a node is sufficiently great to
   achieve the intended aim of the privacy extensions, the observed



Davies, et al.           Expires April 25, 2005                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft           IPv6 Security Overview             October 2004


   behavior of the node could look very like that of a compromised node
   which was being used as the source of a distributed denial-of-service
   (DDoS).  It would thus be difficult to for any future defenses
   against DDoS attacks to distinguish between a high rate change of
   addresses resulting from genuine use of the privacy extensions and a
   compromised node being used as the source of a DDoS with 'in-prefix'
   spoofed source addresses as described in
   [I-D.dupont-ipv6-rfc3041harmful].

2.1.8  Dynamic DNS, Stateless Address Auto-Configuration and Privacy
      Extensions

   The introduction of Stateless Address Auto-Configuration (SLAAC) with
   IPv6 provides an additional challenge to the security of Dynamic DNS.
   With manual addressing or the use of DHCP, the number of hosts
   trusted to make updates to the DNS server is limited, assuming any
   necessary updates are carried out by the DHCP server.  This is true
   equally for IPv4 and IPv6.

   Since SLAAC does not make use of a single and potentially trusted
   DHCP server, but depends on the node obtaining the address, securing
   the insertion of updates into DDNS may need a security association
   between each node and the DDNS server.  This is discussed further in
   [I-D.ietf-dnsop-ipv6-dns-issues].

   Using the Privacy Extensions to SLAAC [RFC3041] may significantly
   increase the rate of updates of Dynamic DNS, assuming a node which
   wishes to use the privacy extensions wishes to publish its address in
   some DNS server.  If the rate of change needed to achieve real
   privacy has to be increased as is mentioned in Section 2.1.7 the
   update rate for DDNS may be excessive.

2.1.9  Extension Headers

   A number of issues relating to the specification of IPv6 Extension
   headers have been identified.  Several of these are discussed in
   [I-D.savola-v6ops-firewalling].

2.1.9.1  Processing Extension Headers in Middleboxes

   In IPv4 deep packet inspection techniques are used to implement
   policing and filtering both as part of routers and in middleboxes
   such as firewalls.  Fully extending these techniques to IPv6 would
   require inspection of all the extension headers in a packet to ensure
   that policy constraints on the use of certain headers and options
   were enforced and to remove packets containing potentially damaging
   unknown options at the earliest opportunity.




Davies, et al.           Expires April 25, 2005                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft           IPv6 Security Overview             October 2004


   This requirement appears to conflict with Section 4 of the IPv6
   specification in [RFC2460] which requires that destination options
   are not processed at all until the packet reaches the appropriate
   destination (either the final destination or a routing header
   waypoint).

   Also [RFC2460] forbids processing the headers other than in the order
   in which they appear in the packet.

   A further ambiguity relates to whether an intermediate node should
   discard a packet which contains a header or destination option which
   it does not recognise.  If the rules above are followed slaveishly,
   it is not (or may not be) legitimate for the intermediate node to
   discard the packet because it should not be processing those headers
   or options.

   [RFC2460] therefore does not appear to take account of the behavior
   of middleboxes and other non-final destinations which may be
   inspecting the packet, and thereby potentially limits the security
   protection of these boxes.

2.1.9.2  Processing Extension Header Chains

   There is a further problem for middleboxes that want to examine the
   transport headers which are located at the end of the IPv6 header
   chain.  In order to locate the transport header or other protocol
   data unit, the node has to parse the header chain.

   The IPv6 specification [RFC2460] does not mandate the use of the
   Type-Length-Value format with a fixed layout for the start of each
   header although it is used for the majority of headers currently
   defined.  (Only the Type field is guaranteed in size and offset).
   For example the fragment header does not conform to the TLV format
   used for all the other headers.

   A middlebox cannot therefore guarantee to be able to process header
   chains which may contain headers defined after the box was
   manufactured.  As noted in Section 2.1.9.1, middleboxes ought not to
   have to know about all header types in use but still need to be able
   to skip over such headers to find the transport PDU start.  This
   either limits the security which can be applied in firewalls or makes
   it difficult to deploy new extension header types.

   As noted in Section 2.1.9.1, Destination Options may contain unknown
   options.  However, the options are encoded in TLV format so that
   intermediate nodes can skip over them during processing, unlike the
   enclosing extension headers.




Davies, et al.           Expires April 25, 2005                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft           IPv6 Security Overview             October 2004


2.1.9.3  Unknown Headers/Destination Options and Security Policy

   A strict security policy might dictate that packets containing either
   unknown headers or destination options are discarded by firewalls or
   other filters.  This requires the firewall to process the whole
   extension header chain which may be currently in conflict with the
   IPv6 specification as discussed in Section 2.1.9.1.

   Even if the firewall does inspect the whole header chain, it may not
   be sensible to discard packets with items unrecognised by the
   firewall because the intermediate node has no knowledge of which
   options and headers are implemented in the destination node.  Hence
   it is highly desirable to make the discard policy configurable to
   avoid firewalls dropping packets with legitimate items that they do
   not recognise because their hardware or software is not aware of a
   new definition.

2.1.9.4  Excessive Hop-by-Hop Options

   IPv6 does not limit the number of hop by hop options which can be
   present in a hop-by-hop option header.  This can be used for mounting
   denial of service attacks affecting all nodes on a path as described
   in [I-D.krishnan-ipv6-hopbyhop].

2.1.9.5  Overuse of Router Alert Option

   The IPv6 router alert option specifies a hop-by-hop option that, if
   present, signals the router to take a closer look at the packet.
   This can be used for denial of service attacks.  By sending a large
   number of packets with the router alert option present an attacker
   can deplete the processor cycles on the routers available to
   legitimate traffic.

2.1.10  Fragmentation: Reassembly and Deep Packet Inspection

   The current specifications of IPv6 in [RFC2460] do not mandate any
   minimum packet size for the fragments of a packet before the last
   one, except for the need to carry the unfragmentable part in all
   fragments.

   The unfragmentable part does not include the transport port numbers
   so that it is possible that the first fragment does not contain
   sufficient information to carry out deep packet inspection involving
   the port numbers.

   Also the reassembly rules for fragmented packets in [RFC2460] do not
   mandate behavior which would minimise the effects of overlapping
   fragments.



Davies, et al.           Expires April 25, 2005                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft           IPv6 Security Overview             October 2004


   Depending on the implementation of packet reassembly and the
   treatment of packet fragments in firewalls and other nodes which use
   deep packet inspection for traffic filtering, this potentially leaves
   IPv6 open to the sort of attacks described in [RFC1858] and [RFC3128]
   for IPv4.

   There is no reason to allow overlapping packet fragments and overlaps
   could be prohibited in a future revision of the protocol
   specification.  Some implementations already drop all packets with
   overlapped fragments.

   Specifying a minimum size for packet fragments does not help in the
   same way as it does for IPv4 because IPv6 extension headers can be
   made to appear very long: an attacker could insert one or more
   undefined destination options with long lengths and the 'ignore if
   unknown' bit set.  Given the guaranteed minimum MTU of IPv6 it seems
   reasonable that hosts should be able to ensure that the transport
   port numbers are in the first fragment in almost all cases and that
   deep packet inspection should be very suspicious of first fragments
   that do not contain them.

2.1.11  Fragmentation Related DoS Attacks

   Packet reassembly in IPv6 hosts also opens up the possibility of
   various fragment-related security attacks.  Some of these are
   analagous to attacks identified for IPv4.  Of particular concern is a
   DoS attack based on sending large numbers of small fragments without
   a terminating last fragment which would potentially overload the
   reconstruction buffers and consume large amounts of CPU resources.

   Mandating the size of packet fragments could reduce the impact of
   this kind of attack by limiting the rate at which fragments could
   arrive.

2.1.12  Areas of Improved Security in IPv6

   There are several areas where IPv4 security is weak which have been
   made stronger either in the base IPv6 specifications or by additional
   specifications.  These areas include:

   o  Combatting threats related to local links, comparable to various
      ARP spoofing techniques associated with IPv4; the Neighbor
      Discovery (ND) threats have been documented in [RFC3756] and
      mechanisms to combat them specified in Secure Neighbor Discovery
      (SEND) [I-D.ietf-send-ndopt].  SEND is an optional mechanism which
      is particularly applicable to wireless and other environments
      where it is difficult to physically secure the link.




Davies, et al.           Expires April 25, 2005                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft           IPv6 Security Overview             October 2004


   o  Improving Mobile IP security: Mobile IPv6 offers significantly
      enhanced security compared with Mobile IPv4 especially when using
      optimized routing and care-of addresses.  Return routability
      checks are used to provide relatively robust assurance that the
      different addresses which a mobile node uses as it moves through
      the network do indeed all refer to the same node.  The threats and
      solutions are described in [RFC3775] and a more extensive
      discussion of the security aspects of the design can be be found
      in [I-D.ietf-mip6-ro-sec].

   Appendix A lists (typically bogus) considerations related to IPv6
   network mapping or probing.  Appendix B lists mainly unfounded claims
   about the lack of privacy in IPv6.

2.2  IPv4-mapped IPv6 Addresses

   Overloaded functionality is always a double-edged sword: it may yield
   some deployment benefits, but often also incurs the price which comes
   with ambiguity.

   One example of such is IPv4-mapped IPv6 addresses: a representation
   of an IPv4 address as an IPv6 address inside an operating system.
   Since the original specification, IPv4-mapped addresses have been
   extended to be used with a transition mechanism [RFC2765], on the
   wire.

   Therefore, it becomes difficult to unambiguously discern whether an
   IPv4 mapped address is really an IPv4 address represented in the IPv6
   address format *or* an IPv6 address received from the wire (which may
   be subject to address forgery, etc.).

   In addition, special cases like these, while giving deployment
   benefits in some arenas, require a considerable amount of code
   complexity (e.g.  in the implementations of bind() system calls)
   which is probably undesirable.  These issues are discussed in
   [I-D.cmetz-v6ops-v4mapped-api-harmful] and
   [I-D.itojun-v6ops-v4mapped-harmful].

   Given the issues that have been identified, it seems appropriate that
   mapped addresses should not be used on the wire.  However, changing
   application behavior by deprecating the use of mapped addresses in
   the operating system interface would have significant impact on
   application porting methods and needs further study.

2.3  Increased End-to-End Transparency

   With IPv6, increased end-to-end transparency in general can sometimes
   be seen as a threat.  Some seem to want limited end-to-end



Davies, et al.           Expires April 25, 2005                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft           IPv6 Security Overview             October 2004


   capabilities, e.g.  in the form of private, local addressing, even
   when it is not necessary.

   People have gotten used to the perceived, dubious security benefits
   of NATs and perimeter firewalls, and the bidirectionality and
   transparency that IPv6 can provide may seem undesirable at times.

   This is a really important issue especially for most enterprise
   network managers.

   It is worth noting that IPv6 does not *require* end-to-end
   connectivity.  It merely provides end-to-end addressability; the
   connectivity can still be controlled using firewalls (or other
   mechanisms), and it is indeed wise to do so.

3.  Issues Due to Transition Mechanisms

3.1  IPv6 Transition/Co-existence Mechanism-specific Issues

   The more complicated the IPv6 transition/co-existence becomes, the
   greater the danger that security issues will be introduced in the
   mechanisms (which may or may not be readily apparent).  Therefore it
   would be desirable to keep the mechanisms simple, and in as small
   pieces as possible.

   One case where such security issues have been analyzed is
   [I-D.ietf-v6ops-6to4-security] .

   As tunneling has been proposed as a model for several more cases than
   are currently being used, its security properties should be analyzed
   in more detail.  There are some generic dangers to tunneling:

   o  it may be easier to avoid ingress filtering checks
   o  it is possible to attack the tunnel interface: several IPv6
      security mechanisms depend on checking that Hop Limit equals 255
      on receipt and that link-local addresses are used.  Sending such
      packets to the tunnel interface is much easier than gaining access
      to a physical segment and sending them there.
   o  automatic tunneling mechanisms are typically particularly
      dangerous as the other end-point is unspecified, and packets have
      to be accepted and decapsulated from everywhere.  Therefore,
      special care should be observed when specifying automatic
      tunneling techniques.

3.2  Automatic Tunneling and Relays

   Two mechanisms have been (or are being) specified which use automatic
   tunneling over IPv4 or UDP/IPv4 between the nodes enabling the same



Davies, et al.           Expires April 25, 2005                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft           IPv6 Security Overview             October 2004


   mechanism for connectivity: 6to4 and Teredo (respectively).

   The first obvious issue (as mentioned above) in such approaches is
   that such nodes must allow decapsulation of traffic from anywhere in
   the Internet.  That kind of decapsulation function must be extremely
   well secured as it's so wide open.

   Even more difficult problem is how these mechanisms are able to
   communicate with native IPv6 nodes or between the automatic tunneling
   mechanisms: such connectivity requires the use of some kind of
   "relays".  These relays could be deployed e.g., in all native IPv6
   nodes, native IPv6 sites, IPv6 ISPs, or just somewhere in the
   Internet.  This has some obvious trust and scaling issues.  As
   authentication of such a relay service is very difficult, and more so
   in some of those deployment models, relays provide a means to for
   address spoofing, (reflected) Denial-of-Service attacks, and other
   threats.

   Threats related to 6to4 are discussed in
   [I-D.ietf-v6ops-6to4-security].

3.3  Tunneling May Break Security Assumptions

   NATs and firewalls have been deployed extensively in the IPv4
   Internet, for the good or the bad.  People who deploy them typically
   have some security/operational requirements in mind (e.g.  a desire
   to block inbound connection attempts), whether misguided or not.

   Tunneling can change that model.  IPv6-over-IPv4 tunneling is
   typically explicitly allowed or disallowed implicitly.  Tunneling
   IPv6 over IPv4 with UDP, however, is often an entirely different
   thing: as UDP must usually be allowed through, at least in part and
   in a possibly stateful manner, one can "punch holes" in NAT's and
   firewalls using UDP.  Actually, the mechanisms have been explicitly
   designed to traverse both NATs and firewalls in a similar fashion.

   One could say that tunneling is especially questionable in home/SOHO
   environments where the level of network administration is not that
   high; in these environments the hosts may not be as managed as in
   others (e.g., network services might be enabled unnecessarily),
   leading to possible security break-ins or other vulnerabilities.

   Holes can be punched both intentionally and unintentionally.  In case
   it is a willing choice from the administrator/user, this is less of a
   problem (but e.g., enterprises might want to block IPv6 tunneling
   explicitly if some employees would do something like this willingly
   on their own).  On the other hand, if a hole is punched
   transparently, without people understanding the consequences, it will



Davies, et al.           Expires April 25, 2005                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft           IPv6 Security Overview             October 2004


   very probably result in a serious threat sooner or later.

   When deploying tunneling solutions, especially tunneling solutions
   which are automatic and/or can be enabled easily by users not
   understanding the consequences, care should be taken not to
   compromise the security assumptions held by the users.

   For example, NAT traversal should not be performed by default unless
   there is a firewall producing a similar by-default security policy as
   IPv4 NAT provides.  Protocol-41 tunneling is less of a problem, as it
   is easier to block if necessary; however, if the host is protected in
   IPv4, the IPv6 side should be protected as well.

   As has been shown in Appendix A, it is relatively easy to find out
   IPv6 address of corresponding to an IPv4 address, so one should never
   rely on "security by obscurity" i.e., relying that nobody is able to
   guess or know the IPv6 address of the host.

4.  Issues Due to IPv6 Deployment

4.1  IPv6 Service Piloting Done Insecurely

   In many cases, IPv6 service piloting is done in a manner which is
   considered to be less secure than as one would do with IPv4.  For
   example, hosts and routers might not be protected by IPv6 firewalls,
   even if in IPv4 firewalls are being used.

   The other possible alternative, in some places, is that no service
   piloting is done at all because IPv6 firewalls may not be widely used
   -- and IPv6 deployment suffers (of course, this is also one of the
   nice excuses for not doing IPv6).

   This problem may be partially due to a slow speed of IPv6-capable
   firewall development and deployment.  However, it is also a problem
   with a lack of information: actually, there are quite a few IPv6
   packet filters and firewalls already, which could be used for
   sufficient access controls, but network administrators may not be
   aware of them yet.

   However, there appears to be a real lack in two areas: 'personal
   firewalls' and enterprise firewalls; the same devices that support
   and are used for IPv4 today are often expected to also become
   IPv6-capable -- even though this is not really required.  That is,
   IPv4 access could be filtered by one firewall, and when IPv6 access
   is added, it could be protected by another firewall; they don't have
   to be the same, and even their models don't have to be the same.

   Another, smaller factor may be that due to a few decisions on how



Davies, et al.           Expires April 25, 2005                [Page 15]

Internet-Draft           IPv6 Security Overview             October 2004


   IPv6 was built, it's more difficult for firewalls to be implemented
   and work under all the cases (e.g.  when new extension headers etc.
   are used) as discussed in Section 2.1.9: it is significantly more
   difficult for intermediate nodes to process the IPv6 header chains
   than IPv4 packets.

   A similar argument, which is often quoted as hindering IPv6
   deployment, has been the lack of Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS).
   It is not clear whether this is more of an excuse than a real reason.

4.2  Enabling IPv6 by Default Brings the Usability Down

   A practical disadvantage of enabling IPv6 as of this writing is that
   it typically brings the observed service level down a bit; that is,
   the usability suffers.

   This is due to at least three reasons:

   o  global IPv6 routing is still rather unstable, leading to packet
      loss, lower throughput, and higher delay
      [I-D.savola-v6ops-6bone-mess]
   o  some applications cannot properly handle both IPv4 and IPv6 or may
      have problems handling all the fallbacks and failure modes (and in
      some cases, e.g.  if the TCP timeout kicks in, this may be very
      difficult)
   o  some DNS server implementations have flaws that severely affect
      DNS queries for IPv6 addresses
      [I-D.ietf-dnsop-misbehavior-against-aaaa]

   Actually, some would be 100% ready to release IPv6 services (e.g.
   web) today, but that would mean trouble for many of their
   dual-stacked customers or users all over the world so they don't:
   these are often published under a separate domain or subdomain, and
   are practically not used that often.

   These issues are also described at some length in
   [I-D.ietf-v6ops-v6onbydefault] .

4.3  Addressing Schemes and Securing Routers

   Whilst in general terms brute force scanning of IPv6 subnets is
   essentially impossible due to the enormously larger address space of
   IPv6 and the 64 bit interface identifiers (see Appendix A), this will
   be obviated if administrators do not take advantage of the large
   space to use unguessable interface identifiers.

   Because the unmemorability of complete IPv6 addresses there is a
   temptation for administrators to use small integers as interface



Davies, et al.           Expires April 25, 2005                [Page 16]

Internet-Draft           IPv6 Security Overview             October 2004


   identifiers when manually configuring them, as might happen on
   point-to-point links.  Such allocations make it easy for an attacker
   to find active nodes that they can then port scan.

   It is also essential to ensure that the management interfaces of
   routers are well secured as the router will usually contain a
   significant cache of neighbor addresses in its neighbor cache.

4.4  Consequences of Multiple Addresses in IPv6

   One positive consequence of IPv6 is that nodes which do not require
   global access can communicate locally just by the use of a link local
   address (if very local access is sufficient) or across the site by
   using a Unique Local Address (ULA).  In either case it is easy to
   ensure that access outside the assigned domain of activity can be
   controlled by simple filters (which may be the default for link
   locals).

   On the other hand, the possibility that a node or interface can have
   multiple global scope addresses makes access control filtering both
   on ingress and egress more complex and requires higher maintenance
   levels.

4.5  Deploying ICMPv6

   In IPv4 it is generally accepted that stringent filtering of ICMP
   packets by firewalls is essential to maintain security.  Because of
   the extended use that is made of ICMPv6 with a multitude of
   functions, the simple set of dropping rules that are usually applied
   in IPv4 need to be significantly developed for IPv6.  The blanket
   dropping of all ICMP messages that is used in some very strict
   environments is simply not possible for IPv6.

   In an IPv6 firewall, policy needs to allow some messages through the
   firewall but also has to permit certain messages to and from the
   firewall.

   To support effective functioning of IPv6, firewalls should typically
   allow the following messages to pass through the firewall (the first
   four are equivalent to the typical IPv4 filtering allowance):
   o  ICMPv6 Type 1, Code 0 - No route to destination error
   o  ICMPv6 Type 3 - Time exceeded error
   o  ICMPv6 Type 128 - Echo request
   o  ICMPv6 Type 129 - Echo response
   o  ICMPv6 Type 2 - Packet too big (required for Path MTU Discovery)
   o  ICMPv6 Type 4 - Parameter problem (this type needs to be
      investigated further as it is possible that  it can be abused.




Davies, et al.           Expires April 25, 2005                [Page 17]

Internet-Draft           IPv6 Security Overview             October 2004


   Additionally the following ICMPv6 messages may be required to be
   supported to and from a firewall:
   o  ICMPv6 Type 2 - packet too big - The firewall itself has to
      participate in Path MTU Discovery.
   o  ICMPv6 Type 130-132 - Multicast Listener Discovery messages have
      to be accepted by routing devices to replace IGMP which is used in
      IPv4[Check for MLDv2]
   o  ICMPv6 Type 133/134 - Router Solicitations and Advertisements -
      assuming the firewall is also a router, it needs to support router
      discovery and host auto-configuration.
   o  ICMPv6 Type 135/136 - Neigbor Solicitation and Advertisement -
      Needed for duplicate address detection and Layer 2 address
      resolution.
   o  ICMPv6 Type 4 - parameter Problem - Needs further investigation
      because of possible abuse.

4.6  Operational Factors when Enabling IPv6 in the Network

   You have to be careful when enabling IPv6 in the network gear for
   multiple reasons:

   IPv6-enabled router software may be unstable(r) yet; either IPv6 is
   unstable, or the software you have to run to be able to run IPv6 is
   different (from non-IPv6 parts) from the one you would run otherwise,
   making the software in practice more unstable -- and raising the bar
   for IPv6 adoption.

   IPv6 processing may not happen at (near) line speed (or in the same
   level as IPv4).  A high amount of IPv6 traffic (even legitimate, e.g.
   NNTP) could easily overload the software-based IPv6 processing and
   cause harm also to IPv4 processing, affecting availability.  That is,
   if people don't feel confident enough in the IPv6 support, they will
   be hesitant to enable it in their "production" networks.

   Sometimes required features may be missing from the vendors' software
   releases; an example is a software enabling IPv6 telnet/SSH access,
   but having no ability to turn it off or limit access to it!

   Sometimes the default IPv6 configuration is insecure.  For example,
   in one vendor, if you have restricted IPv4 telnet to only a few hosts
   in the configuration, you need to be aware that IPv6 telnet will be
   automatically enabled, that the configuration commands used
   previously do not block IPv6 telnet, IPv6 telnet is open to the world
   by default, and that you have to use a separate command to also lock
   down the IPv6 telnet access.

   Many operator networks have to run interior routing protocols for
   both IPv4 and IPv6.  It's possible to run the both in one routing



Davies, et al.           Expires April 25, 2005                [Page 18]

Internet-Draft           IPv6 Security Overview             October 2004


   protocol, or have two separate routing protocols; either approach has
   its tradeoffs.  If multiple routing protocols are used, one should
   note that this causes double the number of processing when links flap
   or recalculation is otherwise needed -- which might more easily
   overload the routers' CPU, causing slightly slower convergence time.

5.  Acknowledgements

   Alain Durand, Alain Baudot, Luc Beloeil, and Andras Kis-Szabo
   provided feedback to improve this memo.  Michael Wittsend and Michael
   Cole discussed issues relating to probing/mapping and privacy.

6.  Security Considerations

   This memo tries to give an overview of security considerations of the
   different aspects of IPv6.

7.  References

7.1  Normative References

   [I-D.savola-v6ops-transarch]
              Savola, P., "A View on IPv6 Transition Architecture",
              draft-savola-v6ops-transarch-03 (work in progress),
              January 2004.

   [RFC2375]  Hinden, R. and S. Deering, "IPv6 Multicast Address
              Assignments", RFC 2375, July 1998.

   [RFC2460]  Deering, S. and R. Hinden, "Internet Protocol, Version 6
              (IPv6) Specification", RFC 2460, December 1998.

   [RFC2463]  Conta, A. and S. Deering, "Internet Control Message
              Protocol (ICMPv6) for the Internet Protocol Version 6
              (IPv6) Specification", RFC 2463, December 1998.

   [RFC3041]  Narten, T. and R. Draves, "Privacy Extensions for
              Stateless Address Autoconfiguration in IPv6", RFC 3041,
              January 2001.

   [RFC3775]  Johnson, D., Perkins, C. and J. Arkko, "Mobility Support
              in IPv6", RFC 3775, June 2004.

7.2  Informative References

   [I-D.dupont-ipv6-rfc3041harmful]
              Dupont, F. and P. Savola, "RFC 3041 Considered Harmful",
              draft-dupont-ipv6-rfc3041harmful-05 (work in progress),



Davies, et al.           Expires April 25, 2005                [Page 19]

Internet-Draft           IPv6 Security Overview             October 2004


              June 2004.

   [I-D.savola-v6ops-6bone-mess]
              Savola, P., "Moving from 6bone to IPv6 Internet",
              draft-savola-v6ops-6bone-mess-01 (work in progress),
              November 2002.

   [I-D.ietf-v6ops-6to4-security]
              Savola, P., "Security Considerations for 6to4",
              draft-ietf-v6ops-6to4-security-04 (work in progress), July
              2004.

   [I-D.ietf-dnsop-misbehavior-against-aaaa]
              Morishita, Y. and T. Jinmei, "Common Misbehavior against
              DNS Queries for IPv6 Addresses",
              draft-ietf-dnsop-misbehavior-against-aaaa-01 (work in
              progress), April 2004.

   [FNAT]     Bellovin, S., "Technique for Counting NATted Hosts", Proc.
              Second Internet Measurement Workshop , November 2002,
              <http://www.research.att.com/~smb/papers/fnat.pdf>.

   [I-D.savola-v6ops-firewalling]
              Savola, P., "Firewalling Considerations for IPv6",
              draft-savola-v6ops-firewalling-02 (work in progress),
              October 2003.

   [I-D.schild-v6ops-guide-v4mapping]
              Schild, C., "Guide to Mapping IPv4 to IPv6 Subnets",
              draft-schild-v6ops-guide-v4mapping-00 (work in progress),
              January 2004.

   [I-D.ietf-v6ops-v6onbydefault]
              Roy, S., Durand, A. and J. Paugh, "Issues with Dual Stack
              IPv6 on by Default", draft-ietf-v6ops-v6onbydefault-03
              (work in progress), July 2004.

   [I-D.chown-v6ops-port-scanning-implications]
              Chown, T., "IPv6 Implications for TCP/UDP Port Scanning",
              draft-chown-v6ops-port-scanning-implications-01 (work in
              progress), July 2004.

   [I-D.savola-ipv6-rh-ha-security]
              Savola, P., "Security of IPv6 Routing Header and Home
              Address Options", draft-savola-ipv6-rh-ha-security-02
              (work in progress), March 2002.

   [I-D.savola-ipv6-rh-hosts]



Davies, et al.           Expires April 25, 2005                [Page 20]

Internet-Draft           IPv6 Security Overview             October 2004


              Savola, P., "Note about Routing Header Processing on IPv6
              Hosts", draft-savola-ipv6-rh-hosts-00 (work in progress),
              February 2002.

   [I-D.ietf-mip6-ro-sec]
              Nikander, P., "Mobile IP version 6 Route Optimization
              Security Design Background", draft-ietf-mip6-ro-sec-02
              (work in progress), October 2004.

   [I-D.ietf-send-ndopt]
              Arkko, J., Kempf, J., Sommerfeld, B., Zill, B. and P.
              Nikander, "SEcure Neighbor Discovery (SEND)",
              draft-ietf-send-ndopt-06 (work in progress), July 2004.

   [RFC3756]  Nikander, P., Kempf, J. and E. Nordmark, "IPv6 Neighbor
              Discovery (ND) Trust Models and Threats", RFC 3756, May
              2004.

   [RFC2765]  Nordmark, E., "Stateless IP/ICMP Translation Algorithm
              (SIIT)", RFC 2765, February 2000.

   [RFC1858]  Ziemba, G., Reed, D. and P. Traina, "Security
              Considerations for IP Fragment Filtering", RFC 1858,
              October 1995.

   [RFC3128]  Miller, I., "Protection Against a Variant of the Tiny
              Fragment Attack (RFC 1858)", RFC 3128, June 2001.

   [I-D.cmetz-v6ops-v4mapped-api-harmful]
              Metz, C. and J. Hagino, "IPv4-Mapped Address API
              Considered Harmful",
              draft-cmetz-v6ops-v4mapped-api-harmful-01 (work in
              progress), October 2003.

   [I-D.itojun-v6ops-v4mapped-harmful]
              Metz, C. and J. Hagino, "IPv4-Mapped Addresses on the Wire
              Considered Harmful",
              draft-itojun-v6ops-v4mapped-harmful-02 (work in progress),
              October 2003.

   [I-D.ietf-dnsop-ipv6-dns-issues]
              Durand, A., Ihren, J. and P. Savola, "Operational
              Considerations and Issues with IPv6 DNS",
              draft-ietf-dnsop-ipv6-dns-issues-09 (work in progress),
              August 2004.

   [I-D.krishnan-ipv6-hopbyhop]
              Krishnan, S., "Arrangement of Hop-by-Hop options",



Davies, et al.           Expires April 25, 2005                [Page 21]

Internet-Draft           IPv6 Security Overview             October 2004


              draft-krishnan-ipv6-hopbyhop-00 (work in progress), June
              2004.


Authors' Addresses

   Elwyn B. Davies
   Nortel Networks
   Harlow Laboratories
   London Road
   Harlow, Essex  CM17 9NA
   UK

   Phone: +44 1279 405 498
   EMail: elwynd@nortelnetworks.com


   Suresh Krishnan
   Ericsson
   8400 Decarie Blvd.
   Town of Mount Royal, QC  H4P 2N2
   Canada

   Phone: +1 514-345-7900
   EMail: suresh.krishnan@ericsson.com


   Pekka Savola
   CSC/Funet

   EMail: psavola@funet.fi

Appendix A.  IPv6 Probing/Mapping Considerations

   Some want the IPv6 numbering topology (either at network or node
   level) [I-D.schild-v6ops-guide-v4mapping] match IPv4 as exactly as
   possible, the others see this as a security threat because IPv6 could
   have different security properties than IPv4.

   That is, if an attacker knows the IPv4 address of the node, he might
   want to try to probe the corresponding IPv6 address, based on the
   assumption that the security defenses might be lower.  This might be
   the case particularly for nodes which are behind a NAT in IPv4, but
   globally addressable in IPv6.  Naturally, this is not a concern if
   the similar security policies are in place.

   On the other hand, brute-force scanning or probing is unfeasible
   [I-D.chown-v6ops-port-scanning-implications].



Davies, et al.           Expires April 25, 2005                [Page 22]

Internet-Draft           IPv6 Security Overview             October 2004


   For example, automatic tunneling mechanisms use rather deterministic
   methods for generating IPv6 addresses, so probing/port-scanning an
   IPv6 node is simplified.  The IPv4 address is embedded at least in
   6to4, Teredo and ISATAP address.  Further than that, it's possible
   (in the case of 6to4 in particular) to learn the address behind the
   prefix; for example, Microsoft 6to4 implementation uses the address
   2002:V4ADDR::V4ADDR while Linux and BSD implementations default to
   2002:V4ADDR::1.  This could also be used as one way to identify an
   implementation.

   One proposal has been to randomize the addresses or Subnet identifier
   in the address of the 6to4 router.  This doesn't really help, as the
   6to4 router (whether a host or a router) will return an ICMPv6 Hop
   Limit Exceeded message, revealing the IP address.  Hosts behind the
   6to4 router can use methods such as RFC 3041 addresses to conceal
   themselves, though.

   To conclude, it seems that with an IPv4 address, the respective IPv6
   address, when automatic tunneling mechanism is being used, could
   possibly be guessed with relative ease.  This has significant
   implications if the IPv6 security policy isn't the same as IPv4.

Appendix B.  IPv6 Privacy Considerations

   It has been claimed that IPv6 harms the privacy of the user, either
   by exposing the MAC address, or by exposing the number of nodes
   connected to a site.

B.1  Exposing MAC Addresses

   The MAC address, which with stateless address autoconfiguration,
   results in an EUI64, exposes the model of network card.  The concern
   has been that a user might not want to expose the details of the
   system to outsiders, e.g., in the fear of a resulting burglary (e.g.,
   if a crook identifies expensive equipment from the MAC addresses).

   In most cases, this seems completely unfounded.  First, such an
   address must be learned somehow -- this is a non-trivial process; the
   addresses are visible e.g., in web site access logs, but the chances
   that a random web site owner is collecting this kind of information
   (or whether it would be of any use) are quite slim.  Being able to
   eavesdrop the traffic to learn such addresses (e.g., by the
   compromise of DSL or Cable modem physical media) seems also quite
   far-fetched.  Further, using RFC 3041 addresses for such purposes is
   straightforward if worried about the risk.  Second, the burglar would
   have to be able to map the IP address to the physical location; this
   is typically only available in the private customer database of the
   ISP.



Davies, et al.           Expires April 25, 2005                [Page 23]

Internet-Draft           IPv6 Security Overview             October 2004


B.2  Exposing Multiple Devices

   Another presented concern is whether the user wants to show off as
   having a lot of computers or other devices at a network; NAT "hides"
   everything behind an address, but is not perfect either [FNAT].

   One practical reason why some may find this desirable is being able
   to thwart certain ISPs' business models, where one should pay extra
   for additional computers (and not the connectivity as a whole).

   Similar feasibility issues as described above apply.  To a degree,
   the counting avoidance could be performed by the sufficiently
   frequent re-use of RFC 3041 addresses -- that is, if during a short
   period, dozens of generated addresses seem to be in use, it's
   difficult to estimate whether they are generated by just one host or
   multiple hosts.



































Davies, et al.           Expires April 25, 2005                [Page 24]

Internet-Draft           IPv6 Security Overview             October 2004


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Davies, et al.           Expires April 25, 2005                [Page 25]



