Internet Draft                                               C. Francis
PKIX Working Group                          WetStone Technologies, Inc.
October 2002                                                  D. Pinkas
Expires: April 2003                                                Bull






                    Attribute Certificate Policy extension
                   <draft-ietf-pkix-acpolicies-extn-01.txt>





Status of this memo

This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with all 
provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering Task 
Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other groups 
may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference material 
or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

Abstract

This document describes one certificate extension to explicitly 
state the Attribute Certificate (AC) policies that apply to a given 
Attribute Certificate.

Conventions Used In This Document

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
"SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].

1. Introduction

When issuing a PKC, a Certificate Authority (CA) can perform various 
levels of verification with regard to the subject identity.  A CA makes 
its verification procedures, as well as other operational rules it 
abides by, "visible" through a certificate policy, which may be 
referenced by a certificate policies extension in the PKC.

Francis, Pinkas                                                  Page 1


Internet-Draft              AC Policy extension            October 2002


When issuing an AC, an Attribute Authority (AA) can perform various 
levels of initial and subsequent verifications with regard to the 
attributes that will be contained in attribute certificates. 

These verification procedures, as well as other operational rules the 
attribute certification authority abides by, can be made "visible" 
through an AC policies extension, which may be included in the AC. 

The purpose of this document is to define such an extension, but not 
the AC policies themselves.

2. AC Policy Extension Semantics

Attribute Certificates are defined in [RFC3281].

An Attribute Certificate Policy (ACP) is a set of rules that indicates 
generic rules for registering, verifying, delivering and revoking the 
attributes contained in a particular Attribute Certificate.

It should thus be noticed that an AA does not necessarily support one 
single policy. However, for each AC that is delivered it SHALL make 
sure that the policy applies to all the attributes that are contained 
in it.

An Attribute Certificate Policy may be used by a certificate user to 
decide whether or not to trust the attributes contained in a 
certificate for a particular purpose.

When a certificate contains an AC policies extension, the extension 
MAY, at the option of the certificate issuer, be either critical or 
non-critical.  The extension MAY contain optional qualifiers.

The AC Policies extension MAY be included in an attribute certificate.
Like all X.509 certificate extensions, the AC policies extension is 
defined using ASN.1 [X.208-88, X.209-88]. 

The AC policies extension is identified by id-pe-acPolicies.

     id-pe-acPolicies OBJECT IDENTIFIER  ::=  { id-pe <<TBD>> }

The AC policies extension includes a list of AC policies recognized by 
the issuing authority that apply to the attributes included in the 
certificate, together with optional qualifier information pertaining to 
these AC policies.

AC Policies and AC policy qualifier types may be defined by any 
organization with a need.  Object identifiers used to identify AC 
Policies and AC Policy qualifier types are assigned in accordance with 
[ITU-T Rec. X660 | ISO/IEC 9834-1].

The presence of this extension in an attribute certificate indicates 
the AC policies for which the attribute certificate is valid.


Francis, Pinkas                                                  Page 2


Internet-Draft              AC Policy extension            October 2002


An application that recognizes this extension and its content SHALL 
process the extension regardless of the value of the criticality flag. 

If the extension is both flagged non-critical and is not recognized, 
then the application MAY ignore it. 

If the extension is flagged critical or is recognized, it indicates 
that the attributes contained in the certificate SHALL only be used for 
the purpose, and in accordance with the rules implied by one of the 
indicated AC policies.  The rules of a particular policy MAY require 
the certificate-using system to process the qualifier value in a 
particular way.

If the extension is marked critical or is recognized, certificate users 
MUST use the list of AC policies and associated qualifiers to determine 
whether it is appropriate to use the attributes contained in that 
certificate for a particular transaction. 

2.1 AC Policy Extension Syntax

The AC Policy syntax mirrors the certificate policies extension used 
for public key certificates defined in [X.509] and profiled in 
[RFC3280].

The syntax for the AC Policy extension is:

acPolicies EXTENSION ::= {
     SYNTAX              acPoliciesSyntax
     IDENTIFIED BY       id-pe-acPolicies}

acPoliciesSyntax ::= SEQUENCE SIZE (1..MAX) OF PolicyInformation

PolicyInformation ::= SEQUENCE {
      policyIdentifier      acPolicyId,
      policyQualifiers      SEQUENCE SIZE (1..MAX) OF 
                                     PolicyQualifierInfo OPTIONAL}

acPolicyId ::= OBJECT IDENTIFIER

   PolicyQualifierInfo ::= SEQUENCE {
        policyQualifierId  PolicyQualifierId,
        qualifier          ANY DEFINED BY policyQualifierId }

To promote interoperability, this document RECOMMENDS that policy 
information terms consist of only an OID.

2.2 Attribute Certificate Policies

The scope of this document is not the definition of the detailed 
content of Attribute Certificate policies themselves, therefore 
specific policies are not defined in this document. 



Francis, Pinkas                                                  Page 3


Internet-Draft              AC Policy extension            October 2002


2.3. Policy Qualifiers

2.3.1. Generic Policy Qualifiers

   This specification defines two generic policy qualifier types for 
   use by certificate policy writers and certificate issuers.  The 
   qualifier types are the CPS Pointer and User Notice qualifiers.

   The CPS Pointer qualifier contains a pointer to a Certification
   Practice Statement (CPS) published by the AA.  The pointer is in the 
   form of a URI.

   User notice is intended for display to a relying party when a
   certificate is used.  The application software SHOULD display all
   user notices in all certificates of the certification path used,
   except that if a notice is duplicated only one copy need be
   displayed.  To prevent such duplication, this qualifier SHOULD only
   be present in end-entity certificates.

These policies Qualifiers are defined in [RFC3280].

   -- policyQualifierIds for Internet policy qualifiers

   id-qt          OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::=  { id-pkix 2 }
   id-qt-cps      OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::=  { id-qt 1 }
   id-qt-unotice  OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::=  { id-qt 2 }

2.3.2. Specific Policy Qualifiers

Specific Policy qualifiers MAY be used to convey important 
differences between specific policies to relying parties.

This specification defines two specific policy qualifier types 
for use by certificate policy writers and certificate issuers. 

2.3.2.1. Initial Verification Qualifier

Attributes inserted in a certificate are only verified at the 
time of the initial registration of the attribute for a given 
end-entity. Unless a specific revocation request is received 
and granted by the AA or the CA, attributes will continue to be 
certified for the period indicated by the certificateÆs 
validity period. 

For an AC, since the validity period of an AC can be much 
shorter than the period during which the asserted attribute(s) 
are granted to the holder, unless specific additional 
information is included, it cannot be known when attributes 
were initially verified.

The initial verification qualifier indicates when the attributes 
contained in the AC have been initially verified. 


Francis, Pinkas                                                  Page 4


Internet-Draft              AC Policy extension            October 2002


   id-qt-iniVer      OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::=  { id-qt W }

   IniVer ::= GeneralizedTime

Note: When an AC contains several attributes with different 
initial verification dates, this field contains the oldest 
verification date.

2.3.2.2. Regular Verification Qualifier

AAs may choose to regularly verify some attributes so that 
relying parties may be more confident about their association with 
the end-entity. This information may be made available directly in an 
attribute certificate through the Regular Verification qualifier.

The Regular Verification Qualifier indicates that the attributes 
contained in the AC are regularly verified and includes the 
verification time period. 

   id-qt-regVer      OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::=  { id-qt X }

   RegVer ::=  CHOICE {
     days       [0]    INTEGER ,
     months     [1]    INTEGER ,
     years      [2]    INTEGER
   }

3. Security Considerations

The Attribute Certification Policy defined in this document applies 
for all the attributes that are included in one AC. AAs shall make sure 
that the policy applies to all the attributes which are included in the 
certificates they issue. 

Attributes may be dynamically grouped in several ACs. It should be 
observed that since the management of some attributes may be different, 
different policies and/or different policy qualifiers may be used by 
the same AA.

4. References

[ITU-T Rec. X660 | ITU-T Recommendation Rec X.660 (1992)
ISO/IEC 9834-1]  | ISO/IEC 9834-1: 1993, Information 
                   technology - Open Systems Interconnection 
                   Procedures for the operation of OSI 
                   Registration Authorities: General procedures.

[RFC3280]  Certificate and Certificate Revocation List (CRL) Profile.
           R. Housley, W.Polk, W.Ford, and D. Solo. April 2002.

[RFC3281]  An Internet Attribute Certificate Profile for Authorization.
           S. Farrell S. and R. Housley. April 2002.


Francis, Pinkas                                                  Page 5


Internet-Draft              AC Policy extension            October 2002

[X.208-88] CCITT.  Recommendation X.208: Specification of 
           Abstract Syntax Notation One (ASN.1). 1988.

[X.209-88] CCITT.  Recommendation X.209: Specification of Basic 
           Encoding Rules for Abstract Syntax Notation One (ASN.1).
           1988.

[X.509]    ITU-T Recommendation X.509 (2000): Information Technology û 
           Open Systems Interconnections - The Directory: 
           Public-key and Attribute Frameworks, March 2000

Author's Addresses

   Christopher S. Francis
   WetStone Technologies, Inc.
   17755 US Highway 19 North, Suite 150
   Clearwater, Florida   33764

   Email: Chris.Francis@wetstonetech.com

   Denis Pinkas
   Bull
   Rue Jean Jaures
   78340 Les Clayes-sous-Bois
   FRANCE

   Email: Denis.Pinkas@bull.net

Full Copyright Statement

Copyright (C) The Internet Society 2002. All Rights Reserved.

This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to 
others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it or 
assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published and 
distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any kind, 
provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are 
included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this 
document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing the 
copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other 
Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of developing 
Internet standards in which case the procedures for copyrights defined 
in the Internet Standards process must be followed, or as required to 
translate it into languages other than English.

The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be 
revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

This document and the information contained herein is provided on an 
"AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING 
TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT 
NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL 
NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR 
FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Francis, Pinkas                                                  Page 6


Internet-Draft              AC Policy extension            October 2002


Acknowledgement

Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the 
Internet Society.


















































Francis, Pinkas                                                  Page 7


Internet-Draft              AC Policy extension            October 2002


Annex A (normative): ASN.1 Definitions

To be provided.



















































Francis, Pinkas                                                  Page 8
