


MANET Autoconfiguration (AUTOCONF)                              S. Singh
Internet-Draft                                                    J. Kim
Expires: September 7, 2006                         Samsung AIT, Comm Lab
                                                              C. Perkins
                                                  Nokia Research Center,
                                       Communications Systems Laboratory
                                                              T. Clausen
                                                LIX, Ecole Polytechnique
                                                                 P. Ruiz
                                                    University of Murcia
                                                           March 6, 2006


 Address autoconfiguration for MANETs: definition and problem statement
                      draft-singh-autoconf-adp-03

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 7, 2006.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

Abstract

   A Mobile Ad Hoc NETwork (MANET) is formed by the association of



Singh, et al.           Expires September 7, 2006               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                     ADP                        March 2006


   mobile devices, usually wireless and capable of multi-hop
   communication among themselves even if there is no networking
   infrastructure available.  MANET properties such as multi-hop,
   autonomous, etc requires separate address autoconfiguration
   mechanism.  This document provides definition, problem statement and
   goals for ad hoc networks address autoconfiguration.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   4.  Problem statement  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     4.1.  Stand-alone ad hoc network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     4.2.  Ad hoc network at the edge of infra-structure network  . .  8
     4.3.  Temporarily hybrid ad hoc network  . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     4.4.  Network merger and partitioning  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   5.  Goals  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   6.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   Appendix A.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 15




























Singh, et al.           Expires September 7, 2006               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                     ADP                        March 2006


1.  Introduction

   A Mobile Ad Hoc NETwork (MANET) is formed by the association of
   mobile devices, usually wireless and capable of multi-hop
   communication among themselves even if there is no networking
   infrastructure available.  However, it is generally expected that, if
   some MANET nodes are connected to external IP networks (e.g.
   Internet), they might act as gateways towards those networks.

   Several independent solutions have been proposed on interconnecting
   MANETs and the Internet[4][5][7].  Most of the solutions are related
   to the issues of discovering Internet gateways and auto- configuring
   global IP addresses that are routable within the Internet.  Usually,
   autoconfiguration of IP addresses in MANET is also required even when
   the MANET is isolated from external networks.

   Currently there is no standard definition for commonly used MANET
   autoconfiguration related terminologies such as MANET local address,
   standalone MANET, etc.  This document provides definition of such
   terminologies and states problems and goals for ad hoc network IP
   address autoconfiguration.  At places, address configuration as used
   in this document may be read as prefix configuration.





























Singh, et al.           Expires September 7, 2006               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                     ADP                        March 2006


2.  Terminology

   The keywords "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC2119 [5].

   Mobile Ad hoc Network (MANET) - An ad hoc network formed autonomously
      in an arbitrary manner by the association of mobile devices,
      usually wireless and capable of multi-hop communication among
      themselves.  MANETs are characterized by highly dynamic
      topologies; that is, network links come and go quickly in
      comparison to existing wired networks.  The dynamic topology may
      be a consequence of wireless link environment effects and/or node
      mobility.

   MANET Node - A device with one or more wireless interfaces and
      associated IP address(es) which is used by the MANET routing
      protocol in use.

   MANET local address - An IP address configured on a MANET node and
      valid for communication among MANET nodes that are part of the
      same ad hoc network.  Nodes MUST NOT communicate with other nodes
      outside the MANET using this address.

   Global address - An IP address configured on a MANET node and valid
      for communication with nodes in the Internet, as well as
      internally within the MANET.

   Internet gateway - An edge node connected to MANET as well as to the
      Internet and capable of providing bidirectional connectivity
      between the Internet and MANET .  These gateways are expected to
      provide topologically correct IPv6 prefixes.  Internet gateways
      mostly run ad hoc routing protocols as well as infrastructure
      network protocols such as OSPF.

   Duplicate Address Detection (DAD) - The process by which a node
      confirms the uniqueness of an address it wishes to configure or
      has already configured.  A node already equipped with an IP
      address participates in DAD in order to protect its IP address
      from being used by another node.

   Standalone ad hoc network - An independent ad hoc network which has
      no connectivity, either direct of via Internet gateways, to any
      other IP networks such as the Internet.







Singh, et al.           Expires September 7, 2006               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                     ADP                        March 2006


   Hybrid ad hoc network - An ad hoc network which has connectivity,
      either direct of via Internet gateways, to other IP networks such
      as the Internet.  They can be envisioned as a standalone MANET
      with one or more Internet Gateways taking part in both MANET and
      the Internet.

   Network merger - The process by which two or more ad hoc networks
      (either standalone or hybrid), previously disjoint, get connected.
      In general, network merger happens as a consequence of node
      mobility and/or wireless link environment.

   Network partitioning - The process by which an ad hoc network (either
      standalone or hybrid) splits into two or more disconnected ad hoc
      networks.  In general, this proccess happens as a consequence of
      node mobility and/or wireless link environment.

   Network merger detection - The process by which MANET nodes detect
      network merger.

   Network partition detection - The process by which MANET nodes detect
      network partition.






























Singh, et al.           Expires September 7, 2006               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                     ADP                        March 2006


3.  Requirements

   o  Network routes (those valid for an entire network prefix instead
      of just a single node) require reachability to every node which
      exists within the prefix, just as within the Internet.

   o  An Internet gateway can be treated as a default router for the
      Internet.

   o  An Internet gateway SHOULD maintain active routes for all nodes
      within the MANET which are actively engaged in communications with
      their partners in the Internet.

   o  Control signals meant for nodes in the ad hoc network MUST NOT
      leak into the Internet.

   o  Nodes within the Internet cannot distinguish whether or not a
      gateway offers connectivity to an ad hoc network or some other
      sort of stub network.

   o  If two gateways advertise connectivity to the same prefix, then
      those two gateways MUST coordinate their routing tables so that
      they exhibit equal reachability for all nodes within that routing
      prefix.

   o  Gateways may offer several different prefixes.  A node may choose
      which gateway and routing prefix to use for autoconfiguration
      according to any convenient criterion; the methods for making the
      determination are not constrained to be only those specified
      within a MANET autoconfiguration protocol specification.

   o  Autoconfigured addresses are likely to have lifetimes associated
      with them, and after the lifetime expires use of the address
      should be immediately discontinued or negotiated.

   o  Address autoconfiguration solution SHOULD work well even when some
      nodes are temporarily disconnected or asleep.

   o  When duplicate addresses are detected, those nodes with
      conflicting addresses MUST resolve the conflict.











Singh, et al.           Expires September 7, 2006               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                     ADP                        March 2006


4.  Problem statement

   Specifications have been developed for address autoconfiguration in
   the traditional IP based network such as RFC 2462, RFC 3315 and RFC
   2461.  However, these specifications are not applicable to MANET
   nodes as-is due to their unique properties.  Unlike in the
   traditional IP networks, each MANET node besides being traffic end-
   point, normally expected to forward traffic destined for other hosts.
   That is each MANET node normally acts as a "router" as well as a
   "host".  Additionally, the notion of all nodes being able to access a
   shared communication medium fails in MANET since every node in a
   particular MANET do not share the same physical link.  In MANET, a
   single transmission does not suffice for a broadcast or link-local
   multicast to reach all nodes constituting a particular MANET.
   Transmissions which are otherwise not supposed to be forwarded by
   routers, such as limited broadcast and link-local multicast, may need
   to be forwarded by the intermediate nodes in order to reach desired
   MANET node.  In other words, nodes constituting a MANET do not share
   access to a single multicast-capable link for signaling.  The above
   mentioned RFCs for address autoconfiguration in the traditional IP
   network assume that subnet-local signals (e.g. link-local multicast
   signals) are received by each of the hosts on the particular subnet
   without being forwarded by the routers defining the subnet boundary.

   Ad hoc networks can either be deployed as a standalone network or as
   an edge network attached to the Internet.  Indeed, IETF MANET WG has
   this point of view for developing the MANET routing protocols.

   There is a growing requirement for a standard address
   autoconfiguration solution for MANETs that can be used by MANET nodes
   constituting standalone networks or edge networks.  The solution
   should be designed with minimum modification, if any, and should be
   compliant with the specifications that are widely used in the
   traditional IP networks.  The address autoconfiguration protocol has
   to carefully distinguish between cases when a gateway offers a
   routing prefix, from the case when a "local" prefix has to be used
   since no routing prefix is available for the purpose.

  
4.1.  Stand-alone ad hoc network

   Standalone ad hoc networks are formed by a group of MANET nodes
   capable of spontaneously forming a multi-hop ad hoc network and has
   no connection (either direct of via gateways) to other IP networks
   such as the Internet.

   Examples of standalone ad hoc networks are temporary networks such as



Singh, et al.           Expires September 7, 2006               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                     ADP                        March 2006


   conference-room networks, battlefield networks, surveillance
   networks, etc.  In order to communicate among themselves, MANET nodes
   need to use Standard IP address autoconfiguration mechanism for
   configuring their interface(s).  These addresses should be routable
   only within the particular ad hoc network and their uniqueness should
   be maintained even in situations where two or more networks,
   initially disjoint, merge together to form a single network.  Due to
   the mobility and wireless properties of the nodes, network merger can
   occur anytime.

4.2.  Ad hoc network at the edge of infra-structure network

                                            H1
                                            |
                                     +---------------+
                                     |   Internet    |
                                     +---------------+
                                       *           *
                                       *           *
                                    GW1*           *
                                     |            GW2
                                     |             |
                                  ---N1            |
                                 /    |            |
                               N4     |           N2--- N5
                                      |            |
                                      N3-----------+

              Fig. 1: Hybrid ad hoc network connected to Internet.

   Hybrid networks can be envisioned as an standalone network connected
   to the Internet via one or more Internet Gateways.  These gateways
   are located between the two networks and are capable of providing
   globally routable addresses as well as bi-directional connectivity to
   the ad hoc nodes connected to them either directly (1-hop) or via one
   or more intermediate nodes.  These gateways may either be fixed or
   mobile, single or multiple, equipped with one or more wired and/or
   wireless interfaces.

   Fig.1. shows an ad hoc network deployed at the edge of the Internet.

   Ad hoc nodes may use Internet gateway for global prefix allocation
   and globally routable address configuration.  However, for such
   network sufficient but limited detail about Internet gateway(s)
   operation is required.






Singh, et al.           Expires September 7, 2006               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                     ADP                        March 2006


4.3.  Temporarily hybrid ad hoc network

   Temporarily hybrid MANET scenario arises due to the situation where
   an ad hoc network may be sometimes stand-alone and sometimes
   connected to the Internet e.g. a car or subway network connected
   while parked or at station and disconnected otherwise.

   Problems related with this ad hoc network operation scenario are
   similar to those introduced in the above two scenarios.  However, in
   this case, ad hoc nodes should detect the loss of reachability to the
   Internet and SHOULD maintain their allocated addresses for the
   lifetime which has been assigned during the autoconfiguration
   process.  For local addresses, no such lifetime is necessary, but
   could anyway be assigned as a minimal protection against
   partitioning.

4.4.  Network merger and partitioning

   By the nature of MANET, two or more ad hoc networks which are
   initially isolated, can merge together or a single ad hoc network can
   get partitioned into two or more separate networks, at any moment in
   time.  As a consequence of network partitioning, some of the routes
   in MANET nodes become invalid and hence some nodes may become
   unreachable.  It is desirable that network partitioning is detected
   due to reasons such as re-use of resources that were initially used
   by the outgoing nodes.

   Network merger can lead to duplication of addresses.  Normally, once
   an address is allocated to a node, it continues using it and
   collaborating to detect and resolve duplicates in case its address is
   allocated to any other node.  Since initially isolated networks had
   allocated addresses independent with each other, there remains some
   probability of more than one node using same address.  Worst possible
   scenario can occur when number of address conflicts after merger are
   as many as number of nodes.  This can happen if, for example,
   addresses were allocated within initially independent MANETs from the
   same address-range.














Singh, et al.           Expires September 7, 2006               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                     ADP                        March 2006


5.  Goals

   Goals listed below are by no means exhaustive.  Additional goals may
   be found necessary as the protocol design, implementation and
   deployment takes place.  Below listed goals is an effort to give a
   bigger scope and as such may or may not fall within the scope of the
   AUTOCONF WG.  These goals include:

      - As mentioned in the above sections, MANETs can be either
      standalone or connected to the Internet via one or more Internet
      gateways.  MANET nodes MUST implement a mechanism to configure
      "local address(es)" when standalone.  It MAY configure global
      address(es) when connected to the Internet.  Nodes MUST ensure
      address uniqueness, explained under next bullet, before
      configuring them to their interfaces.  It MAY be required that the
      configured global addresses are usable even after connectivity
      with the Internet is lost.

      - Each node MUST collaborate and resolve conflicts in case its
      address is duplicated to ensure uniqueness of the tentative
      address.  If the particular address is being used by some other
      node, either one or both nodes MUST stop using the address.  In
      this situation an alternative address MAY be generated.

      - As mentioned in section 4.4, network Merger is quite possible in
      MANETs.  This may or may not result in multiple nodes using same
      address.  However, it is desirable that each node runs mechanism
      to ensure the uniqueness of its current address-in-use.

      - Network partitioning is equally probably scenario in MANET and,
      is desirable that network partitioning is detected due to the
      reasons mentioned in section 4.4.  Hence, MANET nodes MAY need a
      mechanism, either independent or integrated with the the main
      protocol, to detect network partitioning.

      - Protocol should be designed to avoid as many security pitfalls
      as can be avoided.  This may involve using collaboration histories
      and out-of-band mechanisms requiring user interventions.













Singh, et al.           Expires September 7, 2006              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft                     ADP                        March 2006


6.  Security Considerations

   Since this document does not specify any protocol, no additional
   security vulnerabilities are created.  However, given the importance
   of an aoutoconfiguration protocol as a bootstrapping process, it is
   important that protocols are designed trying to provide as much
   security as possible.  Previous work on security in stand-alone ad
   hoc networks has shown that only a limited amount of security can be
   provided due to the absence of central entities or security
   infraestructures capable of validating the identity of nodes.  In
   particular, given that the main goal of an autoconfiguration protocol
   is to provide nodes with IP addresses, special care needs to be taken
   to study the mapping of identities to addresses.  In particular, this
   is of paramount importance in MANETs, in which reconfigurations and
   duplicates may occur.  In the case of hybrid MANET scenarios,
   security remains being a difficult challenge, but an additional
   number of security services are likely to be provided including among
   others authentication and access control.  Security mechanisms for
   autoconfiguration protocols SHOULD be designed so that they continue
   being effective even when parts of the network get temporarilly
   partition, and eventually lose Internet connectivity.






























Singh, et al.           Expires September 7, 2006              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft                     ADP                        March 2006


7.  Acknowledgements


  The authors would like to acknowledge the following people
  for their technical contributions, discussions, reviews and 
  comments : Ruffino Simone, Raquel Morera, Jari Arkko, Dave Thaler, 
  Joe Macker, Christophe jelger, Alicia Trivino and Carlos J. Bernardos.






























Singh, et al.           Expires September 7, 2006              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft                     ADP                        March 2006

Appendix A.  Normative References

   o  [1] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
      Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   o  [2] Thomson, S. and T. Narten, "IPv6 Stateless Address
      Autoconfiguration", RFC 2462, December 1998.

   o  [3] Engelstad, P., Tonnesen, A., Hafslund, A. and G. Egeland,
      "Internet Connectivity for Multi-Homed Proactive Ad Hoc Networks",
      First IEEE International Conference on Sensor and Ad hoc
      Communications and Networks, October 2004.

   o  [4] Ryuji Wakikawa et. al.  Global connectivity for IPv6 Mobile Ad
      Hoc Networks, IETF "draft-wakikawa-manet-globalv6-03.txt"

   o  [5] Shubhranshu Singh, Kim, JH., Choi, YG., Kang, KL. and YS.
      Roh, "Mobile multi-gateway support for IPv6 mobile ad hoc
      networks" I-D draft-singh-manet-mmg-00.txt, June 2004.

   o  [6] Perkins, C., Malinen, J., Wakikawa, R. and E. Belding-Royer,
      "IP Address Autoconfiguration for Ad Hoc Networks", I-D
      draft-perkins-manet-autoconf-01.txt, November 2001.

   o  [7] Cha, H., Park, J. and H. Kim, "Extended Support for Global
      Connectivity for IPv6 Mobile Ad Hoc Networks", October 2003.

   o  [8] Jeong, J., Park, J., Kim, H. and D. Kim, "Ad Hoc IP Address
      Autoconfiguration", I-D draft-jeong-adhoc-ip-addr-autoconf-02.txt,
      February 2004.

   o  [9] Paakkonen, P., Rantonen, M. and J. Latvakoski, "IPv6
      addressing in a heterogeneous MANET-network", I-D
      draft-paakkonen-addressing-htr-manet-00.txt, December 2003.

   o  [10] Jelger, C., Noel, T. and A. Frey, "Gateway and address
      autoconfiguration for IPv6 adhoc networks", I-D
      draft-jelger-manet-gateway-autoconf-v6-02.txt, April 2004.

   o  [11] Sun, Y. and E. Belding-Royer, "A study of dynamic addressing
      techniques in mobile ad hod networks", I-D Wireless communication
      and mobile computing, May 2004.

   o  [12] C. Bernardos and M. Calderon, "Survey of IP address
      autoconfigura- tion mechnisms ofr MANETs," Internet Draft,
      draft-bernardos-manet- autoconf-survey-00.txt, July 2005, work in
      progress.




Singh, et al.           Expires September 7, 2006              [Page 12]

Internet-Draft                     ADP                        March 2006


   o  [13] Engelstad, P., Tonnesen, A., Hafslund, A. and G. Egeland,
      "Internet Connectivity for Multi-Homed Proactive Ad Hoc Networks",
      First IEEE International Conference on Sensor and Ad hoc
      Communications and Networks, October 2004.















































Singh, et al.           Expires September 7, 2006              [Page 13]

Internet-Draft                     ADP                        March 2006


Authors' Addresses

   Shubhranshu
   Samsung AIT, Comm Lab

   Phone: +82 31 280 9569
   Email: Shubranshu@gmail.com


   JaeHoon Kim
   Samsung AIT, Comm Lab

   Phone: +82 31 280 9532
   Email: jaehoonk@samsung.com


   Charles E. Perkins
   Nokia Research Center, Communications Systems Laboratory

   Phone: +1 650 625 2986
   Email: charliep@iprg.nokia.com


   Thomas Heide Clausen
   LIX, Ecole Polytechnique

   Phone: +33 6 6058 9349
   Email: T.Clausen@computer.org
   URI:   http://www.lix.polytechnique.fr/Labo/Thomas.Clausen/


   Pedro M. Ruiz
   University of Murcia

   Phone: +34 968367646
   Email: pedrom@dif.um.es















Singh, et al.           Expires September 7, 2006              [Page 14]

Internet-Draft                     ADP                        March 2006


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Singh, et al.           Expires September 7, 2006              [Page 15]



