

                                                          Himanshu Shah 
                                                            Prabhu Kavi 
   PPVPN Working Group                                   Tenor Networks 
   Internet Draft 
   draft-shah-ppvpn-arp-mediation-00.txt                     Eric Rosen 
                                                          Cisco Systems 
   February 2002                                                        
   Expires: August 2002                               Waldemar Augustyn 
                                                             Consultant 
                                                                        
                                                            Giles Heron 
                                                     PacketExchange,Ltd                                                        
                                                                        
                                                        Sunil Khandekar 
                                                          Vach Kompella 
                                                       TiMetra Networks 
                                                                        
                                                         Vijay Aggarwal 
                                                        Gotham Networks 
                                                                        
                                                         Jeremy Brayley 
                                                         Rafael Francis 
                                                        Laurel Networks 
                                                                        
                                                      Arun Vishwanathan 
                                                       Force10 Networks 
                                                                        
                                                      Ashwin Moranganti                  
                                                  Appian Communications
    
 
             ARP Mediation for IP interworking of Layer 2 VPN 
                                      
 
 
1.0 Status of this Memo 
 
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026. 
    
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that      
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
   at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as 
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
     
   Shah, et al.          Expires August 2002                        1 

   Internet Draft  draft-shah-ppvpn-arp-mediation-00.txt 
                                    
    
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
    
2.0 Abstract 
    
   This draft addresses an issue in a particular kind of Layer 2 VPN, 
   which provides point-to-point connectivity for IP traffic only.  In 
   this kind of VPN it is possible to form heterogeneous point-to-point 
   links, where the two ends of the link use different technologies, 
   e.g., one end is Ethernet and the other is Frame Relay or ATM.  If 
   two IP systems are connected via a heterogeneous point-to-point link, 
   each may be using different address learning techniques, e.g., one is 
   using ARP and the other Inverse ARP. It is up to the Provider Edge 
   routers to make these different techniques interwork.  This draft 
   specifies the procedures, which the Provider Edge routers should 
   perform in order to allow correct operation across heterogeneous 
   point-to-point links. 
    
    
2.1 ID Summary 
    
   SUMMARY 
    
   This ID describes a mechanism by which PE devices learn the IP 
   address of each locally attached CE device and distributes these to 
   other PEs in order to mediate between the address resolution 
   mechanisms used by the CE devices. The ID also points out 
   difficulties, and in some cases, the inoperability of IGPs on the CE 
   devices when interconnected by PE devices using IP L2 interworking 
   VPN solution. 
    
   RELATED DOCUMENTS 
   Draft-kompella-ppvpn-l2vpn-01.txt. 
   draft-ietf-ppvpn-l2vpn-arch-00.txt 
   draft-rosen-ppvpn-l2-signaling-00.txt 
   draft-martini-l2circuit-trans-mpls-08.txt 
   draft-heinanen-inarp-uni-01.txt  
    
   WHERE DOES IT FIT IN THE PICTURE OF THE SUB-IP WORK 
    
   Belongs in PPVPN 
    
   WHY IS IT TARGETED AT THIS WG 
    
   This document describes a mechanism to assist in Provider-
   Provisioned Layer 2 VPNs. 
    
   JUSTIFICATION 
    
   The IP L2 interworking VPN solution described in [L2VPN-Kompella] 
   introduces the concept of Layer 2 IP interworking between disparate 
   Layer 2 media (e.g. Ethernet and Frame Relay).  However, it does not 
     
   Shah, et al.          Expires August 2002                        2 

   Internet Draft  draft-shah-ppvpn-arp-mediation-00.txt 
                                    
    
   address how address resolution protocols should be handled between 
   these disparate media types.  This document describes how the PEs 
   should mediate between the different address resolution protocols 
   that each CE device uses. Also, there are issues when IGP on a 
   point-to-point link CE is interconnected with IGP on a multi-
   access/broadcast link CE. This document outlines these issues.    
    
3.0 Overview 
    
   A heterogeneous circuit is defined as a virtual circuit between two 
   CE devices that consists of two disparate attachment VCs as the 
   endpoints of an Emulated VC. For example, a CE device on Ethernet is 
   attached to an emulated VC whose other end point is a CE device on 
   frame relay. The attachment VC in this example could then be a VLAN 
   tag on Ethernet interface emulated to the attachment VC of a frame 
   relay DLCI on the other end. While such heterogeneous circuits do 
   not work in general, they can be made to work on the assumption that 
   all their traffic is IP traffic and the Emulated VC performs inter-
   working function for the IP data frames. 
    
   The [L2VPN-Kompella] ID describes methodologies that allow 
   heterogeneous layer 2 circuits to be mapped through MPLS tunnels to 
   remote sites that belong to the same VPN. In this "IP L2 
   interworking" scheme the inter-working functions consist of 
   stripping layer 2 header (e.g. Ethernet MAC header) of the data 
   packet at ingress, dispatching the raw IP packets to the egress, and 
   prepending the appropriate Layer 2 header (e.g. RFC 2427 header for 
   frame relay) before sending it to the attached CE device.  
    
   The problem in such IP L2 Interworking scheme is that, for example, 
   if a CE1 is an Ethernet-attached router, it expects to learn the IP 
   address of its neighbor from a multicast routing control packet, and 
   then expects to do ARP to learn the MAC address.  However, if CE2 is 
   attached via frame relay, it expects to use Inverse ARP to learn the 
   IP address of its neighbor, and it does not send, nor may it respond 
   to ARP messages over the frame relay interface. For CE1 and CE2 to 
   inter-work correctly, PE1 and PE2 will need to mediate the address 
   learning and resolution process. 
    
   One option would be to require each CE to have a static 
   configuration of the IP addresses of all remote CEs.  However, this 
   is unwieldy and should be avoided whenever possible.  A better 
   approach would be to have the service provider network automatically 
   mediate between the various ARP messages.  In this document, we 
   propose that the PE devices capture the address resolution protocol 
   messages sent by the CE, and use this information to perform a 
   mediation function between different ARP message formats.  The 
   methods of performing this mediation function are described in this 
   document.  In some cases, this mediation may not be possible, and 
   these situations are also detailed in this document. 
    
   Note that the PEs are capturing the CE∆s IP addresses information 
   solely for the purpose of mediating between different ARP formats.  
     
   Shah, et al.          Expires August 2002                        3 

   Internet Draft  draft-shah-ppvpn-arp-mediation-00.txt 
                                    
    
   The end-to-end service remains a point-to-point layer 2 service 
   where forwarding decisions are solely based upon the circuit 
   identifier (e.g. DLCI). 
    
4.0 Introduction 
    
   In the traditional layer 2 VPNs, the customer facing links are 
   required to be of the same data link type for each "circuit". The PE 
   device is only responsible for shuttling the data traffic from the 
   link connecting to the local CE, over an MPLS core, and to the link 
   connecting to the remote CE. This requirement of homogenous data 
   link type is somewhat restrictive in building various network 
   topologies. In [L2VPN-Kompella], it is observed that if all the 
   traffic is known to be IP traffic, it is possible to relax this 
   restriction by decapsulating the IP packet from one data link 
   encapsulation and simply reencapsulating it in the other. 
 
    However, [L2VPN-Kompella] does not address all the issues. For 
   example, consider a situation where the service provider network 
   creates a Ùcircuitˆ between an Ethernet VLAN tag and a Frame Relay 
   DLCI.  Unless static ARP is used, the CE router connected to the 
   Frame Relay interface precedes its IP activity with   discovery of 
   its neighbor∆s IP address using the inverse ARP protocol [INVARP]. 
   Similarly, the CE router on an Ethernet precedes its direct IP 
   communication by binding its neighbor∆s MAC address to its IP 
   address via ARP protocol [ARP].  However, the Inverse ARP on a 
   point-to-point link is seeking disjoint information from an ARP on a 
   broadcast link.   
 
 
   The PE router is a logical place to perform a mediation function 
   between these related but incompatible address resolution protocols.  
   Performing this function in the PE simplifies the operation of the 
   CE, and keeps pseudo-wire interworking transparent to the CE.   
      
   For each IP Layer 2 interworking circuit, there are three logical 
   steps to performing this address mediation: 
    
     1. Have the PEs discover the attached CE∆s IP addresses. 
     2. Distribute this IP address to the PE at the remote end of the 
        circuit. 
     3. Notify the attached CE about the remote CE∆s IP address. 
       
   In some cases these steps are disjoint while in other cases they 
   could be part of a single step based on whether the IP address of    
   the remote CE device was received along with the cross-connect 
   information.  
    
   It is important to note that the dynamic learning and distribution 
   of the attached CE∆s IP addresses is possible only for some data 
   link technologies. For other data links, static configuration cannot 
   be avoided.  However, this ARP mediation addresses the most common 
     
   Shah, et al.          Expires August 2002                        4 

   Internet Draft  draft-shah-ppvpn-arp-mediation-00.txt 
                                    
    
   methods of creating Layer 2 VPNs, and therefore should be widely 
   useful.  
    
5.0 IP address discovery of local CE device 
    
   For each Layer 2 IP interworking circuit, the PE creates and fills 
   in a tuple consisting of the following: 
    
     1. Attached CE∆s IP address 
     2. Circuit Info 
     3. Remote CE∆s IP address 
    
   This information is gathered using the mechanisms described below. 
    
   The rest of this section describes how IP address of the locally 
   attached CE is learned. Section 6 describes how the learned IP 
   address may be distributed to the remote PE using the signaling 
   mechanisms either of [L2VPN-KOMPELLA] or [MARTINI-TRANS]. Section 7 
   describes how remote PEs process the received cross-connect 
   information with or without IP address for IP address resolution 
   purposes with local CE. 
    
    
5.1 Ethernet data link 
    
   PE device attached to Ethernet data link is either cognizant or 
   noncognizant of IEEE802.1Q based VLAN tagging. When practicing 
   802.1Q based VLAN tagging, each VLAN tag could represent a circuit 
   or a pseudo virtual wire that connects to exactly one remote 
   endpoint through a pair of PE devices. 
    
   Alternatively, the entire Ethernet port may be treated as a single 
   endpoint that is connected to a single remote endpoint via a pair of 
   PE devices.  
    
   In either case, only one Ethernet IP end station (CE device) is 
   presumed to be present for participation within the IP interworking 
   based Layer 2 VPN. 
    
   In order to learn the IP address of the CE device for a given 
   Ethernet circuit (i.e. Ethernet port or Ethernet port + VLAN), PE 
   device may execute router discovery protocol [RFC 1256] whereby a 
   router discovery request (ICMP - router solicitation) message is 
   sent on each circuit using source IP address as zero. The IP address 
   of the CE device is extracted from the router discovery response 
   (ICMP - router advertisement) message from the CE and associated 
   with the circuit.  
    
   The use of router discovery mechanism by the PE is optional. The 
   alternatives could include gleaning source address field of any 
   broadcasts to IP multicast or broadcast address and making sure that 
   only one router on the local LAN is sending such broadcasts. It is 
   also possible to simply wait for the local router to generate ARP 
     
   Shah, et al.          Expires August 2002                        5 

   Internet Draft  draft-shah-ppvpn-arp-mediation-00.txt 
                                    
    
   request for its neighbor. The Ethernet address and protocol address 
   can then be gleaned from the request. 
    
   Once IP address of the CE device is learned, PE periodically 
   generates ARP request message as a mean to verify the existence of 
   CE∆s IP address and it∆s binding to the Ethernet MAC address. The 
   absence of response from the CE device for a given number of retries 
   is used as a cause for a withdrawal of IP address advertisement to 
   the remote PE and entering into the address resolution phase to 
   rediscover the attached CE∆s IP address. 
    
5.2 Frame Relay data link 
    
   A frame relay attached CE device generates inverse ARP request to 
   obtain the IP address of the neighbor when the associated DLCI 
   becomes active. Traditionally, a DLCI becomes active when the DCE 
   signals LMI status active message as a result of associated PVC path 
   becoming operational.  
    
   A PE device attached to a CE, connected either directly or through a 
   set of frame relay switches, plays the role of an intermediate 
   network node for cross-connect purposes. To a frame relay endnode 
   (i.e. CE), presence of intermediate frame relay switches and pair of 
   PE separated by MPLS cloud along with a remote CE on perhaps 
   Ethernet, is transparent and appear as though Ethernet based CE is 
   remote end point of frame relay PVC path. 
    
   However, for IP L2 interworking VPN purposes, Ethernet CE and frame 
   relay CE are two IP end stations and it becomes necessary for PE to 
   play a role in address resolution to keep each end stations unaware 
   of data link inconsistency. 
    
   When processing frame relay inverse ARP request for a DLCI, if the 
   PE does not have IP address associated with the cross-connect from 
   the remote PE, it does not respond, but notes the IP address of the 
   frame relay attached CE and the DLCI information. If the remote IP 
   address were available, it responds with inverse ARP reply. 
   Subsequently, when the IP address of the remote CE becomes 
   available, PE may initiate the inverse ARP request as a mean to 
   notify the neighbor of the IP address. 
    
    
5.3 ATM data link 
    
   A CE device attached to ATM data link treats each PVC as an IP 
   subnet. PE participates in RFC 2225 defined inverse ATM ARP. When 
   processing inATMARP request for a PVC, if the PE does not have IP 
   address associated with the cross-connect from the remote PE, it 
   does not respond, but notes the IP address of the ATM attached CE 
   and the PVC information. If the remote IP address were available it 
   would respond with inATMARP reply. Subsequently, when the IP address 
   of the remote CE becomes available, PE may initiate the inATMARP 
   request as a mean to notify the neighbor of the IP address. 
     
   Shah, et al.          Expires August 2002                        6 

   Internet Draft  draft-shah-ppvpn-arp-mediation-00.txt 
                                    
    
    
6.0 IP address distribution between PE 
    
   There are two cross-connect information distribution mechanisms 
   defined each in [L2VPN-Kompella] and [MARTINI-TRAN]. Following 
   sections discusses how these signaling protocols are extended to 
   distribute the associated IP address information. 
    
6.1 BGP based distribution [L2VPN-Kompella] 
    
   The [L2VPN-Kompella] draft has defined the MP-BGP NLRI for the L2VPN 
   cross-connect information. The NLRI contains label block offset, 
   label base and the size (i.e. length of circuit status vector sub-
   TLV) tuple that provides a set of contiguous labels starting from 
   label base to correspond to a set of remote CE-Ids starting from 
   label block offset.  
    
   We propose an IP address sub-TLV for this NLRI that accompany this 
   tuple. The type value is TBD. The length is same as length of 
   circuit status vector sub-TLV. The value field contains the length 
   number of 4-byte fields where each field is an IP address that 
   corresponds one-to-one with the labels represented by the label base 
   and length field. The PE device should note the label to IP address 
   association by iterating through each IP field value in order. 
    
    
6.2 LDP based distribution [MARTINI-TRANS] 
    
   The [MARTINI-TRANS] uses LDP transport to exchange layer-2 cross-
   connect information for a given VPN. The cross-connect information 
   is represented as a VC FEC element that LDP protocol distributes to 
   remote peer in downstream-unsolicited mode. This document proposes 
   extensions to VC FEC element to support the IP L2 inteworking as a 
   new VPN type and to include the IP address information. 
    
6.2.1 IP L2 Interworking encapsulation 
 
   The IP L2 interworking VPN type is advertised in the "VC-type" field 
   of the VC FEC as the value 0x000C.  
    
   The "interface parameter" field in the VC FEC is defined in 
   [MARTINI-TRANS] as follows. 
    
       0                   1                   2                   3 
       0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 
      +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+ 
      |  Parameter ID |    Length     |    Variable Length Value      | 
      +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+ 
      |                         Variable Length Value                 | 
      |                             "                                 | 
      +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+ 
    
    
     
   Shah, et al.          Expires August 2002                        7 

   Internet Draft  draft-shah-ppvpn-arp-mediation-00.txt 
                                    
    
      The parameter ID is defined as follows: 
      Parameter   ID Length    Description 
    
          0x01         4       Interface MTU in octets. 
          0x02         4       Maximum Number of concatenated ATM cells. 
          0x03   up to 82      Optional Interface Description string. 
          0x04         4       CEM [8] Payload Bytes. 
          0x05         4       CEM options. 
           
    
      The Length field is defined as the length of the interface 
   parameter including the parameter id and length field itself. 
    
   We propose additional parameter for the parameter ID. 
    
          0x06         4       IP address of CE 
    
   The IP address interface parameter contains the IP address 
   associated with the advertised VC-id. If IP address is not known, 
   this interface parameter may not be present in the advertisement. If 
   present, it may contain the IP address value as 0.0.0.0. In either 
   case, receiving PE processes the information as IP address 
   association unknown for the advertised VC-ID. 
    
6.2.2 Data forwarding  
    
   When participating in IP L2 interworking VPN, the receiving PE must 
   check the received access VC type against the local access (or 
   attachment) VC type for the matching cross-connect. When the access 
   VC types are identical, IP L2 interworking aspects of the cross-
   connect should be ignored and revert to traditional data forwarding 
   mechanisms as defined for such VC type in [MARTINI-ENCAP]. 
    
   However, when access VC types are different and the VC type field is 
   IP L2 Interworking, the mechanisms defined in this document should 
   be followed.  
    
   The IP L2 Interworking permits only IP data packets to be exchanged 
   over the emulated VC. The following description from [L2VPN-
   Kompella] shows how data packets are handled by the ingress and 
   egress PE.  
    
   At the ingress PE, an L2 frame's L2 header is completely stripped off 
   and is carried over as an IP packet through a tunnel to the egress 
   PE.  The forwarding decision is still based on the L2 circuit 
   information of the incoming IP frame.  At the egress PE, the IP 
   packet is encapsulated back in an L2 frame and transported over to 
   the destination CE.  The forwarding decision at the egress PE is 
   based on the VC label as discussed in [MARTINI-ENCAP].  The L2 
   technology between egress PE and CE is independent of the L2 
   technology between ingress PE and CE. 
    
     
   Shah, et al.          Expires August 2002                        8 

   Internet Draft  draft-shah-ppvpn-arp-mediation-00.txt 
                                    
    
6.3 IP address distribution operation 
    
   A PE device advertises the IP address of the attached CE only when 
   the encapsulation type of the VPN is IP L2 interworking. It is quite 
   possible that the IP address of a CE device is not available at the 
   time of advertisements. For example, in frame relay the CE device 
   dispatches inverse ARP request only when the DLCI is active and if 
   the PE signals DLCI to be active only when it has received the 
   cross-connect information from the remote PE, a chicken and egg 
   situation arises. In order to avoid such problems, the PE must 
   advertise the cross-connect information with or without (i.e. no IP 
   TLV or 0.0.0.0) the corresponding IP address. When the IP address of 
   the CE device does become available, a new advertisement is 
   generated with updated IP address field value. 
    
   Similarly, If PE detects invalidation of CE∆s IP address (by methods 
   described above), PE may re-advertise the cross-connect information 
   without IP address or with IP address as zero to denote the 
   withdrawal of IP address. The receiving PE may then wait for the IP 
   address information from the remote PE before enabling the unicast 
   IP traffic flow. 
    
    
7.0 How CE learns IP address of remote CE 
    
   Once the PE has learned IP address to label association from the 
   remote PE∆s cross-connect advertisement, it can either initiate the 
   address resolution request or respond to the request from the 
   attached CE device. 
    
7.1 Ethernet data link 
    
   When PE learns about remote CE∆s IP address from the layer 2 VPN 
   advertisement (as described above), it may or may not know local 
   CE∆s IP address. If local CE∆s IP address is not known, it must wait 
   for the arrival of either IGP broadcast packet or RDP response or an 
   ARP request from the local CE. If, however, local CE∆s IP address is 
   already known, PE may choose to generate unsolicited ARP 
   (gratuitous) message to notify the local CE about the association of 
   remote CE∆s IP address and the PE∆s own MAC address. 
    
   In either case, as and when an ARP request is generated by the local 
   CE, PE must proxy ARP response using his own MAC address as the 
   source hardware address and remote CE∆s IP address as source 
   protocol address. PE must respond only to those ARP requests whose 
   destination protocol address matches to remote CE∆s IP address. 
    
   If two CE devices are locally attached to PE where one CE is 
   connected to Ethernet data link and other to Frame relay data link 
   for example, the IP addresses are learned in the same manner as 
   described above. However, since the CE devices are local, the 
   distribution of IP addresses for these CE devices is a local step. 
    
     
   Shah, et al.          Expires August 2002                        9 

   Internet Draft  draft-shah-ppvpn-arp-mediation-00.txt 
                                    
    
7.2 Frame relay data link 
    
   If a PE has received new cross-connect information from the remote 
   PE, the corresponding local DLCI may not be active. PE should use 
   the cross-connect information to activate the DLCI via LMI and 
   schedule the inverse ARP request. The PE may choose to delay 
   generation of inverse ARP request in order for attached CE to 
   generate the request first. However, it is possible that PE may 
   never get inverse ARP request nor may it get the response to its own 
   request. This may be the result of IP protocol not being enabled on 
   CE device at the time when DLCI was activated. This is not an issue 
   since cross connect information exchange is not predicated on 
   learning of CE∆s IP address. As and when the IP protocol is enabled 
   on the CE device, an inverse ARP request would be forthcoming. 
    
   It is also possible that CE router may never generate inverse ARP 
   request as it may already be configured with IP address of the 
   remote end point and/or inverse ARP is disabled or not supported. If 
   inverse ARP protocol is supported (disabled or not), CE router would 
   still respond to inverse ARP request even when it already knows the 
   IP address of the remote end station. However, if inverse ARP 
   protocol is not supported, PE is required to be configured with the 
   IP address of the attached CE router in order for the PE to 
   distribute the IP address as part of the cross-connect information 
   to the remote PE. 
    
7.3 ATM data link 
    
   The PE device should generate the inAtmARP request when the IP 
   address of the remote cross-connected CE device becomes available. 
   The role of PE device in handling address resolution for the IP L2 
   interworking cross-connect for local ATM PVC is similar to that of 
   local frame relay PVC.  
    
   It is also possible that ATM end station is participating in RFC 
   1577 style dynamic ARP mechanisms using the ATM ARP server. This 
   document leaves the option of participation with ATM ARP server to 
   vendor∆s implementation. As always, static configuration of the 
   local CE∆s IP address is another option that PE may use. 
    
8.0 Multipoint IGP to point-to-point IGP issues 
    
   In IP L2 interworking VPN, when an IGP on CE connected to a 
   broadcast link is cross-connected with an IGP on CE connected to a 
   point-to-point link, there are routing protocol related issues that 
   must be addressed. The link state routing protocols are cognizant of 
   the underlying link characteristics and behave accordingly when 
   establishing neighbor adjacencies, representing the network topology 
   and passing protocol packets.  
    
    
8.1 OSPF 
    
     
   Shah, et al.          Expires August 2002                       10 

   Internet Draft  draft-shah-ppvpn-arp-mediation-00.txt 
                                    
    
   OSPF protocol treats broadcast link type with a special procedure 
   that engages in neighbor discovery to elect a designated and a 
   backup designated (DR and BDR respectively) router to form adjacency 
   with. However, these procedures are neither applicable nor 
   understood by OSPF running on a point-to-point link. By cross-
   connecting two neighbors with disparate link types in IP L2 
   interworking VPN causes this confusion that must be avoided.  
    
   Additionally, link type specified in router LSA would appear 
   different for two routers that are supposedly to be present on the 
   same link. Also, OSPF router generates network LSAs when connected 
   to broadcast link such as Ethernet, receipt of which by an OSPF 
   router on the point-to-point link adds to the confusion. 
    
    
   Fortunately, OSPF protocol provides a configuration option 
   (ospfIfType), whereby OSPF would treat the underlying physical 
   broadcast link as a point-to-point link.  
    
   It is strongly recommended that all OSPF protocols on CE devices 
   connected to Ethernet data link must use this configuration when 
   attached PE that is participating in IP L2 Interworking VPN. 
    
8.2 IS-IS 
    
   IS-IS protocol sends LAN Hello PDU (IIH packet) on Ethernet link 
   with MAC address and IP address of the CE device. It expects 
   neighbor to insert his own MAC and IP address in the response. If 
   the neighbor is cross-connected to a point-to-point remote CE 
   device, the LAN Hello PDU would be silently discarded. Similarly, 
   Hello PDU on the point-to-point link does not contain any MAC 
   address, which confuses the cross-connected neighbor on Ethernet 
   link. 
    
   Thus, IS-IS protocol on the CE devices presents problem when 
   interconnected by disparate data link types in IP L2 interworking 
   VPN environment.  There are some mechanisms defined in draft-ietf-
   isis-igp-p2p-over-lan-00.txt to accommodate point-to-point behavior 
   over broadcast network. The feasibility of such technique to solve 
   this problem is under review. 
    
8.3 RIP 
    
   RIP protocol broadcasts RIP advertisements every 30 seconds. If 
   multicast snooping mechanism is used, PE can learn the advertising 
   router∆s IP address from the IP header of the advertisement. No 
   special configuration is required for RIP in this type of layer 2 IP 
   interworking VPN. 
    
9.0 Conclusion 
    
   The three step procedure; discovering IP address of local CE device, 
   distribution of the IP address to remote PE and notifying the IP 
     
   Shah, et al.          Expires August 2002                       11 

   Internet Draft  draft-shah-ppvpn-arp-mediation-00.txt 
                                    
    
   address to the attached CE device; described in this document 
   provides for reduced configuration of the PE devices used for IP-
   interworking solution. 
    
   There are cases where the manual configuration of the IP address is 
   not avoidable. These cases relate to either some of the data links 
   like, Cisco HDLC, that do not support the address resolution 
   protocol or that address resolution is disabled by, for example, use 
   of unnumbered interface in the CE device.  
    
   It is also important to note that IP address changes on the CE 
   devices may require manual interventions (e.g. soft reset of the 
   attached port) on the PE device. 
    
   For most common cases, the procedure described in this document 
   enhances the IP interworking solution of [L2VPN-Kompella]. 
    
10.0 Acknowledgements 
    
   Authors would like to thank Tim Mancour, Bruce Lasley, Bill 
   Townsend, Arnold Sodder and other folks within Tenor who 
   participated in discussions related to this draft. 
    
11.0 Security Considerations 
    
   The security aspects of this solution will be discussed at a later 
   time. 
    
11.0 References 
    
   [L2VPN-Kompella] Kompella et al., "MPLS based Layer 2 VPNs", draft-
   kompella-ppvpn-l2vpn-01.txt, November 2001. 
    
   [L2VPN-ENCAP] Martini et al., "Encapsulation Methods for Transport 
   of Layer 2 Frames over MPLS", draft-martini-l2circuit-encap-mpls-
   04.txt, November 2001, (work in progress). 
    
   [L2VPN-TRANS] Martini et al., "Transport of Layer 2 frames over 
   MPLS", draft-martini-l2circuit-trans-mpls-08.txt. November 2001, 
   (work in progress) 
    
   [INVARP] T.Bradley et al., "Inverse Address Resolution Protocol", 
   RFC2390, September 1998. 
    
   [ARP] Plummer, D., "An Ethernet Address Resolution Protocol:  Or 
   Converting Network Protocol Addresses to 48.bit Ethernet        
   Addresses for Transmission on Ethernet Hardware", STD 37, RFC 826, 
   November 1982. 
    
   [PROXY-ARP] Postel, J., "Multi-LAN Address Resolution", RFC 925, 
   October 1984. 
    
    
     
   Shah, et al.          Expires August 2002                       12 

   Internet Draft  draft-shah-ppvpn-arp-mediation-00.txt 
                                    
    
Author's Address 
    
   Himanshu Shah 
   Tenor Networks 
   100 Nagog Park 
   Acton, MA 01720 
   Email: hshah@tenornetworks.com 
    
   Prabhu Kavi 
   Tenor Networks 
   100 Nagog Park 
   Acton, MA 01720 
   Email: Prabhu_kavi@tenornetworks.com 
    
   Eric Rosen 
   Cisco Systems 
   300 Apollo Drive, 
   Chelmsford, MA 01824 
   Email: erosen@cisco.com 
    
   Waldemar Augustyn 
   Email: waldemar@nxp.com 
    
   Giles Heron 
   PacketExchange Ltd. 
   The Truman Brewery 
   91 Brick Lane 
   LONDON E1 6QL 
   United Kingdom 
   Email: giles@packetexchange.net 
    
   Sunil Khandekar and Vach Kompella 
   TiMetra Networks 
   274 Ferguson Dr. 
   Mountain View, CA 94043 
   Email: sunil@timetra.com 
   Email: vkompella@timetra.com 
    
   Vijay Aggarwal 
   Gotham Networks 
   15 Discovery Way 
   Acton, MA 01720 
   Email: vaggarwal@gothamnetworks.com 
    
    
   Jeremy Brayley and Rafael Francis 
   Laurel Networks 
   Omega Corporate Center 
   1300 Omega drive 
   Pittsburgh, PA 15205 
   Email: jbrayley@laurelnetworks.com 
   Email: rfrancis@laurelnetworks.com 
    
     
   Shah, et al.          Expires August 2002                       13 

   Internet Draft  draft-shah-ppvpn-arp-mediation-00.txt 
                                    
    
   Arun Vishwanathan 
   Force10 Networks 
   1440 McCarthy Blvd., 
   Milpitas, CA 95035 
   Email: arun@force10networks.com 
    
   Ashwin Mornaganti
   Appian Communications
   35 Nagog Park
   Acton, MA 01720
   Email: amoranganti@appiancom.com
   
   
    
     
   Shah, et al.          Expires August 2002                       14 

