
                                                          Neil Harrison 
   Internet Draft                                          Peter Willis 
   Document: draft-harrison-mpls-oam-req-00.txt         British Telecom 
   Expires: November 2001                                               
                                                         Shahram Davari 
                                                             PMC-Sierra 
                                                                        
   Enriqu G. Cuevas                                      Ben Mack-Crane 
   AT&T Laboratories                                            Tellabs 
                                                                        
   Elke Franze                                             Hiroshi Ohta 
   Deutsche Telekom                                                 NTT 
                                                                        
   Tricci So                                          Sanford Goldfless 
   Caspian Network                                         Feihong Chen 
                                                                 Lucent 
                                                                        
                                                               May 2001 
    
    
                   Requirements for OAM in MPLS Networks 
    
    
Status of this Memo 
    
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance 
   with all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026. 
    
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that      
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
   at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as 
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
    
Copyright Notice 
    
   Copyright(C) The Internet Society (2001). All Rights Reserved. 
    
    
Abstract 
 
   This draft provides motivation and requirements for user-plane OAM 
   (Operation and Maintenance) functionality in MPLS networks. 
     
   Harrison et.al       Expires November 2001                  Page 1 
                Requirements for OAM in MPLS Networks        May 2001 
    
   Motivation for this recommendation rose from Network operators' need 
   for tools that ensure reliability and performance of MPLS LSPs 
   (Label Switched Paths). User-plane OAM tools are required to verify 
   that LSPs have been setup and are available to deliver customer data 
   to target destinations according to QoS (Quality of Service) 
   guarantees given in SLAs (Service Level Agreements). 
    
   Requirements presented in this draft include but are not limited to: 
    
     . Tools to efficiently detect and localize defects in MPLS layer 
     . Mechanisms for fast defect notification 
     . Availability and performance criteria 
     . Trigger for corrective actions (e.g. protection switching) when 
        failures occur. 
 
 
Table of Contents 
    
   1. Introduction..................................................2 
   2. Definitions...................................................2 
   3. Motivation for MPLS OAM functions.............................3 
   4. Requirements for OAM functions................................5 
   5. Security Considerations.......................................6 
   6. References....................................................6 
   7. Author's Addresses............................................7 
    
    
   Conventions used in this document 
    
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in 
   this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [1]. 
    
    
1. Introduction 
    
   This Internet draft provides motivation and requirements for OAM 
   (Operation and Maintenance) for the user-plane in MPLS networks. It 
   is recognized that OAM functionality is important in public networks 
   for ease of network operation, for verifying network performance and 
   to reduce operational costs. OAM functionality is especially 
   important for networks, which are required to deliver (and hence be 
   measurable against) QoS (Quality of Service) and availability 
   performance parameters/objectives. 
    
    
2. Definitions 
    
   This document introduces some new terminology, which is required to 
   discuss the functional network components associated with OAM. 
    
     
   Harrison et. al.      Expires August 2001                   Page 2 
                Requirements for OAM in MPLS Networks        May 2001 
    
    
       Functional Architecture                    Meaning 
       Term                         
       ------------------                   ------------------ 
        
       Client/server               A term referring to the transparent 
       (relationship between       transport of a client (ie higher) 
       layer networks)             layer link connection by a server 
                                   (ie lower) layer network trail. 
                                    
       Link connection             A partition of a layer N trail that 
                                   exists between two logically 
                                   adjacent switching points within the 
                                   layer N network. 
                                    
       LSP Tunnel                  An LSP Tunnel is an LSP with well-
                                   defined source (ingress point) and 
                                   sink (egress point) 
                                    
       Subnetwork                  A subnetwork is a contiguous 
                                   topological region of a network 
                                   delimited by its set of peripheral 
                                   access points, and is characterized 
                                   by the possible routing across the 
                                   subnetwork between those access 
                                   points.  A network is the largest 
                                   subnetwork and a node is the 
                                   smallest subnetwork (at least in 
                                   practical physical terms, though 
                                   there are smaller sub-networks 
                                   within nodes). 
                                    
       Trail                       A generic transport entity at layer 
                                   N which is composed of a client 
                                   payload (which can be a packet from 
                                   a client at higher layer N-1) with 
                                   specific overhead added at layer N 
                                   to ensure the forwarding integrity 
                                   of the server transport entity at 
                                   layer N. 
                                    
       Trail termination point     A source or sink point of a trail at 
                                   layer N, at which the trail overhead 
                                   is added or removed respectively.  A 
                                   trail termination point must have a 
                                   unique means of identification 
                                   within the layer network. 
                                    
    
    
    
3. Motivation for MPLS OAM functions 
    
     
   Harrison et. al.      Expires August 2001                   Page 3 
                Requirements for OAM in MPLS Networks        May 2001 
    
   It is recognized that OAM functionality is important in public 
   networks to ensure agreed upon SLAs, reduce operational costs, 
   verify network performance, and facilitate network operations.  
   Network operators need OAM functionality to: 
    
     1. Detect MPLS user-plane defects: MPLS introduces a unique 
        functional layer in the network. MPLS layer OAM functionality 
        is not a substitute for lower layer OAM (also known as server 
        layer) or higher layer OAM (also known as client layer). 
        Moreover MPLS nesting capability (realized through label stack 
        encoding [5]) allows LSPs to create layer networks in their own 
        right, and hence will have defects that are specific to the 
        MPLS LSP layer networks. MPLS user-plane defects are those that 
        are encountered during transport of customer data. Although 
        some MPLS control-plane OAM functions may be available, but 
        network Operators cannot rely exclusively on fate sharing with 
        the control plane to detect all transport defects, because: 
          a. There will not be full commonality of all components 
             traversed by an LSP and the control plane. Therefore 
             control plane survival is not authoritative indication of 
             the health of an LSP. 
          b. It is possible for an MPLS network not to have a control-
             plane (when LSPs are setup statically) or have user data 
             transported on paths that are not used by signaling (when 
             LSPs are not routed hop-by-hop). 
    
     2. Verify whether Availability and Quality of Service guarantees 
        given in SLAs (Service Level Agreements) are in fact being met 
        by the connection. The ability to determine availability 
        performance to achieve QoS for satisfying SLA is critical to 
        network operators who wish to deploy numerous LSPs and dynamic 
        routing in core MPLS networks. 
    
     3. Reduce operating costs, by allowing efficient detection and 
        handling of defects.  Lack of efficient automatic defect 
        detection forces operators to increase their engineering and 
        support workforce, hence increase operating costs 
    
     4. Determine LSP availability and performance reliably and 
        accurately for accounting/billing purpose. This is required to 
        ensure that customers are not inappropriately charged for 
        degraded service or service outages. 
    
     5. Permit rapid localization of defects. 
    
     6. Reduce the duration of defects and thus improves the 
        availability performance. 
    
     7. Protect customer traffic by detecting traffic mis-connections 
        so that customer∆s confidential data are not delivered to wrong 
        destinations (which may otherwise be undetectable). 
    
     8. Help to decrease the number of defects that are not apparent 
        until the customer reports a problem. 
     
   Harrison et. al.      Expires August 2001                   Page 4 
                Requirements for OAM in MPLS Networks        May 2001 
    
    
     9. Allow taking necessary actions against defects even if a 
        network element (NE) fails without notifying this failure to 
        NMS (silent failure) so that consequent defects on LSPs can be 
        detected. 
 
     10. Improve security of MPLS networks, by detecting mis-
        connections, and therefore helping prevent a customer∆s traffic 
        being exposed to another party. 
    
    
4. Requirements for OAM functions 
    
   This section describes the high level requirements that have been 
   identified and requested by a number of service providers. The 
   requirements include but are not limited to: 
    
     1. Both on demand and continuous connectivity verification of LSPs 
        to confirm that defects do not exist on the target LSPs. 
    
     2. If a defect occurs, it is necessary to detect, notify and 
        localize it immediately and to take necessary actions.  This 
        facilitates minimizing the interruption of service by providing 
        the network with sufficient information to take corrective 
        action to bypass the defect (protection switching, re-routing 
        etc.), and to minimize the time to correct the defect and 
        return the failed resource to the available state.  It is 
        necessary that defects be detected and notified automatically 
        without operator intervention for this purpose. 
    
     3. A defect event in a given layer network should not cause 
        multiple alarm events to be raised (in the same layer network 
        or client layer networks). 
    
     4. OAM functions should be able to perform stably in large scale 
        networks. 
    
     5. Necessary operator actions such as setting up and activation of 
        MPLS OAM functions should be minimized in order to use MPLS OAM 
        functions easily even in large scale networks where the number 
        of LSPs tends to be large. 
    
     6. OAM function must be optional to the operator and only be used 
        by the networks that need it.  Operators choose which function 
        to use and which LSP to apply the OAM function. 
    
     7. OAM function must be backward compatible.  LSRs that do not 
        support such function must silently discard or pass through the 
        OAM packets without disturbing the traffic or causing 
        unnecessary actions. 
    
     8. Measurement of availability and QoS performance. 
    
     
   Harrison et. al.      Expires August 2001                   Page 5 
                Requirements for OAM in MPLS Networks        May 2001 
    
     9. The OAM functionality of a MPLS layer should not be dependent 
        on any specific server or client layer technology.  This is 
        critical to ensure that layer networks can evolve (or new/old 
        layer networks be added/removed) without impacting other layer 
        networks. The control-plane of a given layer network must also 
        have its own OAM. [Note - Control-plane OAM is outside the 
        scope of this Recommendation.] 
    
     10. All the major defect conditions must be identified with in-
        service measurable entry and exit criteria, and all consequent 
        actions must be specified.  At least the following MPLS user-
        plane defects need to be detected: 
          a. Loss of LSP connectivity (due to a server layer failure or 
             a failure within the MPLS layer); 
          b. Swapped LSP trails; 
          c. LSP mismerging (of 2 or more LSP trails); (including 
             loops).  
          d. Unintended replication (e.g. unintended multicasting). 
    
     11. It is important to specify how unavailable/available state 
        transitions relate to the stopping/starting of the aggregation 
        of available state QoS metrics. 
    
     12. Connectivity status assessment must not be dependent on user 
        traffic behavior. 
    
     13. The OAM tools provided should ensure (as far as reasonably 
        practicable) that customers should not have to act as failure 
        detectors for the operator. 
    
     14. Under fault conditions a layer network is not expected to 
        behave in a predictable manner.  Therefore OAM functions should 
        not require the defected layer function in a reliable and 
        predictable manner for fault diagnosis. 
 
 
5. Security Considerations 
    
   The OAM function described in this document enhances the security of 
   MPLS networks, by detecting mis-connections, and therefore 
   preventing customers∆ traffic to be exposed to other customers. 
     
   The MPLS OAM functions as defined in this document do not raise any 
   new security issue, to MPLS networks. 
    
    
6. References 
    
    
   [1]  IETF, RFC3031, Multiprotocol Label Switching Architecture, 
   Category: Standards Track, January 2001. 
    
   [2]  IETF, RFC 3032, MPLS label stack encoding, Category: Standards 
   Track, January 2001.Architecture". 
     
   Harrison et. al.      Expires August 2001                   Page 6 
                Requirements for OAM in MPLS Networks        May 2001 
    
    
    
    
7. Author's Addresses 
    
   Neil Harrison 
   British Telecom              Phone: 44-1604-845933 
   Heath Bank                   Email: neil.2.Harrison@bt.com 
   Iugby Road, Harleston 
   South Hampton, UK 
    
   Peter Willis 
   British Telecom              Phone: 44-1473-645178 
   BT, PP RSB10/PP3 B81         Email: peter.j.willis@bt.com 
   Adastrial Park 
   Martlesham, Ipswich, UK  
    
   Shahram Davari 
   PMC-Sierra 
   411 Legget Drive             Phone: 1-613-271-4018 
   Kanata, ON, Canada           Email: Shahram_Davari@pmc-sierra.com 
    
   Ben Mack-Crane 
   Tellabs 
   4951 Indiana Ave             Phone: 1-630-512-7255 
   Lisle, IL, USA               Email: ben.mack-crane@tellabs.com 
    
   Hiroshi Ohta 
   NTT 
   Y-709A, 1-1 Hikarino∆ka      phone: 81-468-59-8840  
   Yokosuka-Shi                 Email: ohta.hiroshi@nslab.ntt.co.jp 
   Kanagawa, Japan 
    
   Sanford Goldfless 
   Lucent Technologies 
   200 Nickerson Road           Phone: 508-786-3655 
   Marlborough, MA 01752        Email: sgoldfless@lucent.com 
    
   Feihong Chen 
   Lucent Technologies 
   200 Nickerson Road           Phone: 508-786-3675 
   Marlborough, MA 01752        Email: fchen6@lucent.com 
    
   Tricci So 
   Caspian Network 
   170 Baytech Drive            Phone: 408-382-5217 
   San Jose, CA                 Email: tso@caspiannetworks.com 
   U.S.A. 94070 
    
   Elke Franze 
   Deutsche Telekom 
   T-Systems 
   T-Nova, Technologiezentrum   Phone: +49 6151 83 5459 
   D-64307 Darmstadt            Email: elke.franze@t-systems.de   
     
   Harrison et. al.      Expires August 2001                   Page 7 
                Requirements for OAM in MPLS Networks        May 2001 
    
   Darmstadt, Germany 
    
   Enriqu G. Cuevas 
   AT&T Laboratories 
   Room A2-1E03                 Phone: +1 732 420 3252 
   200 S. Laurel Avenue         E-mail: ecuevas@att.com 
   Middletown, NJ 07748 USA 
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
     
   Harrison et. al.      Expires August 2001                   Page 8 