SIPPING                                                        D. Petrie
Internet-Draft                                             Pingtel Corp.
Expires: January 17, 2005                                  July 19, 2004



     A Framework for Session Initiation Protocol User Agent Profile
                                Delivery
               draft-ietf-sipping-config-framework-04.txt


Status of this Memo


   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.


   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.


   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."


   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.


   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.


   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 17, 2005.


Copyright Notice


   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).  All Rights Reserved.


Abstract


   This document defines the application of a set of protocols for
   providing profile data to SIP user agents.  The objective is to
   define a means for automatically providing profile data a user agent
   needs to be functional without user or administrative intervention.
   The framework for discovery, delivery, notification and updates of
   user agent profile data is defined here.  As part of this framework a
   new SIP event package is defined here for the notification of profile
   changes.  This framework is also intended to ease ongoing
   administration and upgrading of large scale deployments of SIP user
   agents.  The contents and format of the profile data to be defined is
   outside the scope of this document.




Petrie                  Expires January 17, 2005                [Page 1]
Internet-Draft          SIP UA Profile Framework               July 2004



Table of Contents


   1.   Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   2.   Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     2.1  Requirements Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     2.2  Profile Delivery Framework Terminology . . . . . . . . . .   5
     2.3  Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   3.   Profile Change Event Notification Package  . . . . . . . . .   8
     3.1  Event Package Name . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     3.2  Event Package Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     3.3  SUBSCRIBE Bodies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
     3.4  Subscription Duration  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
     3.5  NOTIFY Bodies  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
     3.6  Notifier processing of SUBSCRIBE requests  . . . . . . . .  12
     3.7  Notifier generation of NOTIFY requests . . . . . . . . . .  13
     3.8  Subscriber processing of NOTIFY requests . . . . . . . . .  13
     3.9  Handling of forked requests  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
     3.10   Rate of notifications  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
     3.11   State Agents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
     3.12   Examples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
     3.13   Use of URIs to Retrieve State  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
       3.13.1   Device URIs  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
       3.13.2   User and Application URIs  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17
       3.13.3   Local Network URIs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17
   4.   Profile Delivery Framework Details . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17
     4.1  Discovery of Subscription URI  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17
       4.1.1  Discovery of Local Network URI . . . . . . . . . . . .  17
       4.1.2  Discovery of Device URI  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  18
       4.1.3  Discovery of User and Application URI  . . . . . . . .  19
     4.2  Enrollment with Profile Server . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
     4.3  Notification of Profile Changes  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  20
     4.4  Retrieval of Profile Data  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  20
     4.5  Upload of Profile Changes  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  20
     4.6  Usage of XCAP with the Profile Package . . . . . . . . . .  20
   5.   IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  23
     5.1  SIP Event Package  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  23
   6.   Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  23
     6.1  Symmetric Encryption of Profile Data . . . . . . . . . . .  23
   7.   Change History . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  24
     7.1  Changes from draft-ietf-sipping-config-framework-03.txt  .  24
     7.2  Changes from draft-ietf-sipping-config-framework-02.txt  .  24
     7.3  Changes from draft-ietf-sipping-config-framework-01.txt  .  24
     7.4  Changes from draft-ietf-sipping-config-framework-00.txt  .  25
     7.5  Changes from
          draft-petrie-sipping-config-framework-00.txt . . . . . . .  25
     7.6  Changes from draft-petrie-sip-config-framework-01.txt  . .  25
     7.7  Changes from draft-petrie-sip-config-framework-00.txt  . .  25
   8.   References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  26




Petrie                  Expires January 17, 2005                [Page 2]
Internet-Draft          SIP UA Profile Framework               July 2004



        Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  28
   A.   Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  28
        Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . .  29

















































Petrie                  Expires January 17, 2005                [Page 3]
Internet-Draft          SIP UA Profile Framework               July 2004



1.  Motivation


   Today all SIP user agent implementers use proprietary means of
   delivering user or device profiles to the user agent.  The profile
   delivery framework defined in this document is intended to enable a
   first phase migration to a standard means of providing profiles to
   SIP user agents.  It is expected that UA implementers will be able to
   use this framework as a means of delivering their existing
   proprietary user and device data profiles (i.e.  using their existing
   proprietary binary or text formats).  This in itself is a tremendous
   advantage in that a SIP environment can use a single profile delivery
   server for profile data to user agents from multiple implementers.
   Follow-on standardization activities can:
   1.  define a standard profile content format framework (e.g.  XML
       with namespaces [W3C.REC-xml-names11-20040204] or name-value
       pairs [RFC0822]).
   2.  specify the content (i.e.  name the profile data parameters, xml
       schema, name spaces) of the data profiles.


   One of the objectives of the framework described in this document is
   to provide a start up experience similar to that of users of an
   analog telephone.  When you plug in an analog telephone it just works
   (assuming the line is live and the switch has been provisioned).
   There is no end user configuration required to make analog phone
   work, at least in a basic sense.  So the objective here is to be able
   to take a new SIP user agent out of the box, plug it in or install
   the software and have it get its profiles without human intervention
   other than security measures.  This is necessary for cost effective
   deployment of large numbers of user agents.


   Another objective is to provide a scalable means for ongoing
   administration of profiles.  Administrators and users are likely to
   want to make changes to user and device profiles.


   Additional requirements for the framework defined in this document
   are described in: [I-D.ietf-sipping-ua-prof-framewk-reqs],
   [I-D.sinnreich-sipdev-req]


2.  Introduction



2.1  Requirements Terminology


   Keywords "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT" and
   "MAY" that appear in this document are to be interpreted as described
   in RFC 2119[RFC2119].






Petrie                  Expires January 17, 2005                [Page 4]
Internet-Draft          SIP UA Profile Framework               July 2004



2.2  Profile Delivery Framework Terminology


   profile - data set specific to a user or device.
   device - SIP user agent, either software or hardware appliance.
   profile content server - The server that provides the content of the
      profiles using the protocol specified by the URL scheme.
   notifier - The SIP user agent server which processes SUBSCRIBE
      requests for events and sends NOTIFY requests with profile data or
      URI(s) point to the data.
   profile delivery server - The logical collection of the SIP notifier
      and the server which provides the contents of the profile URI(s).


2.3  Overview


   The profile life cycle can be described by five functional steps.
   These steps are not necessarily discrete.  However it is useful to
   describe these steps as logically distinct.  These steps are named as
   follows:


   Discovery -  discover a profile delivery server
   Enrollment - enroll with the profile delivery server
   Profile Retrieval - retrieve profile data
   Profile Change Notification - receive notification of profile changes
   Profile Change Upload - upload profile data changes back to the
      profile delivery server


   Discovery is the process by which a UA finds the address and port at
   which it enrolls with the profile delivery server.  As there is no
   single discovery mechanism which will work in all network
   environments, a number of discovery mechanisms are defined with a
   prescribed order in which the UA tries them until one succeeds.


   Enrollment is the process by which a UA makes itself known to the
   profile delivery server.  In enrolling the UA provides identity
   information, name requested profile type(s) and supported protocols
   for profile retrieval.  It also subscribes to a mechanism for
   notification of profile changes.  As a result of enrollment, the UA
   receives the data or the URI for each of the profiles that the
   profile delivery server is able to provide.  Each profile type (set)
   requires a separate enrollment or SUBSCRIBE session.


   Profile Retrieval is the process of retrieving the content for each
   of the profiles the UA requested.


   Profile Change Notification is the process by which the profile
   delivery server notifies the UA that the content of one or more of
   the profiles has changed.  If the content is provided indirectly the
   UA SHOULD retrieve the profile from the specified URI upon receipt of




Petrie                  Expires January 17, 2005                [Page 5]
Internet-Draft          SIP UA Profile Framework               July 2004



   the change notification.


   Profile Upload is the process by which a UA or other entity (e.g.
   OSS, corporate directory or configuration management server) pushes a
   change to the profile data back up to the profile delivery server.


   This framework defines a new SIP event package [RFC3265] to solve
   enrollment and profile change notification steps.  This event packet
   defines everything but the mandatory content type.  This make this
   event package abstract until the content type is bound.  The profile
   content type(s) will be defined outside the scope of this document.
   It is he author's belief that it would be a huge accomplishment if
   all SIP user agent used this framework for delivering their existing
   proprietary profiles.  Even though this does not accomplish
   interoperability of profiles, it is a big first step in easing the
   administration of SIP user agents.  The definition of standard
   profiles and data set (see [I-D.petrie-sipping-profile-datasets] )
   will enable interoperability as a subsequent step.


   The question arises as to why SIP should be used for the profile
   delivery framework.  In this document SIP is used for only a small
   portion of the framework.  Other existing protocols are more
   appropriate for transport of the profile contents (to and from the
   user agent) and are suggested in this document.  The discovery step
   is simply a specified order and application of existing protocols.
   SIP is only needed for the enrollment and change notification
   functionality of the profile delivery framework.  In many SIP
   environments (e.g.  carrier/subscriber and multi-site enterprise)
   firewall, NAT and IP addressing issues make it difficult to get
   messages between the profile delivery server and the user agent
   requiring the profiles.


   With SIP the users and devices already are assigned globally routable
   addresses.  In addition the firewall and NAT problems are already
   presumably solved in the environments in which SIP user agents are to
   be used.  Therefore SIP is the best solution for allowing the user
   agent to enroll with the profile delivery server which may require
   traversal of multiple firewalls and NATs.  For the same reason the
   notification of profile changes is best solved by SIP.


   The content delivery server may be either in the public network or
   accessible through a DMZ.  The user agents requiring profiles may be
   behind firewalls and NATs and many protocols, such as HTTP, may be
   used for profile content retrieval without special consideration in
   the firewalls and NATs (e.g.  an HTTP client on the UA can typically
   pull content from a server outside the NAT/firewall.).


   A conscious separation of device, user, application and local network




Petrie                  Expires January 17, 2005                [Page 6]
Internet-Draft          SIP UA Profile Framework               July 2004



   profiles is made in this document.  This is useful to provide
   features such as hotelling as well as securing or restricting user
   agent functionality.  By maintaining this separation, a user may walk
   up to someone else's user agent and direct that user agent to get
   their profile data.  In doing so the user agent can replace the
   previous user's profile data while still keeping the devices profile
   data that may be necessary for core functionality and communication
   described in this document.  The local network profiles are relevant
   to a visiting device which gets plugged in to a foreign network.  The
   concept of the local network providing profile data is useful to
   provide hotelling (described above) as well as local policy data that
   may constrain the user or device behavior relative to the local
   network.  For example media types and codecs may be constrained to
   reflect the networks capabilities.


   The separation of these profiles also enables the separation of the
   management of the profiles.  The user profile may be managed by a
   profile delivery server operated by the user's ISP.  The device
   profile may be delivered from a profile delivery server operated by
   the user's employer.  The application profile may be delivered from
   the user's ASP.  The local network profile may delivered by a WIFI
   hotspot service provider.  Some interesting services and mobility
   applications are enabled with this separation of profiles.


   A very high level data model is implied here with the separation of
   these four profile types.  Each profile type requires a separate
   subscription to retrieve the profile.  A loose hierarchy exists
   mostly for the purpose of boot strapping and discovery or formation
   of the profile URIs.  No other meaning is implied by this hierarchy.
   However the profile format and data sets to be define outside this
   document, may define additional meaning to this hierarchy.  In the
   boot strapping scenario, a device straight out of the box (software
   or hardware) does not know anything about it's user or local network.
   The one thing that is does know is it's instance id.  So the
   hierarchy of the profiles exists as follows.


   The instance id is used to form the URI for subscribing to the device
   profile.  The device profile may contain a default user AOR for that
   device.  The default user AOR may then be used to retrieve the user
   profile.  Applications to be used on the device may be defined in the
   device and user profiles.  The user's AOR is also used to retrieve
   any application profiles for that user.  The local network profile is
   not referenced in any way from the device, user, application
   profiles.  It is subscribed to and retrieved based upon a URI formed
   from the local network domain.







Petrie                  Expires January 17, 2005                [Page 7]
Internet-Draft          SIP UA Profile Framework               July 2004



3.  Profile Change Event Notification Package


   This section defines a new SIP event package [RFC3265].  The purpose
   of this event package is to send to subscribers notification of
   content changes to the profile(s) of interest and to provide the
   location of the profile(s) via content indirection
   [I-D.ietf-sip-content-indirect-mech] or directly in the body of the
   NOTIFY.  Frequently the profiles delivered to the user agent are much
   larger (e.g.  several KB or even several MB) than the MTU of the
   network.  These larger profiles will cause larger than normal SIP
   messages and consequently higher impact on the SIP servers and
   infrastructure.  To avoid the higher impact and load on the SIP
   infrastructure, content indirection SHOULD be used if the profile is
   large enough to cause packet fragmentation over the transport
   protocol.  The presence of the MIME type for content indirection
   [I-D.ietf-sip-content-indirect-mech] in the Accept header indicates
   that the user agent supports content indirection and that the profile
   delivery server SHOULD use content indirection.  Similarly the
   content type for the differential notification of profile changes
   [I-D.ietf-simple-xcap-package] may be used in the Accept header to
   receive profile change deltas.


   The MIME types or formats of profile to be delivered via this
   framework are to be defined in the documents that define the profile
   contents.  These profile MIME types specified in the Accept header
   along with the profile types specified in the Event header parameter
   "profile-name" MAY be used to specify which profiles get delivered
   either directly or indirectly in the NOTIFY requests.  As this event
   package does not specify the mandatory content type, this package is
   abstract.  The profile definition documents will specify the
   mandatory content type to make a concrete event package.


3.1  Event Package Name


   The name of this package is "sip-profile".  This value appears in the
   Event header field present in SUBSCRIBE and NOTIFY requests for this
   package as defined in [RFC3265].


3.2  Event Package Parameters


   This package defines the following new parameters for the event
   header: "profile-name", "vendor", "model", "version", "effective-by",
   "document", "app-id".  The effective-by parameter is for use in
   NOTIFY requests only.  The others are for use in the SUBSCRIBE
   request, but may be used in NOTIFY requests as well.


   The "profile-name" parameter is used to indicate the token name of
   the profile type the user agent wishes to obtain data or URIs for and




Petrie                  Expires January 17, 2005                [Page 8]
Internet-Draft          SIP UA Profile Framework               July 2004



   to be notified of subsequent changes.  Using a token in this
   parameter allows the URL semantics for retrieving the profiles to be
   opaque to the subscribing user agent.  All it needs to know is the
   token value for this parameter.  This document defines four logical
   types of profiles and their token names.  The contents or format of
   the profiles is outside the scope of this document.


   The four types of profiles define here are "device", "user",
   "application" and "local".  Specifying "device" type profile(s)
   indicates the desire for the profile data (URI when content
   indirection is used) and change notification of the contents of the
   profile(s) that are specific to the device or user agent.  Specifying
   "user" type profile indicates the desire for the profile data or URI
   to the profile(s) and change notification of the profile content for
   the user.  Specifying "application" type profile indicates the desire
   for the profile data or URI to the profile(s) and change notification
   of the profile content for the user's applications.  Specifying
   "local" type profile indicates the desire for profiles data or URI to
   the profile(s) specific to the local network.  The device, user,
   application or local network is identified in the URI of the
   SUBSCRIBE request.  The Accept header of the SUBSCRIBE request MUST
   include the MIME types for all profile content types that the
   subscribing user agent wishes to retrieve profiles or receive change
   notifications.


   Profile-Name       =  "profile-name" HCOLON profile-value
   profile-value      =  profile-types / token
   profile-types      =  "device" / "user" / "application" / "local"


      The "device", "user", "application" or "local" token in the
      profile-name parameter may represent a class or set of profile
      properties.  As standards are defined for specific profile
      contents related to the user device or local network, it may be
      desirable to define additional tokens for the profile-name header.
      Also additional content types may be defined along with the
      profile formats that can be used in the Accept header of the
      SUBSCRIBE to filter or indicate what data sets of the profile are
      desired.


   The rational for the separation of user, device and local network
   type profiles is provided in Section 2.3.  It should be noted that
   any of the types may indicate that zero or more profiles or URIs are
   provided in the NOTIFY request.  As discussed, a default user may be
   assigned to a device.  The default user's AOR may in turn be used as
   the URI to SUBSCRIBE to the "user" and "application" profile types.


   The data provided in the four types of profiles may overlap.  As an
   example the codecs that a user prefers to use, the codecs that the




Petrie                  Expires January 17, 2005                [Page 9]
Internet-Draft          SIP UA Profile Framework               July 2004



   device supports (and the enterprise or device owner wishes to use),
   the codecs that the local network can support (and the network
   operator wishes to allow) all may overlap in how they are specified
   in the three corresponding profiles.  This policy of merging the
   constraints across the multiple profile types can only unambiguously
   be defined along with the profile format and syntax.  This is out of
   scope for this document.


   The "vendor", "model" and "version" parameter values are tokens
   specified by the implementer of the user agent.  These parameters are
   useful to the profile delivery server to affect the profiles
   provided.  In some scenarios it is desirable to provide different
   profiles based upon these parameters.  For example feature property X
   in a profile may work differently on two versions of user agent.
   This gives the profile deliver server the ability to compensate for
   or take advantage of the differences.


   The "network-user" parameter is used when subscribing for local
   network profiles.  If the value of the profile-name parameter is not
   "local", the "network-user" parameter has no defined meaning.  If the
   user has special privileges beyond that of an anonymous user in the
   local network, the "network-user" parameter identifies the user to
   the local network.  The value of this parameter is the user's address
   of record.  The SUBSCRIBE server may authenticate the subscriber to
   verify this AOR.


   The "effective-by" parameter in the Event header of the NOTIFY
   specifies the maximum number of seconds before the user agent MUST
   make the new profile effective.  A value of 0 (zero) indicates that
   the user agent MUST make the profiles effective immediately (despite
   possible service interruptions).  This gives the profile delivery
   server the power to control when the profile is effective.  This may
   be important to resolve an emergency problem or disable a user agent
   immediately.


   The "document" parameter is used to specify a relative URI for a
   specific profile document that the user agent wishes to retrieve and
   to receive change notification.  This is particularly useful for
   profile content like XCAP [I-D.ietf-simple-xcap] where there is a
   well defined URL schema and the user agent knows the specific content
   that it wants.  The "document" parameter value syntax is a quoted
   string.  For more details on the use of this package with XCAP see
   Section 4.6.


   The "app-id" parameter is only used when the "profile-name" parameter
   value is "application".  The "app-id" indicates that the user agent
   wishes to retrieve the profile data or URI and change notification
   for the application profile data for the specific application




Petrie                  Expires January 17, 2005               [Page 10]
Internet-Draft          SIP UA Profile Framework               July 2004



   indicated in the value of the "app-id" parameter.  The "app-id"
   parameter value is a token.


   SUBSCRIBE request Event header examples:
   Event: sip-profile;profile-name=device;
               vendor=acme;model=Z100;version=1.2.3


   Event: sip-profile;profile-name=
      "http://example.com/services/user-profiles/users/freds.xml";
               vendor=premier;model=trs8000;version=5.5


   NOTIFY request Event header examples:
   Event:sip-profile;effective-by=0


   Event:sip-profile;effective-by=3600




3.3  SUBSCRIBE Bodies


   This package defines no new use of the SUBSCRIBE request body.
   Future follow on documents may specify a filter-like mechanism using
   etags to minimize the delivery or notification  of profiles where the
   user agent already has a current version.


3.4  Subscription Duration


   As the presence (or lack of) a device or user agent it not very time
   critical to the functionality of the profile delivery server, it is
   recommended that default subscription duration be 86400 seconds (one
   day).


3.5  NOTIFY Bodies


   The size of profile content is likely to be hundreds to several
   thousand bytes in size.  Frequently even with very modest sized SDP
   bodies, SIP messages get fragmented causing problems for many user
   agents.  For this reason if the Accept header of the SUBSCRIBE
   included the MIME type: message/external-body indicating support for
   content indirection the profile delivery server SHOULD use content
   indirection [I-D.ietf-sip-content-indirect-mech] in the NOTIFY body
   for providing the profiles.


   When delivering profiles via content indirection the profile delivery
   server MUST include the Content-ID defined in
   [I-D.ietf-sip-content-indirect-mech] for each profile URL.  This is
   to avoid unnecessary download of the profiles.  Some user agents are
   not able to make a profile effective without rebooting or restarting.




Petrie                  Expires January 17, 2005               [Page 11]
Internet-Draft          SIP UA Profile Framework               July 2004



   Rebooting is something to be avoided on a user agent performing
   services such as telephony.  In this way the Content-ID allows the
   user agent to avoid unnecessary interruption of service as well.  The
   Content-Type MUST be specified for each URI.


      Initially user agent implementers may use a proprietary content
      type for the profiles retrieved from the URIs(s).  This is a good
      first step towards easing the management of user agents.  Standard
      profile contents, content type and formats will need to be defined
      for true interoperability of profile delivery.  The specification
      of the content is out of the scope of this document.


   Likewise the URL scheme used in the content indirection is outside
   the scope of this document.  This document is agnostic to the URL
   schemes as the profile content may dictate what is required.  It is
   expected that TFTP [RFC3617], FTP [??], HTTP [RFC2616], HTTPS
   [RFC2818], LDAP [RFC3377], XCAP [I-D.ietf-simple-xcap] and other URL
   schemes are supported by this package and framework.


3.6  Notifier processing of SUBSCRIBE requests


   The general rules for processing SUBSCRIBE requests [RFC3265] apply
   to this package.  If content indirection is used for delivering the
   profiles, the notifier does not need to authenticate the subscription
   as the profile content is not transported in the SUBSCRIBE or NOTIFY
   transaction messages.  With content indirection only URLs are
   transported in the NOTIFY request which may be secured using the
   techniques in Section 6.  If content indirection is not used, SIPS
   with SIP authentication SHOULD be used.


   The behavior of the profile delivery server is left to the
   implementer.  The profile delivery server may be as simple as a SIP
   SUBSCRIBE UAS and NOTIFY UAC front end to a simple HTTP server
   delivering static files that are hand edited.  At the other extreme
   the profile delivery server can be part of a configuration management
   system that integrates with a corporate directory and IT system or
   carrier OSS, where the profiles are automatically generated.  The
   design of this framework intentionally provides the flexibility of
   implementation from simple/cheap to complex/expensive.


   If the user or device is not known to the profile delivery server,
   the implementer MAY accept the subscription or reject it.  It is
   recommended that the implementer accept the subscription.  It is
   useful for the profile delivery server to maintain the subscription
   as an administrator may add the user or device to the system,
   defining the profile contents.  This allows the profile delivery
   server to immediately send a NOTIFY request with the profile URIs.
   If the profile delivery server does not accept the subscription from




Petrie                  Expires January 17, 2005               [Page 12]
Internet-Draft          SIP UA Profile Framework               July 2004



   an unknown user or device, the administer or user must manually
   provoke the user agent to reSUBSCRIBE.  This may be difficult if the
   user agent and administrator are at different locations.


3.7  Notifier generation of NOTIFY requests


   As in [RFC3265], the profile delivery server MUST always send a
   NOTIFY request upon accepting a subscription.  If the device or user
   is unknown to the profile delivery server and it chooses to accept
   the subscription, the implementer has two choices.  A NOTIFY MAY be
   sent with no body or content indirection containing the profile
   URI(s).  Alternatively a NOTIFY MAY be sent with a body or content
   indirection containing URI(s) pointing to a default data set.  The
   data sets provided may allow for only limited functionality of the
   user agent (e.g.  a phone user agent with data to enable calls to
   help desk and emergency services.).  This is an implementation and
   business policy decision for the profile delivery server.


   If the URI in the SUBSCIRBE request is a known identity and
   provisioned with the requested profile type (i.e.  as specified in
   the profile-name parameter), the profile delivery server SHOULD send
   a NOTIFY with profile data or content indirection (if the content
   type was included in the Accept header) containing the URI for the
   profile.


   A user agent can provide hotelling by collecting a userËs AOR and
   credentials needed to SUBSCRIBE and retrieve the user's profiles.
   hotelling functionality is achieved by subscribing to the user's AOR
   and specifying the "user" profile type.  This same mechanism can also
   be used to secure a user agent, requiring a user to login to enable
   functionality beyond the default userËs restricted functionality.


   The profile delivery server MAY specify when the new profiles MUST be
   made effective by the user agent.  By default the user agent makes
   the profiles effective as soon as it thinks that it is non-obtrusive.
   Profile changes SHOULD affect behavior on all new dialogs which are
   created after the notification, but may not be able to effect
   existing dialogs.  However the profile delivery server MAY specify a
   maximum time in seconds (zero or more), in the effective-by event
   header parameter, by which the user agent MUST make the new profiles
   effective for all dialogs.


3.8  Subscriber processing of NOTIFY requests


   The user agent subscribing to this event package MUST adhere to the
   NOTIFY request processing behavior specified in [RFC3265].  The user
   agent MUST make the profiles effective as specified in the NOTIFY
   request (see Section 3.7).  The user agent SHOULD use one of the




Petrie                  Expires January 17, 2005               [Page 13]
Internet-Draft          SIP UA Profile Framework               July 2004



   techniques specified in Section 6 to securely retrieve the profiles.


3.9  Handling of forked requests


   This event package allows the creation of only one dialog as a result
   of an initial SUBSCRIBE request.  The techniques to achieve this are
   described in section 4.4.9 of [RFC3265].


3.10  Rate of notifications


   It is anticipated that the rate of change for user and device
   profiles will be very infrequent (i.e.  days or weeks apart).  For
   this reason no throttling or minimum period between NOTIFY requests
   is specified for this package.


3.11  State Agents


   State agents are not applicable to this event package.


3.12  Examples


   Example SUBSCRIBE and NOTIFY request using content indirection:






























Petrie                  Expires January 17, 2005               [Page 14]
Internet-Draft          SIP UA Profile Framework               July 2004



   SUBSCRIBE sip:ff00000036c5@example.com SIP/2.0
   Event: sip-profile;profile-name=device;vendor=acme;
                            model=Z100;version=1.2.3
   From: sip:ff00000036c5@acme.com;tag=1234
   To: sip:ff00000036c5@acme.com;tag=abcd
   Call-ID: 3573853342923422@10.1.1.44
   CSeq: 2131 SUBSCRIBE
   Contact: sip:ff00000036c5@10.1.1.44
   Accept: message/external-body, application/z100-device-profile
   Content-Length: 0




   NOTIFY sip:ff00000036c5@10.1.1.44 SIP/2.0
   Event: sip-profile;effective-by=3600
   From: sip:ff00000036c5@acme.com;tag=abcd
   To: sip:ff00000036c5@acme.com;tag=1234
   Call-ID: 3573853342923422@10.1.1.44
   CSeq: 321 NOTIFY
   MIME-Version: 1.0
   Content-Type: multipart/mixed; boundary=boundary42
   Content-Length: ...


   --boundary42
   Content-Type: message/external-body;
       access-type="URL";
       expiration="Mon, 24 June 2002 09:00:00 GMT";
           URL="http://www.example.com/devices/ff00000036c5";
           size=1234


   Content-Type: application/z100-device-profile
   Content-ID: <39EHF78SA@example.com>


   --boundary42--



3.13  Use of URIs to Retrieve State


   The URI for the SUBSCRIBE request is formed differently depending
   upon which profile type the subscription is for.  This allows the
   different profile types to be potentially managed by different
   profile delivery servers (perhaps even operated by different
   entities).


3.13.1  Device URIs


   The URI for the "device" type profile is base upon the identity of
   the device.  The device URI MUST be unique over time and space for




Petrie                  Expires January 17, 2005               [Page 15]
Internet-Draft          SIP UA Profile Framework               July 2004



   all devices and implementations.  The instance id used as the user
   part of the device URI SHOULD remain the same for the lifetime of the
   user agent.  The device URI is used to identify which profile is
   associated with a specific instance of a user agent.


      If the user agent were to change its device URI, the profile
      delivery server would loose its association between the profile
      and the device.  This would also make it difficult for the profile
      delivery server to track user agents under profile management.


   The URI for the device type profile should use a unique identifier as
   the user portion of the URI.  The host and port portion of the URI as
   set to that of the domain or address of the profile deliver server
   which manages that user agent.  A means of discovering the host and
   port portion is discussed in Section 4.1.  Two approaches are
   suggested for constructing a unique identifier to be used in the user
   portion of the device URI.


      The MAC address of the device may be used if there will always be
      no more than one user agent using that MAC address over time (e.g.
      a dedicate telephone appliance).  The MAC address may not be used
      if more than one user agent instance exists or use the same MAC
      address (e.g.  multiple instances of a softphone may run on a
      general purpose computing device).  The advantage of the MAC
      address is that many vendors put bar codes on the device with the
      actual MAC address on it.  A bar code scanner is a convenient
      means of collecting the instance id for input and provisioning on
      the profile delivery server.  If the MAC address is used, it is
      recommended that the MAC address is rendered in all lower case
      with no punctuation for consistency across implementations.  For
      example a device managed by sipuaconfig.example.com using its MAC
      address to form the device URI might look like:
      sip:00df1e004cd0@sipuaconfig.example.com.
      For devices where there is no MAC address or the MAC address is
      not unique to an instance of a user agent (e.g.  multiple
      softphones on a computer or a gateway with multiple logical user
      agents) it is recommended that a URN [RFC2141] is used as the user
      portion of the device URI.  The approach to defining a user agent
      instance ID in for GRUU [I-D.ietf-sip-gruu] should be considered.
      When constructing the instance id the implementer should also
      consider that a human may need to manual enter the instance id to
      provision the device in the profile delivery server (i.e.  longer
      strings are more error prone in data entry).  When the URN is used
      as the user part of URI, it MUST be URL escaped.  The ":" is not a
      legal character (without being escaped) in the user part of a
      name-addr.  For example the instance ID:
      urn:uuid:f81d4fae-7dec-11d0-a765-00a0c91e6bf6 would be escaped to
      look as follows in a URI:




Petrie                  Expires January 17, 2005               [Page 16]
Internet-Draft          SIP UA Profile Framework               July 2004



      sip:urn%3auuid%3af81d4fae-7dec-11d0-a765-00a0c91e6bf6@example.com.


3.13.2  User and Application URIs


   The URI for the "user" and "application" type profiles is based upon
   the identity of the user.  The user's address of record (AOR) is used
   as the URI in the SUBSCRIBE request.  A new user agent or device may
   not know the user's AOR.  The user's AOR may be obtained as part of a
   default user property in the device profile.  Alternatively the user
   agent may prompt the user for an AOR to be used.  This can provide a
   login and/or hotelling feature on the user agent.


3.13.3  Local Network URIs


   The URI for the "local" type profile is based upon the identity of
   the local network.  When subscribing to the local network profile,
   the use part of the URI is "anonymous".  The host and port part of
   the URI is the local network name/domain.  The discovery of the local
   network name or domain is discussed in Section 4.1.  The user agent
   may provide the user's AOR as the value to the "network-user" event
   header parameter.  This is useful if the user has privileges in the
   local network beyond those of the default user.  The profile delivery
   server SHOULD authenticate the user before providing the profile if
   additional privileges are granted.  Example URI:
   sip:ananymous@example.com


4.  Profile Delivery Framework Details


   The following describes how different functional steps of the profile
   delivery framework work.  Also described here is how the event
   package defined in this document provides the enrollment and
   notification functions within the framework.


4.1  Discovery of Subscription URI


   The discover approach varies depending upon which profile type URI is
   to be discovered.  The order of discover is important in the boot
   strapping situation as user agent may not have any information
   provisioned.  The local network profile should be discovered first as
   it may contain key information such as how to traverse a NAT/firewall
   to get to outside services (e.g.  the user's profile delivery
   server).  The device profile URI should be discovered next.  The
   device profile may contain the default user's AOR.  The user and
   application profile subscription URI's are discovered last.


4.1.1  Discovery of Local Network URI


   The "discovered" host for the "local" profile subscription URI is the




Petrie                  Expires January 17, 2005               [Page 17]
Internet-Draft          SIP UA Profile Framework               July 2004



   local IP network domain for the user agent, either provisioned as
   part of the device's static network configuration or discovered via
   DHCP.  The local network profile subscription URI should not be
   cached as the user agent may be move from one local network to the
   other.  The user agent should perform the local network discovery
   every time it starts up or network connectivity is regained.


4.1.2  Discovery of Device URI


   The discovery function is needed to bootstrap user agents to the
   point of knowing where to enroll with the profile delivery server.
   Section 3.13.1 describes how to form the device URI used to send the
   SUBSCRIBE request for enrollment.  However the bootstrapping problem
   for the user agent (out of the box) is what to use for the host and
   port in the device URI.  Due to the wide variation of environments in
   which the enrolling user agent may reside (e.g.  behind residential
   router, enterprise LAN, WIFI hotspot, ISP, dialup modem) and the
   limited control that the  administrator of the profile delivery
   server (e.g.  enterprise, service provider) may have over that
   environment, no single discovery mechanism works everywhere.
   Therefore a number of mechanisms SHOULD be tried in the specified
   order: SIP DHCP option [RFC3361], SIP DNS SRV [RFC3263], DNS A record
   and manual.  The user agent may be preprovisioned with the host and
   port (e.g.  service providers may preprovision a device before
   sending it to a subscriber) in which case this discovery mechanism is
   not needed.  Before performing the discover steps, the user agent
   SHOULD provide a means to skip the discovery stage and manually enter
   the device URI host and port.  In addition the user agent SHOULD
   allow the user to accept or reject the discovered host and port, in
   case an alternate to the discovered host and port are desired.


   1.  The first discovery mechanism that SHOULD be tried is to
       construct the device SUBSCRIBE URI, as described in Section
       3.13.1, is to use the host and port of the out bound proxy
       discovered by the SIP DHCP option as described in [RFC3361].  If
       the SIP DHCP option is not provided in the DHCP response; or no
       SIP response is received for the SUBSCRIBE request; or a SIP
       failure response other than for authorization is received for the
       SUBSCRIBE request to the sip-profile event, the next discovery
       mechanism SHOULD be tried.
   2.  The local IP network domain for the user agent, either configured
       or discovered via DHCP, should be used with the technique in
       [RFC3263] to obtain a host and port to use in the SUBSCRIBE URI.
       If no SIP response or a SIP failure response other than for
       authorization is received for the SUBSCRIBE request to the
       sip-profile event, the next discovery mechanism SHOULD be tried.
   3.  The fully qualified host name constructed using the host name
       "sipuaconfig" and concatenated with the local IP network domain




Petrie                  Expires January 17, 2005               [Page 18]
Internet-Draft          SIP UA Profile Framework               July 2004



       (as provided via DHCP or provisioned) should be tried next using
       the technique in [RFC3263] to obtain a host and port to use in
       the SUBSCRIBE URI.  If no SIP response or a SIP failure response
       other than for authorization is received for the SUBSCRIBE
       request to the sip-profile event, the next discovery mechanism
       SHOULD be tried.
   4.  If all other discovery techniques fail, the user agent MUST
       provide a manual means for the user to enter the host and port
       used to construct the SUBSCRIBE URI.


   Once a user agent has successfully discovered, enrolled, received a
   NOTIFY response with profile data or URI(s), the user agent SHOULD
   cache the device profile SUBCRIBE URI to avoid having to rediscover
   the profile delivery server again in the future.  The user agent
   SHOULD NOT cache the SUBSCRIBE URI until it receives a NOTIFY with
   profile data or URI(s).  The reason for this is that a profile
   delivery server may send 202 responses to SUBSCRIBE requests and
   NOTIFY responses to unknown user agent (see Section 3.6) with no
   URIs.  Until the profile delivery server has sent a NOTIFY request
   with profile data or URI(s), it has not agreed to provide profiles.


      To illustrate why the user agent should not cache the device
      profile SUBSCRIBE URI until profile data or URI(s) are provided in
      the NOTIFY, consider the following example:  a user agent running
      on a laptop plugged into a visited LAN in which a foreign profile
      delivery server is discovered.  The profile delivery server never
      provides profile URIs in the NOTIFY request as it is not
      provisioned to accept the user agent.  The user then takes the
      laptop to their enterprise LAN.  If the user agent cached the
      SUBSCRIBE URI from the visited LAN (which did not provide
      profiles), when subsequently placed in the enterprise LAN which is
      provisioned to provide profiles to the user agent, the user agent
      would not attempt to discover the profile delivery server.


4.1.3  Discovery of User and Application URI


   The default user's AOR from the device profile (if provided) may then
   be used to subscribe to the "user" and "application" profiles.
   Alternatively the user's AOR to be used for the "user" and
   application" subscription URI, may be "discovered" manually by
   prompting the user.  This "discovered" URI for the user and
   application profile subscription may be cached.


4.2  Enrollment with Profile Server


   Enrollment is accomplished by subscribing to the event package
   described in Section 3.  The enrollment process is useful to the
   profile delivery server as it makes the server aware of user agents




Petrie                  Expires January 17, 2005               [Page 19]
Internet-Draft          SIP UA Profile Framework               July 2004



   to which it may delivery profiles (those user agents the profile
   delivery server is provisioned to provide profiles to; those present
   that the server may be provide profiles in the future; and those that
   the server can automatically provide default profiles).  It is an
   implementation choice and business policy as to whether the profile
   delivery server provides profiles to user agents that it is not
   explicitly provisioned to do so.  However the profile server SHOULD
   accept (with 2xx response) SUBSCRIBE requests from any user agent as
   explained in Section 3.5.


4.3  Notification of Profile Changes


   The NOTIFY request in the sip-profile event package serves two
   purposes.  First it provides the user agent with a means to obtain
   the profile directly data or via URI(s) for desired profiles without
   requiring the end user to manually enter them.  It also provides the
   means for the profile delivery server to notify the user agent that
   the content of the profiles have changed and should be made
   effective.  Optionally the differential changes may be obtained by
   including the content-type defined in [I-D.ietf-simple-xcap-package]
   in the Accept header of the SUBSCRIBE request.


4.4  Retrieval of Profile Data


   The user agent retrieves its needed profile(s) directly or via the
   URI(s) provided in the NOTIFY request as specified in Section 3.5.
   The profile delivery server SHOULD secure the content of the profiles
   using one of the techniques described in Section 6.  The user agent
   SHOULD make the new profiles effective in the timeframe described in
   Section 3.2.


   The contents of the profiles SHOULD be cached by the user agent.
   This it to avoid the situation where the content delivery server is
   not available, leaving the user agent non-functional.


4.5  Upload of Profile Changes


   The user agent or other service MAY push changes up to the profile
   delivery server using the technique appropriate to the profile's URL
   scheme (e.g.  HTTP PUT method, FTP put command).  The technique for
   pushing incremental or atomic changes MUST be described by the
   specific profile data framework.  A means for pushing changes up into
   the profile delivery server for XCAP is defined in
   [I-D.ietf-simple-xcap].


4.6  Usage of XCAP with the Profile Package


   This framework allows for the usage of several different protocols




Petrie                  Expires January 17, 2005               [Page 20]
Internet-Draft          SIP UA Profile Framework               July 2004



   for the retrieval of profiles.  One protocol which is suitable is
   XCAP [I-D.ietf-simple-xcap], which allows for HTTP URIs to represent
   XML documents, elements and attributes.  XCAP defines a specific
   hierarchy for how documents are organized.  As a result, it is
   necessary to discuss how that organization relates to the rough data
   model presented here.


   When a user or device enrolls with a SUBSCRIBE request, the request
   will contain some kind of identifying information for that user or
   device.  This identity is mapped to an XCAP User ID (XUID) based on
   an implementation specific mapping.  The "profile-name" along with
   the "app-id" Event header parameters specify the specific XCAP
   application usage.


   In particular, when the "profile-name" is "application", the "app-id"
   contains the XCAP Application Unique ID (AUID).  When the
   "profile-name" is application, but the "app-id" parameter is absent,
   this specifies that the user wishes to SUBSCRIBE to all documents for
   all application usages associated with the user in the request-uri.
   This provides a convenient way for a single subscription to be used
   to obtain all application data.  The XCAP root is determined by a
   local mapping.


   When the "profile-name" is "device", or "user" or "local-network",
   this maps to an AUID and document selector for representing device,
   user and local-network data, respectively.  The mapping is a matter
   of local policy.  This allows different providers to use different
   XCAP application usages and document schemas for representing these
   profiles, without having to configure the device with the specific
   AUID which is being used.


   Furthermore, when the "document" attribute is present, it identifies
   a specific document that is being requested.  If the "profile-name"
   is "application", the "app-id" MUST be present as well.  The
   "document" attribute then specifies a relative path reference.  Its
   first path segment is either "global", specifying global data, or
   "user", specifying user data for the user in the request URI.  The
   next path segment identifies the path in the global directory or the
   user's home directory.


   For example, consider a phone with an instance ID of
   urn:uuid:00000000-0000-0000-0000-0003968cf920.  To obtain its device
   profile, it would generate a SUBSCRIBE that looks like this:



   SUBSCRIBE
   sip:urn%3auuid%3a00000000-0000-0000-0000-0003968cf920@example.com
   Event: sip-profile;profile-name=device




Petrie                  Expires January 17, 2005               [Page 21]
Internet-Draft          SIP UA Profile Framework               July 2004



   If the profile data is stored in an XCAP server, the server would the
   "device" profile to an application usage and document selector based
   on local policy.  If this mapping specifies the AUID
   "vendor2-device-data" and a document called "index" within the user
   directory, the corresponding HTTP URI for the document is:



   http://xcap.example.com/root/vendor2-device-data/users/
   urn%3auuid%3a00000000-0000-0000-0000-0003968cf920/index


   and indeed, if a content indirection is returned in a NOTIFY, the URL
   would equal this.


   That user profile might specify the user identity (as a SIP AOR) and
   their application-usages.  From that, the device can enroll to learn
   about its application data.  To learn about all of the data:



   SUBSCRIBE sip:user-aor@example.com SIP/2.0
   Event: sip-profile;profile-name=application


   The server would map the request URI to an XUI (user-aor, for
   example) and the xcap root based on local policy.  If there are two
   AUIDs, "resource-lists" [I-D.ietf-simple-xcap-list-usage] and
   "rls-services" [I-D.ietf-simple-xcap-list-usage], this would result
   in a subscription to all documents within:



   http://xcap.example.com/root/rls-services/users/user-aor
   http://xcap.example.com/root/resource-lists/users/user-aor


   The user would not be subscribed to the global data for these two
   application usages, since that data is not important for users.


   However, the user/device could be made aware that it needs to
   subscribe to a specific document.  In that case, its subscribe would
   look like:



   SUBSCRIBE sip:user-aor@example.com SIP/2.0
   Event: sip-profile;profile-name=application;app-id=resource-lists
     ;document="global/index"


   this would result in a subscription to the single global document for
   resource-lists.


   In some cases, these subscriptions are to a multiplicity of
   documents.  In that case, the notification format will need to be one




Petrie                  Expires January 17, 2005               [Page 22]
Internet-Draft          SIP UA Profile Framework               July 2004



   which can indicate what document has changed.  This includes content
   indirection, but also the xcap diff format
   [I-D.ietf-simple-xcap-package].


5.  IANA Considerations


   There are several IANA considerations associated with this
   specification.


5.1  SIP Event Package


   This specification registers a new event package as defined in
   [RFC3265].  The following information required for this registration:
      Package Name: sip-profile
      Package or Template-Package: This is a package
      Published Document: RFC XXXX (Note to RFC Editor: Please fill in
      XXXX with the RFC number of this specification).
      Person to Contact: Daniel Petrie dpetrie@pingtel.com
      New event header parameters: profile-name, vendor, model, version,
      effective-by, document, app-id


6.  Security Considerations


   Profiles may contain sensitive data such as user credentials.  The
   protection of this data depends upon how the data is delivered.  If
   the data is delivered in the NOTIFY body, SIP authentication MUST be
   used for SUBSCRIPTION and SIPS and/or S/MIME MAY be use to encrypt
   the data.  If the data is provided via content indirection, SIP
   authentication is not necessary for the SUBSCRIBE request.  With
   content indirection the data is protected via the authentication,
   authorization and encryption mechanisms provided by the profile URL
   scheme.  Use of the URL scheme security mechanisms via content
   indirection simplifies the security solution as the SIP event package
   does not need to authenticate, authorize or protect the contents of
   the SIP messages.  Effectively the profile delivery server can safely
   provide profile URI(s) to anyone.  The profile content is protected
   via the URL scheme transport mechanisms for authentication,
   authorization and encryption (e.g.  via HTTPS).  HTTPS provides two
   possible mechanisms for authentication:  1) the device may have a
   certificate that the profile deliver server can request in the TLS
   setup; or 2) the profile deliver server may use HTTP authentication
   [RFC2617] with the device or users credentials.


6.1  Symmetric Encryption of Profile Data


   If the transport for the URL scheme used for content indirection does
   not provide authentication, authorization or encryption, a technique
   to provide this is to encrypt the profiles on the content delivery




Petrie                  Expires January 17, 2005               [Page 23]
Internet-Draft          SIP UA Profile Framework               July 2004



   server using a symmetric encryption algorithm using a shared key.
   The encrypted profiles are delivered by the content delivery server
   via the URIs provided in the NOTIFY requests.  Using this technique
   the profile delivery server does not need to provide authentication
   or authorization for the retrieval as the profiles are obscured.  The
   user agent must obtain the username and password from the user or
   other out of band means to generate the key and decrypt the profiles.


7.  Change History


   Many thanks to those who contributed and commented on the many
   iterations of this document.  Detailed input was provided by Jonathan
   Rosenberg from Dynamicsoft, Henning Schulzrinne from Columbia U.,
   Cullen Jennings from Cisco, Rohan Mahy from Cisco, Rich Schaaf from
   Pingtel, Volker Hilt from Bell Labs.


7.1  Changes from draft-ietf-sipping-config-framework-03.txt


   Incorporated changes to better support the requirements for the use
   of this event package with XCAP and SIMPLE so that we can have one
   package (i.e.  simple-xcap-package now defines a content type not a
   package).  Added an additional profile type: application.  Added
   document and app-id Event header parameters in support of the
   application profile.  Define a loose high level data model or
   relationship between the four profile types.  Tried to edit and fix
   the confusing and ambiguous sections related to URI formation and
   discovery for the different profile types.  Better describe the
   importance of uniqueness for the instance id which is used in the
   user part of the device URI.


7.2  Changes from draft-ietf-sipping-config-framework-02.txt


   Added the concept of the local network as a source of profile data.
   There are now three separate logical sources for profile data: user,
   device and local network.  Each of these requires a separate
   subscription to obtain.


7.3  Changes from draft-ietf-sipping-config-framework-01.txt


   Changed the name of the profile-type event parameter to profile-name.
   Also allow the profile-name parameter to be either a token or an
   explicit URI.


   Allow content indirection to be optional.  Clarified the use of the
   Accept header to indicate how the profile is to be delivered.


   Added some content to the Iana section.





Petrie                  Expires January 17, 2005               [Page 24]
Internet-Draft          SIP UA Profile Framework               July 2004



7.4  Changes from draft-ietf-sipping-config-framework-00.txt


   This version of the document was entirely restructured and re-written
   from the previous version as it had been micro edited too much.


   All of the aspects of defining the event package are now organized in
   one section and is believed to be complete and up to date with
   [RFC3265].


   The URI used to subscribe to the event package is now either the user
   or device address or record.


   The user agent information (vendor, model, MAC and serial number) are
   now provided as event header parameters.


   Added a mechanism to force profile changes to be make effective by
   the user agent in a specified maximum period of time.


   Changed the name of the event package from sip-config to sip-profile


   Three high level security approaches are now specified.


7.5  Changes from draft-petrie-sipping-config-framework-00.txt


   Changed name to reflect SIPPING work group item


   Synchronized with changes to SIP DHCP [RFC3361], SIP [RFC3261] and
   [RFC3263], SIP Events [RFC3265] and content indirection
   [I-D.ietf-sip-content-indirect-mech]


   Moved the device identity parameters from the From field parameters
   to User-Agent header parameters.


   Many thanks to Rich Schaaf of Pingtel, Cullen Jennings of Cisco and
   Adam Roach of Dyamicsoft for the great comments and input.


7.6  Changes from draft-petrie-sip-config-framework-01.txt


   Changed the name as this belongs in the SIPPING work group.


   Minor edits


7.7  Changes from draft-petrie-sip-config-framework-00.txt


   Split the enrollment into a single SUBSCRIBE dialog for each profile.
   The 00 draft sent a single SUBSCRIBE listing all of the desired.
   These have been split so that each enrollment can be routed
   differently.  As there is a concept of device specific and user




Petrie                  Expires January 17, 2005               [Page 25]
Internet-Draft          SIP UA Profile Framework               July 2004



   specific profiles, these may also be managed on separate servers.
   For instance in a roaming situation the device might get its profile
   data from a local server which knows the LAN specific profile data.
   At the same time the user specific profiles might come from the
   user's home environment profile delivery server.


   Removed the Config-Expires header as it is largely superfluous with
   the SUBSCRIBE Expires header.


   Eliminated some of the complexity in the discovery mechanism.


   Suggest caching information discovered about a profile delivery
   server to avoid an avalanche problem when a whole building full of
   devices powers up.


   Added the User-Profile From header field parameter so that the device
   can request a user specific profile for a user that is different from
   the device's default user.


8  References


   [I-D.ietf-simple-xcap]
              Rosenberg, J., "The Extensible Markup Language (XML)
              Configuration Access Protocol (XCAP)",
              draft-ietf-simple-xcap-02 (work in progress), February
              2004.


   [I-D.ietf-simple-xcap-list-usage]
              Rosenberg, J., "An Extensible Markup Language (XML)
              Configuration Access Protocol (XCAP)  Usage for Presence
              Lists", draft-ietf-simple-xcap-list-usage-02 (work in
              progress), February 2004.


   [I-D.ietf-simple-xcap-package]
              Rosenberg, J., "A Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) Event
              Package for Modification Events  for the Extensible Markup
              Language (XML) Configuration Access Protocol (XCAP)
              Managed Documents", draft-ietf-simple-xcap-package-01
              (work in progress), February 2004.


   [I-D.ietf-sip-content-indirect-mech]
              Olson, S., "A Mechanism for Content Indirection in Session
              Initiation Protocol (SIP)  Messages",
              draft-ietf-sip-content-indirect-mech-03 (work in
              progress), June 2003.


   [I-D.ietf-sip-gruu]
              Rosenberg, J., "Obtaining and Using Globally Routable User




Petrie                  Expires January 17, 2005               [Page 26]
Internet-Draft          SIP UA Profile Framework               July 2004



              Agent (UA) URIs (GRUU) in the  Session Initiation Protocol
              (SIP)", draft-ietf-sip-gruu-02 (work in progress), July
              2004.


   [I-D.ietf-sipping-ua-prof-framewk-reqs]
              Petrie, D. and C. Jennings, "Requirements for SIP User
              Agent Profile Delivery Framework",
              draft-ietf-sipping-ua-prof-framewk-reqs-00 (work in
              progress), March 2003.


   [I-D.petrie-sipping-profile-datasets]
              Petrie, D., "A Schema for Session Initiation Protocol User
              Agent Profile Data Sets",
              draft-petrie-sipping-profile-datasets-00 (work in
              progress), July 2004.


   [I-D.sinnreich-sipdev-req]
              Butcher, I., Lass, S., Petrie, D., Sinnreich, H. and C.
              Stredicke, "SIP Telephony Device Requirements and
              Configuration", draft-sinnreich-sipdev-req-04 (work in
              progress), July 2004.


   [RFC0822]  Crocker, D., "Standard for the format of ARPA Internet
              text messages", STD 11, RFC 822, August 1982.


   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.


   [RFC2131]  Droms, R., "Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol", RFC
              2131, March 1997.


   [RFC2132]  Alexander, S. and R. Droms, "DHCP Options and BOOTP Vendor
              Extensions", RFC 2132, March 1997.


   [RFC2141]  Moats, R., "URN Syntax", RFC 2141, May 1997.


   [RFC2246]  Dierks, T. and C. Allen, "The TLS Protocol Version 1.0",
              RFC 2246, January 1999.


   [RFC2616]  Fielding, R., Gettys, J., Mogul, J., Frystyk, H.,
              Masinter, L., Leach, P. and T. Berners-Lee, "Hypertext
              Transfer Protocol -- HTTP/1.1", RFC 2616, June 1999.


   [RFC2617]  Franks, J., Hallam-Baker, P., Hostetler, J., Lawrence, S.,
              Leach, P., Luotonen, A. and L. Stewart, "HTTP
              Authentication: Basic and Digest Access Authentication",
              RFC 2617, June 1999.





Petrie                  Expires January 17, 2005               [Page 27]
Internet-Draft          SIP UA Profile Framework               July 2004



   [RFC2818]  Rescorla, E., "HTTP Over TLS", RFC 2818, May 2000.


   [RFC3261]  Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston,
              A., Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley, M. and E. Schooler,
              "SIP: Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261, June 2002.


   [RFC3263]  Rosenberg, J. and H. Schulzrinne, "Session Initiation
              Protocol (SIP): Locating SIP Servers", RFC 3263, June
              2002.


   [RFC3265]  Roach, A., "Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)-Specific
              Event Notification", RFC 3265, June 2002.


   [RFC3361]  Schulzrinne, H., "Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol
              (DHCP-for-IPv4) Option for Session Initiation Protocol
              (SIP) Servers", RFC 3361, August 2002.


   [RFC3377]  Hodges, J. and R. Morgan, "Lightweight Directory Access
              Protocol (v3): Technical Specification", RFC 3377,
              September 2002.


   [RFC3617]  Lear, E., "Uniform Resource Identifier (URI) Scheme and
              Applicability Statement for the Trivial File Transfer
              Protocol (TFTP)", RFC 3617, October 2003.


   [W3C.REC-xml-names11-20040204]
              Layman, A., Tobin, R., Bray, T. and D. Hollander,
              "Namespaces in XML 1.1", W3C REC REC-xml-names11-20040204,
              February 2004.



Author's Address


   Daniel Petrie
   Pingtel Corp.
   400 W. Cummings Park
   Suite 2200
   Woburn, MA  01801
   US


   Phone: "Dan Petrie (+1 781 938 5306)"<sip:dpetrie@pingtel.com>
   EMail: dpetrie@pingtel.com
   URI:   http://www.pingtel.com/


Appendix A.  Acknowledgments







Petrie                  Expires January 17, 2005               [Page 28]
Internet-Draft          SIP UA Profile Framework               July 2004



Intellectual Property Statement


   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; neither does it represent that it
   has made any effort to identify any such rights.  Information on the
   IETF's procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and
   standards-related documentation can be found in BCP-11.  Copies of
   claims of rights made available for publication and any assurances of
   licenses to be made available, or the result of an attempt made to
   obtain a general license or permission for the use of such
   proprietary rights by implementors or users of this specification can
   be obtained from the IETF Secretariat.


   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights which may cover technology that may be required to practice
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF Executive
   Director.


   The IETF has been notified of intellectual property rights claimed in
   regard to some or all of the specification contained in this
   document.  For more information consult the online list of claimed
   rights.



Full Copyright Statement


   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).  All Rights Reserved.


   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.


   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assignees.




Petrie                  Expires January 17, 2005               [Page 29]
Internet-Draft          SIP UA Profile Framework               July 2004



   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.



Acknowledgment


   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.







































Petrie                  Expires January 17, 2005               [Page 30] 