


ecrit                                                           B. Rosen
Internet-Draft                                                   NeuStar
Intended status: Standards Track                           July 28, 2008
Expires: January 29, 2009


 Requirements for handling abandoned calls and premature disconnects in
                    emergency calls on the Internet
            draft-rosen-ecrit-premature-disconnect-rqmts-00

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 29, 2009.

Abstract

   The -phonebcp draft currently requires endpoints to disable sending a
   BYE on an emergency call.  Insufficient justification and lack of
   attention to the entire problem has caused comment on that section of
   the document.  This document attempts to define the problem and the
   requirements to controlling disconnect on emergency calls.









Rosen                   Expires January 29, 2009                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft     Abandoned Call/PrematureDisconnect          July 2008


Table of Contents

   1.  Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
     1.1.  Premature disconnect  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
     1.2.  Abandoned Call  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Requirements for Premature Disconnect . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   3.  Requirements for Abandoned Call . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   4.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   5.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   6.  Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   7.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements  . . . . . . . . . . 7






































Rosen                   Expires January 29, 2009                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft     Abandoned Call/PrematureDisconnect          July 2008


1.  Problem Statement

   [I-D.ietf-ecrit-phonebcp] currently disallows sending of BYE by the
   calling UA.  This requirement has generated a request for additional
   capability, and has also caused some to question why it is needed,
   and how the mechanisms interact with current and future emergency
   call systems.  There are two aspects of handing emergency calls that
   give rise to the discussion.

1.1.  Premature disconnect

   Occasionally, when on an emergency call, a caller hangs up the call
   before the call taker is finished acquiring enough information.
   Emergency calls are stressful, and mistakes are easily made.  A
   mechanism is needed to re-establish communication between the caller
   and the call taker when this happens.  The PSTN has a feature
   available, "Called Party Hold" which is used in some jurisdictions to
   meet this requirement.  When CPH is engaged, if the user hangs up,
   the call is not torn down, but instead is maintained despite the "on
   hook" condition.  The call taker has a mechanism (called "Ringback"
   which is different than call-back) to ring the user's telephone.  If
   the handset is picked up, since the call is still active and
   resources maintained, the caller and the call taker are readily
   reconnected.  Called Party Hold is a feature that has long been
   available in wireline networks, but is not currently implemented in
   wireless networks.  Some jurisdictions are desirous of maintaining
   the current PSAP call disconnect control capability, while other
   jurisdictions would like to gain access to those capabilities.
   Still, in other jurisdictions, the function may not be needed or
   desired.

1.2.  Abandoned Call

   It is not uncommon for an emergency call to be cancelled before it
   reaches a call taker.  Abandoned, in this context, means that the
   call is terminated before the call taker answers it.  While it can be
   that the user is fully aware that the call is being cancelled, and
   considers the cancellation the most appropriate solution, abandoned
   calls are problematic to PSAPs because they don't know why the call
   was abandoned.  Unfortunately, what looks like an abandoned call can
   be a more serious circumstance such as a hostage situation.  In some
   jurisdictions, the PSAP dispatches a police unit to all logged
   abandoned calls.  In such jurisdictions, dispatch could be avoided
   for true inadvertent calling if the call went through, and the call
   taker was able to assess the actual situation.  Other jurisdictions
   do not have the resources and may not respond to abandoned calls at
   all.  Sometimes, application of the function depends on conditions.
   For example, in a mass calling event, an Interactive Media Response



Rosen                   Expires January 29, 2009                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft     Abandoned Call/PrematureDisconnect          July 2008


   unit may be used to answer calls.  Abandoning a call answered by a
   machine may be appropriate.  Even if jurisdictions respond to
   abandoned calls by dispatching emergency personnel in normal
   situations, they may not in this situation.

   Retaining the connection is extremely important when there is no
   callback information (e.g., uninitialized phone) or the caller has
   call termination features active (such as call forwarding, do not
   disturb) and the PSAP is unable to callback.


2.  Requirements for Premature Disconnect

   PD-1  It must be possible to have the PSAP rapidly re-establish
      communications with a caller that attempts to prematurely
      disconnect from the call.
     Rationale:  Time is paramount when handling emergency calls.
      Keeping resources active and available until the call taker
      determines the call can be terminated saves valuable time.
   PD-2  It must be possible for the PSAP to know when the user has
      attempted to prematurely disconnect
     Rationale:  Knowledge of the device state (and caller action) gives
      valuable information to the call taker which may influence how the
      call will be managed going forward.
   PD-3  Reconnecting the caller must work reasonably reliably under
      congestion conditions.
     Rationale:  PSAPs require robust mechanisms to perform their tasks.
   PD-4  When PD-1 is enforced, the PSAP must be able to cause alerting
      at an endpoint which has attempted to prematurely disconnect from
      the emergency call
     Rationale:  The user believes they have disconnected.  The ability
      to alert is needed to encourage the user to reconnect.
   PD-5  When PD-1 is enforced,the caller must not be able to place
      another call until the PSAP allows the call to be released.
     Rationale:  Priority must be given to the PSAP until such time the
      call taker determines the call can be terminated.
   PD-6  All Media and signaling streams flowing between the caller and
      call taker must be maintained to the extent needed for rapid
      reconnection.
     Rationale:  Media and signaling resources must be available as soon
      as the user re-answers.
   PD-7  Control of premature disconnect is not needed in all
      jurisdictions.  It must be possible to not invoke the function and
      allow premature disconnect to terminate the call as if no special
      features were present.






Rosen                   Expires January 29, 2009                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft     Abandoned Call/PrematureDisconnect          July 2008


     Rationale:  This reflects the current situation.


3.  Requirements for Abandoned Call

   AC-1  It must be possible for the PSAP, or the network that serves
      it, to have abandoned calls complete and stay connected.
     Rationale:  PSAPs cannot distinguish between calls which are
      appropriately abandoned and calls that need response but were cut
      short.  Controls to limit abandonment are needed for those PSAPs
      who would otherwise respond to all abandoned calls.
   AC-2  AC-1 shall be applied at the earliest possible time in the call
      establishment process.
     Rationale:  Disallowing call abandonment early minimizes the
      chances of abandoned calls.
   AC-3  Control of abandoned call is not needed in all jurisdictions.
      It must be possible to not invoke the function and allow calls to
      be abandoned as if no special features were present.  Enabling or
      disabling must be dynamic, so that it can be enforced or not
      depending on requirements at the PSAP.
     Rationale:  This reflects the current situation.


4.  IANA Considerations

   There are no IANA Considerations for this document


5.  Security Considerations

   If these features can be enabled by entities other than PSAPs, the
   entity may gain more control over the end device.  Failures of
   various kinds may prohibit callers from being able to disconnect.


6.  Acknowledgments

   Thanks to Guy Caron, Theresa Reese, John Hearty and other members of
   the NENA i2.5 working group for their comments and suggestions on
   this draft.


7.  Informative References

   [I-D.ietf-ecrit-phonebcp]
              Rosen, B. and J. Polk, "Best Current Practice for
              Communications Services in support of Emergency  Calling",
              draft-ietf-ecrit-phonebcp-05 (work in progress),



Rosen                   Expires January 29, 2009                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft     Abandoned Call/PrematureDisconnect          July 2008


              July 2008.


Author's Address

   Brian Rosen
   NeuStar
   470 Conrad Dr.
   Mars, PA  16046
   US

   Phone: +1 724 382 1051
   Email: br@brianrosen.net






































Rosen                   Expires January 29, 2009                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft     Abandoned Call/PrematureDisconnect          July 2008


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.











Rosen                   Expires January 29, 2009                [Page 7]


