 

   PANA Working Group                                                    
   Internet Draft                                    <M. Parthasarathy>  
   Category: Informational                             <Tahoe Networks>
   Document: draft-ietf-pana-threats-eval-03.txt             April 2003 
   Expires: September 2003
  
  
                                        
              PANA Threat Analysis and security requirements  
                                       
     
     
Status of this Memo  
     
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with  
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 [i].   
     
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with  
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 except that the right to  
   produce derivative works is not granted.   
  
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering  
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that       
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet- 
   Drafts.  
     
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months  
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any  
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference  
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress".  
     
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at  
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt  
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at  
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.  
  
Copyright Notice  
  
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved.   
     
     
Abstract  
     
   The PANA (Protocol for carrying authentication for Network Access)  
   working group is developing methods for authenticating clients to the  
   access network using IP based protocols. This document discusses the  
   threats in general without referring to a specific authentication  
   protocol. The security requirements arising out of these threats will  
   be used as additional input to the PANA WG for designing the IP based  
   network access protocol.  
  
  
  
<Parthasarathy>         Expires September 2003                [Page 1]  
                         PANA threat analysis               April 2003  
  
  
  
     
Table of Contents  
     
   1.0 Introduction..................................................2  
   2.0 Keywords......................................................2  
   3.0  Terminology and Definitions.................................3  
   4.0  Usage Scenarios.............................................4  
   5.0  Trust Relationships.........................................4  
   6.0  Threat Scenarios............................................5  
      6.1 PAA Discovery..............................................5  
      6.2 Authentication.............................................6  
      6.3 PaC leaving the network....................................9  
      6.4 Service theft..............................................9  
      6.5 Miscellaneous attacks.....................................10  
   7.0  Summary of Requirements....................................11  
   8.0  Security Considerations....................................12  
   9.0  Normative References.......................................12  
   10.0   Informative References....................................12  
   12.0 Acknowledgments.............................................13  
   13.0 Revision Log................................................13  
   14.0 Author's Addresses..........................................14  
   15.0 Full Copyright Statement....................................14  
     
     
1.0 Introduction  
     
   The PANA (Protocol for carrying authentication for Network Access)  
   working group is developing methods for authenticating clients to the  
   access network using IP based protocols. This document discusses the  
   threats in general without referring to a specific authentication  
   protocol.    
     
   A client wishing to get access to the network must carry on multiple  
   steps. First, it needs to discover the IP address of the PANA  
   authentication agent (PAA) and then execute an authentication  
   protocol to authenticate itself to the network. Once the client is  
   authenticated, there might be other messages exchanged during the  
   lifetime of the network access. This document discusses the threats  
   in these steps without discussing any solutions. The requirements  
   arising out of these threats will be used as input to the PANA  
   working group.  
  
2.0 Keywords  
      
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",  
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this  
   document are to be interpreted as described in [KEYWORDS].   
     
  
  
<Parthasarathy>         Expires September 2003                [Page 2]  
                         PANA threat analysis               April 2003  
  
  
     
3.0  Terminology and Definitions  
  
   Device  
     
      A network element (notebook computer, PDA, etc.) that requires  
      access to a provider's network.  
     
   Network Access Server (NAS)  
     
      Network device that provides access to the network.  
        
   PANA Client (PaC)  
     
      An entity in the edge subnet who is wishing to obtain network  
      access from a PANA authentication agent within a network. A PANA  
      client is associated with a device and a set of credentials to  
      prove its identity within the scope of PANA.  
     
   PANA Authentication Agent (PAA)  
     
      An entity whose responsibility is to authenticate the PANA client  
      (PaC) and grant network access service to the device.  
     
   Authentication Server (AS)  
     
      An entity that authenticates the PaC. It may be co-located with  
      PAA or part of the back-end infrastructure.  
        
   Device Identifier (DI)  
     
      The identifier used by the network as a handle to control and  
      police the network access of a client. Depending on the access  
      technology, identifier might contain any of IP address, link-layer  
      address, switch port number, etc. of a device. PANA authentication  
      agent keeps a table for binding device identifiers to the PANA  
      clients. At most one PANA client should be associated with a DI on  
      a PANA authentication agent.  
        
   Enforcement Point (EP)  
     
      A node that is capable of filtering packets sent by the PaC using  
      the DI information authorized by PAA.  
  
   Compound methods  
     
      Authentication protocol where, sequence of methods are used one  
      after an other or where methods are tunneled inside an  

  
  
<Parthasarathy>         Expires September 2003                [Page 3]  
                         PANA threat analysis               April 2003  
  
  
      independently established tunnel between the client and server  
      [TUN-EAP].  
  
  
     
4.0  Usage Scenarios  
     
   PANA is expected to be used in environments where the nodes trust the  
   operator of the network to provide the service but do not trust the  
   other nodes in the network e.g., Public access networks, Hotel,  
   Airport. Note that the usage of word trust above does not mean trust  
   relationship. It just denotes the belief about how the nodes involved  
   in PANA behave in the future. In these environments, one may observe  
   the following.  
      
       o The link between PaC and PAA may be a shared medium e.g.  
          Ethernet or may not be a shared medium e.g. DSL network.  
  
       o All the PaCs may be authenticated to the access network at  
          layer 2 (3GPP2 CDMA network) and share a security association  
          with layer 2 authentication agent e.g., 802.11 Access point,  
          but still do not trust each other.  
  
   The scenarios mentioned above affect the threat model of PANA. This  
   document discusses the various threats in the context of the above  
   network access scenarios for a better understanding of the threats.  
  
5.0  Trust Relationships  
     
   PANA authentication involves a client, PANA agent (PAA),  
   Authentication server (AS) and an Enforcement point (EP). The  
   communication paths involved between the various entities are as  
   follows.  
     
     1) The path between PaC and PAA  
     2) The path between PaC and EP  
     3) The path between PAA and EP  
     4) The path between PAA and AS  
     
   This document discusses the threats involved in path (1) and (2).  
     
   If PAA and EP are co-located, the path between PAA and EP (3) can be  
   considered secure. Even when they are not co-located, the network  
   operators can setup a security association between PAA and EP to  
   secure the traffic between them. Hence it is assumed that path (3) is  
   secure and not discussed further in the document.  
     
   The authentication server (AS) could be co-located in the same  
   network as PAA or with the back-end system. If it is co-located, then  
  
  
<Parthasarathy>         Expires September 2003                [Page 4]  
                         PANA threat analysis               April 2003  
  
  
   the path (4) can be considered secure. If it is not co-located, there  
   are various threats possible in this path. [RAD-EAP] discusses the  
   possible threats in this path. This implies that if RADIUS is used as  
   the protocol between PAA and AS, then all the vulnerabilities that  
   are mentioned in [RAD-EAP] are applicable to PANA. As it is beyond  
   the scope of PANA to address these threats, this document does not  
   discuss this further.  
     
   There is no pre-existing trust relationship between PaC and EP. When  
   PaC is successfully authenticated, it will further enable key  
   derivation between PaC and EP, which can be used to secure the link.  
   For example, EAP keying framework [EAP-KEY], defines a three party  
   EAP exchange where the clients derive the transient sessions keys to  
   secure the link between PaC and NAS in their final step. Similarly,  
   PANA will provide the ability to derive keys between PaC and EP that  
   can be used to secure the link further. This is further discussed in  
   section 6.4 below.  
     
  
6.0  Threat Scenarios  
     
   The PANA authentication client (PaC) needs to discover the PAA first.  
   This involves either sending solicitations or waiting for  
   advertisements. Once it has discovered the PAA, it will lead to  
   authentication exchange with PAA. Once the access is granted, PaC  
   will most likely exchange data with other nodes in the Internet. All  
   of these are vulnerable to denial of service (DoS), man-in-the-middle  
   (MITM) and service theft attacks.  
  
   The threats are grouped by the various stages the client goes through  
   to gain access to the network. Section 6.1 discusses the threats  
   related to PAA discovery. Section 6.2 discusses about the  
   authentication itself. Section 6.3 discusses about the threats  
   involved while leaving the network. Section 6.4 discusses about  
   service theft. Section 6.5 discusses the miscellaneous threats.   
  
6.1 PAA Discovery  
  
   PaC is in the process of discovering the PAA. The agents like PAA are  
   discovered by sending solicitations or receiving advertisements.  
   Following are the possible threats.  
     
   T6.1.1: A malicious node can pretend to be a PAA by sending a spoofed  
   advertisement.  
  
   In existing dial-up networks, the clients authenticate to the network  
   but generally do not verify the authenticity of the messages coming  
   from Network Access Server (NAS). This mostly works because the link  
   between the device and the NAS is not shared with other nodes  
  
  
<Parthasarathy>         Expires September 2003                [Page 5]  
                         PANA threat analysis               April 2003  
  
  
   (assuming that nobody tampers with the physical link), and clients  
   trust the NAS and the phone network to provide the service, without  
   which the network operator will not make any profit. Since in this  
   environment, nodes in the network cannot directly communicate with  
   each other and may assume that the other end of the point-to-point  
   link is the PAA, spoofing attacks are not present.  
     
   In environments where the link is shared, any node can pretend to be  
   a PAA (including the nodes that are authenticated at layer 2). Hence,  
   the threat is still present in such networks. It is difficult to  
   protect the discovery process, as there is no a priori trust  
   relationship between PAA and PaC. It is also possible that EP might  
   be able to filter out the packets coming from PaC that resembles PAA  
   packets.  
     
   The advertisement may be used to include other information like  
   supported authentication methods etc., besides the discovery of the  
   PAA itself. This can lead to a bidding down attack, as a malicious  
   node can send a spoofed advertisement with capabilities that indicate  
   less secure authentication methods than what the real PAA supports,  
   thereby fooling the PaC into negotiating a less secure authentication  
   method than what would otherwise be available. This is best avoided  
   by limiting the amount of information sent during the PAA discovery  
   process.  
     
   Requirement 1  
     
   PANA MUST not assume that the discovery process is protected. Since,  
   it is difficult to protect the discovery process, the information  
   exchanged during the discovery process SHOULD be limited.  
     
6.2 Authentication  
  
   This section discusses the threats specific to the authentication  
   protocol. Section 6.2.1 discusses the possible threat associated with  
   success/failure indications that are transmitted to PaC at the end of  
   the authentication. Section 6.2.2 discusses the man-in-the-middle  
   attack when compound methods are used. Section 6.2.3 discusses the  
   replay attack and section 6.2.4 discusses about the device identifier  
   attack.  
     
6.2.1 Success or Failure Indications  
  
   An attacker can send false authentication success or failure to the  
   PaC. By sending false failure, the attacker can prevent the client  
   from accessing the network. By sending false success, the attacker  
   can prematurely end the authentication exchange effectively denying  
   service for the PaC.  
     
  
  
<Parthasarathy>         Expires September 2003                [Page 6]  
                         PANA threat analysis               April 2003  
  
  
   If the link is not shared, it may be hard to launch this attack as  
   the attacker needs to inject this packet at the right time and the  
   PaC can always reject packets coming from any source address other  
   than the PAA.  
     
   If the link is shared, it is easy to spoof these packets. If layer 2  
   provides per-packet encryption with pair-wise keys, it might make it  
   hard for the attacker to guess the success/failure packet that the  
   client would accept. Even if the node is already authenticated at  
   layer 2, it can still pretend to be a PAA and spoof the success or  
   failure.  
     
   This attack is possible because the success or failure indication is  
   not protected using a security association between PaC and PAA. In  
   order to avoid this attack, PaC and PAA should mutually authenticate  
   each other. In the process of mutually authenticating each other,  
   they should be able to derive keys to protect the success/failure  
   indications.  
     
   Requirement 2  
     
   PaC and PAA MUST mutually authenticate to each other using methods  
   that can derive keys, which in turn can protect the success and  
   failure indications.    
     
6.2.2 MITM attack  
     
   A malicious node can claim to be PAA to the real PaC and claim to be  
   PaC to the real PAA. This is a MITM attack where the PaC is fooled to  
   think that it is communicating with real PAA and the real PAA is  
   fooled to think that it is communicating with real PaC.  
     
   An instance of MITM attack, when compound authentication methods are  
   used is described in [TUN-EAP]. In these attacks, the server first  
   authenticates to the client. As the client has not proven its  
   identity yet, it acts as the man-in-the-middle, tunneling the  
   identity of the legitimate client to gain access to the network. The  
   attack is possible because there is no verification that the same  
   entities participated among the compound methods. It is not possible  
   to do such verification, if compound methods are used without being  
   able to create cryptographic binding among them. This implies that  
   PANA will be vulnerable to such attacks if compound methods are used  
   without being able to cryptographically bind them.  
     
   Requirement 3  
     
   When compound authentication methods are used in PANA, the methods  
   MUST be cryptographically bound.  
     
  
  
<Parthasarathy>         Expires September 2003                [Page 7]  
                         PANA threat analysis               April 2003  
  
  
     
6.2.3 Replay Attack  
  
   A malicious node can replay the messages that caused authentication  
   failure or success at a later time to create false failures or  
   success. The attacker can also potentially replay other messages of  
   the PANA protocol to deny service to the PaC.  
     
   This threat is absent if the link is not a shared medium. If the link  
   is shared, then the attacker can replay old messages to deny service  
   to the client.  
     
   If the packets are encrypted at layer 2 using pair-wise keys, it will  
   make it hard for the attacker to learn the unencrypted (i.e.,  
   original) packet that needs to be replayed. Even if layer 2 provides  
   replay protection, the attacker can still replay the PANA messages  
   (layer 3) for denying service to the client.  
     
   Requirement 4  
     
   PANA MUST be resistant to replay attacks.  
     
6.2.4 Device Identifier attack  
  
   When the client is successfully authenticated, PAA sends access  
   control information to EP for granting access to the network. The  
   access control information typically contains the device identifier  
   of the PaC, which is obtained from the IP headers and MAC headers of  
   the packets exchanged during the authentication process. The attacker  
   can gain unauthorized access into the network using the following  
   steps.  
     
     . An attacker pretends to be a PAA and sends advertisements. PaC  
        gets fooled and starts exchanging packets with the attacker.  
     . The attacker modifies the IP source address on the packet,  
        adjusts the UDP/TCP checksum and forwards the packet to the real  
        PAA. It does the same on return packets also.  
     . When the real PaC is successfully authenticated, the attacker  
        gains access to the network as the packets contained the IP  
        address (and potentially the MAC address also) of the attacker.  
     
   This threat is absent if the link is not a shared medium. If the  
   layer 2 provides per-packet protection, then it is not possible to  
   change the MAC address and hence this threat may be absent in such  
   cases if EP filters both on IP and MAC address. If the link is  
   shared, it is easy to launch this attack.  
     
   Requirement 5  
     
  
  
<Parthasarathy>         Expires September 2003                [Page 8]  
                         PANA threat analysis               April 2003  
  
  
   PANA MUST be able to protect the device identifier transmitted from  
   the PaC to PAA.  
     
     
6.3 PaC leaving the network  
     
   When the PaC leaves the network, it needs to inform the PAA before  
   disconnecting from the network so that the resources used by PaC can  
   be accounted properly. PAA may also choose to revoke the access any  
   time if it deems necessary. Following are the possible threats.    
     
   T6.3.1: A malicious node can pretend to be a PAA and revoke the  
   access to PaC.  
     
   T6.3.2: A malicious node can pretend to be a real PaC and transmit a  
   disconnect message.  
     
   This threat is absent if the link between PaC and PAA is not a shared  
   medium.  
     
   If the link is shared, any node on the link can spoof the disconnect  
   message. Even if the layer 2 has per-packet authentication, the  
   attacker can pretend to be a PaC e.g. by spoofing the IP address, and  
   disconnect from the network. Similarly, any node can pretend to be a  
   PAA and revoke the access to the PaC.  
     
   In some link layers, e.g., 802.11, disassociate and de-authenticate  
   messages are not protected (even with 802.11i). In such link layers,  
   protecting PANA messages may not be very useful as the attacker can  
   attack using the link layer mechanisms rather than PANA.   
     
   Requirement 6  
     
   PANA MUST be able to protect disconnect and revocation messages.  
     
     
6.4 Service theft  
     
   An attacker can gain unauthorized access into the network by stealing  
   the service from another client. Once the PaC is successfully  
   authenticated, EP will have filters in place to prevent unauthorized  
   access into the network. The filters will be based on something that  
   will be carried on every packet. For example, the filter could be  
   based on IP and MAC address where the packets will be dropped unless  
   the packets coming with certain IP address match the MAC address  
   also. Following are the possible threats.  
     
   T6.4.1: Attacker can spoof both the IP and MAC address of an  
   authorized client to gain unauthorized access. Attacker can launch  
  
  
<Parthasarathy>         Expires September 2003                [Page 9]  
                         PANA threat analysis               April 2003  
  
  
   this attack easily by just sniffing the wire for IP and MAC address.  
   This lets the attacker use the network without any authorization thus  
   getting a free service.  
     
   These threats are absent in links that are not shared as simple  
   ingress filtering can prevent one node from impersonating as another  
   node.  
     
   If the link between PaC and PAA is shared, it is easy to launch this  
   attack. If layer 2 provides per-packet protection using pair-wise  
   keys, it can prevent the attacker from gaining unauthorized access  
   using the layer 2 identifier of some other node.  
     
   PANA MUST be able to prevent service theft. In some cases e.g. non- 
   shared links, it is sufficient to provide access control information  
   like IP address, MAC address, etc., to EP, which in turn can prevent  
   unauthorized users from gaining access to the network by policing the  
   packets for matching addresses. In the case of shared links, this  
   information is not sufficient to prevent service theft. PANA MUST be  
   able to bootstrap a shared secret between the PaC and PAA which can  
   be further used to setup a security association (e.g., IPsec) between  
   PaC and EP to prevent service theft on shared links.   
     
   Requirement 7  
     
   PANA MUST be able to generate sufficient access control information  
   like IP address, MAC address etc. for EP to prevent service theft.  
   PANA MUST be able to bootstrap a shared secret between the PaC and  
   PAA which can be further used to setup a security association (e.g.,  
   IPsec) between PaC and EP to prevent service theft on shared links.  
  
     
6.5 Miscellaneous attacks  
     
   T6.5.1: There are various forms of DoS attacks that can be launched  
   on the PAA or AS. A few are mentioned below. AS it is hard to protect  
   against, there is no specific requirement on DoS attack. Protocol  
   should be designed carefully to mitigate or prevent such attacks.  
  
     . Attacker can bombard the PAA with lots of authentication  
        requests. If PAA and AS are not collocated, PAA may have to  
        allocate resources to store some state about PaC locally before  
        it receives the response from the backend AS. This can deplete  
        memory resources on PAA.  
     . The attacker can force the PAA or AS to make a public key  
        computation with minimal effort, that can deplete the CPU  
        resources of the PAA or AS.  
     

  
  
<Parthasarathy>         Expires September 2003               [Page 10]  
                         PANA threat analysis               April 2003  
  
  
   T6.5.2: PaC acquires IP address before PANA authentication begins  
   using methods like e.g., DHCP in IPv4 and auto-configuration in IPv6  
   [PANAREQ]. If IP addresses are assigned before authentication, it  
   opens up the possibility of DoS attack where malicious nodes can  
   deplete the IP addresses by assigning multiple IP addresses. If  
   stateless auto-configuration [ADDRCONF] is used, the attacker can  
   respond to duplicate address detection probes sent by any node on the  
   network effectively not allowing the node to configure a link local  
   address. If stateful mechanism is used in IPv6 e.g., DHCPv6, then  
   this attack is still possible. Address depletion attack is not  
   specific to PANA, but a known attack in DHCP [DHCP-AUTH]. If PANA  
   assumes that the client has an IP address already, it opens up the  
   network to the DoS attack.  
     
   Requirement 8  
     
   PANA should not assume that the PaC has acquired an IP address before  
   PANA begins.   
     
     
7.0  Summary of Requirements  
     
     
        1. PANA MUST not assume that the discovery process is protected.  
          Since, it is difficult to protect the discovery process, the  
          information exchanged during the discovery process SHOULD be  
          limited.  
          
        2. PaC and PAA MUST mutually authenticate to each other using  
          methods that can derive keys, which in turn can protect the  
          success and failure indications.  
  
        3. When compound authentication methods are used in PANA, the  
          methods MUST be cryptographically bound.  
  
        4. PANA MUST be resistant to replay attacks.   
  
        5. PANA MUST be able to protect the device identifier  
          transmitted from the PaC to PAA.  
  
        6. PANA MUST be able to protect disconnect and revocation  
          messages.  
  
        7. PANA MUST be able to generate sufficient access control  
          information like IP address, MAC address etc. for EP to  
          prevent service theft. PANA MUST be able to bootstrap a  
          shared secret between the PaC and PAA which can be further  
          used to setup a security association (e.g., IPsec) between  
          PaC and EP to prevent service theft on shared links.  
  
  
<Parthasarathy>         Expires September 2003               [Page 11]  
                         PANA threat analysis               April 2003  
  
  
  
        8. PANA should not assume that the PaC has acquired an IP  
          address before PANA begins.  
  
  
8.0  Security Considerations  
     
   This document discusses various threats with IP based network access  
   protocol.  
  
  
9.0  Normative References  
  
  
   1. Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3", BCP  
      9, RFC 2026, October 1996.  
     
   2. [PANAUS] Yoshihiro Ohba et. al, "Problem Space and Usage Scenarios  
      for PANA", draft-ietf-pana-usage-scenarios-03.txt   
  
   3. [PANAREQ] A. Yegin et al., "Protocol for Carrying Authentication  
      for Network Access (PANA) Requirements and Terminology", draft- 
      ietf-pana-requirements-04.txt  
     
   4. [KEYWORDS] S. Bradner, "Key words for use in RFCS to indicate  
      requirement levels", RFC 2119, March 1997  
     
     
10.0 Informative References  
                      
     
   5. Bernard Aboba, "Pros and Cons of Upper Layer Network  Access",  
      BURP BOF.   
     
   6. Arunesh Mishra, William A. Arbaugh, "An Initial Security Analysis  
      of the IEEE 802.1X Standard"  
     
   7. IEEE. Standard for port based network access control. IEEE Draft  
      P802.1X  
     
   8. [RADIUS] C. Rigney et.al, "Remote Authentication Dial In User  
      Service".  
     
   9. [EAP-KEY] Bernard Aboba et. al, "EAP keying framework", Work in  
      Progress.  
     
   10. [ADDRCONF] Susan Thomson et. al "IPv6 Stateless Address  
      Autoconfiguration", RFC2462.  

  
  
<Parthasarathy>         Expires September 2003               [Page 12]  
                         PANA threat analysis               April 2003  
  
  
                                                                          
     
   11. [DHCP-AUTH] R. Droms, et. al "Authentication for DHCP messages",  
      RFC3118.  
  
   12. [RAD-EAP] Bernard Aboba, et. al "Radius support for Extensible  
      authentication protocol", draft-aboba-radius-rfc2869bis-08.txt  
     
   13. [TUN-EAP] J. Puthenkulam et. al "The compound authentication  
      binding problem", draft-puthenkulam-eap-binding-01.txt  
  
  
  
12.0 Acknowledgments  
     
   The author would like to thank the following people (in no specific  
   order) for providing comments: Alper Yegin, Basavaraj Patil, Pekka  
   Nikkander, Bernard Aboba, Francis Dupont, Michael Thomas, Yoshihiro  
   Ohba, Gabriel Montenegro, Tschofenig Hannes and Bill Sommerfeld.  
     
13.0 Revision Log  
          
        Changes between 02 and 03  
             - Changed Requirement 1 to include text about weak  
               authentication suites.  
             - Clarified text in a few places.  
             - Rearranged the order of definitions in terminology  
               section.  
             - Removed some confusing text with respect to IPsec from  
               the Service theft section.  
     
        Changes between revision 01 and 02  
          
        - Renamed the section "Assumptions" to "Trust relationships"  
           and added more text to clarify the relationship between PaC  
           and EP.  
        - Added more text for threats in PAA – AS path  
        - Merged the "Type of Attacks" section into "Threat Scenarios"  
        - Removed the requirement on DoS attack  
        - Reworded most of the requirements  
     
        Changes between revision 00 and 01.  
          
        - Removed unused terms from section 3.0  
        - Removed identity protection as a threat after feedback from  
           Atlanta IETF55 meeting.  



  
  
<Parthasarathy>         Expires September 2003               [Page 13]  
                         PANA threat analysis               April 2003  
  
  
        - Renamed the section "Attacks on Normal Data communication"  
           to "Service theft". Removed confidentiality as a requirement  
           from that section.  
        - Added a new threat "Device Identifier attack".  
  
  
14.0 Author's Addresses  
     
   Mohan Parthasarathy  
   Tahoe Networks  
   3052 Orchard Drive  
   San Jose, CA 95134  
     
   Phone: 408-944-8220  
   Email: mohanp@tahoenetworks.com  
  
15.0 Full Copyright Statement  
     
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003).  All Rights Reserved.  
  
   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to  
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it  
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published  
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any  
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are  
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this  
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing  
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other  
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of  
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for  
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be  
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than  
   English.  
     
   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be  
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.  
     
        
   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an  
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING  
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING  
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION  
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF  
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  
     
   Acknowledgement  
     
   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the  
   Internet Society.  
  
  
<Parthasarathy>         Expires September 2003               [Page 14]  
                         PANA threat analysis               April 2003  
  
  
     
     
     
     













































  
  
<Parthasarathy>         Expires September 2003               [Page 15] 
