


Network Working Group                                      P. Levis, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                              M. Boucadair
Intended status: Informational                              JL. Grimault
Expires: December 24, 2009                               A. Villefranque
                                                          France Telecom
                                                           June 22, 2009


              IPv4 Address Shortage: Needs and Open Issues
           draft-levis-behave-ipv4-shortage-framework-02.txt

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 24, 2009.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents in effect on the date of
   publication of this document (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info).
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.

Abstract

   This document analyses the main issues related to IPv4 Internet



Levis, et al.           Expires December 24, 2009               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft            IPv4 Address Shortage                June 2009


   access in the context of public IPv4 address exhaustion.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Shared IPv4 Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3.  Solution Space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     3.1.  CGN-based Solutions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     3.2.  A+P Solutions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     3.3.  Common Architecture  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   4.  Address Space Multiplicative Factor  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   5.  Number of Current Sessions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   6.  Service Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   7.  IPv6 Migration and IPv4-IPv6 Coexistence . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   8.  Network Addressing Capability  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   9.  Scarcity of Private Addressing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   10. Scalability  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   11. Impact on Information System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   12. Impact on Services . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   13. Port Space Boundaries  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   14. Flow Discrimination  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
   15. Impact on Intra-Domain and Inter-Domain Routing  . . . . . . . 17
   16. Fragmentation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
   17. QoS  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
     17.1. QoS performance  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
     17.2. QoS mechanisms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
     17.3. Introduction of Single Point of Failure (Robustness) . . . 18
   18. Support of Multicast . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
   19. Mobile-IP  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
   20. End-Users Facilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
   21. Management Tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
   22. Legal Obligations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
     22.1. Traceability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
     22.2. Interception . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
   23. Security . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
     23.1. Port Randomization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
     23.2. Duplicate Effects  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
     23.3. IPsec  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
   24. Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
   25. IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
   26. Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
   27. Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25







Levis, et al.           Expires December 24, 2009               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft            IPv4 Address Shortage                June 2009


1.  Introduction

   Taking into consideration the IPv4 public address pool currently
   available at the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA), it is
   expected that the Regional Internet Registries (RIRs) will have no
   more public IPv4 addresses to allocate in the short term.  At the
   time of writing, this foreseen date is mid-2012.  See the IPv4
   Address Report website (available at
   http://www.potaroo.net/tools/ipv4/index.html) for a thorough analysis
   of this issue, and an updated prediction.

   This exhaustion phenomenon has been anticipated for a long time by
   the IETF, with the specification of the IPv6 protocol as the IPv4
   successor.  IPv6 increases the IPv4 addressing space by a power-of-
   four factor.  IPv6 specifications are mature and current
   standardization effort is exclusively dedicated to operational
   aspects.  Unfortunately, IPv6 was not devised as backwards compatible
   with IPv4; it is not possible to have IPv6-based applications
   directly exchange IP packets with their IPv4-based counterparts.  The
   expected transition process was to assume hosts and routers will be
   Dual-Stack, that is, will support the two distinct protocol families
   IPv4 and IPv6, and to wait until the entire Internet supports Dual-
   Stack connectivity to deprecate IPv4.  More than a decade later,
   IPv4-only communications are still the norm, and IPv6 is still rather
   marginal.  ISPs will need to continue to provide IPv4 Internet access
   to their customers at the exhaustion date, if they do not want to see
   their business completely stalled or decreasing.  They will wind up
   with public address pools that cannot grow.  They will have to adapt
   to this situation, and enter an IPv4 address shortage management
   phase.

   This document analyses the main issues related to IPv4 Internet
   access in the context of public IPv4 address exhaustion.  Another
   complementary study can be find in
   [I-D.ford-shared-addressing-issues].


2.  Shared IPv4 Addresses

   So far, the current practice (particularly for fixed service
   offering) has been to give a unique IPv4 public address to each
   customer.  A common design is to assign this global IPv4 address to
   the Customer Premises Equipment (CPE), and to assign IPv4 private
   addresses to the hosts connected behind the CPE.  A private to public
   (and vice versa) translation occurs in the CPE owing to the
   activation of a Network Address and Port Translator (NAPT) function
   [RFC3022].  In this context, the public addresses that can be seen in
   any IP packets always refer to a unique customer.  To cope with the



Levis, et al.           Expires December 24, 2009               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft            IPv4 Address Shortage                June 2009


   IPv4 address exhaustion, this kind of practices is no more
   affordable.  Therefore, ISPs are bound to share the same IPv4 public
   address among several customers at the same time.

   All IPv4 address shortage mechanisms extend the address space in
   adding port information.  We call them by the generic name of IPv4
   shortage solutions, or shared address solutions.  IPv4 shortage
   solutions differ on the way they manage the port value.  In this new
   context, a public IPv4 address seen in an IP packet can refer to
   several customers.  The port information must be considered as well,
   in order to be able to unambiguously identify the customer pointed by
   that shared address.  In particular, the port information along with
   the address information, must eventually be taken into account in
   order to correctly reach the intended destination.


3.  Solution Space

3.1.  CGN-based Solutions

   These solutions propose the introduction of a NAPT function in the
   ISP network, denoted also as Carrier Grade NAT (CGN), or Large Scale
   NAT (LSN) [I-D.nishitani-cgn], or Provider NAT.  The CGN is
   responsible for translating private addresses to publicly routable
   addresses.  Private addresses are assigned to customers, a pool of
   public addresses is assigned to the CGN, the number of public
   addresses is much smaller than the number of customers.  A public
   address of the CGN pool will therefore be shared by several customers
   at the same time.

   Packet processing is as follows (for port-based communications):

   o  Outgoing packets from an internal host to an Internet host: the
      internal host sends a packet with a private IPv4 source address.
      This packet goes up to the CGN, possibly after a first private to
      private address translation in the CPE, the CGN dynamically
      replaces the private source address by a public source address and
      modifies the source port value.  The CGN creates an entry in its
      NAT mapping (or binding) table for each new mapping.  Dynamic
      mappings can only be created by outgoing packets.

   o  Incoming packets from an Internet host to an internal host: the
      remote host sends a packet with a destination address within the
      CGN public address pool.  If, and only if, a mapping already
      exists for the (destination address, destination port, protocol)
      tuple, the CGN can reverse the mapping and forward the packet
      towards the internal side.  However, even if this mapping exists,
      the CGN may discard the packet due to a particular filtering



Levis, et al.           Expires December 24, 2009               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft            IPv4 Address Shortage                June 2009


      policy.  If no mapping exists for the (destination address,
      destination port, protocol), the CGN discards the packet.

   CGN-based solutions can be deployed in different network
   configurations.  One outstanding flavor is the DS-lite CGN
   [I-D.ietf-softwire-dual-stack-lite]: there is no NAT in the CPEs,
   IPv6 addresses (or prefixes) are assigned to CPEs, no IPv4 addresses
   are assigned to CPEs, traffic is tunnelled between CPEs and the DS-
   lite CGN into IPv6.

3.2.  A+P Solutions

   These solutions avoid the presence of a CGN function.  They assign
   the same IP public address to several customers at the same time
   (shared address).  They also assign a restricted port range to each
   customer so that two customers with the same IP address have two
   different port ranges that do not overlap.  These solutions are
   called A+P (Address+Port) [I-D.ymbk-aplusp], or Port Range
   [I-D.boucadair-port-range], or SAM (Stateless Address Mapping)
   [I-D.despres-sam].  These solutions introduce a new function in the
   ISP network called Port Range Router (PRR).

   Packet processing is as follows (for port-based communications):

   o  Outgoing packets from an internal host to an Internet host: the
      internal host sends a packet with its public shared address as the
      source address and a source port within his dedicated port range
      (the internal host may also send a packet with a private address,
      and then a NAPT in the CPE forces the source port to be within the
      port range and translates the private source address into the
      shared public address allocated).  No specific handling is
      necessary in the ISP network, apart from the traditional IP
      routing process.  In order to allow internal communications
      (within the same ISP realm), the outgoing packets have however to
      go up to the device that embeds the PRR function, but the packet
      will be processed by this PRR, if and only if, the PRR handles the
      destination subnet.

   o  Incoming packets from an Internet host to an internal host: the
      remote host sends a packet with a shared destination public
      address.  Owing to routing protocol advertisements, this packet is
      routed up to the PRR that handles this address subnet.  The PRR is
      in charge to find a route towards the actual internal
      correspondent -for instance, CPEs have setup PPP sessions with the
      PRR, the PRR maintains a binding table between (IPv4 address, Port
      Range) couples and PPP session IDs-.  The PRR that handles the
      shared address of a user must be in the data path of any packet
      intended to that user.



Levis, et al.           Expires December 24, 2009               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft            IPv4 Address Shortage                June 2009


   Port range solutions are sometimes described as a CGN function that
   would have been distributed among the CPEs.  This is not false, but
   may be a rather misleading view, in the sense that it would assume
   CGN has not disappeared but simply melt into the CPEs, and that, to
   some extent, it is still CGN.  Actually, the very purpose of A+P
   solutions is to completely get rid of any CGN function.  One main
   interest of A+P solutions is that PRR devices are simple equipment
   which, unlike CGN devices, have no per-user session processing, and
   do not modify packet headers.  Thus, PRR performance should not be an
   issue.

3.3.  Common Architecture

   To provide a common architecture, we introduce the SHared Ip
   Processor (SHIP) function embedded in a SHIP device.  A SHIP device
   can host either a CGN function or a PRR function, or both.  In the
   latter case, some traffic is CGN-processed (outgoing and incoming
   packets), some is PRR-processed (incoming packets).  There can be
   several SHIP devices in the same ISP network.
                                (3)
       (1)                 +----------+
   +---------+             |          |
   |         |    (2)      |          |              +-----------------+
   |Host/CPE |-------------|   SHIP   |--------------|THE IPv4 INTERNET|
   |         |             |          |              +-----------------+
   +---------+             |          |
                           +----------+

                        Shared Address Architecture

   This architecture is composed of the following elements:

   (1) The hosts are directly connected (e.g. mobile terminal), or
   connected through a CPE.  For PRR-based solutions, packets are sent
   with source ports within their allocated Port Ranges.  A Host/CPE
   must know a SHIP device to which it can send its traffic.

   (2) The network infrastructure between CPEs and PRR:

   o  Ensures outgoing packets are routed up to the SHIP device;

   o  Ensures incoming packets are routed up to the intended Host/CPE.

   (3) The SHIP device may:

   o  Translate (NAPT) outgoing and incoming packets for CGN-processed
      traffic (CGN function only);




Levis, et al.           Expires December 24, 2009               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft            IPv4 Address Shortage                June 2009


   o  Find a route to incoming packets for PRR-processed traffic (PRR
      function only).

   Many architectural issues are common to all IPv4 shortage solutions,
   whether they rely on the presence of a CGN or a PRR.  Including, for
   instance, means to ensure proper routing between customers and SHIP
   devices, and SHIP devices location.  Therefore, it does make sense to
   describe and specify all solutions on a concerted basis, and not in
   completely separate ways.


4.  Address Space Multiplicative Factor

   The purpose of sharing public IPv4 addresses is to potentially
   increase the addressing space.  A key parameter is the factor by
   which ISPs want or need to multiply their IPv4 public address space;
   and the consequence is the number of customers sharing the same
   public IPv4 address.  This parameter is called the address space
   multiplicative factor, the inverse is called the compression ratio.

   It is expected that IPv6 traffic will take an increasing part during
   the next years to come, at the expense of IPv4 traffic.  We should
   reach a safety point in the future, where the number of IPv4 public
   addresses, in use at the same time, begins decreasing.  From an ISP
   point of view, the multiplicative factor must be enough to survive
   until this event occurs for its own customers.

   The multiplicative factor can only be applied to the part of
   customers that is eligible to shared address.  The reasons a customer
   cannot have a shared address can be:

   o  It would not be compatible with the service he has currently
      subscribed to (for example: business customer).

   o  His CPE does not allow the solution selected by the ISP (for
      example it does not handle port restriction for PRR-based
      solutions or it does not allow IPv4 in IPv6 encapsulation for DS-
      lite solution), and its replacement is not easy.

   Different ISPs may have very different needs.  A long-lived ISP,
   whose number of customers is rather stable, will have an existing
   address pool that will only need a small extension to cope with the
   next years to come (small multiplicative factor, less than 10).  A
   new comer will need a much bigger multiplicative factor (e.g. 1000).
   A mobile operator may see its address need explode if the IP mobile
   handset market dramatically grows, with Internet 3G access and
   Internet wireless (Wi-Fi/WiMAX) hotspot access.




Levis, et al.           Expires December 24, 2009               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft            IPv4 Address Shortage                June 2009


   The multiplicative factor is an important criterion in order to
   select a solution.  When the multiplicative factor is large, the
   average number of ports per customer is small; in that case, it is
   essential to manage port attribution the closest to the need as
   possible, and to avoid to dedicate ports to people who do not use
   them, when other people are running out of ports.  Then, the larger
   the multiplicative factor is, the more dynamic the port assignment
   has to be.

   CGN solutions provide the most dynamic port assignment scheme, hence
   the best possible ratio.  However, CGNs can also be produced with
   functionalities that reduce their dynamicity; for instance, a port
   range can be attributed to each user, the CGN mapping is constrained
   into this range, in order, for example, to ease legal storage.  As
   for A+P solutions, their dynamicity can vary a lot, depending on the
   Port Range assignment policy.  Port Ranges can be assigned in a
   complete static way; one Port Range is assigned once and for all to
   each customer, no port can be added in, or removed from, the
   attributed Range.  On the opposite, Port Range assignment can be
   fully dynamic; small Port Ranges (possibly up to one port) are
   dynamically assigned and removed.

   Whatever the multiplicative factor selected, one must keep in mind
   that trying to deploy solutions that increase the IPv4 space by a big
   factor, might be seen as an incentive to postpone again and again
   IPv6 deployment.


5.  Number of Current Sessions

   In any kind of solutions, the number of current sessions per customer
   has, de facto, to be limited in some way.  Therefore, the number of
   current sessions per customer is a limit to take into account in any
   architectural dimensioning.  According to [RFC2663] terminology: "A
   session is defined as the set of traffic that is managed as a unit
   for translation.  TCP/UDP sessions are uniquely identified by the
   tuple of (source IP address, source TCP/UDP port, target IP address,
   target TCP/UDP port)".

   A CGN must sustain the traffic that will occur in its location point
   at the most loaded time, in terms of number of current sessions, and
   number of new sessions per second (i.e. when these parameter values
   are the highest).  A Port Range solution should be less sensitive
   than a CGN to session rate and number, because a PRR is a per-user,
   and not a per-session, process.

   UDP sessions and TCP sessions are separately handled in a CGN (a CGN
   mapping incorporates the protocol value); it is as if the same public



Levis, et al.           Expires December 24, 2009               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft            IPv4 Address Shortage                June 2009


   IPv4 address pool was allocated twice: once for the TCP
   communications and once for the UDP communications (of course other
   Transport protocols may be taken into account such as SCTP or DCCP).
   Therefore, the number of public addresses needed in a CGN will be
   driven by the type of communications -TCP or UDP- which consumes the
   highest number of public addresses.  This consumption depends on the
   number of current sessions.  Actually, for a Full Cone CGN (Endpoint-
   Independent Mapping and End point-Independent Filtering [RFC4787]),
   the address consumption should directly depend on the number of
   current couples (customer source address, customer source port)
   rather than on the number of current sessions.

   For the same traffic conditions, a Port Range solution should need
   more addresses than a CGN.  Let's assume, for the sake of simplicity,
   that port range allocation is a static one-size fits all.  The range
   size should not only cover the average number of current sessions per
   user at peak time, but should also take into account the distribution
   of sessions, and should be significantly larger than the average if
   the standard deviation is large.  So, where a CGN consumes no more
   ports than the number of current sessions, a Port Range solution, due
   to the attribution of ports by blocks, consumes more ports, and thus
   more addresses.

   The IPv6 increasing deployment should have a decreasing effect on the
   number of current IPv4 sessions per customer.  If the percentage of
   end-to-end IPv6 traffic significantly increases, so that the volume
   of IPv4 traffic begins decreasing, then the number of IPv4 sessions
   will be decreasing.  The smaller the number of current IPv4 sessions
   per customer is, the higher the number of customers under the same
   IPv4 public address can be (better compression ratio), and
   consequently, the lower the number of IPv4 public addresses is
   needed.  Hence, the pressure on IPv4 address shortage would be
   relaxed, because one IPv4 public address would be able to potentially
   serve more customers.  However, this effect will only occur for
   customers who have both an IPv6 access and a shared IPv4 access.
   This advocates the strategy to systematically bound a shared IPv4
   access to any IPv6 access.  It is difficult to foresee to what extent
   the IPv6 traffic will decrease the number of current IPv4 sessions,
   but in any case, IPv6 activation should increase the potential IPv4
   multiplicative factor.  If it does not, that means IPv6 does not take
   over IPv4.

   As for the current usage of ports, several hundreds as peak numbers
   per customer, seems current practice, although several thousands may
   be not unusual with some P2P applications (e.g.  BitTorrent).  The
   degree of fairness -balanced distribution of sessions between
   customers-, traffic loss due to the limitation in number of sessions,
   may vary according to the traffic conditions, and the policy



Levis, et al.           Expires December 24, 2009               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft            IPv4 Address Shortage                June 2009


   enforced.  The knowledge of the distribution of sessions among a set
   of users, makes it possible to know how many users might be adversely
   affected if/when system limits are reached.  However, it is surely
   not that straightforward to really assess the degradation the
   customers should experience, from the knowledge of their session
   number limitations.


6.  Service Management

   At the time of IPv4 address exhaustion in the RIRs, ISPs will have to
   manage public address pools that cannot grow (at least from the
   RIRs).  Concretely, they will have to decide to whom they allocate
   shared addresses and to whom they allocate unique public addresses,
   to the extent of the availability of addresses.  Many policies can be
   envisaged, taking into account parameters such as: old vs. new
   customers, user profile, access type, geographic considerations,
   unique address as the privileged choice, shared address as the
   privileged choice, etc.

   Care must be taken when considering the ratio that reflects the
   number of customers who will share a given global IPv4 address, not
   only to preserve some flexibility on the global address space that is
   left, but also to make sure that the ISP can adequately serve
   customer's requirements, without degrading the services they have
   subscribed to.  ISPs can adjust the volume of IPv4 public addresses
   available playing on the balance between shared and unique
   allocations.

   o  To increase the public IPv4 address pool: increase the number of
      customers with shared address; increase the ratio of customers per
      shared address.

   o  To decrease the public IPv4 address pool: decrease the number of
      customers with shared address; decrease the ratio of customers per
      shared address.


7.  IPv6 Migration and IPv4-IPv6 Coexistence

   IPv6 is the only solution to solve the IPv4 public address
   exhaustion, that is, to actually get rid of the limitation on the
   number of IP addresses.  IPv4 shared addresses are not candidate to
   IPv6 replacement.  However, we should be very careful; whatever the
   network model deployed, applications and business will run on top of
   it.  If we do not want to see IPv4 address shortage mechanisms
   postpone IPv6 deployment, all Internet actors must adopt a voluntary
   position towards IPv6.



Levis, et al.           Expires December 24, 2009              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft            IPv4 Address Shortage                June 2009


   Any IPv4 address shortage solution should make use, as much as
   possible, of the IPv6 transport capabilities available, in order to
   increase the IPv6 traffic and to move forward from an IPv4-enabled
   ISP network towards an almost IPv6-only ISP network.  If it is not
   the case, the risk is to delay IPv6 operational deployments, in
   staying on a pure Dual-Stack attitude for ever, similar to the ships
   in the night routing approach, where the protocols independently live
   their own lives.  IPv4 in IPv6 tunnels, and/or NAT64 and NAT46
   translations should be favored.  However, increasing the number of
   IPv6 packets does not automatically mean IPv6 is being generalized,
   if the main purpose of these packets is to carry IPv4 information.
   This is very similar to what occurred with ATM, especially in
   European countries, where ATM cells have heavily been used to convey
   IPv4 packets in the backhaul networks, but have never been used for
   end-to-end communications!

   Some public IPv4 addresses will be required to connect IPv4 and IPv6
   realms, through IPv4-IPv6 translators, for the sake of global
   reachability.

   IPv4 shortage solutions may interfere with exiting IPv4 to IPv6
   transition mechanisms, which were not designed with IPv4 shortage
   considerations.  With A+P for instance, incoming 6to4 packets should
   be able to find their way from a 6to4 Relay up to the appropriate
   6to4 CPE router, despite the lack of direct port range information
   (UDP/TCP initial source port did not pass through the CPE Port Range
   NAT translation process).  One solution would be that a 6to4 IPv6
   address embeds not only an IPv4 address but also a Port Range value.


8.  Network Addressing Capability

   The network addressing capability is the level of flexibility the
   network has to configure customers' devices, either with a unique
   public IPv4 address, or with a shared public IPv4 address.  It may be
   assessed through the following considerations:

   o  Is it possible to configure any customer's device with a shared
      address, regardless his location and his history?

   o  Is it possible to configure any customer's device with a unique
      public address, regardless his location and his history?

   o  Is it straightforward to switch, for any customer, from a shared
      address to a unique public address, and vice versa?

   What is considered here is not the policy decision to allocate a
   unique or a shared address, but the network capability to enforce



Levis, et al.           Expires December 24, 2009              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft            IPv4 Address Shortage                June 2009


   such address management schemes.


9.  Scarcity of Private Addressing

   In several IPv4 shortage scenarios, private addresses, (as defined in
   [RFC1918]), can be assigned to CPEs, and to SHIP devices.  This can
   be applied, for instance, to CGN double NAT architecture.  In this
   case, if there are intermediate routers between CPEs and CGN, the
   outgoing packets are encapsulated into IPv4 packets addressed to a
   CGN private address (tunneling), and the incoming packets are
   natively routed towards the CPEs -the routing infrastructure must be
   able to route the CPEs' private addresses-.  If there are no
   intermediate routers, no tunnel is necessary.  However, private
   addresses are already in use in many ISPs' networks, they belong to a
   finite space which may rapidly raise overlapping issues as both the
   number of customers and the number of services that can be subscribed
   by these customers increase.  As a consequence, some ISPs use Virtual
   Private Networks (VPNs) such as [RFC4364] to allow reusing the same
   private addresses several times with no routing overlaps.  This
   brings a lot of complexity in network configuration and management.

   It has been suggested to make the 240/4 block available for private
   addressing [I-D.wilson-class-e].  This address block, formerly
   designated as "Class E", is still noted as being reserved in the IANA
   IPv4 address registry.  If it were reassigned for private addressing
   that would yield around 268 millions extra private addresses.
   However, many current implementations of the TCP/IP protocol stack do
   not allow the use of the 240/4 block.  This is a severe blocking
   point for a lot of existing devices: CPE, NAT or routers.  This issue
   will only be solved when the vendors' implementations accept the
   (240/4) addresses.

   Another suggestion [I-D.shirasaki-isp-shared-addr] is to reserve some
   public blocks (typically three or four /8) only for internal usage.
   So far, there has been no consensus upon this proposal.


10.  Scalability

   The number of state entries in the ISP equipment (mainly the SHIP
   devices) can have a significant impact on performance, scalability,
   and solution cost.  CGNs need to store many highly dynamic user
   session states.  Basically, PRRs will keep information about Port
   Range attribution; they will not need to store a lot of states, the
   states dynamicity will depend on the assignment policy enforced by
   ISPs.




Levis, et al.           Expires December 24, 2009              [Page 12]

Internet-Draft            IPv4 Address Shortage                June 2009


   IPv4 shortage solutions must be able to adapt to the different ISP
   needs and be flexible enough to cover their evolutions.  Customers
   under shared addresses can be geographically disseminated in very
   different ways: scattered vs. localised, sparse vs. dense.  In term
   of architecture two types of responses are possible for the placement
   of the SHIP devices: close to the users (many devices that federate
   few customers) vs. close to the core (few devices that federate many
   customers).

   A+P solutions should be rather flexible and scalable.  A PRR
   treatment is a light process and should be straightforward to
   implement, a PRR function could then be implemented in almost any
   router devices.  From this viewpoint, it will be rather comfortable
   for a network manager to activate the PRR functions he wants, when he
   needs and where he needs, with no big extra CAPEX (CAPital
   EXpenditure) increase.  For the same number of customers federated, a
   CGN device should be more expensive than a PRR device.  That could
   make CGN solutions less flexible and scalable than A+P solutions.

   Another important scalability parameter is the impact on the CPEs.
   Some IPv4 shortage mechanisms require specific features in the CPEs.
   In that case, IPv4 shared addresses will not be able to spread to
   current CPEs that lack these appropriate features.  Some CPEs are ISP
   branded which makes them, on the one hand, easier to control and to
   enhance, but which can be, on the other hand, very expensive for ISPs
   if a lot of legacy CPEs need to be replaced (if a software update is
   not enough).

   A+P solutions require that CPEs receive specific Port Ranges (e.g.
   through DHCP), and that they control and restrict the source port of
   outgoing packets, according to the assigned Port Ranges.
   Supplementary CPE resources (hardware and software) to run these two
   features should be tiny (if not null) because, for example, in Linux
   OS the port range restriction is already part of the OS (Netfilter/
   Iptables) and the DHCP process is already in the CPE, and would only
   need to be complemented with port range negotiation as proposed in
   [I-D.bajko-pripaddrassign] for DHCPv4, and in
   [I-D.boucadair-dhcpv6-shared-address-option] for DHCPv6.

   Some CGN solutions can be used with no specific features in the CPEs,
   just adding a second NAT level in the ISP network, to the extent that
   routing is correctly achieved between CPEs and CGN.  The DS-lite CGN
   flavor requires CPEs to be NATless and to have a tunnel interface
   IPv4 into IPv6 (with several possible encapsulation types) to
   communicate with the DS-lite CGN device.  A+P IPv6 variant also
   requires the same kind of IPv4 into IPv6 encapsulation.





Levis, et al.           Expires December 24, 2009              [Page 13]

Internet-Draft            IPv4 Address Shortage                June 2009


11.  Impact on Information System

   IPv4 shortage solutions will have an impact on the Information System
   platforms and applications handling the administrative and technical
   information to control the activation of services (service ordering
   and service handling functions), and to manage the customer profiles.
   The possibility to give either a unique or a shared address, coupled
   or not with an IPv6 address, could yield several types of customers
   to deal with: IPv4 unique only, IPv4 shared only, IPv4 unique + IPv6,
   IPv4 shared + IPv6, IPv6 only.

   Common practice used to rely upon the global IPv4 address assigned to
   a CPE device for customer identification purposes.  The forthcoming
   address depletion therefore encourages ISPs to revisit their customer
   identification schemes since global IPv4 addresses will be shared
   amongst several customers.  This clearly advocates for an IPv6-based
   customer identification scheme and thus impacts the way customer-
   specific management policies are enforced.

   Additionally, "Service and Network Assurance" functions may be
   impacted by the introduction of SHIP function.  Impacts should be
   assessed.  Moreover, dedicated interface to access the CPE when no
   IPv4 address is assigned (e.g.  DS-lite) should be defined and
   implemented (preferably such access should migrate towards IPv6).


12.  Impact on Services

   There is a potential danger for the following types of applications:

   o  Applications that establish inbound communications;

   o  Applications that carry address information in their payload;

   o  Applications that carry port information in their payload;

   o  Applications that use fixed ports (e.g. well known);

   o  Applications that do not use any port (e.g.  ICMP);

   o  Applications that assume the uniqueness of customers' addresses
      (e.g.  IP address as identifier);

   o  Applications that explicitly prohibit twice the same address to
      access to a resource at the same time.

   Current applications already implement some mechanisms in order to
   circumvent the presence of NATs (typically CPE NATs):



Levis, et al.           Expires December 24, 2009              [Page 14]

Internet-Draft            IPv4 Address Shortage                June 2009


   o  ALGs;

   o  Port Forwarding;

   o  UPnP IGD;

   o  NAT-PMP;

   o  NAT Traversal techniques: ICE, STUN, TURN, etc.

   It should be considered to what extent these mechanisms can still be
   used with IPv4 shortage mechanisms.

   Impact on existing services:

   o  Will this service work as usual?

   o  Will this service work but with a degradation?

   o  What level of degradation?

   o  Will this service not work at all?

   o  What modifications are needed if any?

   Impact on future services:

   o  What new constraints are to be taken into account to devise new
      services?

   CGN solutions should have more impact on applications than A+P
   solutions.  Basically, from an end-to-end perspective, A+P solutions
   should not be perceived by applications, to the extent of the port
   range limitation, whereas a CGN should be perceived as a
   supplementary blocking mechanism that must be circumvent by specific
   techniques and protocols.  This is particular sensitive for P2P
   applications, even if Full Cone CGN behavior should alleviate some
   problems.


13.  Port Space Boundaries

   Most of the time the source port issued by a client application will
   be translated, apart from a direct knowledge of a Port Range
   restriction by the client's stack (A+P), either by a NAT in the
   user's device (A+P), or by a CPE NAT (A+P), or by a CPE NAT and/or a
   CGN NAT (CGN).




Levis, et al.           Expires December 24, 2009              [Page 15]

Internet-Draft            IPv4 Address Shortage                June 2009


   IANA has classified the whole port space in three categories (as
   defined in http://www.iana.org/assignments/port-numbers):

   o  The Well Known Ports are those from 0 through 1023.

   o  The Registered Ports are those from 1024 through 49151.

   o  The Dynamic and/or Private Ports are those from 49152 through
      65535.

   [RFC4787] notices that current NATs have different policies with
   regard to this classification; some NATs restrict their translations
   to the use of dynamic ports, some also include registered ports, some
   preserve the port range if it is in the well-known range.  [RFC4787]
   makes it clear that the use of port space [1024, 65535] is safe:
   "mapping a source port to a source port that is already registered is
   unlikely to have any bad effects".  Therefore, for both A+P and CGN
   solutions, there is no reason to only consider a subset of the port
   space [1024, 65535] for outgoing source ports.  In any case, limiting
   the number of ports available will limit the compression ratio.

   The problem is trickier for Well Known Ports.  For outgoing source
   ports, [RFC4787] points out that "certain applications expect the
   source UDP port to be in the well-known range", hence, it can be safe
   to keep the source port in the Well Known Ports in that case.  This
   is possible for a CGN, to the extent that this port is still
   available; this is not possible for A+P if the well known port value
   is not in the attributed Port Range.  Apart from port preservation,
   the use of Well Known Ports should be prohibited for outgoing source
   ports, because some applications will not work (for instance MSN
   messenger cannot sign in).

   For inbound communications, it is interesting to be able to use a
   destination port within the Well Known Ports, in order to reach a
   server hosted by a customer (however, this constraint can be
   alleviated with the use of SRV records [RFC2782]).  This possibility
   is limited.  It is unlikely, for example, to satisfy all customers
   who may request port 80.  For a CGN, a given customer will get port
   80 if there is still one address of the CGN public pool where port 80
   is currently not used, with the restriction that if this customer
   already uses an external public address, it can be harmful to give
   him a second current external public address (this is referenced in
   behave WG documents as "IP address pooling behavior" of "arbitrary"
   vs. "paired").  For A+P, a given customer will only get port 80 if
   port 80 is within his Port Range.






Levis, et al.           Expires December 24, 2009              [Page 16]

Internet-Draft            IPv4 Address Shortage                June 2009


14.  Flow Discrimination

   ISPs can offer walled garden services along with Internet services.
   ISPs may want these flows not to traverse the IPv4 shortage
   facilities put in place.  For instance, all the IPv4 traffic does not
   have to be processed by a CGN facility, for various reasons that are
   mostly ISP policy-specific and which include -but are not necessarily
   limited to- performance considerations, service-specific forwarding
   policies.  It should be clear how these IPv4 flows can bypass the
   IPv4 shortage facilities and how they can be handled by the
   corresponding service platform/gateway.  However, the best practice
   seems to rapidly migrate these services from IPv4 to IPv6.


15.  Impact on Intra-Domain and Inter-Domain Routing

   The introduction of port consideration to route packets to their
   final destinations may have an impact on the current routing
   infrastructure: on the architecture, the IGP and EGP configuration,
   the addressing configuration, and on routers performances.

   The introduction of new nodes that cannot be circumvent could also
   yield non optimized paths, especially for communications between
   customers attached to the same ISP realm.

   Centralized SHIP devices could also strongly modify the current flow
   distribution scheme among the different links and nodes, and then
   lead to non optimal paths.


16.  Fragmentation

   When a packet is fragmented, the port information (either UDP or TCP)
   will only be present in the first fragment.  The other fragments will
   not bear the port information which is necessary to a correct
   treatment up to the destination.  Dedicated means to ease fragmented
   packets routing should be activated.


17.  QoS

17.1.  QoS performance

   The possible degradation of end-to-end performances (e.g. delay)
   experienced in the context of IPv4 shortage solutions should be
   evaluated.





Levis, et al.           Expires December 24, 2009              [Page 17]

Internet-Draft            IPv4 Address Shortage                June 2009


17.2.  QoS mechanisms

   The impact on QoS mechanisms should be investigated.  In particular
   the ability to classify traffic in order to apply differentiated
   treatments could be hindered by the fact that an IPv4 address is
   shared among several users, possibly in a dynamic way.  In
   particular, transparent DSCP handling should be supported by SHIP
   devices.

17.3.  Introduction of Single Point of Failure (Robustness)

   The introduction of new nodes/functions, specifically where the port
   information is managed, can create single points of failure.  Any
   IPv4 shortage solution should consider the opportunity to add
   redundancy features in order to alleviate the impact on the
   robustness of the offered IP connectivity service.

   Additionally, load balancing and load sharing means should be
   evaluated.  The ability of the solution to allow hot swapping from a
   machine to another, in minimizing the perturbations, should be
   considered.

   For CGN solutions, the ability to switch from a CGN node to another
   one without losing active sessions, might be rather complex to
   achieve due to the need to keep the two devices synchronized with the
   same active session states.  For the A+P solutions such hot swapping
   is clearly achievable because an A+P node in the network does not
   maintain any session-based states; thus, fail-over means would be
   lightweight.


18.  Support of Multicast

   It should be assessed if a customer with a shared address can receive
   multicast packets and source multicast packets.

   Particularly, impact on IGMP should be identified and solutions
   proposed.  Because of the presence of several end-user devices with
   the same IP address, membership to multicast groups should be
   evaluated and enhancement should be proposed if required.  Besides
   the membership issue, building multicast trees may be impacted.  This
   impact should be assessed and alternatives proposed.


19.  Mobile-IP

   Owing to the deployment of a Mobile-IP architecture, a mobile
   terminal continues to access its connectivity service when visiting a



Levis, et al.           Expires December 24, 2009              [Page 18]

Internet-Draft            IPv4 Address Shortage                June 2009


   Foreign Network.  In order to avoid traffic loss, it is recommended
   to use the home address (HoA), and not the care-of address (CoA), to
   reach that mobile terminal.  A dedicated entity called HA (Home
   Agent) is responsible for routing the traffic according to the
   binding table it maintains.  This table includes in particular the
   association between the HoA and CoA.  A Foreign Agent (FA) can
   optionally be deployed in the visited network.  If an IP address is
   shared (in the home network or/and in the visited network), HA or FA
   must be updated so as to take into account the port information to
   achieve its operations (i.e. relay traffic destined to HoA to the
   current CoA).


20.  End-Users Facilities

   In the current deployments, end-users are used to configuring their
   CPEs in order to control the traffic entering/exiting their home LAN.

   One important and very used feature is the ability to open ports
   (port forwarding) either manually, or with a protocol such as UPnP
   IGD.  If a CGN is present, the port must also be open in the CGN.
   However, ISPs may not be very incline to see their customers
   configure some specific parameters in a device inside their networks.
   Furthermore, any supplementary treatment in the NAPT process is also
   prone to decrease the overall CGN performances.  The situation may be
   alleviated if the CGN architecture is composed of only one NAT level
   (no NAT in the CPE) as for DS-lite.  If all NATs are Full Cone the
   need for port forwarding may be less critical, especially to allow
   P2P communications.  For A+P the port forwarding capability may still
   be used at CPE level, with the limitation that the port open must be
   within the Port Range (for instance no possibility to open port 80,
   if port 80 is not in the allocated Port Range).  UPnP IGD version 2
   should, on this matter, facilitate the Port Range working, in
   allowing CPEs to allocate another port number than the one first
   requested by the terminals.

   The use of the DNS SRV records [RFC2782] could be the solution to
   host servers in customers' premises under shared addresses.  SRV
   records give the possibility to specify a port value related to a
   service, and then allow services to be accessible on ports which are
   not Well Known ports (e.g. a web server accessible on a port
   different from 80).

   Another widely used feature is the ability to store specific ALGs on
   the CPE to allow applications to correctly behave despite the
   presence of the NAT CPE (even if it is harmful and should be avoided,
   to the extent possible, according to behave WG recommendations).
   When the CPE belongs to the customer, the customer has all



Levis, et al.           Expires December 24, 2009              [Page 19]

Internet-Draft            IPv4 Address Shortage                June 2009


   flexibility to tailor the device to his needs, if the CPE belongs to
   the ISP, the customer depends on the ISP good will to satisfy his
   request.  For CGNs, it would be difficult to customize the CGN with
   specific ALGs coming from specific customers' requirements, the
   customers should wind up with only a limited set of possibilities if
   any.  For A+P, ALGs should work as usual, and have the same
   possibilities as today, possibly taking into account the limited port
   choice.  Like current deployment, and in the context of A+P, the
   resources required to run ALGs concern the CPE and no network nodes.


21.  Management Tools

   ISPs deploy a set of tools and applications for the management of
   their infrastructure, especially for supervision purposes.  Impact on
   these tools should be evaluated and solutions proposed when required.
   Particularly, means to assign IP connectivity information, means to
   monitor the overall network, to assess the reachability of devices
   should be specified.  In this context, impact on tools (e.g.  ICMP-
   based) to check the reachability of network nodes should be
   evaluated.


22.  Legal Obligations

   ISPs can be required by governmental and/or regulation authorities to
   provide customer-specific information upon request.

22.1.  Traceability

   Legal obligations require an ISP to provide the identity of a
   customer upon request of the authorities.  Because one public IPv4
   address may be shared between several customers, the knowledge of the
   IP address is not enough to have a chance to find the appropriate
   customer.  The legal request should include the information: [IP
   address - Port - Protocol- Begin_Timestamp - End_Timestamp].

   A CGN must record and store all mappings (typically during 6 months
   to one year, depending on the legislation) that it creates.  The
   piece of information to store by mapping is two-part: Index, and
   Customer_Discriminator.

   o  Index: is the information that will match legal request input.  It
      is composed of: [Public IP address - Public port - Protocol - Date
      of mapping creation - Date of mapping deletion].

   o  Customer_Discriminator: is the Information that will identify the
      customer for a given index value.  The customer discriminator



Levis, et al.           Expires December 24, 2009              [Page 20]

Internet-Draft            IPv4 Address Shortage                June 2009


      depends on the kind of CGN solution put in place.  For a DS-lite
      CGN the customer discriminator is his IPv6 prefix, for other CGN
      architectures it can be, for instance and among other
      possibilities, an IPv4 private address, a PPP session ID.

   The complete DS-lite storage tuple is: [IPv6 prefix - Public IP
   address - Public port - Protocol - Date of mapping creation - Date of
   mapping deletion] per mapping.  It should not be necessary to store
   the private address and private port.  The ISP should be responsible
   for resolving the customer identity: who the ISP has an agreement
   with, but not the identity of who in the customer's house was
   actually connected (which is of the customer responsibility).

   If we consider one mapping per session (in fact it should be less for
   a Full Cone, one mapping per couple as seen in Section 5) an ISP
   should record and retain traces of all sessions created by all
   customers during one year (if the legal storage duration is one
   year).  This can be a problem not only as a big volume of data to
   store, but also as a big volume of data to constantly transfer from
   the CGN to the storage place.

   A PRR has only to keep one entry [Public IP address - Port Range
   -Date of beginning of Port Range assignment-Date of end of Port Range
   assignment] per customer.  Legal storage should not be a main issue
   for A+P solutions, especially if Port Range assignment remains rather
   static.

22.2.  Interception

   This process is proactive, a given group of communications is
   replicated in real time towards a law enforcement agency.  Typically,
   the point of replication is the first IP hop in the ISP network.
   Wiretapping techniques need to be transparent to the customer, so
   that the targeted customer cannot be aware of the interception, owing
   to tools such as traceroute that would make appear modification on
   the path.  They even need to be transparent to network administration
   team, and need special login with special privileges only accessible
   to authorized members.


23.  Security

23.1.  Port Randomization

   A kind of blind attacks that can be performed against TCP relies on
   the attacker's ability to guess the 5-tuple (Protocol, Source
   Address, Destination Address, Source Port, Destination Port) that
   identifies the transport protocol instance to be attacked.  Document



Levis, et al.           Expires December 24, 2009              [Page 21]

Internet-Draft            IPv4 Address Shortage                June 2009


   [I-D.ietf-tsvwg-port-randomization] describes a number of methods for
   the random selection of the client port number, such that the
   possibility of an attacker guessing the exact value is reduced.  With
   shared IPv4 addresses, the port selection space is reduced.  This
   issue seems more severe for A+P solutions than for CGN; Intuitively,
   assuming the port range is known, the smaller the port range is, the
   more predictable the port choice is.

   It should be noted that to guess the port information may not be
   sufficient to carry out a successful blind attack.  The exact TCP
   Sequence Number (SN) should also be known, a TCP segment is processed
   only if all previous segments have been received, except for some
   Reset Segment implementations which immediately process the Reset as
   long as it is within the Window.  If SN is randomly chosen it will be
   difficult to guess it (SN is 32 bits long); port randomization is one
   protection among others against blind attacks.

23.2.  Duplicate Effects

   Some types of attacks that have an impact on a targeted IPv4 public
   address, could see their effects increased by the number of customers
   who share this address.  For example, if a given address that has,
   deliberately or not misbehaved, is consequently forbidden to access
   some resources, the whole set of customers who share this address
   will be impacted.  Application developers should find alternative
   information to uniquely identify connected users.

23.3.  IPsec

   Even if IPSec is not deployed for mass market (e.g. residential),
   impacts of solutions based on shared IP addresses should be evaluated
   and assessed.  [RFC3947] proposes a solution to solve issues
   documented in [RFC3715].  The applicability of [RFC3947] in the
   context of shared IP address should be evaluated.


24.  Acknowledgements

   We are grateful to Christian Jacquenet, Iain Calder, and Marcelo
   Bagnulo, for their helpful comments and suggestions for improving
   this document.

   This document has also been deeply improved by the fruitful exchanges
   with all people who have actively participated in the proposal of
   IPv4 shortage solutions.






Levis, et al.           Expires December 24, 2009              [Page 22]

Internet-Draft            IPv4 Address Shortage                June 2009


25.  IANA Considerations

   There are no IANA considerations.

   Note to RFC Editor: this section may be removed on publication as an
   RFC.


26.  Security Considerations

   Security considerations are discussed in the Security section


27.  Informative References

   [I-D.bajko-pripaddrassign]
              Bajko, G., Savolainen, T., Boucadair, M., and P. Levis,
              "Port Restricted IP Address Assignment",
              draft-bajko-pripaddrassign-01 (work in progress),
              March 2009.

   [I-D.boucadair-dhcpv6-shared-address-option]
              Boucadair, M., Levis, P., Grimault, J., Savolainen, T.,
              and G. Bajko, "Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol
              (DHCPv6) Options for Shared IP Addresses  Solutions",
              draft-boucadair-dhcpv6-shared-address-option-00 (work in
              progress), May 2009.

   [I-D.boucadair-port-range]
              Boucadair, M., Levis, P., Bajko, G., and T. Savolainen,
              "IPv4 Connectivity Access in the Context of IPv4 Address
              Exhaustion", draft-boucadair-port-range-01 (work in
              progress), January 2009.

   [I-D.despres-sam]
              Despres, R., "Stateless Address Mapping (SAM) Avoiding
              NATs and restoring the end-to-end  model in IPv6",
              draft-despres-sam-02 (work in progress), March 2009.

   [I-D.ford-shared-addressing-issues]
              Durand, A., Ford, M., and P. Roberts, "Issues with ISP
              Responses to IPv4 Address Exhaustion",
              draft-ford-shared-addressing-issues-00 (work in progress),
              March 2009.

   [I-D.ietf-softwire-dual-stack-lite]
              Durand, A., Droms, R., Haberman, B., and J. Woodyatt,
              "Dual-stack lite broadband deployments post IPv4



Levis, et al.           Expires December 24, 2009              [Page 23]

Internet-Draft            IPv4 Address Shortage                June 2009


              exhaustion", draft-ietf-softwire-dual-stack-lite-00 (work
              in progress), March 2009.

   [I-D.ietf-tsvwg-port-randomization]
              Larsen, M. and F. Gont, "Port Randomization",
              draft-ietf-tsvwg-port-randomization-03 (work in progress),
              March 2009.

   [I-D.nishitani-cgn]
              Nishitani, T., Miyakawa, S., Nakagawa, A., and H. Ashida,
              "Common Functions of Large Scale NAT (LSN)",
              draft-nishitani-cgn-02 (work in progress), June 2009.

   [I-D.shirasaki-isp-shared-addr]
              Shirasaki, Y., Miyakawa, S., Nakagawa, A., Yamaguchi, J.,
              and H. Ashida, "ISP Shared Address",
              draft-shirasaki-isp-shared-addr-02 (work in progress),
              March 2009.

   [I-D.wilson-class-e]
              Wilson, P., Michaelson, G., and G. Huston, "Redesignation
              of 240/4 from "Future Use" to "Private Use"",
              draft-wilson-class-e-02 (work in progress),
              September 2008.

   [I-D.ymbk-aplusp]
              Bush, R., Maennel, O., Zorz, J., Bellovin, S., and L.
              Cittadini, "The A+P Approach to the IPv4 Address
              Shortage", draft-ymbk-aplusp-03 (work in progress),
              March 2009.

   [RFC1918]  Rekhter, Y., Moskowitz, R., Karrenberg, D., Groot, G., and
              E. Lear, "Address Allocation for Private Internets",
              BCP 5, RFC 1918, February 1996.

   [RFC2663]  Srisuresh, P. and M. Holdrege, "IP Network Address
              Translator (NAT) Terminology and Considerations",
              RFC 2663, August 1999.

   [RFC2782]  Gulbrandsen, A., Vixie, P., and L. Esibov, "A DNS RR for
              specifying the location of services (DNS SRV)", RFC 2782,
              February 2000.

   [RFC3022]  Srisuresh, P. and K. Egevang, "Traditional IP Network
              Address Translator (Traditional NAT)", RFC 3022,
              January 2001.

   [RFC3715]  Aboba, B. and W. Dixon, "IPsec-Network Address Translation



Levis, et al.           Expires December 24, 2009              [Page 24]

Internet-Draft            IPv4 Address Shortage                June 2009


              (NAT) Compatibility Requirements", RFC 3715, March 2004.

   [RFC3947]  Kivinen, T., Swander, B., Huttunen, A., and V. Volpe,
              "Negotiation of NAT-Traversal in the IKE", RFC 3947,
              January 2005.

   [RFC4364]  Rosen, E. and Y. Rekhter, "BGP/MPLS IP Virtual Private
              Networks (VPNs)", RFC 4364, February 2006.

   [RFC4787]  Audet, F. and C. Jennings, "Network Address Translation
              (NAT) Behavioral Requirements for Unicast UDP", BCP 127,
              RFC 4787, January 2007.


Authors' Addresses

   Pierre Levis (editor)
   France Telecom
   42 rue des Coutures
   BP 6243
   Caen Cedex 4  14066
   France

   Email: pierre.levis@orange-ftgroup.com


   Mohamed Boucadair
   France Telecom

   Email: mohamed.boucadair@orange-ftgroup.com


   Jean-Luc Grimault
   France Telecom

   Email: jeanluc.grimault@orange-ftgroup.com


   Alain Villefranque
   France Telecom

   Email: alain.villefranque@orange-ftgroup.com









Levis, et al.           Expires December 24, 2009              [Page 25]


