 
   
 
   CCAMP Working Group  
   Internet Draft                                      
                                                           Zafar Ali 
                                               Jean-Philippe Vasseur 
                                                         Anca Zamfir 
                                                 Cisco Systems, Inc. 
                                                     Jonathan Newton 
                                                  Cable and Wireless 
   Intended status: Informational                      July 03, 2008 
   Expires: January 02, 2009 
 
 
                                   
           draft-ietf-ccamp-mpls-graceful-shutdown-06.txt 
 
           Graceful Shutdown in MPLS and Generalized MPLS  
                    Traffic Engineering Networks 
 
 
Status of this Memo 
    
   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that       
   any applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is       
   aware have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she       
   becomes aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of       
   BCP 79. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
   documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-
   Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as "work 
   in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
    
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html 
    
   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 02, 2009. 
    
Copyright Notice 
    
   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008). 




                        Expires September 2007               [Page 1] 
 
        draft-ietf-ccamp-mpls-graceful-shutdown-06.txt      July 07 
 
 
   Abstract 
 
   MPLS-TE Graceful Shutdown is a method for explicitly notifying 
   the nodes in a Traffic Engineering (TE) enabled network that the 
   TE capability on a link or on an entire Label Switching Router 
   (LSR) is going to be disabled. MPLS-TE graceful shutdown 
   mechanisms are tailored toward addressing planned outage in the 
   network.  
    
   This document provides requirements and protocol mechanisms to 
   reduce/eliminate traffic disruption in the event of a planned 
   shutdown of a network resource. These operations are equally 
   applicable to both MPLS and its Generalized MPLS (GMPLS) 
   extensions.  
 
Table of Contents 
 
   1. Introduction................................................2 
   2. Terminology.................................................3 
   3. Requirements for Graceful Shutdown..........................4 
   4. Mechanisms for Graceful Shutdown............................5 
   4.1 OSPF/ ISIS Mechanisms for graceful shutdown................5 
   4.2 RSVP-TE Signaling Mechanisms for graceful shutdown.........6 
   5. Security Considerations.....................................8 
   6. IANA Considerations.........................................8 
   7. Acknowledgments.............................................8 
   8. Reference...................................................8 
   8.1 Normative Reference........................................8 
   8.2 Informative Reference......................................9 
   9. Authors' Address:..........................................10 
   10. Intellectual Property Considerations......................10 
   11. Disclaimer of Validity....................................11 
   12. Copyright Statement.......................................11 

 
1. Introduction 
 
   When outages in a network are planned (e.g. for maintenance 
   purpose), some mechanisms can be used to avoid traffic 
   disruption. This is in contrast with unplanned network element 
   failure, where traffic disruption can be minimized thanks to 
   recovery mechanisms but may not be avoided. Hence, a Service 
   Provider may desire to gracefully (temporarily or indefinitely) 
   remove a TE Link, a group of TE Links or an entire node for 
   administrative reasons such as link maintenance, 
   software/hardware upgrade at a node or significant TE 
   configuration changes. In all these cases, the goal is to 
   minimize the impact on the traffic carried over TE LSPs in the 
   network by triggering notifications so as to gracefully reroute 
                                                             
                         Expires January 2008            [Page 2] 
 
        draft-ietf-ccamp-mpls-graceful-shutdown-06.txt      July 07 
 
   such flows before the administrative procedures are started. 
   These operations are equally applicable to both MPLS and its 
   Generalized MPLS (GMPLS) extensions.  
    
   Graceful shutdown of a resource may require several steps. These 
   steps can be broadly divided into two sets: disabling the 
   resource in the control plane and removing the resource for 
   forwarding. The node initiating the graceful shutdown condition 
   is expected to introduce a delay between disabling the resource 
   in the control plane and removing the resource for forwarding. 
   This is to allow the control plane to gracefully divert the 
   traffic away from the resource being gracefully shutdown. The 
   trigger for the graceful shutdown event is a local matter at the 
   node initiating the graceful shutdown. Typically, graceful 
   shutdown is triggered for administrative reasons, such as link 
   maintenance or software/hardware upgrade.  
    
   This document describes the mechanisms that can be used to 
   gracefully shutdown MPLS/ GMPLS Traffic Engineering on a 
   resource. As mentioned earlier, the graceful shutdown of the 
   Traffic Engineering capability on a resource could be 
   incorporated in the shutdown operation of an interface, but it is 
   a separate step that is taken before the IGP on the link is 
   brought down and before the interface is brought down at 
   different layers. This document only addresses TE nodes and TE 
   resources.  
 
2. Terminology 
  
   LSR - Label Switching Router. The terms node and LSR are used 
   interchangeably in this document.  
    
   GMPLS -         - The term GMPLS is used in this document to refer to 
   packet MPLS-TE, as well as GMPLS extensions to MPLS-TE.  
    
   LSP - An MPLS-TE/ GMPLS-TE Label Switched Path. 
    
   Head-end node: Ingress LSR that initiated signaling for the Path. 
    
   Border node: Ingress LSR of an LSP segment (S-LSP).   
    
   Path Computation Element (PCE): An entity that computes the 
   routes on behalf of its clients (PCC). 
    
   TE Link -           - The term TE link refers to single or a bundle of 
   physical link(s) or FA-LSP(s) on which traffic engineering is 
   enabled [RFC4206], [RFC4201]. 
    
   Last resort resource: If a path to a destination from a given 
   head-end node cannot be found upon removal of a resource (e.g., 
                                                             
                         Expires January 2008            [Page 3] 
 
        draft-ietf-ccamp-mpls-graceful-shutdown-06.txt      July 07 
 
   TE link, TE node), the resource is called last resort to reach 
   that destination from the given head-end node.  
 
 
3. Requirements for Graceful Shutdown 
 
   This section lists the requirements for graceful shutdown in the 
   context of GMPLS Traffic Engineering. 
 
   - Graceful shutdown is required to address graceful removal of 
   one TE link, one component link within a bundled TE link, a set 
   of TE links, a set of component links, label resource(s) or an 
   entire node.  
    
   - Once an operator has initiated graceful shutdown of a network 
   resource, no new TE LSPs may be set up that use the resource. 
   Any signaling message for a new LSP that explicitly specifies the 
   resource, or that would require the use of the resource due to 
   local constraints, is required to be rejected as if the resource 
   were unavailable. 
    
   - It is desirable for new LSP setup attempts that would be 
   rejected because of graceful shutdown of a resource (as described 
   in the previous requirement) to avoid any attempt to use the 
   resource by selecting an alternate route or other resources. 
    
    
   - If the resource being shutdown is a last resort, it can be 
   used. Time or decision for removal of the resource being shutdown 
   is based on a local decision at the node initiating the graceful 
   shutdown procedure.  
     
   - It is required to give the ingress node the opportunity to take 
   actions in order to reduce/eliminate traffic disruption on the 
   LSP(s) that are using the network resources which are about to be 
   shutdown.  
 
   - Graceful shutdown mechanisms are equally applicable to intra-
   domain and TE LSPs spanning multiple domains. Here, a domain is 
   defined as either an IGP area or an Autonomous System [RFC4726]. 
    
   - Graceful shutdown is equally applicable to GMPLS-TE, as well as 
   packet-based (MPLS) TE LSPs. 
    
   - In order to make rerouting effective, it is required that when 
     a node initiates the graceful shutdown of a resource, it 
     identifies to all other network nodes the TE resource under 
     graceful shutdown. 
   - Depending on switching technology, it may be possible to 
     shutdown a label resource, e.g., shutting down a lambda in a 
     Lambda Switch Capable (LSC) node.  
                                                             
                         Expires January 2008            [Page 4] 
 
        draft-ietf-ccamp-mpls-graceful-shutdown-06.txt      July 07 
 
4. Mechanisms for Graceful Shutdown 
 
   An IGP only solution based on [RFC3630], [RFC3784], [RFC4203] and 
   [RFC4205] are not applicable when dealing with Inter-area and 
   Inter-AS traffic engineering, as IGP LSA/LSP flooding is 
   restricted to IGP areas/levels. Consequently, RSVP based 
   mechanisms are required to cope with TE LSPs spanning multiple 
   domains. At the same time, RSVP mechanisms only convey the 
   information for the transiting LSPs to the router along the 
   upstream Path and not to all nodes in the network. Furthermore, 
   graceful shutdown notification via IGP flooding is required to 
   discourage a node from establishing new LSPs through the 
   resources being shutdown. In the following sections the 
   complementary mechanisms for RSVP-TE and IGP for Graceful 
   Shutdown are described. 
    
   A node where a link or the whole node is being shutdown may first 
   trigger the IGP updates as described in Section 4.1, introduce a 
   delay to allow network convergence and only then use the 
   signaling mechanism described in Section 4.2. 
    
 
4.1 OSPF/ ISIS Mechanisms for graceful shutdown 
 
   The procedures provided in this section are equally applicable to 
   OSPF and ISIS.  
 
   OSPF and ISIS procedure for graceful shutdown of TE link(s) is 
   similar to graceful restart of OSPF and ISIS as described in 
   [RFC4203] and [RFC4205], respectively. Specifically, the node 
   where graceful-shutdown of a link is desired originates the TE 
   LSA/LSP containing Link TLV for the link under graceful shutdown 
   with Traffic Engineering metric set to 0xffffffff, 0 as 
   unreserved bandwidth, and if the link has LSC or FSC as its 
   Switching Capability then also with 0 as Max LSP Bandwidth. A 
   node may also specify a value for Minimum LSP bandwidth which is 
   greater than the available bandwidth. This would discourage new 
   LSP establishment through the link under graceful shutdown.  
    
   If graceful shutdown procedure is performed for a component link 
   within a TE Link bundle and it is not the last component link 
   available within the TE link, the link attributes associated with 
   the TE link are recomputed. Similarly, If graceful shutdown 
   procedure is performed on a label resource within a TE Link, the 
   link attributes associated with the TE link are recomputed. If 
   the removal of the component link or label resource results in a 
   significant bandwidth change event, a new LSA is originated with 
   the new traffic parameters. If the last component link is being 
   shutdown, the routing procedure related to TE link removal is 
   used.  
                                                             
                         Expires January 2008            [Page 5] 
 
        draft-ietf-ccamp-mpls-graceful-shutdown-06.txt      July 07 
 
 
   Neighbors of the node where graceful shutdown procedure is in 
   progress continues to advertise the actual unreserved bandwidth 
   of the TE links from the neighbors to that node, without any 
   routing adjacency change.  
 
   When graceful shutdown at node level is desired, the node in 
   question follows the procedure specified in the previous section 
   for all TE Links.  
 
4.2 RSVP-TE Signaling Mechanisms for graceful shutdown 
 
   As discussed in Section 3, one of the requirements for the 
   signaling mechanism for graceful shutdown is to carry information 
   about the resource under graceful shutdown. The Graceful Shutdown 
   mechanism outlined in the following section uses PathErr in order 
   to achieve this requirement. These mechanisms apply to both 
   existing and new LSPs.  
 
   The node where graceful shutdown of an unbundled link or an 
   entire bundled TE link is desired triggers a PathErr message with 
   the error code "Notify" and an error value of "Local link 
   maintenance required" for all affected LSPs. Similarly, the node 
   that is being gracefully shutdown triggers a PathErr message with 
   the error code "Notify" and an error value of "Local node 
   maintenance required" for all LSPs.  
    
   MPLS TE Link Bundling [RFC4201] requires that an LSP is pinned 
   down to a component link(s). Consequently, graceful shutdown of a 
   component link in a bundled TE link differs from graceful 
   shutdown of unbundled TE link or entire bundled TE link. 
   Specifically, in the former case, when only a subset of component 
   links and not the entire TE bundled link is being shutdown, the 
   remaining component links of the bundled TE link may still be 
   able to admit new LSPs. The node where graceful shutdown of a 
   component link is desired triggers a PathErr message with the 
   error code "Notify" and the new error value of "Local component 
   link maintenance required" for all affected LSPs. The PathErr 
   message includes in the ERROR_SPEC the TE Link ID address. If the 
   last component link is being shutdown, procedure for gracefully 
   shutdown entire bundled TE link outlined above is be used, 
   instead.  
    
   If graceful shutdown of a label resource is desired, the node 
   initiating this action triggers a PathErr message with the error 
   code "Notify" and the new error value of "Local label resource 
   maintenance required" for the affected LSP. The PathErr message 
   includes in the ERROR_SPEC the TE Link ID address.  
    
   The "Notify" error code for the ERROR SPEC object is defined in 
   [RFC3209]. The "local link maintenance required" and "local node 
   maintenance required" error value for the "Notify" error code are 
                                                             
                         Expires January 2008            [Page 6] 
 
        draft-ietf-ccamp-mpls-graceful-shutdown-06.txt      July 07 
 
   defined in [RFC4736]. This document defines following two error 
   value for the "Notify" error code: 
    
         12 (TBA)   Local component link maintenance required 
         13 (TBA)   Local label resource maintenance required 
    
   The PathErr message includes in the ERROR_SPEC the TE Link ID 
   address. 
    
   If unbundled TE link, component link of a bundled TE link, entire 
   bundled TE link, or label resource of a TE link is being 
   gracefully shutdown, the PathErr message includes the ERROR_SPEC 
   object containing IP address of the TE Link being gracefully 
   shutdown. If TE link is unnumbered, the PathErr message includes 
   the ERROR_SPEC object containing unnumbered ID and TE node ID for 
   the TE Link being gracefully shutdown. Similarly, if the TE node 
   is being gracefully shutdown, the PathErr message includes in the 
   ERROR_SPEC object the MPLS-TE node ID address.  
 
   When a head-end node, or border node receives a PathErr message 
   with "Notify" error code and error value of "local link 
   maintenance required" or "local node maintenance required", or 
   "local component link maintenance required", or "local label 
   resource maintenance required" it triggers a make-before-break 
   procedure. When performing path computation for the new LSP, the 
   head-end node, or border node avoids using the TE resources 
   identified by the IP address contained in the PathErr. If PCE is 
   used for path computation, head-end node or border node acts as 
   PCC to request the PCE via PCEP for path computation avoiding 
   resource being gracefully shutdown. The amount of time the head-
   end node, or border node avoid using the TE resources identified 
   by the IP address contained in the PathErr is based on a local 
   decision at head-end node or border node.  
    
   If node initiating the graceful shutdown procedure received path 
   setup request for a new tunnel using resource being gracefully 
   shutdown, it sends a Path Error message with "Notify" error code 
   in the ERROR SPEC object and an error value consistent with the 
   type of resource being gracefully shutdown. However, based on a 
   local decision, if node initiating the graceful shutdown 
   procedure received path setup request for an existing tunnel, it 
   may allow signaling for it. This is to allow resource being 
   gracefully shutdown as a "last resort". The node initiating the 
   graceful shutdown procedure can distinguish between new and 
   existing tunnels based on the tunnel ID in the SESSION object.  
    
   Time or decision for removal of the resource being shutdown from 
   forwarding is based on a local decision at the node initiating 
   the graceful shutdown procedure.  
                                                             
                         Expires January 2008            [Page 7] 
 
        draft-ietf-ccamp-mpls-graceful-shutdown-06.txt      July 07 
 
5. Security Considerations 
 
   This document introduces two new error values for "Notify" error 
   code of the ERROR SPEC object defined in [RFC3209]. The procedure 
   in this document also uses two error values for "Notify" error 
   code of the ERROR SPEC object already defined in [RFC4736]. This 
   document also introduces ways to make resources unavailable for 
   the control plane. It is therefore recommended that procedures in 
   [RFC2747], which provides mechanisms to protect against external 
   agents compromising the RSVP signaling state in an RSVP agent, be 
   used.  Specifically, [RFC2747] mechanisms provide some degree of 
   protection to the head-end node or border node RSVP agent against 
   making resources unavailable for control plan from an external 
   agent sending Path Error messages with existing or new error code 
   and error values. In summary, existing security considerations 
   specified in [RFC2747], [RFC2205], [RFC3209], [RFC4736], 
   [RFC3471], [RFC3473] and [MPLS-GMPLS-SECURITY] remain relevant 
   and suffice.   
    
   This document relies on existing procedures for advertisement of 
   TE LSA/LSP containing Link TLV. Tampering with TE LSAs may have 
   an effect on traffic engineering computations, and it is 
   suggested that any mechanisms used for securing the transmission 
   of normal OSPF LSAs/ ISIS LSPs be applied equally to all Opaque 
   LSAs/ LSPs this document uses.  In summary, existing security 
   considerations specified in [RFC3630], [RFC3784], [RFC4203], 
   [RFC4205] and [MPLS-GMPLS-SECURITY] remain relevant and suffice.  
 
6. IANA Considerations 
 
   The following assignment is required in the "Notify" subsection 
   of "Error Codes and Values" section of the "RSVP PARAMETERS" 
   registry (located at http://www.iana.org/assignments/rsvp-
   parameters): 
    12 (TBA) - "Local component link maintenance required" flag. 
    13 (TBA)   Local label resource maintenance required.  
 
7. Acknowledgments 
 
   The authors would like to thank Adrian Farrel for his detailed 
   comments and suggestions. The authors would also like to 
   acknowledge useful comments from David Ward, Sami Boutros, and 
   Dimitri Papadimitriou.  
 
8. Reference 
 
8.1 Normative Reference 
 
   [RFC3209] Awduche D., Berger, L., Gan, D., Li T., Srinivasan, V., 
   Swallow, G., "RSVP-TE: Extensions to RSVP for LSP Tunnels", RFC 
   3209, December 2001. 
                                                             
                         Expires January 2008            [Page 8] 
 
        draft-ietf-ccamp-mpls-graceful-shutdown-06.txt      July 07 
 
 
   [RFC4736] Jean-Philippe Vasseur, et al "Reoptimization of MPLS 
   Traffic Engineering loosely routed LSP paths", RFC 4736, November 
   2006.  
 
8.2 Informative Reference 
 
   [RFC3630] Katz D., Kompella K., Yeung D., "Traffic Engineering 
   (TE) Extensions to OSPF Version 2", RFC 3630, September 2003.  
    
   [RFC3784] Smit, H. and T. Li, "Intermediate System to 
   Intermediate System (IS-IS) Extensions for Traffic Engineering 
   (TE)", RFC 3784, June 2004. 
    
   [RFC4203] Kompella, K., Ed., and Y. Rekhter, Ed., "OSPF 
   Extensions in Support of Generalized Multi-Protocol Label 
   Switching (GMPLS)", RFC 4203, October 2005.  
    
   [RFC4205]  Kompella, K., Ed., and Y. Rekhter, Ed., "Intermediate 
   System to Intermediate System (IS-IS) Extensions in Support of 
   Generalized Multi-Protocol Label Switching (GMPLS)", RFC 4205, 
   October 2005. 
 
   [RFC2205] Braden, R. Ed. et al, "Resource ReSerVation Protocol 
   (RSVP) Version 1, Functional Specification", RFC 2205, December 
   1997.  
    
   [RFC3471]  Berger, L., "Generalized Multi-Protocol Label 
   Switching (GMPLS) Signaling Functional Description", RFC 3471, 
   January 2003. 
    
   [RFC3473]  Berger, L., "Generalized Multi-Protocol Label 
   Switching (GMPLS) Signaling Resource ReserVation Protocol-Traffic 
   Engineering (RSVP-TE) Extensions", RFC 3473, January 2003. 
    
     
   [RFC4726] Farrel A, Vasseur, J.-P., Ayyangar A., "A Framework for 
   Inter-Domain MPLS Traffic Engineering", RFC 4726, November 2006.  
     
   [RFC4201] Kompella, K., Rekhter, Y., Berger, L., "Link Bundling 
   in MPLS Traffic Engineering", RFC 4201, October 2005. 
    
   [RFC4206] Kompella K., Rekhter Y., "Label Switched Paths (LSP) 
   Hierarchy with Generalized Multi-Protocol Label Switching (GMPLS) 
   Traffic Engineering (TE)", RFC 4206, October 2005.  
    
   [RFC2747]  Baker, F., Lindell, B., and M. Talwar, "RSVP 
   Cryptographic Authentication", RFC 2747, January 2000. 
   [MPLS-GMPLS-SECURITY] Fang, L. et al, "Security Framework for 
   MPLS and GMPLS Networks", draft-fang-mpls-gmpls-security-
   framework-01.txt, work in progress.  
                                                             
                         Expires January 2008            [Page 9] 
 
        draft-ietf-ccamp-mpls-graceful-shutdown-06.txt      July 07 
 
 
9. Authors' Address: 
 
   Zafar Ali 
   Cisco systems, Inc., 
   2000 Innovation Drive         
   Kanata, Ontario, K2K 3E8 
   Canada.  
   Email: zali@cisco.com 
    
   Jean Philippe Vasseur 
   Cisco Systems, Inc. 
   300 Beaver Brook Road 
   Boxborough , MA - 01719 
   USA 
   Email: jpv@cisco.com 
    
   Anca Zamfir 
   Cisco Systems, Inc.  
   2000 Innovation Drive  
   Kanata, Ontario, K2K 3E8  
   Canada 
   Email: ancaz@cisco.com  
    
   Jonathan Newton 
   Cable and Wireless 
   jonathan.newton@cw.com 
 
10. Intellectual Property Considerations 
 
   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be 
   claimed to pertain to the implementation or use of the technology 
   described in this document or the extent to which any license 
   under such rights might or might not be available; nor does it 
   represent that it has made any independent effort to identify any 
   such rights.  Information on the procedures with respect to 
   rights in RFC documents can be found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 
    
   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the 
   use of such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR 
   repository at http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 
    
   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention 
   any copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other 
   proprietary rights that may cover technology that may be required 
   to implement this standard.  Please address the information to 
   the IETF at ietf-ipr@ietf.org. 
 
                         Expires January 2008            [Page 10] 
 
        draft-ietf-ccamp-mpls-graceful-shutdown-06.txt      July 07 
 
 
11. Disclaimer of Validity 
 
   This document and the information contained herein are provided 
   on an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE 
   REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE 
   IETF TRUST AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL 
   WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY 
   WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE 
   ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR 
   FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
 
12. Copyright Statement 
 
   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008). 
    
   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions 
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors 
   retain all their rights. 
 

































                                                             
                         Expires January 2008            [Page 11] 
