


Network Working Group                                         W. Sanchez
Internet-Draft                                                  C. Daboo
Expires: November 30, 2008                                    Apple Inc.
                                                            May 29, 2008


                   WebDAV Current Principal Extension
               draft-sanchez-webdav-current-principal-01

Status of This Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on November 30, 2008.

Abstract

   This specification defines a new WebDAV property that allows clients
   to quickly determine the principal corresponding to the current
   authenticated user.












Sanchez & Daboo         Expires November 30, 2008               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft          WebDAV Current Principal                May 2008


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Conventions Used in This Document . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   3.  DAV:current-user-principal  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   4.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   5.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   6.  Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   7.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   Appendix A.  Change History (to be removed prior to
                publication as an RFC) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5








































Sanchez & Daboo         Expires November 30, 2008               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft          WebDAV Current Principal                May 2008


1.  Introduction

   WebDAV [RFC4918] is an extension to HTTP [RFC2616] to support
   improved document authoring capabilities.  The WebDAV ACL [RFC3744]
   extension adds access control capabilities to WebDAV.  It introduces
   the concept of a "principal resource" which is used to represent
   information about authenticated entities on the system.

   Some clients have a need to determine the [RFC3744] principal that a
   server is associating with the currently authenticated HTTP user.
   While [RFC3744] defines a DAV:current-user-privilege-set property for
   retrieving the privileges granted to that principal, there is no
   recommended way to do identify the principal in question, which is
   necessary to perform other useful operations.  For example, a client
   may wish to determine which groups the current user is a member of,
   or modify a property of the principal resource associated with the
   current user.

   The DAV:principal-match REPORT provides some useful functionality,
   but there are common situations where the results from that query can
   be ambiguous (e.g. not only is an individual user principal returned,
   but also every group principal that the user is a member of, and
   there is no clear way to distinguish which is which).

   This specification proposes an extension to WebDAV ACL that adds a
   DAV:current-user-principal property to resources under access control
   on the server.  This property specifies the principal resource
   corresponding to the currently authenticated user.

2.  Conventions Used in This Document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].

   When XML element types in the namespace "DAV:" are referenced in this
   document outside of the context of an XML fragment, the string "DAV:"
   will be prefixed to the element type names.

3.  DAV:current-user-principal

   Name:  current-user-principal

   Namespace:  DAV:







Sanchez & Daboo         Expires November 30, 2008               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft          WebDAV Current Principal                May 2008


   Purpose:  Indicates a URL for the current authenticated user's
      principal resource on the server.

   Value:  Single DAV:href element.

   Protected:  This property is computed on a per-request basis, and
      therefore is protected.

   Description:  The DAV:current-user-principal property contains either
      a DAV:href or DAV:unauthenticated XML element.  The DAV:href
      element contains a URL to a principal resource corresponding to
      the currently authenticated user.  That URL MUST be one of the
      URLs in the DAV:principal-URL or DAV:alternate-URI-set properties
      defined on the principal resource and MUST be an http(s) scheme
      URL.  When authentication has not been done or has failed, this
      property MUST contain the DAV:unauthenticated pseudo-principal.

      In some cases there may be multiple principal resources
      corresponding to the same authenticated principal.  In that case
      the server is free to choose any one of the principal resource
      URIs for the value of the DAV:current-user-principal property.
      However, servers SHOULD be consistent and use the same principal
      resource URI for each authenticated principal.

   COPY/MOVE behavior:  This property is computed on a per-request
      basis, and is thus never copied or moved.

   Definition:

      <!ELEMENT current-user-principal (unauthenticated | href)>
      <!-- href value: a URL to a principal resource -->

   Example:

      <D:current-user-principal xmlns:D="DAV:">
        <D:href>/principals/users/cdaboo</D:href>
      </D:current-user-principal>

4.  Security Considerations

   This specification does not introduce any additional security issues
   beyond those defined in HTTP [RFC2616], WebDAV [RFC4918] and WebDAV
   ACL [RFC3744].

5.  IANA Considerations

   This document does not require any actions on the part of IANA.




Sanchez & Daboo         Expires November 30, 2008               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft          WebDAV Current Principal                May 2008


6.  Acknowledgments

   This specification is based on discussions that took place within the
   Calendaring and Scheduling Consortium's CalDAV Technical Committee.
   The authors thank the participants of that group for their input.

   The authors thank Julian Reschke for his valuable input via the
   WebDAV working group mailing list.

7.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC2616]  Fielding, R., Gettys, J., Mogul, J., Frystyk, H.,
              Masinter, L., Leach, P., and T. Berners-Lee, "Hypertext
              Transfer Protocol -- HTTP/1.1", RFC 2616, June 1999.

   [RFC3744]  Clemm, G., Reschke, J., Sedlar, E., and J. Whitehead, "Web
              Distributed Authoring and Versioning (WebDAV)
              Access Control Protocol", RFC 3744, May 2004.

   [RFC4918]  Dusseault, L., "HTTP Extensions for Web Distributed
              Authoring and Versioning (WebDAV)", RFC 4918, June 2007.

Appendix A.  Change History (to be removed prior to publication as an
             RFC)

   Changes from -00:

   1.  Changed DAV:current-user-principal-resource to DAV:current-user-
       principal.

   2.  Correct DAV:current-user-principal element definition to use
       valid XML and not use the "DAV:" prefix for children.

   3.  Typo "DAV:unauthenticed" should be spelled "DAV:unauthenticated".














Sanchez & Daboo         Expires November 30, 2008               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft          WebDAV Current Principal                May 2008


Authors' Addresses

   Wilfredo Sanchez
   Apple Inc.
   1 Infinite Loop
   Cupertino, CA  95014
   USA

   EMail: wsanchez@wsanchez.net
   URI:   http://www.apple.com/


   Cyrus Daboo
   Apple Inc.
   1 Infinite Loop
   Cupertino, CA  95014
   USA

   EMail: cyrus@daboo.name
   URI:   http://www.apple.com/































Sanchez & Daboo         Expires November 30, 2008               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft          WebDAV Current Principal                May 2008


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.












Sanchez & Daboo         Expires November 30, 2008               [Page 7]

