





INTERNET-DRAFT                                      Kurt D. Zeilenga
Intended Category: Informational                    OpenLDAP Foundation
Expires: 12 May 2002                                12 November 2001



                     Authentication Mechanisms Levels
                     <draft-zeilenga-auth-lvl-02.txt>


Status of this Memo

  This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with all
  provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

  This document is intended to be, after appropriate review and
  revision, submitted to the RFC Editor as an Informational document.
  Distribution of this memo is unlimited.  Comments may sent directly to
  the author <Kurt@OpenLDAP.org>.

  Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering Task
  Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that other
  groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.
  Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
  and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
  time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
  material or to cite them other than as ``work in progress.''

  The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
  <http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt>. The list of
  Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
  <http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html>.

  Copyright 2001, The Internet Society.  All Rights Reserved.

  Please see the Copyright section near the end of this document for
  more information.


Abstract

  Numerous authentication mechanisms are in use today on the Internet.
  It is desirable to give administrators the choice of which mechanisms
  to support in their deployments and to give users the choice which
  mechanisms to use.  This document offers terminology designed to be
  easily understandable by users and administrators of Internet services
  while remaining meaningful to designers and developers of these
  services and associated Internet protocols.



Zeilenga            Authentication Mechanisms Levels            [Page 1]

INTERNET-DRAFT         draft-zeilenga-auth-lvl-02       12 November 2001


Conventions and Terminology

  The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
  "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
  document are to be interpreted as described in BCP 14 [RFC2119].

  The terms "attack", "active attack", "passive attack", and "masquerade
  attack" are used as defined in FYI 36 [RFC2828] as follows:

    $ attack
      (I) An assault on system security that derives from an intelligent
      threat, i.e., an intelligent act that is a deliberate attempt
      (especially in the sense of a method or technique) to evade
      security services and violate the security policy of a system.

      - Active vs. passive: An "active attack" attempts to alter system
        resources or affect their operation. A "passive attack" attempts
        to learn or make use of information from the system but does not
        affect system resources.

    $ masquerade attack
      (I) A type of attack in which one system entity illegitimately
      poses as (assumes the identity of) another entity.

  This document use of other terms as defined in RFC 2828, excepting
  "strong" authentication (as this used as defined below).


1. Introduction

  There are many authentication mechanisms in use today on the Internet.
  These mechanisms range from no or very weak authentication to very
  strong authentication.  Developers of internet applications and
  services often provide a wide range of authentication mechanisms to
  address differing demands from their user community.  The choice of
  which mechanisms to use is often left to the service administrator
  and/or the user.

  While some administrators and even some users might have knowledge of
  the applicable security considerations for each mechanism available to
  them, this is often not the case.

  This document offers terminology designed to be easily understandable
  by users and administrators of Internet services while remaining
  meaningful to designers and developers of these services and
  associated Internet protocols.





Zeilenga            Authentication Mechanisms Levels            [Page 2]

INTERNET-DRAFT         draft-zeilenga-auth-lvl-02       12 November 2001


2. Authentication Levels

  This document defines four levels of authentication mechanisms based
  upon the types of attacks they are prone to.  In increasing strength,
  the four levels are:

    NONE    - Prone to masquerade attacks.  Also, absence of
              authentication (anonymous).
    WEAK    - Prone to active and passive attacks,
    LIMITED - Prone to active attacks but resists passive attacks, and
    STRONG  - Resists active and passive attacks.

  Use of STRONG authentication mechanisms is strongly RECOMMENDED,
  especially on the Internet.  Use of LIMITED authentication mechanisms
  MAY be acceptable when the threat of active attack is minimal.  WEAK
  or NONE (excepting anonymous) authentication mechanisms SHOULD NOT be
  used, especially on the Internet.  Anonymous mechanisms may be used
  when and where appropriate.

  Additionally, mechanisms MAY be assigned reduced levels due to
  obsolescence or deprecation or other appropriate reasons.


3. Use of Authentication Levels

  It is intended that authentication levels be used to restrict the set
  of authentication used or allowed for a specific purpose.

  When enabling access to services or resources, mechanisms at or above
  the indicated level SHOULD be viewed as sufficient to grant access.
  That is, grant access at LIMITED indicates that use of LIMITED or
  higher is needed to grant access.

  When disabling access, mechanisms at or below the indicated level
  SHOULD be viewed as sufficient to deny access.  That is, deny access
  at LIMITED indicates that use of LIMITED or lower is needed to deny
  access.


3.1. Authentication Levels in User Interfaces

  Interfaces can provide a means for the user to select authentication
  mechanisms to use by level.  It is recommended that user also be given
  the ability to select specific mechanisms.  As flaws can be found
  after development of an user interface, it is also recommended that
  the user be provided with a means for disabling a mechanism and/or
  lowering the level associated with the mechanism.




Zeilenga            Authentication Mechanisms Levels            [Page 3]

INTERNET-DRAFT         draft-zeilenga-auth-lvl-02       12 November 2001


3.2. Authentication Levels in Administrative Interfaces

  Interfaces can provide a means for the administrator to select
  authentication mechanisms to allow by level.  As flaws can be found
  after development of an administrative interface, it is also
  recommended that the administrator be provided with a means for
  disabling a mechanism and/or lowering the level associated with the
  mechanism.


3.3. Authentication Levels in Access Control Services

  Access control services can grant or deny access to resources based
  upon a number of factors.  The level of authentication mechanism used
  to establish the user's identity may be used as a contributing factor
  to access control decisions.


4. Categorization of Authentication Mechanisms

  This section provides an example categorization of a few common
  authentication mechanisms based upon current accumulation of
  knowledge.  As significant flaws can be discovered in the mechanism
  categorized below or in their implementation, the assigned
  authentication level of a particular implementation of a specific
  mechanism should be repeatedly reevaluated.


4.1. Anonymous Mechanisms

  Anonymous mechanisms provide no authentication (by design) and hence
  are categorize at level NONE.

  Example: SASL ANONYMOUS [RFC2245]


4.2. Non-verified Identity Mechanisms

  Non-verified identity mechanisms do not require information proving
  the claimed identity.  Such mechanisms are categorized at level NONE.

  Examples: LDAP "unauthenticated" bind [RFC2251] and mechanism which
            use unauthenticated protocol elements such as IP source
            addresses.


4.3. Plain Password Mechanisms




Zeilenga            Authentication Mechanisms Levels            [Page 4]

INTERNET-DRAFT         draft-zeilenga-auth-lvl-02       12 November 2001


  Plain password mechanisms offer no protection from eavesdroppers.
  Such mechanisms are categorized at level WEAK.

  Examples: FTP USER/PASS [RFC959], POP3 USER/PASS [RFC1939]


4.4. Plain Password Mechanisms over Protected Transport Services

  The categorization of "protected" plain password mechanisms depends on
  ciphers used to protect transport services and the mechanisms used to
  establish cipher keys.  Generally such mechanisms can be categorized
  as LIMITED or STRONG.

  Example: LDAP "simple" bind over TLS [RFC2829,RFC2830]


4.5. Simple Challenge-Response Mechanisms

  A number of simple Challenge-Response mechanisms have been developed
  over the years.  These include a variety of simple mechanisms such as
  APOP [RFC1725] and CRAM-MD5 [RFC2195].  Though these mechanisms
  generally protect against eavesdropping and replay attacks, the
  mechanisms are subject to a variety of active attacks.  Though this
  mechanisms could be categorized as LIMITED based upon their resistance
  to passive attacks, we categorize them as WEAK as they is generally
  viewed as deprecated in favor of DIGEST based mechanisms [RFC2831].

  Example: IMAP/POP Challenge/Response [RFC2195]


4.6. Digest based Challenge-Response mechanisms

  Digest mechanisms protect against passive attacks but are subject to a
  number of active attacks.  Digest mechanisms are categorized at level
  LIMITED.

  Example: HTTP Digest Access Authentication [RFC2617], SASL DIGEST-MD5
            Mechanism [RFC2831]


4.7. One Time Passwords (OTP)

  OTP [RFC2289] based mechanisms generally only protect against passive
  eavesdropping and replay attacks but are subject to a number of active
  attacks.  For these reasons, OTP based mechanisms are categorized at
  level LIMITED.

  Example: SASL One-Time-Password Mechanism [RFC2444]



Zeilenga            Authentication Mechanisms Levels            [Page 5]

INTERNET-DRAFT         draft-zeilenga-auth-lvl-02       12 November 2001


4.8. Secure Remote Password (SRP)

  SRP [RFC2945] is a relatively new user/password based mechanism which
  resists passive attacks.  SRP resists dictionary attacks.  The
  mechanism also resists active attacks.  For these reasons, it is
  categorized as a STRONG mechanism.

  Example: Telnet Authentication: SRP [RFC2944]


4.9. Kerberos V

  The Kerberos [RFC1510] authentication service resists both active and
  passive attacks, however Kerberos is prone to off-line dictionary
  attacks.  There are mechanisms, such as pre-authentication, which may
  be used to resist such attacks.  When such mechanisms are used,
  Kerberos V can be categorized as a STRONG mechanism.  If such a
  mechanism is not in use (or it cannot be determined if one is in use),
  categorization at a lower level is appropriate.

  Example: SASL GSSAPI Mechanism [RFC2222]


4.10. Public Key based authentication

  In general, public key based authentication services resist both
  active and passive attacks and hence are categorized as a STRONG
  mechanism.

  Example: Simple Public Key GSS-API Mechanism [RFC2025]


4.11. SASL EXTERNAL

  The SASL EXTERNAL mechanism itself provides no authentication, but is
  a request to use an identity established by an underlying
  authentication mechanism.  Hence, the authentication level of the
  EXTERNAL mechanism is the authentication level of underlying
  authentication mechanism.  While it is common for the underlying
  authentication to be Public Key based authentication via TLS, it just
  as easily could be a non-verified identity mechanisms.  EXTERNAL
  should be classified at the level of weakest underlying authentication
  mechanism which the application supports EXTERNAL use with.

  Example: BEEP SASL EXTERNAL [RFC3080]


5. Security Considerations



Zeilenga            Authentication Mechanisms Levels            [Page 6]

INTERNET-DRAFT         draft-zeilenga-auth-lvl-02       12 November 2001


  Security issues are discussed throughout this document.  This section
  details additional security considerations which the reader should be
  aware of.  Additional general security considerations related to
  authentication can be found in "On Internet Authentication" [RFC1704],
  as well as the "Users' Security Handbook" [RFC2504] and the "Site
  Security Handbook" [RFC2196].


5.1. Confidentiality of Authentication Information

  It is often desirable to select an authentication mechanism which
  protects the confidentiality of authentication information.  In some
  situations, services may be obligated by law to protect the privacy of
  the user.   In such cases, use of a mechanism which protects the
  identity of the user from eavesdropping can be used.

  Authentication levels defined by this document are not indicative of
  the level of confidentiality of authentication information provided by
  the mechanism.


5.2. Data Integrity and Confidentiality

  It is often desirable to select an authentication mechanism based upon
  the kind of integrity and confidentiality services they provide after
  successful authentication.  Mechanisms which provide data integrity
  protection are resistant against hijacking and similar attacks.

  Authentication levels defined by this document are not explicitly
  indicative of the kind of integrity and confidentiality services
  offered by the mechanism.  However, most STRONG and many LIMITED
  mechanisms provide both integrity and confidential services.

  It may be appropriate categorize mechanisms which resist passive and
  active attacks but are subject to hijacking and similar attacks as
  LIMITED.


6. Acknowledgment

  This document is based upon input from numerous members of the IETF.


7. Author's Address

  Kurt D. Zeilenga
  OpenLDAP Foundation
  <Kurt@OpenLDAP.org>



Zeilenga            Authentication Mechanisms Levels            [Page 7]

INTERNET-DRAFT         draft-zeilenga-auth-lvl-02       12 November 2001


8. Normative References

  [RFC1704] N. Haller, R. Atkinson, "On Internet Authentication", RFC
            1704, October 1994.

  [RFC2119] S. Bradner, "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
            Requirement Levels", BCP 14 (also RFC 2119), March 1997.

  [RFC2196] B. Fraser, "Site Security Handbook", FYI 8 (also RFC 2196),
            September 1997.

  [RFC2504] E. Guttman, L. Leong, G. Malkin, "Users' Security Handbook",
            FYI 34 (also RFC 2504), February 1999.

  [RFC2828] R. Shirey, "Internet Security Glossary", FYI 36 (also RFC
            2828), May 2000.


9. Informative References

  [RFC959]  J. Postel, J.K. Reynolds, "File Transfer Protocol", STD 9,
            October 1985.

  [RFC1510] J. Kohl, and C. Neuman, "The Kerberos Network Authentication
            Service (V5)", RFC 1510, September 1993.

  [RFC1939] J. Myers, M. Rose, "Post Office Protocol - Version 3", STD
            53, May 1996.

  [RFC2025] C. Adams, "The Simple Public-Key GSS-API Mechanism (SPKM)",
            RFC 2025, October 1996.

  [RFC2195] J. Klensin, R. Catoe, and P. Krumviede, "IMAP/POP AUTHorize
            Extension for Simple Challenge/Response", RFC 2195,
            September 1997.

  [RFC2222] J. Myers, "Simple Authentication and Security Layer (SASL)",
            RFC 2222, October 1997

  [RFC2244] C. Newman, "The One-Time-Password SASL Mechanism", RFC 2244,
            November 1997.

  [RFC2246] T. Dierks, C. Allen, "The TLS Protocol Version 1.0", RFC
            2246, January 1999.

  [RFC2245] C. Newman, "Anonymous SASL Mechanism", RFC 2245, November
            1997.




Zeilenga            Authentication Mechanisms Levels            [Page 8]

INTERNET-DRAFT         draft-zeilenga-auth-lvl-02       12 November 2001


  [RFC2251] M. Wahl, T. Howes, S. Kille, "Lightweight Directory Access
            Protocol (v3)", RFC 2251, December 1997.

  [RFC2617] J. Franks, P. Hallam-Baker, J.  Hostetler, S. Lawrence, P.
            Leach, A. Luotonen, L. Stewart, "HTTP Authentication: Basic
            and Digest Access Authentication", RFC 2617, June 1999.

  [RFC2829] M. Wahl, H. Alvestrand, J. Hodges, R.  Morgan,
            "Authentication Methods for LDAP", RFC 2829, May 2000.

  [RFC2830] J. Hodges, R. Morgan, M. Wahl, "Lightweight Directory Access
            Protocol (v3): Extension for Transport Layer Security", RFC
            2830, May 2000.

  [RFC2831] P. Leach, C. Newman, "Using Digest Authentication as a SASL
            Mechanism", RFC 2831, May 2000.

  [RFC2944] T. Wu, "Telnet Authentication: SRP", RFC 2944, September
            2000.

  [RFC2945] T. Wu, "The SRP Authentication and Key Exchange System", RFC
            2944, September 2000.

  [RFC3080] M. Rose, "The Blocks Extensible Exchange Protocol Core", RFC
            3080, March 2001.


Full Copyright

  Copyright 2001, The Internet Society.  All Rights Reserved.

  This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
  others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
  or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published and
  distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any kind,
  provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
  included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
  document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
  the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
  Internet organizations, except as needed for the  purpose of
  developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
  copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be followed,
  or as required to translate it into languages other than English.

  The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
  revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

  This document and the information contained herein is provided on an



Zeilenga            Authentication Mechanisms Levels            [Page 9]

INTERNET-DRAFT         draft-zeilenga-auth-lvl-02       12 November 2001


  "AS IS" basis and THE AUTHORS, THE INTERNET SOCIETY, AND THE INTERNET
  ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
  INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
  INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
  WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.














































Zeilenga            Authentication Mechanisms Levels           [Page 10]

