Network Working Group                      J.L. Le Roux (France Telecom) 
Internet Draft                                        D. Brungard (AT&T) 
Category: Informational                                     E. Oki (NTT) 
Expires: January 2006                        D.  Papadimitriou (Alcatel) 
                                                       K. Shiomoto (NTT) 
                                                  M. Vigoureux (Alcatel) 
                                                         
                                                                         
                                                                         
                                                               July 2005 
 
 
        Evaluation of existing GMPLS Protocols against Multi Layer 
                    and Multi Region Networks (MLN/MRN) 
 
               draft-leroux-ccamp-gmpls-mrn-eval-01.txt 
 
 
Status of this Memo 
 
   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any 
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware 
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes 
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79. 
 
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026. Internet-Drafts are working 
   documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas, 
   and its working groups. Note that other groups may also distribute 
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt. 
    
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
Abstract 
    
   This document provides an evaluation of Generalized Multi-Protocol 
   Label Switching (GMPLS) protocols and mechanisms against the 
   requirements for Multi-Layer Networks (MLN) and Multi Region Networks 
   (MRN). In addition, this document identifies areas where additional 
   protocol extensions or procedures are needed to satisfy these 
   requirements, and provides guidelines for potential extensions. 
 
 
Le Roux et al.      Evaluation of GMPLS against MLN/MRN Reqs    [Page 1] 
  
Internet Draft  draft-leroux-ccamp-gmpls-mrn-eval-01.txt     July 2005 


 
Conventions used in this document 
 
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119. 
 
Table of Contents 
    
   1.      Introduction................................................3 
   2.      MLN/MRN Requirements overview...............................4 
   3.      Analysis....................................................4 
   3.1.    Multi-layer aspects.........................................4 
   3.1.1.  Support for Virtual Network Topology Reconfiguration........4 
   3.1.1.1.  Control of Forwarding Adjacencies (FA) setup/release......4 
   3.1.1.2.  Virtual TE-link...........................................6 
   3.1.1.3.  Traffic Disruption minimization during FA release.........7 
   3.1.1.4.  Stability.................................................7 
   3.1.2.  Support for FA LSP attributes inheritance...................7 
   3.1.3.  Support for Triggered signaling.............................7 
   3.1.4.  FA connectivity verification................................8 
   3.2.    Multi-Region specific aspects...............................8 
   3.2.1.  Support for Multi-region signaling..........................8 
   3.2.2.  Advertisement of Internal Adaptation Capabilities...........9 
   4.      Evaluation Conclusion......................................10 
   5.      Security considerations....................................10 
   6.      Acknowledgments............................................10 
   7.      References.................................................10 
   8.      Authors' Addresses:........................................11 
   9.      Intellectual Property Statement............................12 
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    

 
Le Roux, et al.   Evaluation of GMPLS against MLN/MRN Reqs    [Page 2] 
  
Internet Draft  draft-leroux-ccamp-gmpls-mrn-eval-01.txt     July 2005 


1. Introduction 
 
   Generalized Multi-Protocol Label Switching (GMPLS) extends MPLS to 
   handle multiple switching technologies: packet switching, layer-two 
   switching, TDM switching, wavelength switching and fiber switching 
   (see [RFC 3945]). 
    
   A data plane layer is a collection of network resources capable of 
   terminating and/or switching data traffic of a particular format. For 
   example, LSC, TDM VC-11 and TDM VC-4-64c represent three different 
   layers. A network comprising transport nodes with different data 
   plane switching layers controlled by a single GMPLS control plane 
   instance is called a Multi-Layer Network (MLN).  
 
   A GMPLS switching type (PSC, TDM, etc.) describes the ability of a 
   node to forward data of a particular data plane technology, and 
   uniquely identifies a control plane region. The notion of LSP Region 
   is defined in [HIER]. A MLN comprising of multiple switching types 
   (e.g. PSC and TDM) is called a Multi-Region Network (MRN). 
    
   Note that the region is a control plane only concept. That is, layers 
   of the same region share the same switching technology and, 
   therefore, need the same set of technology specific signaling 
   objects.  
 
   Note that a MRN is necessarily a MLN, but not vice versa, as a MLN 
   may consist of a single region (control of multiple data plane layers 
   within a region). Hence, in the following, we use the term layer if 
   the mechanism discussed applies equally to layers and regions (e.g. 
   VNT, virtual TE-link, etc.), and we specifically use the term region 
   if the mechanism applies only for supporting a MRN. 
 
   The objectives of this document are to evaluate existing GMPLS 
   mechanisms and protocols ([RFC 3945], [GMPLS-RTG], [GMPLS-SIG]) 
   against the requirements for MLN and MRN, defined in [MRN-REQ]. From 
   this evaluation, we identify several areas where additional protocol 
   extensions and modifications are required to meet these requirements, 
   and provide guidelines for potential extensions. 
    
   Section 2 provides an overview of MLN/MRN requirements. 
   Section 3 evaluates for each of these requirements, whether current 
   GMPLS protocols and mechanisms allow addressing the requirements. 
   When the requirements are not met, the document identifies whether 
   the required mechanisms could rely on GMPLS protocols and procedure 
   extensions or if it is entirely out of the scope of GMPLS protocols. 
    
   Note that this document specifically addresses GMPLS control plane   
   functionality for MLN/MRN in the context of a single administrative 
   control plane partition. 
    
    
  
 
Le Roux, et al.   Evaluation of GMPLS against MLN/MRN Reqs    [Page 3] 
  
Internet Draft  draft-leroux-ccamp-gmpls-mrn-eval-01.txt     July 2005 


2. MLN/MRN Requirements overview 
 
   [MRN-REQ] lists a set of functional requirements for Multi 
   Layer/Region Networks (MLN/MRN). These requirements are summarized 
   below: 
    
        -Support of robust Virtual Network Topology reconfiguration.     
         This implies the following requirements: 
                -Optimal control of Forwarding Adjacencies (FA) setup   
                 and release; 
                -Support for virtual TE-links; 
                -Traffic Disruption minimization during FA release (e.g.    
                 network reconfiguration events); 
                -Stability 
    
        -Support for FA LSP attributes inheritance; 
         
        -Support for Triggered Signaling; 
 
        -Support for FA data plane connectivity verification; 
 
        -Support for Multi-region signaling; 
 
        -Advertisement of the adaptation capabilities and resources; 
 
3. Analysis 
    
3.1. Multi-layer aspects 
    
3.1.1. Support for Virtual Network Topology Reconfiguration 
 
   A set of lower-layer FAs provides a Virtual Network Topology (VNT) to 
   the upper-layer. By reconfiguring the VNT (FA-LSP setup/release) 
   according to traffic demands between source and destination node 
   pairs of a layer, network performance factors such as maximum link 
   utilization and residual capacity of the network can be optimized. 
   Such optimal VNT reconfiguration implies several mechanisms that are 
   analyzed in the following sections. 
    
   Note that the VNT approach is just one approach among others, to 
   perform inter-layer Traffic Engineering.   
    
3.1.1.1. Control of Forwarding Adjacencies (FA) setup/release 
         
   In a multi-layer network, FAs are created, modified, released 
   periodically according to the change of incoming traffic demands from 
   the upper layer. 
    
   This implies a TE mechanism that takes into account the demands 
   matrix, the TE topology and potentially the current VNT in order to 
   compute a new VNT.  
    
 
Le Roux, et al.   Evaluation of GMPLS against MLN/MRN Reqs    [Page 4] 
  
Internet Draft  draft-leroux-ccamp-gmpls-mrn-eval-01.txt     July 2005 


   Several building blocks are required to support such TE mechanism: 
        - Discovery of TE topology and available resources; 
        - Collection of traffic demands of the upper layer; 
        - VNT engine, ensuring VNT computation and reconfiguration    
          according to upper layer traffic demands and TE topology  
         (and potentially old VNT); 
        - FA setup/release; 
    
   GMPLS routing protocols support TE topology discovery and  
   GMPLS signaling protocols allow setting up/releasing FAs. 
 
   VNT computation and reconfiguration is out of the scope of GMPLS 
   protocols. Such functionality can be achieved directly on layer 
   border LSRs, or one or more external tools, as for instance Path 
   Computation Elements (PCE) (see [PCE-ARCH]).  
 
   The set of traffic demands of the upper layer is required to 
   recompute and re-optimize the VNT. This functionality must have 
   knowledge of the aggregated bandwidth reserved by upper layer LSPs 
   established between any pair of border LSRs.  
    
   Existing GMPLS routing allows for the collection of traffic demands 
   of the upper region. It can be deduced from FA TE-link 
   advertisements.  
   The set of traffic demands can be inferred: 
        - either directly, based on upper-layer FA TE-link 
           advertisements. The traffic demands between two points 
           correspond to the cumulated bandwidth reserved by upper-layer 
           LSPs between these two points; 
        - or indirectly, based on lower-layer FA TE-link 
           advertisements. In this case a mechanism to infer the upper-
           layer traffic demand from the aggregated bandwidth reserved 
           in lower-layer LSPs might be required, as all pairs of border 
           nodes may not be directly connected by a lower layer LSP. 
    
   Collection of traffic demands of an upper region may actually be 
   achieved in several ways depending on the location of VNT engines: 
        - If a VNT engine is distributed on border region LSRs, then the  
          collection of traffic demands would rely on existing GMPLS  
          routing, as per described above;  
        - If a VNT engine is located on an external tool (e.g. a PCE)  
          then the collection of traffic demands may be achieved using  
          existing GMPLS routing, provided that the tool relies on GMPLS  
          routing to discover TE link information, or it may rely on  
          another mechanism out of the scope of GMPLS protocols (e.g.  
          SNMP, PCC-PCE communication protocolà). 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
Le Roux, et al.   Evaluation of GMPLS against MLN/MRN Reqs    [Page 5] 
  
Internet Draft  draft-leroux-ccamp-gmpls-mrn-eval-01.txt     July 2005 


 
3.1.1.2. Virtual TE-link 
         
   A virtual TE-link is a TE-link between two nodes, not actually 
   associated to a fully provisioned FA-LSP. A virtual TE-link 
   represents the potentiality to setup a FA-LSP. There is no IGP 
   adjacency associated to a virtual TE-link. A virtual TE-link is 
   advertised as any classical TE-link, i.e. following the rules in 
   [HIER] defined for fully provisioned TE-links. Particularly, the 
   flooding scope of a virtual TE link is within an IGP area, as any TE-
   link. 
     
   During its signalling, if an upper-layer LSP makes use of a virtual 
   TE-link, the underlying FA-LSP is immediately signalled and 
   provisioned. 
    
   The use of virtual TE-links has two main advantages: 
    
     - flexibility: allows to compute a LSP path using TE links and this 
       without taking into account the actual status of the  
       corresponding FA-LSP in the lower layer in terms of provisioning; 
     
     - stability: allows stability of TE-links, while 
       avoiding wastage of bandwidth in the lower layer, as data 
       plane connections are not established. 
    
   Note also that it avoids state maintenance but is susceptible to 
   create contention if no adequate/consistent admission control is put 
   in place. 
 
   Virtual TE-links are setup/deleted/modified dynamically, according to 
   the change of the (forecast) traffic demand, operator's policies for 
   capacity utilization, and the available resources in the lower layer. 
    
   The support of Virtual TE-links requires two main building blocks: 
        -A TE mechanism for dynamic modification of virtual TE-link    
         Topology; 
        -A signaling mechanism for the dynamic setup and deletion of 
         virtual TE-links. Setting up a virtual TE-link  
         requires a signalling mechanism allowing an end-to-end  
         association between virtual TE-link end points so as to  
         exchange link identifiers as well as some TE parameters. 
    
   The TE mechanism responsible for triggering/policing dynamic 
   modification of virtual TE-links is out of the scope of GMPLS 
   protocols. 
    
   Current GMPLS signalling does not allow setting up and releasing 
   virtual TE-links. Hence GMPLS signalling must be extended to support 
   virtual TE-links. The association between virtual TE-link end-points 
   may rely on extensions to the RSVP-TE ASON Call procedure ([GMPLS-
   ASON]). 
 
Le Roux, et al.   Evaluation of GMPLS against MLN/MRN Reqs    [Page 6] 
  
Internet Draft  draft-leroux-ccamp-gmpls-mrn-eval-01.txt     July 2005 


    
   Note that the support of virtual TE-link does not require any GMPLS 
   routing extension. 
 
3.1.1.3. Traffic Disruption minimization during FA release 
 
   Before deleting a given FA-LSP, all nested LSPs have to be rerouted 
   and removed from the FA-LSP to avoid traffic disruption. 
   The mechanisms required here are similar to those required for 
   graceful deletion of a TE-Link. A Graceful TE-link deletion mechanism 
   allows for the deletion of a TE-link without disrupting traffic of 
   TE-LSPs that where using the TE-link. 
   GMPLS protocols do not provide for explicit indication to trigger 
   such operation. 
    
   Hence, GMPLS routing and/or signaling extensions are required 
   to support graceful deletion of TE-links.  This may rely, for 
   instance, on new signaling Error code to notify head-end LSRs that a 
   TE-link along the path of a LSP is going to disappear, and also on 
   new routing attributes (if limited to a single IGP area), such as 
   defined in [GR-SHUT]. 
 
3.1.1.4. Stability 
         
   The upper-layer LSP stability may be impaired if the VNT undergoes 
   frequent changes. In this context robustness of the VNT is defined as 
   the capability to smooth impact of these changes and avoid their 
   subsequent propagation. 
    
   Guaranteeing VNT stability is out of the scope of GMPLS protocols and 
   relies entirely on the capability of TE algorithms to minimize 
   routing perturbations. This requires that the TE algorithm takes into 
   account the old VNT when computing a new VNT, and tries to minimize 
   the perturbation. 
          
3.1.2. Support for FA LSP attributes inheritance 
 
   When FA TE-link parameters are inherited from FA-LSP parameters, 
   specific inheritance rules are applied.  
    
   This relies on local procedures and policies and is out of the scope 
   of GMPLS protocols.  
   Note that this requires that both head and tail-ends of the FA-LSP 
   are driven by same policies. 
    
3.1.3. Support for Triggered signaling. 
 
   When a LSP crosses the boundary from an upper to a lower layer, it 
   may be nested in or stitched to a lower-layer LSP. If such an LSP 
   does not exist the LSP may be established dynamically. Such a 
   mechanism is referred to as "Triggered signaling".  
    
 
Le Roux, et al.   Evaluation of GMPLS against MLN/MRN Reqs    [Page 7] 
  
Internet Draft  draft-leroux-ccamp-gmpls-mrn-eval-01.txt     July 2005 


   Triggered signaling requires the following building blocks: 
        -The identification of layer boundaries. 
        -A path computation engine capable of computing a path     
         containing multiple layers. 
        -A mechanism for nested signaling. 
 
   The identification of layer boundaries is supported by GMPLS routing 
   protocols. The identification of layer boundaries is performed using 
   the interface switching capability descriptor associated to the TE-
   link (see [HIER] and [GMPLS-RTG]). 
    
   The capability to compute a path containing multiple layers is a 
   local implementation issue and is out of the scope of GMPLS protocols. 
    
   A mechanism for nested signaling is defined in [HIER]. 
    
   Hence, GMPLS protocols already meet this requirement.  
    
3.1.4. FA connectivity verification 
 
   Once fully provisioned, FA liveliness may be achieved by verifying 
   its data plane connectivity. 
    
   FA connectivity verification relies on technology specific mechanisms 
   (e.g. for SDH, G.707, G.783, for MPLS, BFD, etc.) as for any other 
   LSP. Hence this requirement is out of the scope of GMPLS protocols. 
    
   Note that the time to establish the FA-LSP must be minimized. 
 
3.2. Multi-Region specific aspects 
    
3.2.1. Support for Multi-region signaling 
    
   Applying the triggered signaling procedure discussed above, in a MRN 
   environment may lead to setup of one-hop FA-LSPs between each node. 
   Therefore, considering that the path computation is able to take into 
   account richness of information with regard to the Switching 
   Capability (SC) available on given nodes belonging to the path, it is 
   consistent to provide enough signaling information to indicate the SC 
   to be used and on over which link.   
        
   Limited extension to existing GMPLS signaling procedures is required 
   for this purpose as it only mandates indication of the SCs to be 
   included or excluded before initiating the LSP provisioning procedure. 
   This enhancement would solve the ambiguous choice of SC that are 
   potentially used along a given path, particularly in case of ERO 
   expansion, or when an ERO sub-object identifies a multi-SC TE link. 
   This would give the possibility to optimize resource usage on a 
   multi-region basis. 
    
    
    
 
Le Roux, et al.   Evaluation of GMPLS against MLN/MRN Reqs    [Page 8] 
  
Internet Draft  draft-leroux-ccamp-gmpls-mrn-eval-01.txt     July 2005 


3.2.2. Advertisement of Internal Adaptation Capabilities 
 
   In the MRN context, nodes supporting more than one switching 
   capability on at least one interface are called Hybrid nodes. Hybrid 
   nodes contain at least two distinct switching elements that are 
   interconnected by internal links, to provide adaptation between the 
   supported switching capabilities.  
   These internal links have finite capacities and must be taken into 
   account when computing the path of a multi-region TE-LSP.  
   The advertisement of the internal adaptation capability is required 
   as it provides critical information when performing multi-region path 
   computation. 
 
   The advertisement of the internal adaptation capability, using 
   existing GMPLS routing, would require dividing a hybrid node, in the 
   routing plane, in several logical nodes, and advertising internal 
   adaptation capabilities as TE-links between logical nodes. Of course 
   such approach must be avoided as it leads to the introduction of 
   internal node states. 
    
   Hence, GMPLS routing must be extended to meet this requirement. This 
   could rely on the advertisement of the internal adaptation 
   capabilities as a new TE link attribute (that would complement the 
   Interface Switching Capability Descriptor TE link attribute).  
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
 

 
Le Roux, et al.   Evaluation of GMPLS against MLN/MRN Reqs    [Page 9] 
  
Internet Draft  draft-leroux-ccamp-gmpls-mrn-eval-01.txt     July 2005 


4. Evaluation Conclusion 
 
   Most of MLN/MRN requirements will rely on mechanisms and procedures 
   that are out of the scope of the GMPLS protocols, and thus do not 
   require any GMPLS protocol extensions. They will rely on local 
   procedures and policies, and on specific TE mechanisms and 
   algorithms. 
    
   As regards Virtual Network Topology (VNT) computation and 
   reconfiguration, specific TE mechanisms that could, for instance, 
   rely on PCE based mechanisms and protocols need to be defined, but 
   these mechanisms are out of the scope of GMPLS protocols 
    
   Four areas for extensions of GMPLS protocols and procedures have been 
   identified: 
    
        - GMPLS signaling extension for the setup/deletion of    
          the virtual TE links (as well as exact trigger for its actual  
          provisioning); 
    
        - GMPLS routing and signaling extension for graceful TE link  
          deletion; 
 
        - GMPLS signalling extension for constrained multi-region  
          signalling (SC inclusion/exclusion); 
    
        - GMPLS routing extension for the advertisement of the  
          internal adaptation capability of hybrid nodes. 
    
5. Security considerations 
    
   This document specifically addresses GMPLS control plane   
   functionality for MLN/MRN in the context of a single administrative 
   control plane partition and hence does not introduce additional 
   security threats beyond those described in [RFC3945]. 
 
6. Acknowledgments 
 
   We would like to thank Julien Meuric and Igor Bryskin for their 
   useful comments. 
    
7. References 
 
   [RFC3979] Bradner, S., "Intellectual Property Rights in IETF 
   Technology", BCP 79, RFC 3979, March 2005. 
 
   [RFC3945] Mannie, E., et. al. "Generalized Multi-Protocol Label 
   Switching Architecture", RFC 3945, October 2004 
    
   [GMPLS-RTG] Kompella, K., Ed. and Y. Rekhter, Ed., "Routing 
   Extensions in Support of Generalized Multi-Protocol Label Switching", 
   draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-routing, work in Progress. 
 
Le Roux, et al.   Evaluation of GMPLS against MLN/MRN Reqs   [Page 10] 
  
Internet Draft  draft-leroux-ccamp-gmpls-mrn-eval-01.txt     July 2005 


 
   [GMPLS-SIG] Berger, L., et. al. "Generalized Multi-Protocol Label 
   Switching (GMPLS) Signaling Functional Description", RFC 3471, 
   January 2003. 
    
   [GMPLS-ASON] Papadimitriou, D., et. al., " Generalized MPLS (GMPLS)    
   RSVP-TE Signalling in support of Automatically Switched Optical 
   Network (ASON)", draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-rsvp-te-ason, work in progess. 
    
   [MRN-REQ] Shiomoto, K., Papadimitriou, D., Le Roux, J.L., Vigoureux, 
   M., Brungard, D., "Requirements for GMPLS-based multi-region and 
   multi-layer networks", draft-shiomoto-ccamp-gmpls-mrn-reqs, work in 
   progess.  
 
   [PCE-ARCH] Farrel, A., Vasseur, J.P., Ash, J., "Path Computation 
   Element (PCE) Architecture", draft-ietf-pce-architecture, work in 
   progress. 
    
   [GTEP] Oki, E., et. al., "Generalized Traffic Engineering Protocol", 
   draft-oki-pce-gtep, work in progress. 
    
   [HIER] K. Kompella and Y. Rekhter, "LSP hierarchy with generalized 
   MPLS TE", draft-ietf-mpls-lsp-hierarchy-08, work in progress. 
 
   [GR-SHUT] Ali, Z., Zamfir, A., "Graceful Shutdown in MPLS Traffic 
   Engineering Network", draft-ali-ccamp-mpls-graceful-shutdown, work in 
   progress.  
 
8. Authors' Addresses:  
  
   Jean-Louis Le Roux  
   France Telecom  
   2, avenue Pierre-Marzin  
   22307 Lannion Cedex, France 
   Email: jeanlouis.leroux@francetelecom.com 
    
   Deborah Brungard 
   AT&T 
   Rm. D1-3C22 - 200 S. Laurel Ave. 
   Middletown, NJ, 07748 USA 
   E-mail: dbrungard@att.com 
    
   Eiji Oki 
   NTT 
   3-9-11 Midori-Cho 
   Musashino, Tokyo 180-8585, Japan 
   Email: oki.eiji@lab.ntt.co.jp 
    
   Dimitri Papadimitriou 
   Alcatel 
   Francis Wellensplein 1, 
   B-2018 Antwerpen, Belgium 
 
Le Roux, et al.   Evaluation of GMPLS against MLN/MRN Reqs   [Page 11] 
  
Internet Draft  draft-leroux-ccamp-gmpls-mrn-eval-01.txt     July 2005 


   Email: dimitri.papdimitriou@alcatel.be 
    
   Kohei Shiomoto 
   NTT 
   3-9-11 Midori-Cho 
   Musashino, Tokyo 180-8585, Japan 
   Email: shiomoto.kohei@lab.ntt.co.jp 
    
   Martin Vigoureux 
   Alcatel 
   Route de Nozay, 
   91461 Marcoussis Cedex, France 
   Email: martin.vigoureux@alcatel.fr 
 
 
9. Intellectual Property Statement 
 
   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to 
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in 
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights 
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has 
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information 
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be 
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 
    
   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of 
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 
    
   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at  
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org. 
    
   Disclaimer of Validity 
    
   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an 
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS 
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET 
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, 
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE 
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED 
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
    
   Copyright Statement 
    
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).  This document is subject 
 
Le Roux, et al.   Evaluation of GMPLS against MLN/MRN Reqs   [Page 12] 
  
Internet Draft  draft-leroux-ccamp-gmpls-mrn-eval-01.txt     July 2005 


   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and 
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights. 
 

















































 
Le Roux, et al.   Evaluation of GMPLS against MLN/MRN Reqs   [Page 13] 
