


IPv6 Operations                                            T. Chown, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                 University of Southampton
Intended status: Informational                          October 27, 2008
Expires: April 30, 2009


        Considerations for IPv6 Address Selection Policy Changes
               draft-chown-addr-select-considerations-00

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 30, 2009.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

Abstract

   Through operational experience of IPv6 Default Address Selection
   (RFC3484) [1] implementations, it appears that a requirement has
   arisen for hosts and networks to be able to have their policies for
   address selection updated.  This text discusses considerations for
   such policy changes, e.g. examples of cases where a change of policy
   is required, and the likely frequency of such policy changes.  This
   text also includes some discussion on the need to also update
   RFC3484, where default policies are currently defined.



Chown                    Expires April 30, 2009                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft      Address Selection Considerations        October 2008


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Issues to Consider . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3.  Other Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   4.  Drivers for Policy Changes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     4.1.  Internal vs External Tiggers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     4.2.  Administratively Triggered Changes . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     4.3.  Start-up vs Running Changes  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   5.  On Address Changes and Obtaining Policy  . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   6.  How Dynamic? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   7.  On RFC3484 Default Policies  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   8.  Considerations for Solutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   9.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   10. IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   11. Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   12. Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 10
































Chown                    Expires April 30, 2009                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft      Address Selection Considerations        October 2008


1.  Introduction

   There have been various operational issues observed (RFC5220) [2]
   with Default Address Selection for IPv6 (RFC3484) [1].  As as a
   result, there has been some demand for the capability for systems and
   networks to be able to have their policy tables, and potentially the
   rules described in RFC3484, modified.


2.  Issues to Consider

   There are a number of aspects to consider in the context of such
   address selection policy updates.

   First is the frequency for which such updates are likely to be
   required; this will be determined largely from identifying the
   scenarios in which policy changes will be required.  This may include
   overriding default system policies on startup, as well as changes
   while a system is running.

   Second, by understanding how dynamic the policy update mechanism
   needs to be we should be better placed to determine what types of
   update approaches best meet those needs.  There may be other
   considerations of course, e.g. whether the systems are in managed or
   unmanaged environments, and whether the solution should be proactive
   or automated, as discussed in [4].

   Third, if we assume some policy update mechanism is defined we should
   consider how hosts and systems may become aware that a policy change
   has happened, and how policy can be disseminated in a timely fashion.
   Thus we need to understand what kind of technical/concrete event(s)
   can be used for triggering the policy table update mechanism, e.g.
   address re-obtainment, address lifetime expiration, or perhaps policy
   lifetime expiration.

   Finally, we should assess whether these update solutions require or
   need 3484 to be updated.  In some instances, we might envision
   solutions that simply use RFC3484 as guidelines and provide
   sufficient controls to address the current limitations in the RFC.
   However, as noted in RFC5220 [2], not all the operational issues
   observed to date can be remedied by updating RFC3484 alone.  Thus
   there may be further work required elsewhere, which may of course
   still include an RFC3484 update, to address all the issues detailed
   in RFC5220, as described in [6]).







Chown                    Expires April 30, 2009                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft      Address Selection Considerations        October 2008


3.  Other Related Work

   We note that there is some existing work in defining Requirements for
   Address Selection Machanisms [3], and some initial work has been done
   in the solution space (for DHCP) [5], but these are not discussed
   here.  While RFC5221 does assume that a dynamic policy update
   mechanism of some form is available, this draft is currently aimed at
   understanding the scenarios and triggers for policy changes, to
   better inform future solution discussions.


4.  Drivers for Policy Changes

   If we wish to determine how frequent address selection policy changes
   are likely to be, we need to understand why such policies might need
   to be changed, for particular sites or networks.

   One obvious source of drivers for policy change is RFC5220, in which
   operational issues with the existing policies described in RFC3484
   are listed.  Each subsection of this document gives a reason why the
   existing rules or policy tables in RFC3484 may not be sufficient in
   certain cases.  There have been some significant changes to IPv6
   since RFC3484 was drafted which have impacted the RFC, e.g. the
   introduction of Unique Local Addresses (ULAs), and concerns about
   longest prefix matching affecting (DNS) round robin load balancing.

   In summary, the issues raised in RFC5220 were:

   o  Multiple Routers on a Single Interface

   o  Ingress Filtering

   o  Problem Half-Closed Network Problem (*)

   o  Combined Use of Global and ULA (*)

   o  Site Renumbering (*)

   o  Multicast Source Address Selection (*)

   o  Temporary Address Selection

   o  IPv4 or IPv6 Prioritization (*)

   o  ULA and IPv4 Dual-Stack Environment (*)

   o  ULA or Global Prioritization (*)




Chown                    Expires April 30, 2009                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft      Address Selection Considerations        October 2008


   The authors of RFC5220 noted which of these issues can be solved by
   changes to the RFC3484 policy table, marked (*) above, and which
   cannot.  It is interesting to note that issues largely related to
   internal networking and (administrative) policy decisions can be
   handled this way.

4.1.  Internal vs External Tiggers

   When considering drivers or triggers that may lead to a requirement
   for the policy to change, we can consider those external to a site or
   network and those internal.  In the case of the first two examples
   above, a dynamic policy table update may be required by externally
   driven routing changes, assuming the site uses a dynamic routing
   protocol intra-site and the routing protocol is configured to reflect
   changes of extra-site routing topology.  In such a case, the policy
   table of hosts may needs to be updated according to the routing
   policy.

   It should be noted that we have other mechanims for dynamic routing
   topology change, for example deprecating one of the advertised
   prefixes, perhaps when one of the upstream links has a problems.

   Other examples of external factors include a new transition mechanism
   being defined (e.g. as with the emergence of Teredo using 2001::/32
   as assigned by IANA) and its inclusion being required in the policy
   table, or a site renumbering event that could be triggered by an
   upstream provider's actions.

4.2.  Administratively Triggered Changes

   The other examples above are, in the general case, where the site
   administrator chooses to change a local policy and in doing so
   triggers the need for policy table updates.  Some of these changes
   one might assume to be set once, and to change rarely, e.g.:

   o  Setting priority use of IPv6 over IPv4 (or vice versa).

   o  Setting priority use of ULAs over globals (or vice versa).

   o  Setting priority use of privacy addresses over globals (or vice
      versa).

   o  An internal network renumbering occurs, perhaps due to a site
      expanding.

   o  Disabling longest-prefix match functions to facilitate round-robin
      load balancing.




Chown                    Expires April 30, 2009                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft      Address Selection Considerations        October 2008


   However it may be the case that different parts of a site have
   different policies, or policies are changed in a rolling fashion
   across a site over time as IPv6 or ULAs are introduced (for example).

   Other administrative changes may occur more frequently, e.g.:

   o  Routing tables and forwarding tables change dynamically.

   o  A different provider (link) is preferred for a given destination.

   It's possible that provider links may vary on a daily basis, or by
   time of day.

4.3.  Start-up vs Running Changes

   When a host starts up it may be configured with the default RFC3484
   policies.  At this stage a number of addresses may be configured on a
   number of interfaces on the host.  At this time it may be desirable
   for the host to be able to receive the site-specific policy updates
   as a start-up override from the RFC3484 defaults.

   Other policy changes may later be required while the host is running.
   Ideally the same protocol should be used for the start-up and running
   state updates.


5.  On Address Changes and Obtaining Policy

   When a policy table change is made, the change of policy needs to be
   propogated to the hosts in a network.  From the host perspective, one
   could assume that when a host changes an address, it should re-obtain
   the selection policy.  If the policy is distributed via the same
   mechanism that informs a host of a change of address(es), the
   application of the policy should be synchronised sufficiently with
   the address change.  However, not all hosts may receive the update
   information at the same time, e.g. dependent on DHCP lease timers.

   Where hosts use DHCPv6 for address information, in the absence of
   some form of Reconfigure message, a host may see a delay in policy
   changes being notified.  It should also be noted of course that not
   all policy changes are tied to a host changing one or more addresses.
   One possible tool to help here is the DHCPv6 Lifetime Option
   (RFC4242), which was originally introduced to assist with network
   renumbering events.

   Thus there is a general issue of timely and synchronised
   dissemination of new policy.




Chown                    Expires April 30, 2009                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft      Address Selection Considerations        October 2008


6.  How Dynamic?

   The discussion above suggests that many of the potential triggers for
   policy table changes are 'one-off' in nature, i.e. a site makes a
   one-time policy change.

   However, there are also some cases where updates may be required to
   be more frequent, e.g. the gradual introduction of new policy across
   a large site, and cases where preferred links for certain
   destinations change frequently over time (possibly daily).  It is not
   clear how common these cases are, and thus further input is welcomed
   here.


7.  On RFC3484 Default Policies

   RFC3484 includes text about mechanisms for changing policy, having
   'policy hooks' and having a configurable policy table.  The
   implication is that defaults can be changed, and the text gives
   examples of this in Section 10.  That said, it remains the case that
   some operational issues with RFC3484 are not just related to the
   table, but on rules themselves, e.g. longest prefix match (affecting
   DNS round robin as described in [2]).

   We should note though that the word 'default' has to be defined here,
   i.e. what is the scope of this 'default'.  It seems it is 'system
   wide' but first it just moves the issue to the 'system' definition
   and second larger or smaller granularities make sense (for instance
   'link wide' and 'user wide').  Whether and how this can be considered
   in an open question.

   It certainly seems the case that the issues raised in RFC5220, and
   discussed in [6] mean that an update of RFC3484 is required, if only
   because some of the issues (as highlighted earlier) cannot be
   addressed by updating the policy table alone.


8.  Considerations for Solutions

   In this first draft we avoid any discussion of impact on or
   implications for solutions.  Except that it would be highly
   preferable if the start-up and running state solutions used the same
   protocol.


9.  Security Considerations

   There are no extra Security consideration for this document.



Chown                    Expires April 30, 2009                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft      Address Selection Considerations        October 2008


10.  IANA Considerations

   There are no extra IANA consideration for this document.


11.  Acknowledgements

   The design team working on this draft is: Marcelo Bagnulo Braun, Marc
   Blanchet, Tim Chown, Francis Dupont, Tim Enos, TJ Evans, Brian
   Haberman, Tony Hain, Ruri Hiromi, Suresh Krishnan, Arifumi Matsumoto,
   Janos Mohacsi, Sebastien Roy, Teemu Savolainen, Fujisaki Tomohiro,
   and John Zhao.


12.  Informative References

   [1]  Draves, R., "Default Address Selection for Internet Protocol
        version 6 (IPv6)", RFC 3484, February 2003.

   [2]  Matsumoto, A., Fujisaki, T., Hiromi, R., and K. Kanayama,
        "Problem Statement for Default Address Selection in Multi-Prefix
        Environments: Operational Issues of RFC 3484 Default Rules",
        RFC 5220, July 2008.

   [3]  Matsumoto, A., Fujisaki, T., Hiromi, R., and K. Kanayama,
        "Requirements for Address Selection Mechanisms", RFC 5221,
        July 2008.

   [4]  Matsumoto, A., Fujisaki, T., Hiromi, R., and K. Kanayama,
        "Solution approaches for address-selection problems",
        draft-ietf-6man-addr-select-sol-01 (work in progress),
        June 2008.

   [5]  Fujisaki, T., Matsumoto, A., Niinobe, S., Hiromi, R., and K.
        Kanayama, "Distributing Address Selection Policy using DHCPv6",
        draft-fujisaki-dhc-addr-select-opt-06 (work in progress),
        June 2008.

   [6]  Matsumoto, A., Fujisaki, T., Hiromi, R., and K. Kanayama,
        "Things To Be Considered for RFC 3484 Revision",
        draft-arifumi-6man-rfc3484-revise-00 (work in progress),
        June 2008.









Chown                    Expires April 30, 2009                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft      Address Selection Considerations        October 2008


Author's Address

   Tim Chown (editor)
   University of Southampton
   Southampton, Hampshire  SO17 1BJ
   United Kingdom

   Email: tjc@ecs.soton.ac.uk











































Chown                    Expires April 30, 2009                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft      Address Selection Considerations        October 2008


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Chown                    Expires April 30, 2009                [Page 10]

