





INTERNET-DRAFT          Source-Specific Multicast            H. Holbrook
Expires Apr 19, 2004                                       Cisco Systems
                                                                 B. Cain
                                                        Storigen Systems
                                                             19 Oct 2003


                    Source-Specific Multicast for IP
                      <draft-ietf-ssm-arch-04.txt>


Status of this Memo

This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with all
provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering Task
Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that other groups
may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts as reference material
or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
"SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC 2119].

















Holbrook/Cain                                                   [Page 1]

INTERNET-DRAFT          Source-Specific Multicast            19 Oct 2003


Abstract

IP addresses in the 232/8 (232.0.0.0 to 232.255.255.255) range are
designated as source-specific multicast (SSM) destination addresses and
are reserved for use by source-specific applications and protocols.  For
IP version 6 (IPv6), the address prefix FF3x::/32 is reserved for
source-specific multicast use.  It defines an extension to the Internet
network service that applies to datagrams sent to SSM addresses and
defines the host and router requirements to support this extension.

1.  Introduction

The Internet Protocol (IP) multicast service model is defined in RFC
1112 [RFC1112].  RFC 1112 specifies that a datagram sent to an IP
multicast address (224.0.0.0 through 239.255.255.255) G is delivered to
each "upper-layer protocol module" that has requested reception of
datagrams sent to address G.  RFC 1112 calls the network service
identified by a multicast destination address G a "host group."  This
model supports both one-to-many and many-to-many group communication.
This document uses the term "Any-Source Multicast" (ASM) to refer to
model of multicast defined in RFC 1112.  RFC 2373 [RFC2373] specifies
the form of IPv6 multicast addresses with ASM semantics.

IP addresses in the 232/8 (232.0.0.0 to 232.255.255.255) range are
currently designated as source-specific multicast (SSM) destination
addresses and are reserved for use by source-specific applications and
protocols [IANA-ALLOCATION].

For IPv6, the address prefix FF3x::/32 is reserved for source-specific
multicast use, where 'x' is any valid scope identifier, by [IPV6-UBM].
Using the terminology of [IPv6-UBM], all SSM addresses must have P=1,
T=1, and plen=0.  [IPv6-MALLOC] mandates that the network prefix field
of an SSM address also be set to zero, hence all SSM addresses fall in
the FF3x::/96 range.  Future documents may allow a non-zero network
prefix field if, for instance, a new IP address to MAC address mapping
is defined.  Thus, address allocation should occur within the FF3x::/96
range, but a system should treat all of FF3x::/32 as SSM addresses, to
allow for compatibility with possible future uses of the network prefix
field.

Addresses in the range FF3x::4000:0000 through FF3x::7FFF:FFFF are
reserved in [IPv6-MALLOC] for allocation by IANA.  Addresses in the
range FF3x::8000:0000 through FF3x::FFFF:FFFF are allowed for dynamic
allocation by a host, as described in [IPV6-MALLOC].  Addresses in the
range FF3x::0000:0000 through FF3x::3FFF:FFFF are invalid IPv6 SSM
addresses.  ([IPV6-MALLOC] indicates that FF3x::0000:0001 to
FF3x:3FFF:FFFF must set P=0 and T=0, but for SSM, [IPV6-UBM] mandates
that  P=1 and T=1, hence their designation as invalid).  The treatment



Holbrook/Cain                                                   [Page 2]

INTERNET-DRAFT          Source-Specific Multicast            19 Oct 2003


of a packet sent to such an invalid address is undefined -- a router or
host MAY choose to drop such a packet.

Source-specific multicast delivery semantics are provided for a datagram
sent to an SSM address.  That is, a datagram with source IP address S
and SSM destination address G is delivered to each upper-layer "socket"
that has specifically requested the reception of datagrams sent to
address G by source S, and only to those sockets.  The network service
identified by (S,G), for SSM address G and source host address S, is
referred to as a "channel."  In contrast to the ASM model of RFC 1112,
SSM provides network-layer support for one-to-many delivery only.

The benefits of source-specific multicast include:

    Elimination of cross-delivery of traffic when two sources
    simultaneously use the same source-specific destination address.
    The simultaneous use of an SSM destination address by multiple
    sources and different applications is explicitly supported.

    Avoidance of the need for inter-host coordination when choosing
    source-specific addresses, as a consequence of the above.

    Avoidance of many of the router protocols and algorithms that are
    needed to provide the ASM service model.  For instance, the "shared
    trees" and Rendezvous Points of the PIM-Sparse Mode (PIM-SM)
    protocol [PIM-SM] are not necessary to support the source-specific
    model.  The router mechanisms required to support SSM are in fact
    largely a subset of those that are used to support ASM.  For
    example, the shortest-path tree mechanism of the PIM-SM protocol can
    be adapted to provide SSM semantics.

Like ASM, the set of receivers is unknown to an SSM sender.  An SSM
source is provided with neither the identity of receivers nor their
number.

SSM is particularly well-suited to dissemination-style applications with
one or more senders whose identities are known before the application
begins.  For instance, a data dissemination application that desires to
provide a secondary data source in case the primary source fails over
might implement this by using one channel for each source and
advertising both of them to receivers.  SSM can be used to build multi-
source applications where all participants' identities are not known in
advance, but the multi-source "rendezvous" functionality does not occur
in the network layer in this case.  Just like in an application that
uses unicast as the underlying transport, this functionality can be
implemented by the application or by an application-layer library.





Holbrook/Cain                                                   [Page 3]

INTERNET-DRAFT          Source-Specific Multicast            19 Oct 2003


Multicast resource discovery of the form in which a client sends a
multicast query directly to a "service location group" to which servers
listen is not directly supported by SSM.

This document defines the semantics of source-specific multicast
addresses and specifies the policies governing their use.  In
particular, it defines an extension to the Internet network service that
applies to datagrams sent to SSM addresses and defines host extensions
to support the network service.  Hosts, routers, applications, and
protocols that use these addresses MUST comply with the policies
outlined in this document.  Failure of a host to comply may prevent that
host or other hosts on the same LAN from receiving traffic sent to an
SSM channel.  Failure of a router to comply may cause SSM traffic to be
delivered to parts of the network where it is unwanted, unnecessarily
burdening the network.

2.  Semantics of Source-Specific Multicast Addresses

The source-specific multicast service is defined as follows:

    A datagram sent with source IP address S and destination IP address
    G in the SSM range is delivered to each host socket that has
    specifically requested delivery of datagrams sent by S to G, and
    only to those sockets.

Where, using the terminology of [IGMPv3],

    "socket" is an implementation-specific parameter used to distinguish
    among different requesting entities (e.g., programs or processes or
    communication end-points within a program or process) within the
    requesting host; the socket parameter of BSD Unix system calls is a
    specific example.

Any host may send a datagram to any SSM address, and delivery is
provided according to the above semantics.

The IP module interface to upper-layer protocols is extended to allow a
socket to "Subscribe" to or "Unsubscribe" from a particular channel
identified by an SSM destination address and a source IP address.  The
extended interface is defined in section 4.1.  It is meaningless for an
application or host to request reception of datagrams sent to an SSM
destination address G, as is supported in the any-source multicast
model, without also specifying a corresponding source address, and
routers MUST ignore any such request.

Multiple source applications on different hosts can use the same SSM
destination address G without conflict because datagrams sent by each
source host Si are delivered only to those sockets that requested



Holbrook/Cain                                                   [Page 4]

INTERNET-DRAFT          Source-Specific Multicast            19 Oct 2003


delivery of datagrams sent to G specifically by Si.

The key distinguishing property of the model is that a channel is
identified (addressed) by the combination of a unicast source address
and a multicast destination address in the SSM range.  So, for example,
the channel

    S,G = (192.0.2.1, 232.7.8.9)

differs from

    S,G = (192.0.2.2, 232.7.8.9),

even though they have the same destination address portion.  Similarly,
for IPv6,

   S,G = (2001:3618::1, FF33::1234)

and

   S,G = (2001:3618::2, FF33::1234)

are different channels.

3.  Terminology

To reduce confusion when talking about the any-source and source-
specific multicast models, we use different terminology when discussing
them.

We use the term "channel" to refer to the service associated with an SSM
address.  A channel is identified by the combination of an SSM
destination address and a specific source, e.g., an (S,G) pair.

We use the term "host group" (used in RFC 1112) to refer to the service
associated with "regular" ASM multicast addresses (excluding those in
the SSM range).  A host group is identified by a single multicast
address.

Any host can send to a host group, and similarly, any host can send to
an SSM destination address.  A packet sent by a host S to an ASM
destination address G is delivered to the host group identified by G.  A
packet sent by host S to an SSM destination address G is delivered to
the channel identified by (S,G).  The receiver operations allowed on a
host group are called "join(G)" and "leave(G)" (as per RFC 1112).  The
receiver operations allowed on a channel are called "Subscribe(S,G)" and
"Unsubscribe(S,G)."




Holbrook/Cain                                                   [Page 5]

INTERNET-DRAFT          Source-Specific Multicast            19 Oct 2003


The following table summarizes the terminology:

  Service Model:        any-source          source-specific
  Network Abstraction:  group               channel
  Identifier:           G                   S,G
  Receiver Operations:  Join, Leave         Subscribe, Unsubscribe

We note that, although this document specifies a new service model
available to applications, the protocols and techniques necessary to
support the service model are largely a subset of those used to support
ASM.

4.  Host Requirements

This section describes requirements on hosts that support source-
specific multicast, including:

  - Extensions to the IP Module Interface

  - Extensions to the IP Module

  - Allocation of SSM Addresses


4.1.  Extensions to the IP Module Interface

The IP module interface to upper-layer protocols is extended to allow
protocols to request reception of all datagrams sent to a particular
channel.


    Subscribe ( socket, source-address, group-address, interface )

    Unsubscribe ( socket, source-address, group-address, interface )

where

    "socket" is as previously defined in Section 2,

and, paraphrasing [IGMPv3],

    "interface" is a local identifier of the network interface on which
    reception of the channel identified by the (source-address,group-
    address) pair is to be enabled or disabled.  A special value may be
    used to indicate a "default" interface.  If reception of the same
    channel is desired on multiple interfaces, Subscribe is invoked once
    for each.




Holbrook/Cain                                                   [Page 6]

INTERNET-DRAFT          Source-Specific Multicast            19 Oct 2003


The above are strictly abstract functional interfaces -- the
functionality can be provided in an implementation-specific way.  On a
host that supports the multicast source filtering application
programming interface of [MSFAPI], for instance, the Subscribe and
Unsubscribe interfaces may be supported via that API.  When a host has
been configured to know the SSM address range, (whether the
configuration mechanism is manual or through a protocol) the host's
operating system SHOULD return an error to an application that makes a
non-source-specific request to receive multicast sent to an SSM
destination address.

Widespread implementations of the IP packet reception interface (e.g.,
the recvfrom() system call in BSD unix) do not allow a receiver to
determine the destination address to which a datagram was sent.  On a
host with such an implementation, the destination address of a datagram
cannot be inferred when the socket on which the datagram is received is
Subscribed to multiple channels.  Host operating systems SHOULD provide
a way for a host to determine both the source and the destination
address to which a datagram was sent.  (As one example, the Linux
operating system provides the destination of a packet as part of the
response to the recvmsg() system call.)  Until this capability is
present, applications may be forced to use higher-layer mechanisms to
identify the channel to which a datagram was sent.

4.2.  Requirements on the Host IP Module

An incoming datagram destined to an SSM address MUST be delivered by the
IP module to all sockets that have indicated (via Subscribe) a desire to
receive data that matches the datagram's source address, destination
address, and arriving interface.  It MUST NOT be delivered to other
sockets.

When the first socket on host H subscribes to a channel (S,G) on
interface I, the host IP module on H sends a request on interface I to
indicate to neighboring routers that the host wishes to receive traffic
sent by source S to source-specific multicast destination G.  Similarly,
when the last socket on a host unsubscribes from a channel on interface
I, the host IP module sends an unsubscription request for that channel
to interface I.

These requests will typically be Internet Group Management Protocol
version 3 messages for IPv4, or Multicast Listener Discovery Version 2
messages for IPv6 [IGMPv3,MLDv2].  A separate document describes how
IGMPv3 and MLDv2 are adapted to support source-specific multicast.







Holbrook/Cain                                                   [Page 7]

INTERNET-DRAFT          Source-Specific Multicast            19 Oct 2003


4.3.  Allocation of Source-Specific Multicast Addresses

The SSM destination address 232.0.0.0 is reserved, and a system MUST NOT
send a datagram with a destination address of 232.0.0.0.  The address
range 232.0.0.1-232.0.0.255 is currently reserved for allocation by
IANA.  SSM destination addresses in the range FF3x::4000:0000 through
FF3x::7FFF:FFFF are similarly reserved for IANA allocation
[IPv6-MALLOC].

The policy for allocating the rest of the SSM addresses to sending
applications is strictly locally determined by the sending host.

When allocating SSM addresses dynamically, a host or host operating
system MUST NOT allocate sequentially starting at the first allowed
address.  It is RECOMMENDED to allocate SSM addresses to applications
randomly, while ensuring that allocated addresses are not given
simultaneously to multiple applications (and avoiding the reserved
addresses).  For IPv6, the randomization should apply to the lowest 31
bits of the address.

As described in Section 6, the mapping of an IP packet with SSM
destination address onto a link-layer multicast address does not take
into account the datagram's source IP address (on commonly-used link
layers like Ethernet).  If all hosts started at the first allowed
address, then with high probability, many source-specific channels on
shared-medium local area networks would use the same link-layer
multicast address.  As a result, traffic destined for one channel
subscriber would be delivered to another's IP module, which would then
have to discard the datagram.

A host operating system SHOULD provide an interface to allow an
application to request a unique allocation of a channel destination
address in advance of a session's commencement, and this allocation
database SHOULD persist across host reboots.  By providing persistent
allocations, a host application can advertise the session in advance of
its start time on a web page or in another directory.  (We note that
this issue is not specific to SSM applications -- the same problem
arises for ASM.)

This document neither defines the interfaces for requesting or returning
addresses nor specifies the host algorithms for storing those
allocations.  One plausible abstract API is defined in RFC 2771
[RFC2771].  Note that RFC 2771 allows an application to request an
address within a specific range of addresses.  If this interface is
used, the starting address of the range SHOULD be selected at random by
the application.





Holbrook/Cain                                                   [Page 8]

INTERNET-DRAFT          Source-Specific Multicast            19 Oct 2003


For IPv6, administratively scoped SSM channel addresses are created by
choosing an appropriate scope identifier for the SSM destination
address.  Normal IPv6 multicast scope boundaries [SCOPINGV6] are applied
to traffic sent to an SSM destination address, including any relevant
boundaries applied to both the source and destination address.

No globally agreed-upon administratively-scoped address range [ADMIN-
SCOPE] is currently defined for IPv4 source-specific multicast.  For
IPv4, administrative scoping of SSM addresses can be implemented within
an administrative domain by filtering outgoing SSM traffic sent to a
scoped address at the domain's boundary routers.

5.  Router Requirements

5.1.  Packet Forwarding

A router that receives an IP datagram with a source-specific destination
address MUST silently drop it unless a neighboring host or router has
communicated a desire to receive packets sent from the source and to the
destination address of the received packet.

5.2.  Protocols

Certain IP multicast routing protocols already have the ability to
communicate source-specific joins to neighboring routers (in particular,
PIM-SM [PIM-SM]), and these protocols can, with slight modifications, be
used to provide source-specific semantics.  Companion documents will
specify the required modifications to those protocols to support SSM.

A network can concurrently support SSM in the SSM address range and any-
source multicast in the rest of the multicast address space, and it is
expected that this will be commonplace.  In such a network, a router may
receive a non-source-specific, or "(*,G)" in conventional terminology,
request for delivery of traffic in the SSM range from a neighbor that
does not implement source-specific multicast in a manner compliant with
this document.  A router that receives such a non-source-specific
request for data in the SSM range MUST NOT use the request to establish
forwarding state and MUST NOT propagate the request to other neighboring
routers.  A router MAY log an error in such a case.  This applies both
to any request received from a host, e.g., an IGMPv1 or IGMPv2 host
report, and to any request received from a routing protocol, e.g., a
PIM-SM (*,G) join.  The inter-router case is further discussed in
section 8, Transition Considerations.

It is essential that all routers in the network give source-specific
semantics to the same range of addresses in order to achieve the full
benefit of SSM.  To comply with this specification, a router MUST treat
ALL IANA-allocated SSM addresses with source-specific semantics.



Holbrook/Cain                                                   [Page 9]

INTERNET-DRAFT          Source-Specific Multicast            19 Oct 2003


6.  Link-Layer Transmission of Datagrams

Source-specific multicast packets are transmitted on link-layer networks
as specified in RFC 1112 for IPv4 and as in [ETHERv6] for IPv6.  On most
shared-medium link-layer networks that support multicast (e.g.,
Ethernet), the IP source address is not used in the selection of the
link-layer destination address.  Consequently, on such a network, all
packets sent to destination address G will be delivered to any host that
has subscribed to any channel (S,G), regardless of S.  And therefore,
the IP module MUST filter packets it receives from the link layer before
delivering them to the socket layer.

7.  Security Considerations

This section outlines security issues pertaining to SSM.  The following
topics are addressed: limitations of IPSec, denial of service attacks,
source spoofing, and security issues related to administrative scoping.

7.1.  IPSec and SSM

The IPSec Authentication Header (AH) and Encapsulating Security Payload
(ESP) protocols [IPSEC] can be used to secure SSM traffic.  As of this
writing, however, the IPSec protocols have some limitations when used
with SSM.  This section describes those limitations.

[IPSEC] specifies that every incoming packet that requires IPSec
processing is ultimately looked up in a local Security Association
Database (SAD) to determine the Security Association (SA) that is to be
applied to the packet.  The resulting SA determines the decryption
and/or authentication key to use and the anti-replay window, if one is
used.  The key used for the SAD lookup is:

    - the packet's destination IP address

    - the IPSec protocol (ESP or AH)

    - the Security Parameter Index (SPI)

A problem arises for SSM because the source address is not included in
the SAD lookup.  IPSec does not currently provide any way to ensure that
two unrelated SSM channels will have unique SAD entries at all
receivers.  Two senders that happen to choose the same SSM destination
address and the same Security Parameter Index will "collide" in the SAD
at any host that is receiving both channels.  Because the channel
addresses and SPIs are both allocated autonomously by the senders, there
is no reasonable means to ensure that each sender uses a unique
destination address or SPI.




Holbrook/Cain                                                  [Page 10]

INTERNET-DRAFT          Source-Specific Multicast            19 Oct 2003


In practice, this problem only arises if a receiver subscribes
simultaneously to two unrelated channels using IPSec whose sources
happen to have chosen the same IP destination address (IPDA) and the
same IPSec SPI.  The <IPDA,SPI> tuple, however, consists of 56 bits that
are generally randomly chosen, and a conflict is unlikely to occur
through random chance.

But when this problem occurs, however unlikely, a host will not be able
to simultaneously receive IPSec-protected traffic from the two colliding
sources under the current IPSec model.

This problem is under investigation and a solution will appear in a
separate document.  One possible solution is to include the source
address in the SAD lookup when the destination is an SSM address.

7.2.  Denial of Service

A subscription request creates (S,G) state in a router to record the
subscription, invokes processing on that router, and possibly causes
processing at neighboring routers.  A host can mount a denial of service
attack by requesting a large number of subscriptions.  A denial of
service can result if:

    - a large amount of traffic arrives when it was otherwise undesired,
    consuming network resources to deliver it and host resources to drop
    it

    - a large amount of source-specific multicast state is created in
    network routers, using router memory and CPU resources to store and
    process the state

    - a large amount of control traffic is generated to manage the
    source-specific state, using router CPU and network bandwidth

To reduce the damage from such an attack, a router MAY have
configuration options to limit, for example, the following items:

    - The total rate at which all hosts on any one interface are allowed
    to initiate subscriptions (to limit the damage caused by forged
    source-address attacks)

    - The total number of subscriptions that can be initiated from any
    single interface or host.

Any decision by an implementor to artificially limit the rate or number
of subscriptions should be taken carefully, however, as future
applications may use large numbers of channels.  Tight limits on the
rate or number of channel subscriptions would inhibit the deployment of



Holbrook/Cain                                                  [Page 11]

INTERNET-DRAFT          Source-Specific Multicast            19 Oct 2003


such applications.

A router SHOULD verify that the source of a subscription request is a
valid address for the interface on which it was received.  Failure to do
so would exacerbate a spoofed-source address attack.

We note that these attacks are not unique to SSM -- they are also
present for any-source multicast.

7.3.  Spoofed Source Addresses

By forging the source address in a datagram, an attacker can potentially
violate the SSM service model by transmitting datagrams on a channel
belonging to another host.  Thus, an application requiring strong
authentication should not assume that all packets that arrive on a
channel were sent by the requested source without higher-layer
authentication mechanisms.  The IPSEC Authentication Header [IPSEC] may
be used to authenticate the source of an SSM transmission, for instance.

Some degree of protection against spoofed source addresses in multicast
is already fairly widespread, because the commonly deployed IP multicast
routing protocols [PIM-DM, PIM-SM, DVMRP] incorporate a "reverse-path
forwarding check" that validates that a multicast packet arrived on the
expected interface for its source address.  Routing protocols used for
SSM SHOULD incorporate such a check.

Source Routing [RFC791] (both Loose and Strict) in combination with
source address spoofing may be used to allow an impostor of the true
channel source to inject packets onto an SSM channel.  An SSM router
SHOULD by default disallow source routing to an SSM destination address.
A router MAY have a configuration option to allow source routing.  Anti-
source spoofing mechanisms such as source address filtering at the edges
of the network are also strongly encouraged.

7.4.  Administrative Scoping

Administrative scoping should not be relied upon as a security measure
[ADMIN-SCOPE]; however, in some cases it is part of a security solution.
It should be noted that no administrative scoping exists for IPv4
source-specific multicast.  An alternative approach is to manually
configure traffic filters to create such scoping if necessary.

Furthermore, for IPv6, neither source nor destination address scoping
should be used as a security measure.  In some currently-deployed IPv6
routers (those that do not conform to [SCOPED-ARCH]), scope boundaries
are not always applied to all source address (for instance, an
implentation may filter link-local addresses but nothing else).  Such a
router may incorrectly forward an SSM channel (S,G) through a scope



Holbrook/Cain                                                  [Page 12]

INTERNET-DRAFT          Source-Specific Multicast            19 Oct 2003


boundary for S.


8.  Transition Considerations

A host that complies with this document will send ONLY source-specific
host reports for addresses in the SSM range.  As stated above, a router
that receives a non-source-specific (e.g., IGMPv1 or IGMPv2 or MLDv1)
host report for a source-specific multicast destination address MUST
ignore these reports.  Failure to do so would violate the SSM service
model promised to the sender: that a packet sent to (S,G) would only be
delivered to hosts that specifically requested delivery of packets sent
to G by S.

During a transition period, it would be possible to deliver SSM
datagrams in a domain where the routers do not support SSM semantics by
simply forwarding any packet destined to G to all hosts that have
requested subscription of (S,G) for any S.  However, this implementation
risks unduly burdening the network infrastructure by delivering (S,G)
datagrams to hosts that did not request them.  Such an implementation
for addresses in the SSM range is specifically not compliant with
Section 5.2 of this document.

9.  IANA Considerations

Addresses in the range 232.0.0.1 through 232.0.0.255 and IPv6 addresses
in the range FF3x:4000:0000 to FF3x::7FFF:FFFF are reserved for services
with wide applicability that either require or would strongly benefit if
all hosts used a well-known SSM destination address for that service.
IANA shall allocate addresses in this range according to IETF Consensus
[IANA-CONSIDERATIONS].  Any proposal for allocation must consider the
fact that, on an Ethernet network, all datagrams sent to any SSM
destination address will be transmitted with the same link-layer
destination address, regardless of the source.  Furthermore, the fact
that SSM destinations in 232.0.0.0/24 and 232.128.0.0/24 use the same
link-layer addresses as the reserved IP multicast group range
224.0.0.0/24 must also be considered.  Similar consideration should be
given to the IPv6 reserved multicast addresses.

Except for the aforementioned addresses, IANA SHALL NOT allocate any SSM
destination address to a particular entity or application.  To do so
would compromise one of the important benefits of the source-specific
model: the ability for a host to simply and autonomously allocate a
source-specific multicast address from a large flat address space.







Holbrook/Cain                                                  [Page 13]

INTERNET-DRAFT          Source-Specific Multicast            19 Oct 2003


10.  Acknowledgments

The SSM service model draws on a variety of prior work on alternative
approaches to IP multicast, including the EXPRESS multicast model of
Holbrook and Cheriton [EXPRESS], Green's [SMRP] and the Simple Multicast
proposal of Perlman et. al. [SIMPLE].  We would also like to thank Jon
Postel and David Cheriton for their support in reassigning the 232/8
address range to SSM.  Brian Haberman contributed to the IPv6 portion of
this document.  Thanks to Pekka Savola for a careful review.

11.  Normative References

[ETHERv6]   Crawford, M., "Transmission of IPv6 Packets over Ethernet
Networks", RFC2464, Dec 1998.

[IPSEC] S. Kent, R. Atkinson, "Security Architecture for the Internet
Protocol.", RFC 2401.

[IPV6-UBM] B. Haberman, D. Thaler, "Unicast-Prefix-based IPv6 Multicast
Addresses.", RFC 3306, August 2002.

[IPV6-MALLOC] B. Haberman, "Dynamic Allocation Guidelines for IPv6
Multicast Addresses", RFC 3307, August 2002.

[RFC791] Postel, J., ed., "Internet Protocol, Darpa Internet Program
Protocol Specification," September 1981.

[RFC1112] Deering, S., "Host Extensions for IP Multicasting," RFC 1112,
August 1989.

[RFC2373] Hinden, R. and Deering, S.  "IP Version 6 Addressing
Architecture."  RFC 2373, July 1998.

12.  Informative References

[ADMIN-SCOPE] Meyer, D., "Administratively Scoped IP Multicast", BCP 23,
RFC 2365, July 1998.

[DVMRP] Waitzman, D., Partridge, C., and S. Deering., "Distance Vector
Multicast Routing Protocol," RFC 1075, Nov 1988.

[EXPRESS] Holbrook, H., and Cheriton, D.  "Explicitly Requested Source-
Specific  Multicast: EXPRESS support for Large-scale Single-source
Applications."  Proceedings of ACM SIGCOMM '99, Cambridge, MA, September
1999.

[IANA-ALLOCATION] Internet Assigned Numbers Authority,
http://www.iana.org/assignments/multicast-addresses.



Holbrook/Cain                                                  [Page 14]

INTERNET-DRAFT          Source-Specific Multicast            19 Oct 2003


[IANA-CONSIDERATIONS] Narten, T., and H. Alvestrand, "Guidelines for
Writing an IANA Considerations Section in RFCs," RFC 2434, October 1998.

[IGMPv2] Fenner, W., "Internet Group Management Protocol, Version 2,"
RFC 2236, November 1997.

[IGMPv3] Cain, B., Deering, S., and A. Thyagarajan, "Internet Group
Management Protocol, Version 3," RFC 3376, October 2002.

[MLDv2] R. Vida, and L. Costa.  "Multicast Listener Discovery Version 2
(MLDv2) for IPv6."  Work in Progress.

[MSFAPI] Thaler, D., Fenner, B., and Quinn, B.  "Socket Interface
Extensions for Multicast Source Filters."  Work in Progress.

[PIM-SM] Estrin, D., Farinacci, D., Helmy, A., Thaler, D., Deering, S.,
Handley, M., Jacobson, V., Liu, C., Sharma, P. and L. Wei, "Protocol
Independent Multicast-Sparse Mode (PIM-SM): Protocol Specification," RFC
2362, June 1998.

[PIM-DM] Deering, S., Estrin, D., Farinacci, D., Jacobson, V., Helmy,
A., Meyer, D., and L. Wei, "Protocol Independent Multicast Version 2
Dense Mode Specification," Work in Progress.

[RFC2119] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
Requirement Levels," RFC 2119, March 1997.

[RFC2710] S. Deering, W. Fenner, B. Haberman, "Multicast Listener
Discovery (MLD) for IPv6", RFC 2710, October 1999.

[RFC2771] Finlayson, R., "An Abstract API for Multicast Address
Allocation," RFC 2771, February 2000.

[SCOPINGV6] Deering, S. et. al, "IP Version 6 Scoped Address
Architecture", Work in Progress.

[SIMPLE] R. Perlman, C-Y Lee, A. Ballardie, J. Crowcroft, Z. Wang, T.
Maufer, C. Diot, and M. Green.  "Simple Multicast: A Design for Simple,
Low-Overhead Multicast."  Work in Progress.

[SMRP] Green, M.  "Method and System of Multicast Routing for Groups
with a Single Transmitter."  United States Patent Number 5,517,494.

Authors' Addresses







Holbrook/Cain                                                  [Page 15]

INTERNET-DRAFT          Source-Specific Multicast            19 Oct 2003


     Brad Cain
     Storigen Systems
     650 Suffolk St.
     Lowell, MA 01854
     bcain@storigen.com


     Hugh Holbrook
     Cisco Systems
     170 W. Tasman Drive
     San Jose, CA 95134
     holbrook@cisco.com


Intellectual Property Rights Notice

The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
intellectual property or other rights that might be claimed to  pertain
to the implementation or use of the technology described in this
document or the extent to which any license under such rights might or
might not be available; neither does it represent that it has made any
effort to identify any such rights.  Information on the IETF's
procedures with respect to rights in standards-track and standards-
related documentation can be found in BCP-11.  Copies of claims of
rights made available for publication and any assurances of licenses to
be made available, or the result of an attempt made to obtain a general
license or permission for the use of such proprietary rights by
implementors or users of this specification can be obtained from the
IETF Secretariat.

The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary rights
which may cover technology that may be required to practice this
standard.  Please address the information to the IETF Executive
Director.

Full Copyright Statement

Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002).  All Rights Reserved.

This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it or
assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published and
distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any kind,
provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are included
on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this document itself
may not be modified in any way, such as by removing the copyright notice
or references to the Internet Society or other Internet organizations,



Holbrook/Cain                                                  [Page 16]

INTERNET-DRAFT          Source-Specific Multicast            19 Oct 2003


except as needed for the purpose of developing Internet standards in
which case the procedures for copyrights defined in the Internet
Standards process must be followed, or as required to translate it into
languages other than English.

The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

This document and the information contained herein is provided on an "AS
IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK
FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT
INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR
FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

This document expires Apr 19, 2004.



































Holbrook/Cain                                                  [Page 17]

