



Network                                                            J. Bi
Internet-Draft                                                    G. Yao
Intended status: Standards Track                          Tsinghua Univ.
Expires: January 5, 2015                                    July 4, 2014


                         Software Defined SAVI
                        draft-bi-aponf-sdsavi-00

Abstract

   This document is about the APONF use case for SAVI.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 5, 2015.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2014 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

   This document may contain material from IETF Documents or IETF
   Contributions published or made publicly available before November
   10, 2008.  The person(s) controlling the copyright in some of this



Bi & Yao                 Expires January 5, 2015                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                 APONF SAVI                      July 2014


   material may not have granted the IETF Trust the right to allow
   modifications of such material outside the IETF Standards Process.
   Without obtaining an adequate license from the person(s) controlling
   the copyright in such materials, this document may not be modified
   outside the IETF Standards Process, and derivative works of it may
   not be created outside the IETF Standards Process, except to format
   it for publication as an RFC or to translate it into languages other
   than English.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  APONF Use Case for SAVI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     3.1.  Element View Collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     3.2.  Configuration Generation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     3.3.  Binding and Filtering Generation Process  . . . . . . . .   3
   4.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4

1.  Introduction

   To validate the source address of local traffic can greatly improve
   the security and traceability of the network.  The IETF Source
   Address Validation Improvements working group has standardized a
   number of finer-granularity source address validation solutions,
   i.e., FCFS-SAVI, DHCP-SAVI, SEND-SAVI.  However, due to the
   considerations on simplify in implementation and deployment, the
   solutions only cover the basic scenarios.  Whenever these solutions
   are enforced in scenarios with new source address usage related
   elements, for example, Mobile IP, these solutions may behavior
   improperly.  In real deployment of SAVI solutions, the operators have
   to take such elements into account and evaluate whenever legitimate
   traffic will be filtered by the SAVI solutions.  On the other hand,
   considering the emergence of new protocols related with source
   address usage and assignment, to design a SAVI solution for all the
   possible scenario is extremely complex, if possible.

   Ideally, a SAVI solution should have a look at the related elements
   in the network, and the decide the proper binding and filtering
   strategy.  The APONF (Application-based Policy for Network Functions)
   work aims at providing the network management application-based
   policy protocol(s), mechanisms and models required by network
   management applications to easily, accurately, and efficiently select
   and use the available communication network capabilities through the
   use of network management policies.  Based on APONF, a SAVI solution
   can effectively get the visibility of the related elements, and the
   traffic to manage.  The document proposes a APONF use case for SAVI.




Bi & Yao                 Expires January 5, 2015                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                 APONF SAVI                      July 2014


2.  Terminology

   The terminology used in the APONF problem statement draft
   [ID.karagiannis-aponf-problem-statement-00] applies also to this
   draft.

3.  APONF Use Case for SAVI

   With APONF enabled, the SAVI solution is deployed as a network
   service application rather than processes running on each switch.
   This section discusses the possible implementation of SAVI with
   APONF.

3.1.  Element View Collection

   From the interfaces provided by APONF, the SAVI solution at first
   collects the related elements.  An incomplete list contains: the
   address assignment mechanisms and their priorities, the topologies,
   the roles of network devices(e.g., host, DHCP server/relay,
   switches), the address transition mechanisms, the supported local/
   cross-network mobility mechanisms, the tunnel/encapsulation/
   decapsulate configuration and mechanisms, the address authentication
   mechanisms, etc.

3.2.  Configuration Generation

   Based on the collected view, the SAVI application tries to generate
   the required configurations.  The protection perimeter and the port
   attribute can be automatically generated based on the topology and
   the roles of network devices.  The related attachment points can be
   specially marked if the address from them are affected by transition/
   tunnel mechanisms.

3.3.  Binding and Filtering Generation Process

   The SAVI application can install filtering rules pro-actively or
   reactively.  It can make use the interface to the router, DHCP
   server, the switches to set up bindings for address.  Such bindings
   are used to handle the most common cases covered in existing SAVI
   solutions.  The SAVI application gives an eye on the traffic to
   filter.  It checks whether these traffic belonging to one of the
   possible exceptions, e.g., an address is generated by a transition
   mechanism but rather an address assignment mechanism.  Such bindings
   can then be installed reactively.







Bi & Yao                 Expires January 5, 2015                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                 APONF SAVI                      July 2014


4.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

Authors' Addresses

   Jun Bi
   Tsinghua University
   Network Research Center, Tsinghua University
   Beijing  100084
   China

   EMail: junbi@tsinghua.edu.cn


   Guang Yao
   Tsinghua University
   Network Research Center, Tsinghua University
   Beijing  100084
   China

   EMail: yaoguang@cernet.edu.cn




























Bi & Yao                 Expires January 5, 2015                [Page 4]
