Network Working Group                                           G. Daley
Internet-Draft                                    Monash University CTIE
Expires: August 15, 2005                                     E. Nordmark
                                                        Sun Microsystems
                                                                N. Moore
                                                  Monash University CTIE
                                                       February 14, 2005


     Tentative Source Link-Layer Address Options for IPv6 Neighbour
                               Discovery
                     draft-daley-ipv6-tsllao-01.txt

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, I certify that any applicable
   patent or other IPR claims of which I am aware have been disclosed,
   and any of which I become aware will be disclosed, in accordance with
   RFC 3668.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 15, 2005.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).  All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   The proposed IPv6 Duplicate Address Detection (DAD) Optimization
   "Optimistic DAD" defines a set of recoverable procedures which allow
   a node to make use of an address before DAD completes.  Essentially,
   Optimistic DAD forbids usage of certain Neighbour Discovery options
   which could pollute active neighbour cache entries, while an address



Daley, et al.           Expires August 15, 2005                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft    Tentative Source Link-Layer Address Options    February 2005


   is tentative.

   This document defines a new option and procedures to replace cache
   polluting options, in a way which is useful to tentative nodes.
   These procedures are designed to be to backward compatible with
   existing devices which support IPv6 Neighbour Discovery.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.1   Tentative Source Link-Layer Address Option Format  . . . .  3
     1.2   Tentative Source Link-Layer Address Option Semantics . . .  4
   2.  Sending Solicitations containing TSLLAO  . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     2.1   Sending Neighbour Solicitations with TSLLAO  . . . . . . .  5
     2.2   Sending Router Solicitations with TSLLAO . . . . . . . . .  5
   3.  Receiving Tentative Source Link-Layer Address Options  . . . .  5
     3.1   Handling Tentative Source Link-Layer Address Options . . .  6
     3.2   Receiving Neighbour Solicitations containing TSLLAO  . . .  6
     3.3   Receiving a Router Solicitation containing TSLLAO  . . . .  7
     3.4   Sending Directed Advertisements without the Neighbour
           Cache  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   4.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   5.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   6.  Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   7.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   7.1   Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   7.2   Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
       Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   A.  Constraints imposed by IPv6 Neighbour Discovery  . . . . . . . 11
     A.1   Constraints on Neighbour Solicitations . . . . . . . . . . 11
     A.2   Constraints on Router Solicitations  . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   B.  Interactions with legacy nodes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     B.1   Legacy Neighbour Solicitation processing . . . . . . . . . 12
     B.2   Legacy Router Solicitation Processing  . . . . . . . . . . 12
       Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . 14
















Daley, et al.           Expires August 15, 2005                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft    Tentative Source Link-Layer Address Options    February 2005


1.  Introduction

   Source Link-Layer Address Options (SLLAOs) are sent in Neighbour
   discovery messages in order to notify neighbours of a mapping between
   a specific IPv6 Network layer address and a link-layer (or MAC)
   address.  Upon reception of a neighbour discovery message containing
   such an option, nodes update their neighbour cache entries with the
   IP to link-layer address mapping in accordance with procedures
   defined in IPv6 Neighbour Discovery [2].

   Optimistic DAD [4] prevents usage of these options in Router and
   Neighbour Solicitation messages from a tentative address (while
   Duplicate Address Detection is occurring).  This is because receiving
   a Neighbour Solicitation (NS) or Router Solicitation (RS) containing
   an SLLAO would otherwise overwrite an existing cache entry, even if
   the cache entry contained the legitimate address owner, and the
   solicitor was a duplicate address.

   Neighbour Advertisement (NA) messages don't have such an issue, since
   the Advertisement message contains a flag which explicitly disallows
   overriding of existing cache entries, by the target link-layer
   address option carried within.

   The effect of preventing SLLAOs for tentative addresses is that
   communications with these addresses are sub-optimal for the tentative
   period.  Sending solicitations without these options causes an
   additional round-trip for neighbour discovery if the advertiser does
   not have an existing neighbour cache entry for the solicitor.

   Tentative Source Link-Layer Address Options are designed to replace
   the existing Source Link-Layer Address Options available in IPv6
   Neighbour Discovery, when a device is performing Optimistic DAD, or a
   device is sending Router Solicitations from an unspecified source
   address.

1.1  Tentative Source Link-Layer Address Option Format















Daley, et al.           Expires August 15, 2005                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft    Tentative Source Link-Layer Address Options    February 2005


     0                   1                   2                   3
     0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 5 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    |     Type      |    Length     |    Link-Layer Address ...
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+

   Fields:
     Type   TBD    (Requires IANA Allocation) suggest 33 (0x21)

     Length         The length of the option (including the type and
                    length fields) in units of 8 octets.

     Link-Layer Address
                    The variable length link-layer address.

     Description
                    The Tentative Source Link-Layer Address option
                    contains the link-layer address of the sender of
                    the packet.  It is used in the Neighbour
                    Solicitation and Router Solicitation packets.


1.2  Tentative Source Link-Layer Address Option Semantics

   The Tentative Source Link-Layer Address option (TSLLAO) functions in
   the same role as the Source Link-Layer Address option defined for
   [2], but it MUST NOT override an existing neighbour cache entry.

   The differing neighbour cache entry MUST NOT be affected by the
   reception of the Tentative Source Link-Layer Address option.  This
   ensures that tentative addresses are unable to modify legitimate
   neighbour cache entries.

   In the case where an entry is unable to be added to the neighbour
   cache, a node MAY send responses direct to the link-layer address
   specified in the TSLLAO.

   For these messages, no Neighbour Cache entry may be created, although
   response messages may be directed to a particular unicast address.

   These procedures are discussed further in Section 3.3.

2.  Sending Solicitations containing TSLLAO

   Tentative Source Link-Layer Address Options may be sent in Router and
   Neighbour Solicitations, as described below.

   In a case where it is safe to send a Source Link-Layer Address



Daley, et al.           Expires August 15, 2005                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft    Tentative Source Link-Layer Address Options    February 2005


   Option, a host SHOULD NOT send a TSLLAO, since the message may be
   misinterpreted by legacy nodes.

   Importantly, a node MUST NOT send a TSLLAO in the same message where
   a Source Link-Layer Address Option is sent.

2.1  Sending Neighbour Solicitations with TSLLAO

   Neighbour Solicitations sent to unicast addresses MAY contain a
   TSLLAO.

   Since delivery of a packet to a unicast destination requires prior
   knowledge of the destination's hardware address, unicast Neighbour
   Solicitation packets may only be sent to destinations for which a
   neighbour cache entry already exists.

   For example, if checking bidirectional reachability to a router, it
   may be possible to send a Neighbour Solicitation with TSLLAO to the
   router's advertised address.

   As discussed in [2], the peer device may not have a cache entry even
   if the soliciting host does, in which case reception of TSLLAO may
   create a neighbour cache entry, without the need for neighbour
   discovering the original solicitor.

2.2  Sending Router Solicitations with TSLLAO

   Any Router Solicitation, including those from the unspecified
   address, MAY be sent with a TSLLAO.

   Router Solicitations sent with a TSLLAO from the unspecified address
   will not create a neighbour cache entry, but can allow a directed
   response as described in Section 3.4.

3.  Receiving Tentative Source Link-Layer Address Options

   Receiving a Tentative Source Link-Layer Address Option allows nodes
   to unicast responses to solicitations without performing neighbour
   discovery.

   It does this by allowing the solicitation to create STALE neighbour
   cache entries if one doesn't exist, but only update an entry if the
   link-layer address in the option matches the entry.

   Additionally, TSLLAO messages may be used to direct advertisements to
   particular link-layer destinations without updating neighbour cache
   entries.  This is described in Section 3.4.




Daley, et al.           Expires August 15, 2005                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft    Tentative Source Link-Layer Address Options    February 2005


3.1  Handling Tentative Source Link-Layer Address Options

   Use of Tentative Source Link-Layer Address Options is only defined
   for Neighbour and Router Solicitation messages.

   In any other received message, the presence of the option is silently
   ignored, that is, the packet is processed as if the option was not
   present.

   It is REQUIRED that the same validation algorithms for Neighbour and
   Router Solicitations received with TSLLAO as in the IPv6 Neighbour
   Discovery specification [2], are used.

   In the case that a solicitation containing a TSLLAO is received, The
   only processing differences occur in checking and updating the
   neighbour cache entry.  Particularly, there is no reason to believe
   that the host will remain tentative after receiving a responding
   advertisement.

   As defined in Section 1.1,  Tentative Source Link-Layer Address
   Options do not overwrite existing neighbour cache entries where the
   link-layer addresses of the option and entry differ.

   If a solicitation from a unicast source address is received where no
   difference exists between the TSLLAO and an existing neighbour cache
   entry, the option MUST be treated as if it were an SLLAO after
   message validation, and processed accordingly.

   In the case that a cache entry is unable to be created or updated due
   to existence of a conflicting neighbour cache entry, the receiving
   node MAY send a direct advertisement to the soliciting host by
   responding with an appropriate advertisement, where the link-layer
   address contained in the TSLLAO is extracted and used as the
   destination address of the link-layer frame.

   This is described further in Section 3.4.

3.2  Receiving Neighbour Solicitations containing TSLLAO

   The TSLLAO option is only allowed in Neighbour Solicitations with
   specified source addresses for which SLLAO is not required.

   A Neighbour Solicitation message received with TSLLAO and an
   unspecified source address MUST be silently discarded.

   Upon reception of a Tentative Source Link-Layer Address Option in a
   Neighbour Solicitation for which the receiver has the Target Address
   configured, a node checks to see if there is a neighbour cache entry



Daley, et al.           Expires August 15, 2005                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft    Tentative Source Link-Layer Address Options    February 2005


   with conflicting link-layer address.

   If no such entry exists, the neighbour cache of the receiver SHOULD
   be updated, as if the Tentative Source Link-Layer Address Option was
   a SLLAO.

   Sending of the solicited Neighbour Advertisement then proceeds
   normally, as defined in section 7.2.4 of [2].

   If there is a conflicting neighbour cache entry, the node processes
   the solicitation as defined in Section 7.2.4 of [2], except that the
   Neighbour Cache entry MUST NOT be modified, and when it is time to
   transmit the Neighbour Advertisement response, it follows Section 3.4
   below.

3.3  Receiving a Router Solicitation containing TSLLAO

   In IPv6 Neighbour Discovery [2], responses to Router Solicitations
   are either sent to the all-nodes multicast address, or may be sent to
   the solicitation's source address if it is a unicast address.

   Including a TSLLAO in the solicitation allows a router to choose to
   send a packet directly to the link-layer address even in situations
   where this would not normally be possible.

   For Router Solicitations with unicast source addresses, neighbour
   caches SHOULD be updated with the link-layer address from a TSLLAO if
   there is no differing neighbour cache entry.  In this case, Router
   Advertisement continues as in Section 6.2.6 of [2].

   For received solicitations with a differing neighbour cache entry or
   those containing a TSLLAO with an unspecified source address,
   responses can be generated in accordance with Section 3.4 below.

3.4  Sending Directed Advertisements without the Neighbour Cache

   In the case where a received solicitation has a link-layer address
   specified in a TSLLAO which is different to an existing neighbour
   cache entry, modification of the neighbour cache MUST NOT occur.

   It may be valuable though to generate a responding advertisement
   according to the rules in [2].

   In this case the unicast link-layer address of the advertisement is
   extracted from the TSLLAO option and used as the destination of the
   link-layer frame.  Sending such a packet MUST NOT consult the
   neighbour or destination caches for address.




Daley, et al.           Expires August 15, 2005                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft    Tentative Source Link-Layer Address Options    February 2005


   Such packets SHOULD scheduled as if they were unicast advertisements
   as specified in [2].

   If an implementation can not send an Neighbour Advertisement or
   Router Advertisement using information from the TSLLAO i.e, without
   consulting the neighbour cache, then it SHOULD behave as if the
   TSLLAO option was not present in the solicitation message.

4.  IANA Considerations

   For standardization, it would be required that the IANA provide
   allocation of the Tentative Source Link-Layer Address Option (Section
   1.1) from the IPv6 Neighbour Discovery options for IPv6.

   Potential details of the allocation process for these options is
   detailed in the expired draft [5].

5.  Security Considerations

   The use of the TSLLAO in Neighbour and Router Solicitation messages
   acts in a similar manner to SLLAO, updating neighbour cache entries,
   in a way which causes packet transmission.

   Particular care should be taken that transmission of messages
   complies with existing IPv6 Neighbour Discovery Procedures, so that
   unmodified hosts do not receive invalid messages.

   An attacker may cause messages may be sent to another node by an
   advertising node (a reflector), without creating any ongoing state on
   the reflector.

   This is attack requires one solicitation for each advertisement and
   the advertisement has to go to a unicast MAC destination.  That said,
   the size of the advertisement may be significantly larger than the
   solicitation, or the attacker and reflector may be on a medium with
   greater available bandwidth than the victim.

   For link-layers where it isn't possible to spoof the link-layer
   source address this allows a slightly increased risk of reflection
   attacks from nodes which are on-link.

   Additionally, since a SEND host must always advertise using SEND
   options and signatures, a non-SEND attacker may cause excess
   computation on both a victim node and a router by causing SEND
   advertisement messages to be transmitted to a particular MAC address
   and the all-nodes multicast.  [3] specifies guidelines to hosts
   receiving unsolicited advertisements in order to mitigate such
   attacks.



Daley, et al.           Expires August 15, 2005                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft    Tentative Source Link-Layer Address Options    February 2005


   While this is the same effect as experienced when accepting SLLAO
   from non-SEND nodes, the lack of created neighbour cache entries on
   the advertiser may make such attacks more difficult to trace.

   Modification of Neighbour Discovery messages on the network is
   possible, unless SEND is used.  [3] provides a protocol specification
   in which soliciting nodes sign ND messages with a private key and use
   addresses generated from this key.

   Even if SEND is used, the lifetime of a neighbour cache entry may be
   extended by continually replaying a solicitation message to a
   particular router or hosts.  Since this may be achieved for any
   Neighbour or Router Solicitation message, corresponding
   advertisements to the original transmitters of these solicitation
   messages may occur.

   SEND defines use of Timestamp values to protect a device from attack
   through replay of previously sent messages.  Although this applies to
   Neighbour and Router Solicitation messages, granularity of the
   timestamp allows the messages to be used for up to five minutes [3].

   All Router and Neighbour Solicitations using SEND contain a Nonce
   option, containing a random identifier octet string.  Since SEND
   messages are digitally signed, and may not be easily modified, replay
   attacks will contain the same Nonce option, as was used in the
   original solicitation.

   While the Nonce Option included in a transmission to another node may
   not vary within one short solicitation period (the host may itself
   replay solicitations in the case of packet loss), the presence of the
   timestamp option ensures that for later solicitations, a different
   Timestamp and Nonce will be used.

   Therefore, a receiver seeing a solicitation with the same Timestamp
   and Nonce (and signature) for more than either of
   MAX_RTR_SOLICITATIONS (for Router Solicitations), MAX_UNICAST_SOLICIT
   or MAX_MULTICAST_SOLICIT (for Neighbour Solicitations), SHOULD ignore
   further solicitations with this (Nonce,Timestamp,Source) triple,
   ensuring that no modification is made to neighbour cache entries.
   This applies to any solicitation packet capable of carrying a SEND
   payload, whether they use TSLLAO or SLLAO.

   Stations noticing such an attack SHOULD notify their administrator of
   the attempt at Denial-of-service.

6.  Acknowledgments

   Erik Nordmark coined a proposal for TSLLAO during a conversation with



Daley, et al.           Expires August 15, 2005                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft    Tentative Source Link-Layer Address Options    February 2005


   JinHyeock Choi and Greg Daley.

7.  References

7.1  Normative References

   [1]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
        Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [2]  Narten, T., Nordmark, E. and W. Simpson, "Neighbor Discovery for
        IP Version 6 (IPv6)", RFC 2461, December 1998.

   [3]  Arkko, J., Kempf, J., Sommerfeld, B., Zill, B. and P. Nikander,
        "SEcure Neighbor Discovery (SEND)", draft-ietf-send-ndopt-06
        (work in progress), July 2004.

   [4]  Moore, N., "Optimistic Duplicate Address Detection for IPv6",
        draft-ietf-ipv6-optimistic-dad-03 (work in progress), January
        2005.

7.2  Informative References

   [5]  Narten, T., "IANA Allocation Guidelines for Values in IPv6 and
        Related Headers", draft-narten-ipv6-iana-considerations-00 (work
        in progress), October 2002.

   [6]  Thomson, S. and T. Narten, "IPv6 Stateless Address
        Autoconfiguration", RFC 2462, December 1998.


Authors' Addresses

   Greg Daley
   Centre for Telecommunications and Information Engineering
   Department of Electrical and Computer Systems Engineering
   Monash University
   Clayton, Victoria  3800
   Australia

   Phone: +61 3 9905 4655
   EMail: greg.daley@eng.monash.edu.au










Daley, et al.           Expires August 15, 2005                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft    Tentative Source Link-Layer Address Options    February 2005


   Erik Nordmark
   Sun Microsystems, Inc.
   17 Network Circle
   Mountain View, CA
   USA

   Phone: +1 650 786 2921
   EMail: erik.nordmark@sun.com


   Nick "Sharkey" Moore
   Centre for Telecommunications and Information Engineering
   Department of Electrical and Computer Systems Engineering
   Monash University
   Clayton, Victoria  3800
   Australia

   EMail: nick.moore@eng.monash.edu.au

Appendix A.  Constraints imposed by IPv6 Neighbour Discovery

   Hosts which send and receive Tentative Source Link Layer Address
   Options may be interacting with legacy nodes which support IPv6
   Neighbour Discovery procedures, but do not understand the new option.

   For these nodes, the presence of the option is silently ignored, that
   is, the packet is processed as if the option was not present.
   Therefore all messages sent with TSLLAO options MUST be compliant
   with the existing requirements for options and addressing specified
   in the IPv6 Neighbour Discovery RFC [2].

A.1  Constraints on Neighbour Solicitations

   As described in Section 7.2.2 of [2], packets sent to solicited
   nodes' multicast addresses MUST contain Source Link-Layer Address
   options.

      Neighbour solicitations to multicast addresses MUST NOT contain
      TSLLAO

   Neighbour Solicitations to unicast addresses SHOULD include a
   link-layer address (if the sender has one has one) as a Source
   Link-Layer Address option.

      Unicast neighbour solicitations without Source Link-Layer Address
      Options MAY contain TSLLAO, if the solicitor has a Link-Layer
      address.




Daley, et al.           Expires August 15, 2005                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft    Tentative Source Link-Layer Address Options    February 2005


A.2  Constraints on Router Solicitations

   As described in Section 6.3.7 of [2], Router Solicitations SHOULD
   contain Source Link-Layer Address Options.

      Router Solicitations without Source Link-Layer Address options MAY
      contain a TSLLAO.


Appendix B.  Interactions with legacy nodes

   Devices which do not implement Tentative Source Link Layer address
   options will act as if no option was placed within the Neighbour
   Discovery message.  The following sections summarize how legacy hosts
   will interact with messages containing TSLLAO.

Appendix B.1  Legacy Neighbour Solicitation processing

   A node can include the TSLLAO option in a unicast NS (and no SLLAO
   option) when the transmitter's address is either tentative or
   optimistic.

      An RFC 2461 host receiving such a packet will "see" a packet
      without an SLLAO option, which is allowed in RFC2461.

      If the recipient host has an existing neighbour cache entry for
      the transmitter, it can then send a Neighbour Advertisement.

      Where no neighbour cache entry exists, the recipient will send a
      multicast NS (containing its own SLLAO) in order for the original
      transmitter to respond with an NA.  Upon reception of the original
      transmitter's NA, an NA is sent back to the origin.

   The TSLLAO option MUST NOT be included in an NS message which has no
   source address.

      An RFC 2461 host sees an NS without a source address as a
      Duplicate Address Detection message.

      Reception of duplicate address detection messages may cause
      side-effects on other hosts, which may cause them to treat
      addresses as invalid.


Appendix B.2  Legacy Router Solicitation Processing

   A node can include the TSLLAO option in an RS with a unicast source
   address (and no SLLAO option) when the transmitter's address is



Daley, et al.           Expires August 15, 2005                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft    Tentative Source Link-Layer Address Options    February 2005


   either tentative or optimistic.

      An RFC 2461 router receiving such a packet will "see" a packet
      without an SLLAO option, which is allowed in RFC2461.

      If the router has an existing neighbour cache entry for this host,
      it may send a Unicast RA in response, but may send a multicast in
      preference.

      If no neighbour cache entry exists, some routers will not be able
      to provide a unicast response.  These routers will schedule a
      multicast response.

      Other routers may attempt to perform neighbour discovery (by
      sending a multicast NS), and unicast a response when a neighbour
      cache entry has been created.

   A node can include the TSLLAO option in an RS with an unspecified
   source address (and no SLLAO option) when the transmitter's address
   is tentative.

      RFC 2461 routers receiving this solicitation will "see" a message
      without a SLLAO (such options are not allowed in RFC2461).

      These routers will schedule a multicast RA response.


























Daley, et al.           Expires August 15, 2005                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft    Tentative Source Link-Layer Address Options    February 2005


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Daley, et al.           Expires August 15, 2005                [Page 14]

