



Network Working Group                                      M. Nottingham
Internet-Draft                                            9 January 2022
Intended status: Informational                                          
Expires: 13 July 2022


                 Centralization and Internet Standards
          draft-nottingham-avoiding-internet-centralization-01

Abstract

   Despite being designed and operated as a decentralized network-of-
   networks, the Internet is continuously subjected to forces that
   encourage centralization.

   This document offers a definition of centralization, explains why it
   is undesirable, identifies different types of centralization,
   catalogues limitations of common approaches to controlling it, and
   explores what Internet standards efforts can do to address it.

About This Document

   This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.

   Status information for this document may be found at
   https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-nottingham-avoiding-internet-
   centralization/.

   Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
   https://github.com/mnot/avoiding-internet-centralization.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 13 July 2022.




Nottingham                Expires 13 July 2022                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft    Centralization and Internet Standards     January 2022


Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2022 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  What is Centralization  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  Why Avoid Centralization  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   4.  Kinds of Centralization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     4.1.  Direct Centralization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     4.2.  Necessary Centralization  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     4.3.  Indirect Centralization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     4.4.  Inherited Centralization  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     4.5.  Platform Centralization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   5.  The Limits of Decentralization  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     5.1.  Federation isn't Enough . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
     5.2.  Multi-Stakeholder Administration is Hard  . . . . . . . .  11
     5.3.  Blockchains Are Not Magical . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   6.  What Should Internet Standards Do?  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
     6.1.  Manage Centralization Risk Where Effective  . . . . . . .  14
     6.2.  Create Standards to Decentralize Proprietary Functions  .  15
     6.3.  Limit Intermediary Power  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
     6.4.  Avoid Over-Extensibility  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
   7.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17
   8.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17
   Appendix A.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  20
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  20

1.  Introduction

   The Internet has succeeded in no small part because of its purposeful
   avoidance of any single controlling entity.  While this approach may
   reflect a desire to prevent a single technical failure from having
   wide impact,[RAND] it has also enabled the Internet's rapid adoption
   and broad spread, because internetworking did not require obtaining
   permission from or ceding control to another entity -- thereby
   accommodating a spectrum of requirements and positioning the Internet



Nottingham                Expires 13 July 2022                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft    Centralization and Internet Standards     January 2022


   as a public good.

   While avoiding centralization is a widely shared goal for the
   Internet, meeting that goal has proven difficult.  Many successful
   protocols and applications on the Internet today are designed or
   operated in a centralized fashion -- to the point where some
   proprietary, centralized services have become so well-known that they
   are commonly mistaken for the Internet itself.  Even when protocols
   incorporate techniques intended to prevent centralization, economic
   and social factors can drive users to prefer centralized solutions
   built with or on top of supposedly decentralized technology.

   These difficulties call into question what role architectural
   regulation -- in particular, open standards bodies such as at the
   IETF -- should be play in preventing, mitigating, and controlling
   centralization of the Internet.

   This document discusses aspects of centralization that relate to
   Internet standards efforts.  Section 2 provides a definition of
   centralization.  Section 3 explains why centralization of Internet's
   functions is undesirable.  Section 4 surveys the different kinds of
   centralization that might surface on the Internet.  Section 5 then
   catalogues high-level approaches to mitigating centralization and
   discusses their limitations.  Finally, Section 6 considers the role
   that Internet standards play in avoiding centralization and
   mitigating its effects.

   Engineers who design and standardize Internet protocols are the
   primary audience for this document.  However, designers of
   proprietary protocols can benefit from considering aspects of
   centralization, especially if they intend their protocol to be
   considered for eventual standardisation.  Likewise, policymakers can
   use this document to help identify and remedy inappropriately
   centralized protocols and applications.

2.  What is Centralization

   This document defines "centralization" as the ability of a single
   entity (e.g., a person, company, or government) -- or a small group
   of them -- to observe, control, or extract rent from the operation or
   use of a given function on the Internet.

   Here, "function" is defined broadly.  It might be an enabling
   protocol already defined by standards, such as IP [RFC791], BGP
   [RFC4271], TCP [RFC793], or HTTP [HTTP].  It might also be a proposal
   for a new enabling protocol, or an extension to an existing one.





Nottingham                Expires 13 July 2022                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft    Centralization and Internet Standards     January 2022


   However, centralization is not limited to standards-defined
   protocols.  User-visible applications built on top of the functions
   provided by standards are also vulnerable to centralization -- for
   example, social networking, file sharing, financial services, and
   news dissemination.  Likewise, the supply of hardware, operating
   systems, and software can exhibit centralization.

   Centralization risk is strongest when it necessarily affects the
   entire Internet.  However, it can also be present when a substantial
   portion of the Internet's users lack options for a given function.
   For example, if there is only one provider a function in a given
   region or legal jurisdiction, that function is effectively
   centralized for those users.

   "Decentralization" is the process of identifying centralization risk
   in the functions of a protocol or application, followed by
   application of appropriate techniques to prevent or mitigate
   centralization.

   Decentralization does not require that a given function need be so
   widely distributed that other important factors, such as efficiency,
   resiliency, latency, or availability are sacrificed.  In some cases,
   a function that is only available through a relatively small number
   of providers can be effectively decentralized, given the appropriate
   circumstances (see, for example, the DNS).

   Therefore, discussions of centralization and architectural efforts at
   decentralization need to be made on a case-by-base basis, depending
   on the function in question, surrounding circumstances, and other
   regulatory mechanisms.

   Note that it is important to distinguish centralization from anti-
   competitive concerns (also known as "anti-trust").  While there are
   many interactions between them and making the Internet more
   competitive may be a motivation for avoiding centralization, only
   courts are authoritative in determining what is and is not anti-
   competitive in a given market, not standards bodies and other
   technical fora.

3.  Why Avoid Centralization

   Centralization is undesirable because it is counter to the nature of
   the Internet, because it violates the end users' expectations, and
   because of the many negative effects it can have on the networks
   operation and evolution.






Nottingham                Expires 13 July 2022                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft    Centralization and Internet Standards     January 2022


   Firstly, the Internet's very nature is incompatible with
   centralization of its functions.  As a 'large, heterogeneous
   collection of interconnected systems' [BCP95] the Internet is often
   characterised as a 'network of networks'.  As such, these networks
   relate as peers who agree to facilitate communication, rather than
   having a relationship of subservience to others' requirements or
   coercion by them.

   Secondly, as the Internet's first duty is to the end user [RFC8890],
   allowing such power to be concentrated into few hands is counter to
   the IETF's mission of creating an Internet that 'will help us to
   build a better human society.'  [BCP95] When a third party has
   unavoidable access to communications, the 'informational and
   positional advantages' [INTERMEDIARY-INFLUENCE] gained can be used to
   observe behavior (the 'panopticon effect') and shape or even deny
   behaviour (the 'chokepoint effect') -- which can be used by those
   parties (or the states that have authority over them) for coercive
   ends.  [WEAPONIZED-INTERDEPENDENCE]

   Finally, concentration of power has deleterious effects on the
   Internet itself, including:

   *  _Limiting Innovation_: Centralization can preclude the possibility
      of 'permissionless innovation' -- the ability to deploy new,
      unforeseen applications without requiring coordination with
      parties other than those you are communicating with.

   *  _Constraining Competition_: The Internet and its users benefit
      from robust competition when applications and services are
      available from many different providers -- especially when those
      users can build their own applications and services based upon
      interoperable standards.  When dependencies are formed on a
      centralized service or platform, it effectively becomes an
      essential facility, which encourages abuse of power.

   *  _Reducing Availability_: The Internet's availability (as well as
      applications and services built upon it) improves when there are
      many ways to obtain access to it.  While centralized services
      typically benefit from the focused attention that their elevated
      role requires, when they do fail the resulting loss of
      availability can have disproportionate impact.

   *  _Creating Monoculture_: At the scale available to a centralized
      service or application, minor flaws in features such as
      recommendation algorithms can be magnified to a degree that can
      have broad (even societal) consequences.  Diversity in the
      implementation of these functions is significantly more robust,
      when viewed systemically.  [POLYCENTRIC]



Nottingham                Expires 13 July 2022                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft    Centralization and Internet Standards     January 2022


   *  _Self-Reinforcement_: As widely noted (see, eg., [ACCESS]), a
      centralized service benefits from access to data which can be used
      to further improve its offerings, while denying such access to
      others.

   See also [TECH-SUCCESS-FACTORS].

   To summarize, centralization would allow the Internet (or some part
   of it) to be captured, effectively turning it into a 'walled garden'
   that fails to meet both architectural design goals and users'
   expectations, and endangering its ongoing viability at the same time.

4.  Kinds of Centralization

   Centralization of the Internet is not uniform; it presents in a
   variety of ways, depending on its relationship to the function in
   question and underlying causes.  The subsections below offer the
   start of a classification system for Internet centralization.

4.1.  Direct Centralization

   The most straightforward kind of centralization creates a fixed role
   for a specific party.  For example, most proprietary messaging,
   videoconferencing, chat, and similar protocols operate in this
   fashion.

   While it has been argued that such protocols are simpler to design,
   more amenable to evolution, and more likely to meet user needs
   [MOXIE], this approach most often reflects commercial goals -- in
   particular, a strong desire to capture the financial benefits of the
   protocol by 'locking in' users to a proprietary service.

   Directly centralised protocols and applications are not considered to
   be part of the Internet per se; instead, they are more properly
   characterized as proprietary protocols that are built on top of the
   Internet.  As such, they are not regulated by the Internet
   architecture or standards, beyond the constraints that the underlying
   protocols (e.g., TCP, IP, HTTP) impose.

4.2.  Necessary Centralization

   Some protocols require the introduction of centralization risk that
   is unavoidable by nature.








Nottingham                Expires 13 July 2022                  [Page 6]

Internet-Draft    Centralization and Internet Standards     January 2022


   For example, when there is a need a single, globally coordinated
   'source of truth', that function is by nature centralized.  The most
   obvious instance is seen in the Domain Name System (DNS), which
   allows human-friendly naming to be converted into network addresses
   in a globally consistent fashion.

   Allocation of IP addresses is another example of a necessary function
   being a centralization risk.  Internet routing requires addresses to
   be allocated uniquely, but if the addressing function were captured
   by a single government or company, the entire Internet would be at
   risk of abuse by that entity.

   Similarly, the need for coordination in the Web's trust model brings
   centralization risk, because a Certificate Authority (CA) can control
   communication between the Web sites that they sign certificates for
   and users whose browsers trust the CA's root certificates.

   Protocols that need to solve the "rendezvous problem" to coordinate
   communication between two parties that are not in direct contact also
   suffer from this kind of centralization risk.  For example, chat
   protocols need a way to coordinate communication between two parties
   that wish to talk; while the actual communication can be direct
   between them (so long as the protocol facilitates that), the
   endpoints' mutual discovery typically requires a third party.

   Internet protocols often attempt to mitigate necessary centralization
   risk using measures such as mandated federation Section 5.1 and
   multi-stakeholder administration Section 5.2.

   Because of the inherent risks and costs of these approaches,
   functions that successfully use these techniques are often reused by
   others with similar requirements.  For example, if a protocol
   requires a coordinated, global naming function, reusing the Domain
   Name System is usually preferable to establishing a new system,
   because its centralization risk is known and understood, and the
   risks inherent in establishing new mitigations are avoided.

4.3.  Indirect Centralization

   Even when a protocol avoids direct centralization and does not
   exhibit any necessary centralization, it might become centralized in
   practice when external factors influence its deployment.  Indirect
   centralization can be caused by factors that encourage use of a
   central function despite the absence of such a requirement in the
   protocol itself.  Such factors might be economic, social, or legal.






Nottingham                Expires 13 July 2022                  [Page 7]

Internet-Draft    Centralization and Internet Standards     January 2022


   Often, the factors driving indirect centralization are related to the
   network effects that are so often seen on the Internet.  While in
   theory every node on the Internet is equal, in practice some nodes
   are much more connected than others: for example, just a few sites
   drive much of the traffic on the Web. While expected and observed in
   many kinds of networks [SCALE-FREE], network effects award asymmetric
   power to nodes that act as intermediaries to communication.

   Left unchecked, these factors can cause a potentially decentralized
   application to become directly centralised, because the central
   function has leverage to "lock in" users.  For example, social
   networking is an application that is currently supplied by a small
   number of directly centralized, proprietary platforms despite
   standardization efforts (see, e.g.,
   [W3C.CR-activitystreams-core-20161215]), due to the powerful network
   effects associated.

   By its nature, indirect centralization is difficult to avoid in
   protocol design, and federated protocols are particularly vulnerable
   to it (see Section 5.1).

4.4.  Inherited Centralization

   Most Internet protocols depend on other, "lower-layer" protocols.
   The features, deployment, and operation of these dependencies can
   surface centralization risk into functions and applications build "on
   top" of them.

   For example, the network between endpoints can introduce
   centralization risk to application-layer protocols, because it is
   necessary for communication and therefore has power over it.  A given
   network might block access to, slow down, or modify the content of
   various application protocols or specific services for financial,
   political, operational, or criminal reasons, thereby creating
   pressure to use other services, which can in turn result in
   centralization of them.

   Inherited centralization risk is only present when users cannot use
   an alternative means of accessing the desired service.  For example,
   users often have flexibility in choice of Internet access, so they
   could just "route around" a network that impacts their chosen
   service.  However, such choices are often not available in the
   moment, and the Internet's topology means that a choke point upstream
   could still affect their Internet access.

   When deployed at scale, encryption can be an effective technique to
   control many inherited centralization risks.  By reducing the number
   of parties who have access to content of communication, the ability



Nottingham                Expires 13 July 2022                  [Page 8]

Internet-Draft    Centralization and Internet Standards     January 2022


   of lower-layer protocols and intermediaries at those layers to
   interfere with or observe is precluded.  Even when they can still
   prevent communication, the use of encryption makes it more difficult
   to discriminate the target from other traffic.

   Note that the prohibitive effect on inherited centralization is most
   pronounced when most (if not all) traffic is encrypted -- providing
   yet more motivation for that goal (see also [RFC7258]).

4.5.  Platform Centralization

   The complement to inherited centralization is platform centralization
   -- where a function does not directly define a central role, but
   could facilitate centralization in the applications it supports.

   For example, HTTP [HTTP] in itself is not considered a centralized
   protocol; interoperable servers are relatively easy to instantiate,
   and multiple clients are available.  It can be used without central
   coordination beyond that provided by DNS, as discussed above.

   However, applications built on top of HTTP (as well as the rest of
   the 'Web Platform') often exhibit centralization.  As such, HTTP is
   an example of a platform for centralization -- while the protocol
   itself is not centralized, it does facilitate the creation of
   centralized services and applications.

   Like indirect centralization, platform centralization is difficult to
   completely avoid in protocol design.  Because of the layered nature
   of the Internet, most protocols are designed to allow considerable
   flexibility in how they are used, often in a way that it becomes
   attractive to form a dependency on one party's operation.  Notably,
   this can happen even if the protocol does not accommodate
   intermediation explicitly.

5.  The Limits of Decentralization

   Over time, various techniques have been developed to decentralize
   protocols and applications.  While these approaches can be used to
   create a function which is less centralized or less amenable to some
   kinds of centralization, they are not adequate to completely avoid
   centralization on their own.  As such, while the use of these
   techniques is often appropriate and sometimes effective, they are not
   indicators of whether a protocol is centralized without further
   analysis.







Nottingham                Expires 13 July 2022                  [Page 9]

Internet-Draft    Centralization and Internet Standards     January 2022


5.1.  Federation isn't Enough

   A widely known technique for managing centralization in Internet
   protocols is federation -- that is, designing them in such a way that
   new instances of any intermediary or otherwise centralized function
   are relatively easy to create, and they are able to maintain
   interoperability and connectivity with other instances.

   For example, SMTP [RFC5321] is the basis of the e-mail suite of
   protocols, which has two functions that are necessarily centralized:

   1.  Giving each user a globally unique address, and

   2.  Routing messages to the user, even when they change network
       locations or are disconnected for long periods of time.

   E-mail reuses DNS to help mitigate the first risk.  To mitigate the
   second, it defines an intermediary role for routing users' messages,
   the Message Transfer Agent (MTA).  By allowing anyone to deploy a MTA
   and defining rules for interconnecting them, the protocol's users
   avoid a requirement for a single, central router.

   Users can (and often do) choose to delegate that role to someone
   else, or run their own MTA.  However, running your own mail server
   has become difficult, due to the likelihood of a small MTA being
   classified as a spam source.  Because large MTA operaters are widely
   known and have greater impact if their operation is affected, they
   are less likely to be classified as such, thereby indirectly
   centralizing the protocol's operation (see Section 4.3).

   Another example of a federated Internet protocol is XMPP [RFC6120],
   supporting "instant messaging" and similar functionality.  Like
   e-mail, it reuses DNS for naming and requires federation to
   facilitate rendezvous of users from different systems.

   While some deployments of XMPP do support truly federated messaging
   (i.e., a person using service A can interoperably chat with someone
   using service B), many of the largest do not.  Because federation is
   voluntary, some operators made a decision to capture their users into
   a single service, rather than provide the benefits of global
   interoperability.

   The examples above illustrate that federation can be a useful
   technique to avoid direct centralization and manage necessary
   centralization, but on its own is not sufficient to avoid indirect
   and platform centralization.  If the value provided by a protocol can
   be captured by a single entity, they may use the protocol as a
   platform to obtain a 'winner take all' outcome -- a significant risk



Nottingham                Expires 13 July 2022                 [Page 10]

Internet-Draft    Centralization and Internet Standards     January 2022


   with many Internet protocols, since network effects often promote
   such outcomes.  Likewise, external factors (such as spam control)
   might naturally 'tilt the table' towards a few operators of these
   protocols.

5.2.  Multi-Stakeholder Administration is Hard

   Delegating the administration of a necessarily centralized function
   (see Section 4.2) to a multi-stakeholder body is occasionally used to
   mitigate its effects.

   A multi-stakeholder body is an institution that includes
   representatives of the different kinds of parties that are affected
   by the system's operation ("stakeholders") in an attempt to make
   well-reasoned, broadly agreed-to, and authoritative decisions.

   The most relevant example of this technique is the administration of
   the Domain Name System [RFC1035], which as a "single source of truth"
   exhibits necessary centralization of the naming function, as well as
   the operation of the system.  To mitigate operational centralization,
   this task is carried out by multiple root servers that are
   administered by separate operators -- themselves diverse in geography
   and a selection of corporate entities, non-profits and government
   bodies from many jurisdictions and affiliations.  Furthermore, the
   name space itself is regulated by ICANN
   (https://www.icann.org/resources/pages/governance/governance-en),
   which is defined as a globally multi-stakeholder body with
   representation from end users, governments, operators, and others.

   Another example of multi-stakeholderism is the standardization of
   Internet protocols themselves.  Because a specification effectively
   controls the behavior of implementations that are conformant with it,
   the standardization process can be seen as a single point of control.
   As a result, Internet standards bodies like the IETF allow open
   participation and contribution, make decisions in an open and
   accountable way, have a well-defined process for making (and when
   necessary, appealing) decisions, taking into account the views of
   different stakeholder groups [RFC8890].

   Yet another example is the administration of the Web's trust model,
   implemented by Web browsers as relying parties and Certificate
   Authorities as trust anchors.  To assure that all parties meet the
   operational and security requirements necessary to provide the
   desired properties, the CA/Browser Forum (https://cabforum.org) was
   established as an oversight body that involves both of those parties
   as stakeholders.





Nottingham                Expires 13 July 2022                 [Page 11]

Internet-Draft    Centralization and Internet Standards     January 2022


   In each of these examples, setup and ongoing operation of a multi-
   stakeholder organization is not trivial.  This is a major downside of
   this approach.  Additionally, the legitimacy of such an organization
   cannot be assumed, and may be difficult to establish and maintain
   (see, eg, [LEGITIMACY-MULTI]).  This concern is especially relevant
   if the function being coordinated is broad, complex, and/or
   contentious.

5.3.  Blockchains Are Not Magical

   Increasingly, distributed consensus technologies such as the
   blockchain are touted as a solution to centralization issues.  A
   complete survey of this rapidly-changing area is beyond the scope of
   this document, but at a high level, we can generalise about their
   properties.

   These techniques attempt to avoid centralization risk by distributing
   intermediary or otherwise potentially centralized functions to
   members of a large pool of protocol participants.  Verification of
   proper performance of a function is typically guaranteed using
   cryptographic techniques (often, an append-only transaction ledger).
   The assignment of a particular task to a node for handling usually
   cannot be predicted or controlled.

   Sybil attacks (where enough participants coordinate their activity to
   affect the protocol's operation) are a major concern for these
   protocols.  Diversity in the pool of participants is encouraged using
   indirect techniques such as proof-of-work (where each participant has
   to demonstrate significant consumption of resources) or proof-of-
   stake (where each participant has some other incentive to execute
   correctly).

   Appropriate use of these techniques can create barriers to direct and
   inherited centralization.  However, depending upon the application in
   question, indirect and platform centralization can still be possible.

   Furthermore, distributed consensus technologies have several
   potential shortcomings that may make them inappropriate -- or at
   least difficult to use -- for many Internet applications, because
   their use conflicts with other important goals:

   1.  Distributed consensus protocols can have significant implications
       for privacy.  Because activity (such as queries or transactions)
       are shared with many unknown parties, they have very different
       privacy properties than traditional client/server protocols.
       Mitigations (e.g., Private Information Retrieval; see, eg, [PIR])
       are still not suitable for broad deployment.




Nottingham                Expires 13 July 2022                 [Page 12]

Internet-Draft    Centralization and Internet Standards     January 2022


   2.  Their complexity and "chattiness" typically result in
       significantly less efficient use of the network (often, to
       several orders of magnitude).  When distributed consensus
       protocols use proof-of-work, energy consumption can become
       significant (to the point where some jurisdictions have banned
       its use).

   3.  Distributed consensus protocols are still not proven to scale to
       the degree expected of successful Internet protocols.  In
       particular, relying on unknown third parties to deliver
       functionality can introduce variability in latency, availability,
       and throughput.  This is a marked change for applications with
       high expectations for these properties (e.g., commercial Web
       services).

   4.  By design, distributed consensus protocols diffuse responsibility
       for a function among several, difficult-to-identify parties.
       While this may be an effective way to prevent some kinds of
       centralization, it also means that making someone accountable for
       how the function is performed is impossible, beyond the bounds of
       the protocol's design.

   It is also important to recognise that a protocol or an application
   can use distributed consensus for some functions, but still have
   centralization risk elsewhere.  Even when distributed consensus is
   used exclusively (which is uncommon, due to the associated costs),
   some degree of coordination is still necessary -- whether that be
   through governance of the function itself, creation of shared
   implementations, or documentation of shared wire protocols.  That
   represents centralization risk, just at a different layer (inherited
   or platform, depending on the circumstances).

   These potential shortcomings do not rule out the use of distributed
   consensus technologies for every use case.  They do, however, caution
   against relying upon these technologies to avoid centralization
   uncritically.

6.  What Should Internet Standards Do?

   Centralization is driven by powerful forces -- both economic and
   social -- as well as the network effects that come with Internet
   scale.  Moreover, because permissionless innovation is a core value
   for the Internet, and yet much of the centralization seen on the
   Internet is performed by proprietary platforms that take advantage of
   this nature, the controls available to standards efforts on their own
   are very limited.





Nottingham                Expires 13 July 2022                 [Page 13]

Internet-Draft    Centralization and Internet Standards     January 2022


   Nevertheless, while standards bodies on their own cannot prevent
   centralization, there are meaningful steps that can be taken to
   prevent some functions from exhibiting some forms of centralization.
   There are also valuable contributions that standards efforts can make
   to other relevant forms of regulation.

6.1.  Manage Centralization Risk Where Effective

   Some types of centralization risk are relatively easy to manage in
   standards efforts.  A directly centralized protocol, were it to be
   proposed, would be rejected out of hand by the IETF.  There is a
   growning body of knowledge and experience with necessary
   centralization, and a strong inclination to reuse existing
   infrastructure where possible.  As discussed above, encryption is
   often a way to manage inherited centralization.  All of these
   responses are appropriate ways for Internet standards to manage
   centralization risk.

   However, precluding indirect and platform centralization are much
   more difficult in standards efforts.  Because we have no "protocol
   police", it's not possible to demand that someone stop building a
   proprietary service using a purportedly federated protocol.  We also
   cannot stop someone from building centralized services "on top" of
   standard protocols without violating architectural goals like
   permissionless innovation.

   Therefore, committing significant resources to scrutinizing protocols
   for hidden or latent centralization risk -- especially for indirect
   and platform risks -- is unlikely to actually prevent Internet
   centralization.  Almost all existing Internet protocols -- including
   IP, TCP, HTTP, and DNS -- suffer some form of indirect or platform
   centralization.  Refusing to standardize a newer protocol because it
   faces similar risks would not be equitable, proportionate, or
   effective.

   Centralization risk is sometimes perceived to be in tension with
   other goals, such as privacy.  While there is rarely a pure tradeoff
   between two abstract goals such as these, when it does occur
   attention should be paid to how effective architectural regulation
   (such as a standards effort) is in achieving each goal.  In this
   example, a technical mechanism might be much more effective at
   improving privacy, whereas centralization might be better controlled
   by other regulators -- leading to the conclusion that the standards
   effort should focus on privacy.







Nottingham                Expires 13 July 2022                 [Page 14]

Internet-Draft    Centralization and Internet Standards     January 2022


6.2.  Create Standards to Decentralize Proprietary Functions

   Standards efforts should focus on creating new specifications for
   functions that are currently only satisfied by proprietary,
   centralized protocols.  For example, if social networking is thought
   to be a centralized function, this might mean creating specifications
   that enable decentralized social networking, perhaps using some or
   all of the techniques described in Section 5.

   Keen readers will point out that social networking is effectively
   centralized despite the existence of such standards (see, e.g.,
   [W3C.CR-activitystreams-core-20161215]), because the IETF and W3C
   create voluntary standards, not mandatory regulations.

   However, architecture is not the only form of regulation; legal
   mechanisms combined with changing norms and the resulting market
   forces have their own regulatory effects [NEW-CHICAGO].  While for
   much of its lifetime the Internet has only been subject to limited
   legal regulation, that period appears to be ending.

   It is far from certain that a legal mandate for interoperability
   based upon Internet standards will eventuate, but it is increasingly
   discussed as a remedy for competition issues (see, e.g., [OECD]).  It
   is also not certain that legally-mandated standards will fully
   address centralization risks.  However, if such specifications are
   not available from the Internet community, they may be created
   elsewhere without reference to the Internet's architectural goals.

   Even absent a legal mandate, changes in norms and the market -- due
   to increasing knowledge and distrust of centralized functions -- can
   create demand for such specifications and the corresponding
   implementations.

6.3.  Limit Intermediary Power

   The introduction of an intermediary role -- i.e., one that performs a
   function but is not a first party to communication -- adds indirect
   and platform centralization risk to Internet protocols, because it
   brings opportunities for control and observation.  At the same time,
   intermediation often adds significant value to a protocol, or enables
   what is considered a necessary function.










Nottingham                Expires 13 July 2022                 [Page 15]

Internet-Draft    Centralization and Internet Standards     January 2022


   While (as discussed above) standards efforts have a very limited
   capability to prevent or control indirect and platform
   centralization, constraints on intermediary functions -- when
   designed explicitly into a protocol -- and prevent at least the most
   egregious outcomes.  In general, this can be achieved by limiting the
   nature of the intermediary role to the most minimal function
   possible.

   For example, HTTP allows intermediaries to see the full content of
   traffic by default, even when they are only performing basic
   functions such as routing.  However, with the introduction of HTTPS
   and the CONNECT method (see Section 9.3.6 of [HTTP]), combined with
   market forces to adopt HTTPS, those intermediaries now only have
   access to the appropriate routing information.

   When carefully considered, intermediation can be a powerful way to
   enforce functional boundaries -- for example, to reduce the need for
   users to trust potentially malicious endpoints, as seen in the so-
   called 'oblivious' protocols currently in development (e.g.,
   [I-D.pauly-dprive-oblivious-doh]) that allow end users to hide their
   identity from services, while still accessing them.

   The same advice applies in these cases; the observation and control
   potential SHOULD be as minimal as possible, while still meeting the
   design goals of the protocol.

   See [I-D.thomson-tmi] for more guidance.

   Another kind of intermediation is created when a new feature or
   service is built using a standard as a substrate.  For example, many
   Web sites offer new functions like social networking and aggregated
   news updates that can be viewed as a proprietary intermediary
   function on the Internet.  These intermediaries may not be a format
   part of the underlying protocol (in the case of Web sites, HTTP), but
   they can still interpose a third party into communication.  This kind
   of intermediation is more effectively dealt with by standardising the
   function, rather than restricting the capability of the protocol; see
   Section 6.2.

6.4.  Avoid Over-Extensibility

   An important feature of Internet protocols is their ability to evolve
   over time, so that they can meet new requirements and adapt to new
   conditions without requiring a "flag day" to upgrade implementations.
   Typically, protocol evolution is accommodated through extension
   mechanisms, where optional features can be added over time in an
   interoperable fashion.




Nottingham                Expires 13 July 2022                 [Page 16]

Internet-Draft    Centralization and Internet Standards     January 2022


   However, protocol extensions can also increase the risk of platform
   centralization if a powerful entity can change the target for
   meaningful interoperability by adding proprietary extensions to a
   standard protocol.  This is especially true when the core standard
   does not itself provide sufficient utility on its own.

   For example, the SOAP protocol [SOAP] was an extremely flexible
   framework, allowing vendors to attempt to capture the market by
   requiring use of their preferred extensions to interoperate.

   Therefore, standards efforts should be focused on providing concrete
   utility to the majority of their users as published, rather than
   being a "framework" where interoperability is not immediately
   available.  Furthermore, Internet protocols should not make every
   aspect of their operation extensible; extension points should be
   reasoned, appropriate boundaries for flexibility and control.  When
   extension points are defined, they should not allow an extension to
   declare itself to be mandatory-to-interoperate, as that pattern
   invites abuse.

7.  Security Considerations

   This document does not have direct security impact on Internet
   protocols.  However, failure to consider centralization risks might
   result in a myriad of security issues.

8.  Informative References

   [ACCESS]   Vestager, M., "Defending Competition in a Digitised World,
              Address at the European Consumer and Competition Day",
              April 2019, <https://wayback.archive-
              it.org/12090/20191129202059/https://ec.europa.eu/
              commission/commissioners/2014-2019/vestager/announcements/
              defending-competition-digitised-world_en>.

   [BCP95]    Alvestrand, H., "A Mission Statement for the IETF",
              BCP 95, RFC 3935, October 2004.

              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/bcp95>

   [HTTP]     Fielding, R. T., Nottingham, M., and J. Reschke, "HTTP
              Semantics", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-ietf-
              httpbis-semantics-19, 12 September 2021,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-httpbis-
              semantics-19>.






Nottingham                Expires 13 July 2022                 [Page 17]

Internet-Draft    Centralization and Internet Standards     January 2022


   [I-D.pauly-dprive-oblivious-doh]
              Kinnear, E., McManus, P., Pauly, T., Verma, T., and C. A.
              Wood, "Oblivious DNS Over HTTPS", Work in Progress,
              Internet-Draft, draft-pauly-dprive-oblivious-doh-09, 5
              January 2022, <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/
              draft-pauly-dprive-oblivious-doh-09>.

   [I-D.thomson-tmi]
              Thomson, M., "Principles for the Involvement of
              Intermediaries in Internet Protocols", Work in Progress,
              Internet-Draft, draft-thomson-tmi-02, 6 July 2021,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-thomson-tmi-
              02>.

   [INTERMEDIARY-INFLUENCE]
              Judge, K., "Intermediary Influence", 2014,
              <https://scholarship.law.columbia.edu/
              faculty_scholarship/1856>.

   [LEGITIMACY-MULTI]
              Palladino, N. and N. Santaniello, "Legitimacy, Power, and
              Inequalities in the Multistakeholder Internet Governance",
              2020.

   [MOXIE]    Marlinspike, M., "Reflections: The ecosystem is moving",
              May 2016,
              <https://signal.org/blog/the-ecosystem-is-moving/>.

   [NEW-CHICAGO]
              Lessig, L., "The New Chicago School", June 1998.

   [OECD]     OECD, "Data portability, interoperability and digital
              platform competition", June 2021,
              <https://www.oecd.org/daf/competition/data-portability-
              interoperability-and-digital-platform-competition-
              2021.pdf>.

   [PIR]      Olumofin, F. and I. Goldberg, "Revisiting the
              Computational Practicality of Private Information
              Retrieval", 2010.

   [POLYCENTRIC]
              Aligia, P.D. and V. Tarko, "Polycentricity: From Polanyi
              to Ostrom, and Beyond", April 2012.







Nottingham                Expires 13 July 2022                 [Page 18]

Internet-Draft    Centralization and Internet Standards     January 2022


   [RAND]     Baran, P., "On Distributed Communications: Introduction to
              Distributed Communications Networks", 1964,
              <https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_memoranda/
              RM3420.html>.

   [RFC1035]  Mockapetris, P., "Domain names - implementation and
              specification", STD 13, RFC 1035, DOI 10.17487/RFC1035,
              November 1987, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc1035>.

   [RFC4271]  Rekhter, Y., Ed., Li, T., Ed., and S. Hares, Ed., "A
              Border Gateway Protocol 4 (BGP-4)", RFC 4271,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC4271, January 2006,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc4271>.

   [RFC5321]  Klensin, J., "Simple Mail Transfer Protocol", RFC 5321,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC5321, October 2008,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc5321>.

   [RFC6120]  Saint-Andre, P., "Extensible Messaging and Presence
              Protocol (XMPP): Core", RFC 6120, DOI 10.17487/RFC6120,
              March 2011, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc6120>.

   [RFC7258]  Farrell, S. and H. Tschofenig, "Pervasive Monitoring Is an
              Attack", BCP 188, RFC 7258, DOI 10.17487/RFC7258, May
              2014, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7258>.

   [RFC791]   Postel, J., "Internet Protocol", STD 5, RFC 791,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC0791, September 1981,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc791>.

   [RFC793]   Postel, J., "Transmission Control Protocol", STD 7,
              RFC 793, DOI 10.17487/RFC0793, September 1981,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc793>.

   [RFC8890]  Nottingham, M., "The Internet is for End Users", RFC 8890,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC8890, August 2020,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8890>.

   [SCALE-FREE]
              Albert, R., "Emergence of Scaling in Random Networks",
              October 1999, <https://barabasi.com/f/67.pdf>.

   [SOAP]     Mitra, N. and Y. Lafon, "SOAP Version 1.2 Part 0: Primer
              (Second Edition)", World Wide Web Consortium
              Recommendation REC-soap12-part0-20070427, 27 April 2007,
              <https://www.w3.org/TR/2007/REC-soap12-part0-20070427>.





Nottingham                Expires 13 July 2022                 [Page 19]

Internet-Draft    Centralization and Internet Standards     January 2022


   [TECH-SUCCESS-FACTORS]
              Kende, M., Kvalbein, A., Allford, J., and D. Abecassis,
              "Study on the Internet's Technical Success Factors",
              December 2021, <https://blog.apnic.net/wp-
              content/uploads/2021/12/MKGRA669-Report-for-APNIC-LACNIC-
              V3.pdf>.

   [W3C.CR-activitystreams-core-20161215]
              Snell, J. and E. Prodromou, "Activity Streams 2.0", World
              Wide Web Consortium CR CR-activitystreams-core-20161215,
              15 December 2016, <https://www.w3.org/TR/2016/CR-
              activitystreams-core-20161215>.

   [WEAPONIZED-INTERDEPENDENCE]
              Farrell, H. and A.L. Newman, "Weaponized Interdependence:
              How Global Economic Networks Shape State Coercion", 2019,
              <https://doi.org/10.1162/ISEC_a_00351>.

Appendix A.  Acknowledgements

   This document benefits from discussions with Brian Trammell during
   our shared time on the Internet Architecture Board.

Author's Address

   Mark Nottingham
   Prahran
   Australia

   Email: mnot@mnot.net
   URI:   https://www.mnot.net/




















Nottingham                Expires 13 July 2022                 [Page 20]
