

CCAMP Working Group                                S. Ansorge (Alcatel)
Internet Draft                                           W. Bigos (AGH)
Category: Informational                            G. Grammel (Alcatel)
Expiration Date: December 2002               D. Papadimitriou (Alcatel) 
                                                F. Tetzlaff (T-Systems)
                                             F.-J. Westphal (T-systems)

                                                              June 2002


            Applicability of LMP (and LMP-WDM) to Link Segments

           draft-papadimitriou-ccamp-lmp-ls-applicability-00.txt


Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
      all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026 [1].

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of
   six months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
   documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts
   as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in
   progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.


1. Abstract

   Integration of Generalized MPLS-capable SONET/SDH networks in
   existing backbone environments has generated the need to determine
   inter-working capabilities between nodes interconnected by both
   SONET/SDH and non-SONET/SDH overhead terminating networks. This is
   particularly the case for critical functions and applications such
   as the ones provided by the Link Management Protocol [LMP] and its
   WDM extensions [LMP-WDM]. In this context, this document describes
   the applicability of their respective functions and illustrates them
   through several inter-connection architectures.

2. Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in
   this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [2].


D.Papadimitriou et al.  Expires December 2002                       1

draft-papadimitriou-ccamp-lmp-ls-applicability-00.txt        June 2002


3. Introduction

   Today nearly all regional-, metro- and backbone transmission
   networks are equipped with SONET/SDH devices. These networks are
   managed by manual operations via a centralized management system.
   Most of the current SONET/SDH devices does either not provide the
   required capability for GMPLS to operate (also referred to as legacy
   SONET/SDH nodes) or are not capable to support the GMPLS protocol
   set required to act as LSRs (also referred to as GMPLS-capable
   nodes). One migration scenario for the near future may consist out
   of a small GMPLS capable sub-network which is initially build out of
   a few GMPLS capable nodes only and the GMPLS capable nodes are
   interconnected via manually established connections over a legacy
   SONET/SDH sub-network. The operation and maintenance in legacy
   SONET/SDH environments are well defined as well as their interaction
   with the management plane. For the GMPLS capable nodes exists the
   recent proposed LMP protocol and appropriate enhancements like LMP-
   SDH [LMP-SONET-SDH]. The missing link is the communication between
   and across both sub-networks.

   This document proposes LMP and LMP-WDM as lightweight protocols to
   essentially communicate information between and across non-LMP
   capable and LMP-capable device(s). In turn, this enables to build a
   logical GMPLS network on top of existing legacy environments and to
   fulfill the requirements of different migration scenarios.

   The Link Management Protocol [LMP] is being developed as part of the
   GMPLS protocol suite to manage traffic engineering (TE) links. LMP
   currently consists of four main functions, of which, the first two
   are mandatory and the last two are optional:

         1. Control channel management
         2. Link property correlation
         3. Link verification
         4. Fault management

   Control channel management is used to establish and maintain IP
   connectivity between adjacent nodes. This is done using a Config
   message exchange followed by a lightweight keep-alive message
   exchange. Link property correlation is used to aggregate multiple
   data links into a single TE Link and to synchronize the link
   properties. Link verification is used to verify the physical
   connectivity of the data links and to exchange the data link IDs.
   Fault management is used to localize failure points and consequently
   suppress alarms on subsequent points in both opaque and transparent
   networks.

   In [LMP-SONET-SDH], we define SONET/SDH technology specific
   information needed when running LMP. Specifically, we define the
   SONET/SDH test procedures used for Link and LSP verification and
   link property correlation. We also propose a Link verification
   procedure using loopback capable SONET/SDH interface.


D.Papadimitriou et al.   Expires December 2002                       2

draft-papadimitriou-ccamp-lmp-ls-applicability-00.txt        June 2002


   This document describes two generic SONET/SDH node inter-connection
   cases and the applicability of LMP between these edge devices. In
   the first case (described in Sections 5 and 6), LMP-capable
   SONET/SDH edge devices are connected by a legacy SONET/SDH network
   that terminates the section overhead and none of its node is LMP-
   capable (the LMP session is provided between the client SONET/SDH
   devices only). In the second case (described in Section 7), the LMP
   (and LMP-WDM) capable SONET/SDH edge devices are connected through a
   non-SONET/SDH network that does not terminate the section overhead
   at its edges. Moreover, one considers that the edge devices of the
   non-SONET/SDH network are LMP-WDM capable. Several reference
   architectures and scenarios (see Section 4) illustrate these two
   generic inter-connection cases. From these, this document deduces
   the applicability of the LMP functions and their detailed
   operations.

4. Scope and Covered scenarios

   Depending on the configuration of the underlying legacy SONET/SDH
   network, there are many different possible migration scenarios from
   legacy configuration to networks, which are completely GMPLS
   capable. Some criteria to distinguish between different scenarios
   are listed here:
     - For protection purposes it is possible to connect two GMPLS
       capable nodes via a protected SONET/SDH connection.  .
     - Another way is to protect the interconnection of the GMPLS
       capable sub-network via a further interconnection within the
       legacy sub-network which is disjoint with the first and may be
       selected in the case of an fault. The GMPLS capable nodes have
       to take care about protection switching time within the legacy
       sub-network.
     - A further distinction could be made by SONET/SDH leased lines
       configured with or without automatic laser shutdown. A
       unidirectional link failure results into bi-directional link
       failure.
     - And finally the legacy SONET/SDH sub-networks in between the
       GMPLS capable sub-network can be operated unidirectional or bi-
       directional.

   Thus this document covers 3 migration scenarios. Each of them is
   described in detail here below:

   Scenario 1: Reference architecture

   LMP Network <----  --- non-LMP Sub-Network  ---  ---> LMP Network
         |                                                    |
         |                                                    |
         |                                                    |
   SONET/SDH Net <--  -->  SONET/SDH Sub-Net   <--  ---> SONET/SDH Net
    Edge Node(X)          Node(1) ---- Node(N)           Edge Node(Y)
         |                                                    |
         |                                                    |
         |                                                    |

D.Papadimitriou et al.   Expires December 2002                       3

draft-papadimitriou-ccamp-lmp-ls-applicability-00.txt        June 2002


          <---------------------- LMP ----------------------->

   Here one assumes Path OH transparency over the SONET/SDH sub-
   network, thus the non-LMP Sub-Network includes only MS/Line (or
   RS/section) Terminating equipment and provides only path trail
   service.

   The path trail between the LMP capable (GMPLS capable) SONET/SDH
   sub-network is terminated at edge Node(X) and edge Node(Y). The
   SONET/SDH leased line between node (1) and node (N) of the legacy
   SONET/SDH sub-network is unprotected, without automatic laser
   shutdown and bi-directional. The considered SONET/SDH overhead
   information is related to the SONET/SDH path between Node(X) and
   Node(Y). Without further restrictions it may be necessary to define
   a kind of bundling of trails (and not links) between the LMP
   adjacencies (Node (X) and Node (Y)). The specific aspects related to
   trail discovery and bundling are addressed in Section 6.

   Scenario 2 û Reference Architecture

   This scenario can be considered as a particular case of the previous
   one where Node(X) and Node(Y) are inter-connected  through a legacy
   SONET/SDH sub-network managed by an Element Management System (EMS).
   In turn, this EMS represents from the edge node viewpoint, an LMP-
   capable adjacent node hiding the non-support of LMP within the
   legacy sub-network.


   LMP Network   <--  ---  non-LMP Sub-Network  ---  --> LMP Network
         |                                                   |
         |                                                   |
         |                                                   |
   SONET/SDH Net <--  -->   SONET/SDH Sub-Net   <--  --> SONET/SDH Net
   Edge Node(X)            Node(1) ---- Node(N)          Edge Node(Y)
         |                                                   |
         |                                                   |
         |                                                   |
          <---------LMP--------->  EMS  <--------LMP-------->


   In such conditions, potential problem may come from the processing
   time of the LMP messages at the EMS. This, in addition to the time
   it takes to correlate the information received from the edge LMP
   sessions defined between Node(X) and EMS and between EMS and
   Node(Y), with the one received through its proprietary interface to
   the non-LMP sub-network nodes).

   It may thus be advisable to combine both LMP Sessions with an edge-
   to-edge LMP session in order to achieve the following LMP
   adjacencies and sessions:

   LMP Network   <--  ---  non-LMP Sub-Network  ---  --> LMP Network
         |                                                   |

D.Papadimitriou et al.   Expires December 2002                       4

draft-papadimitriou-ccamp-lmp-ls-applicability-00.txt        June 2002


         |                                                   |
         |                                                   |
   SONET/SDH Net <--  -->   SONET/SDH Sub-Net   <--  --> SONET/SDH Net
    Edge Node(X)           Node(1) ---- Node(N)          Edge Node(Y)
       |   |                                               |   |
       |   |                                               |   |
       |    <---------LMP------->  EMS  <-------LMP------->    |
       |                                                       |
        <--------------------------LMP------------------------>


   The purpose of this edge-to-edge LMP session (between the SONET/SDH
   legacy sub-network edge nodes, e.g. Node(X) and Node(Y)) is somehow
   less obvious. Here, the value added by this edge-to-edge LMP session
   in the above architecture would (only) help to determine whether the
   failure is located inside or outside the SONET/SDH sub-network but
   when located inside if the defect is localized between edge nodes or
   internal to the sub-network (i.e. between Node(1) and Node(N)).

   Scenario 3 û Reference Architecture

   In this architecture, one assumes that the SONET/SDH edge Node(X)
   and Node(Y) maintain an LMP session with the edge nodes of the
   legacy SONET/SDH sub-network through the use of an EMS system (EMS1
   for Node(X) and EMS2 for Node(Y)).

   However, since LMP continuity is not available between edge Node(X)
   and Node(Y) a complementary edge-to-edge LMP session between Node(1)
   and Node(N) should normally allow to bridge their local instances
   with the EMS systems located at the edges. In this context, the
   following configuration can be considered:

     LMP Network <------    LMP Sub-Network     ------> LMP Network
            |                                              |
            |                                              |
   SONET/SDH Net <-- -->   SONET/SDH Sub-Net    <-- --> SONET/SDH Net
    Edge Node(X)         Node(1) -------- Node(N)       Edge Node(Y)
            |             |  |             |  |            |
            |             |  |             |  |            |
            |             |  |             |  |            |
           EMS1 <---LMP---    <----LMP---->    ---LMP---> EMS2

   Here, the Element Management System (EMS) fulfilling an LMP Proxy
   function allows considering actions based on failure indication
   correlated information, if the failure is external to the SONET/SDH
   sub-network then either EMS1 or EMS2 will take the recovery decision
   under its responsibility. However, if the failure is internal to the
   SONET/SDH sub-network then through a dedicated message exchange
   between Node(1) and EMS1 (or between Node(N) and EMS2) the recovery
   action could still be initiated by EMS1 (or EMS2) and executed by
   the edge nodes Node(X) (or Node(Y), respectively).



D.Papadimitriou et al.   Expires December 2002                       5

draft-papadimitriou-ccamp-lmp-ls-applicability-00.txt        June 2002


   Note: (LMP) Control Channel
   ---------------------------

   In the SONET/SDH context, two signalling transport mechanisms are
   defined: out-of-band or in-band through the RS/Section (D1-D3) and
   MS/Line DCC (D4-D12) û note for OC-768 (D13-D156 is also defined).

   Therefore, due to the termination of the MS/Line and RS/Section at
   the legacy sub-network SONET/SDH nodes, one should preferably
   consider an out-of-band control channel. This because having an in-
   band control channel would imply maintaining an (LMP) control
   channel using the Data Communication Channel (DCC) bytes and some
   overhead mapping facilities to allow forwarding DCC information
   between neighbouring RS/Section and MS/Line trails.

5. Fault Localization

   Fault Management, includes Fault Detection, Fault Correlation and
   Fault Localization/Isolation. [LMP] provides the tools to deliver
   the Fault Localization/Isolation capabilities. However, he challenge
   compared to the canonical LMP model is that a node adjacency does
   not give a corresponding LMP adjacency.

   Moreover, labels have an associated structure relying on their
   multiplexing structure (see [GMPLS-SDHSONET] and [GMPLS-OTN]). Once
   the local label is exchanged across an interface to its neighboring
   node, the value of the local label may be not significant to the
   neighbor node since the value used for the local label and the
   remote label may not necessarily be the same. This issue does not
   present a problem in a simple connection between adjacent nodes the
   timeslots are mapped 1:1 across the interface. However, once a non-
   GMPLS capable sub-network is introduced between these nodes (as in
   the above figure, where the sub-network provides re-arrangement
   capability for the timeslots) label association becomes an issue.

   These observations generate the following issues with respect to
   LMP:

   1. Fault correlation must be provided between non-physically
      adjacent LMP neighbors
   2. Links are not anymore symmetrical (the labels on an egress
      interface of the edge Node(X) are not necessarily the same at the
      ingress interface of the edge Node(Y) and vice versa)

   To enable fault correlation and isolation/localization between non-
   physically adjacent LMP neighbors the complete defect indication
   flows considered here can be summarized as follows when a
   unidirectional failure occurs:

   Node(X) <------- Subnet -------> Node(Y)

   Node(X)           FDI ---------> Node(Y) - Forward DI (downstream)
                                                                |

D.Papadimitriou et al.   Expires December 2002                       6

draft-papadimitriou-ccamp-lmp-ls-applicability-00.txt        June 2002


   Node(X) <-------- BDI ---------- Node(Y) û Backward DI (upstream)

   DI is used as a generic term to indicate a Defect indication (such
   as LoF, LoP or LoM depending upon the connectivity or continuity,
   supervision respectively). See Appendix 1 for the SONET/SDH
   Supervision Capabilities. The FDI is used as a generic term and
   refers to the Alarm Indication Signal (AIS), AIS is a signal sent
   downstream as an indication that an upstream defect has been
   detected. The BDI is used as a generic term and refers to the Remote
   Defect Indication (RDI). RDI is a signal sent upstream as an
   indication to the remote transmit end that the received end has
   detected an incoming trail defect or is receiving AIS.

   The first action to be executed between Node(X) and Node(Y) is to
   obtain the interface ID mapping (and label association), for this
   purpose one expects here to see the capability for these node to
   insert a J1/J2 Trace  pattern sent in-band to be correlated with an
   out-of-band test message as described in [LMP-SONET-SDH].

   Then, in order to locate the failure event, one takes advantage of
   the Fault isolation/localization capabilities of [LMP], which can be
   briefly summarized through the following flow diagram:

                             Tx ----------------> Rx
                     Node(i)                         Node(j)
                             Rx <---------------- Tx

   1. Failure detected at Node(j) Receiver (Rx) side
   2. ChannelStatus message sent from Node(j) to Node(i), the latter
      sends an Acknowledgment message back to Node(j) upon reception
   3. Correlation is performed at Node(i) (notice that once
      correlation and localization is performed any subsequent recovery
      action can be initiated)
   4. ChannelStatus message sent from Node(i) to Node(j), upon
      reception, the latter sends an Acknowledgment message back to
      Node(i)

   Here, the expected LMP behavior can be determined from the following
   indications received from the transport plane overhead. Here below
   we analyze the following cases:

   Case a) Uni- or bi-directional failure within the legacy network

   Case b) Uni- or bi-directional failure outside the legacy network
           - Case b1) Downstream FDI
           - Case b2) Upstream FDI


   Case a) Uni- or Bi-directional failure within the legacy SONET/SDH
   sub-network

   Consider for instance that Node(Y) receives an FDI (and optionally,
   Node(Y) sends a BDI that is subsequently received by Node(X)) and

D.Papadimitriou et al.   Expires December 2002                       7

draft-papadimitriou-ccamp-lmp-ls-applicability-00.txt        June 2002


   wants to locate whether the failure has occurred inside or outside
   the SONET/SDH legacy sub-network (see Section 4 - Scenario 1, for
   instance). In this case, Node(Y) receiving the FDI sends a
   (ChannelStatus) message to Node(X), the latter after acknowledging
   its reception, verifies the indication received for the same trail
   in the upstream direction (i.e. Node(X) verifies if an defect
   indication has been on the corresponding receiver side) and in the
   downstream direction (i.e. Node(X) checks if it has received an FDI
   indication at one of its input ports). Then, since Node(X) has not
   received an FDI indication at one of its incoming or outgoing
   interfaces, the fault has been localized as uni-directional failure
   within the legacy sub-network. In this eventuality, Node(X) can
   perform any of the sub-sequent recovery action needed to recover the
   trail under failure condition. Then, Node(X) sends a (ChannelStatus)
   message to Node(Y) which acknowledges its reception.

   So, in brief, in case of unidirectional failure, the fault isolation
   steps are the following:

   1. Node(Y): Send ChannelStatus message to Node(X) upon FDI reception
               and wait for ACK
   2. Node(X): ACK the ChannelStatus message received from Node(Y) and
               perform correlation
   3. Node(X): Send ChannelStatus message to Node(Y) and wait for ACK

   This becomes more complex when a bi-directional failure occurs:

   Node(X) <------- Subnet -------> Node(Y)

   Node(X)           FDI ---------> Node(Y) û Forward DI (downwstream)

   Node(X) <-------- FDI            Node(Y) û Forward DI (upstream)

   Here, both Node(X) and Node(Y) sends a (ChannelStatus) message
   toward Node(Y) and Node(X) respectively. After acknowledgment, both
   sides correlate the FDI received at their input port, and determine
   the bi-directionality of the failure within the legacy sub-network.

   Thus here, the correlation will generate a (ChannelStatus) message
   from node Node(X) to Node(Y). This message indicates the interface
   status corresponding to the one specified by the (LMP) neighboring
   node but also the status of the corresponding receiver interface
   (i.e. the one through which the FDI message is received).

   In order to prevent any further FDI (AIS) to be reported by Node(Y)
   to a supervisory system, one assumes here that once the
   acknowledgment (ChannelStatusAck) message is received by the sender
   of the ChannelStatus message, alarm reporting is suppressed.
   Moreover, taking into account that LMP will not generate any
   subsequent (ChannelStatus) Message as long as the FDI indication is
   received this would pace the whole process and thus avoid
   overflowing the control plane until the interface status recovers.


D.Papadimitriou et al.   Expires December 2002                       8

draft-papadimitriou-ccamp-lmp-ls-applicability-00.txt        June 2002


   Note: Automatic Laser Shutdown (ALS)

   ALS can be considered as a specific case of uni-directional failure
   generating bi-directional failure indication. Consider the following
   situation:

        Tx --- .. --- Rx - Tx1 ---x---> Rx2 û Tx --- .. --- Rx
                            |            |
     TE <---- FDI ---       x            x       --- FDI ----> TE
                            |            |
        Rx --- .. --- Tx - Rx1 <--x---- Tx2 û Rx --- .. --- Tx

   The consecutive Loss of Signal defect (dLOS) at "conventional"
   receiver RX2 is used to shutdown the output of "conventional"
   transmitter TX2, which is the adjacent transmitter in the opposite
   direction. This in turn leads to dLOS in "conventional" receiver
   Rx1, which in turn shuts down "conventional" transmitter Tx1. After
   shutdown the output power of the transmitter shall be sufficiently
   low to generate dLOS at the receiver side. See [ITUT-G664] for more
   details on ALS and [ITUT-G783] for more detail on dLOS.

   Case b) Uni- or Bi-directional failure outside the legacy SONET/SDH
   sub-network

   In this case, the legacy SONET/SDH only forward the defect
   indication and therefore one can reasonable assume that Node(X) will
   detect the same indication as Node(Y). Thus the failure is located
   outside the SONET/SDH legacy sub-network and either an FDI or
   optionally a BDI is detected.

   Ingress incoming interface / Egress incoming interface

   Case b1) Downstream FDI

   On one hand, if Node(X) then  Node(Y) receive an FDI as depicted in
   the following figure:

   Node(W) ----------- Node(X) ---- Subnet ----> Node(Y)

   Node(W) --- FDI --> Node(X) ----  FDI   ----> Node(Y)

   By receiving the FDI on one of its ingress interface, Node(X)
   follows the canonical fault localization/ correlation procedure
   while Node(Y) by receiving the FDI transported over the legacy
   SONET/SDH sub-network follows the procedure described here below: .

   By receiving the ChannelStatus message from Node(Y), Node(X)
   correlates this information received for the corresponding ingress
   interface (flowing in the downstream direction) and egress interface
   (flowing in the upstream direction). Since a defect indication is
   only received at one of its ingress interfaces for the corresponding
   trail (from Node(W)), Node(X) sends a ChannelStatus message to
   Node(Y) indicating that the corresponding egress interface (toward

D.Papadimitriou et al.   Expires December 2002                       9

draft-papadimitriou-ccamp-lmp-ls-applicability-00.txt        June 2002


   Node(Y)) has not received any failure indication for that trail.
   This means that the failure is localized upstream to Node(X).
   Therefore, neither Node(X) or Node(Y) will perform any subsequent
   recovery actions for that trail as the failure is located upstream,
   outside to the legacy SONET/SDH network.

   Case b2) Upstream FDI

   On the other hand, if Node(Y) then  Node(X) receive an FDI as
   depicted in the following figure:

   Node(X) <--- Subnet ----- Node(Y) ----------- Node(Z)

   Node(X) <---  FDI   ----- Node(Y) <-- FDI --- Node(Z)

   One gives the precedence to the node receiving the FDI indication,
   however this does not provide any effective processing since from
   one side both edge nodes will either wait for each other or send the
   initiating fault correlation message. Thus one has to rely on the
   ChannelStatus message sent by Node(Y) to Node(Z) and the one sent by
   Node(X) to Node(Y). Both are triggered by the FDI indication
   received on their egress interface that generates the above-
   mentioned (downstream) sequence of ChannelStatus message.

   Here, by receiving from Node(X) the ChannelStatus message, Node(Y)
   correlates this information with the one detected at its egress
   interface (flowing in the upstream direction). Since, a defect
   indication has been received on one of its egress interfaces for the
   corresponding trail but not one of its ingress interfaces. Thus,
   Node(Y) has to rely on the ChannelStatus message sent to Node(Z) in
   order to know where the fault is localized. In any case, Node(Y)
   sends a ChannelStatus message to Node(X) indicating that the
   corresponding ingress interface (toward Node(X)) has not received
   any failure indication for that trail. This means that the failure
   is localized downstream to Node(Y). Therefore, neither Node(X) or
   Node(Y) will perform any subsequent recovery actions for that trail
   as the failure is located downstream and outside to the legacy
   SONET/SDH network.

6. Link Verification and Property Correlation

   In LMP, the canonical Link Verification procedure assumes that any
   link verification operation is performed before inserting the user
   traffic.

   In the context, Link Verification procedure is used to deliver
   1) Interface ID Mapping and Label Association at bootstrap
   2) Capability to verify the connectivity of a trail when not
      transporting normal traffic

   In the current context (for instance, scenario 1), Link Connectivity
   Verification procedure throughout the SONET/SDH sub-network can be
   provided by using inherent (Path) Trail Trace mechanisms, as defined

D.Papadimitriou et al.   Expires December 2002                      10

draft-papadimitriou-ccamp-lmp-ls-applicability-00.txt        June 2002


   in [LMP-SONET-SDH]. This has to be performed on unallocated data
   links since one can not apply Path Trail Trace capabilities of the
   POH (J1, J2 bytes) unless the signal label (C2 byte of the POH) is
   supervisory unequipped together with UNEQ alarm de-activation. Thus
   one expects to perform this operation during the initial discovery
   phase.

   Note: using Supervisory Trail Termination (STT) function is
   applicable when the transport plane is not carrying user traffic. In
   this case the function generates a valid signal (at Node(X)) that
   can be supervised from the other side (at Node(Y), for instance).

   Moreover, one has to consider that [LMP] does not allow the exchange
   of the SONET/SDH label in order to provide a consistent interface
   ID/Label association between non-adjacent deviceÆs interfaces. Thus
   in addition to exchange of the interface ID during Link Verification
   (see [LMP-SONET-SDH]) one foresees here the exchange of the
   corresponding Label value (see [GMPLS-SONET-SDH]). The corresponding
   message exchange only involves (as described in [LMP]) local
   interface identifier exchange in such a way that provisioning of the
   non-adjacent device corresponding values are dynamically discovered.

   Once this interface mapping and label association is available at
   the nodes bordering the legacy SONET/SDH network (for instance,
   Node(X) and Node(Y)), trail bundling operation can be performed.
   Trail bundling extends the Link Property Correlation from the
   section to the path level allowing the grouping of path trails
   having for instance, the same Resource Class and Traffic Engineering
   Metric as specified in [GMPLS-ARCH]. However, one of the major
   aspects is to define a (path) trail correlation property enabling to
   group most (if not any) of the SONET/SDH specific path attributes
   such as performance monitoring capabilities and (configurable)
   thresholds for instance.

7. LMP-WDM Applicability

   In this section, we address the applicability (and the potential
   extension) of the LMP(-WDM) capabilities to support information
   exchange between SONET/SDH nodes connected via a non-SONET/SDH sub-
   network, for instance a legacy Optical Transport Hierarchy (OTH)
   sub-network. In this context, the main difference with respect to
   the LMP-WDM scope is that the switching capable element is not
   necessarily GMPLS-capable. Therefore, in this case, the server
   entity may support one or more switching capability and not only
   optical channel multiplexing capability, as it is the case with
   Optical Line Systems (see [CCAMP-OLI]).

   As described in [LMP-WDM], LMP for WDM systems helps in maintenance
   of control channel connectivity, verification of component link
   connectivity, and link, fiber, or channel failures within the
   network between Cross-Connects and Optical Line Systems (OLS). These
   extensions to LMP are referred to as LMP-WDM and have been designed


D.Papadimitriou et al.   Expires December 2002                      11

draft-papadimitriou-ccamp-lmp-ls-applicability-00.txt        June 2002


   in compliance with the ôcarrier requirementö specification (see
   [OLI]).

   However, this protocol can be easily extended to cover additional
   technologies extending beyond ôpre-OTNö such as OTH and SONET/SDH.
   Thus, the three LMP/LMP-WDM scenarios can also be considered for
   these environments.

7.1 Scope and Scenarios

   Here, using the generic (inter-connection) scenario 2, where the
   SONET/SDH nodes (LMP Network edge nodes) maintain trails through a
   non-SONET/SDH network, one gets the following reference
   architecture:

   LMP Network   <--  --- LMP-WDM Sub-Network   ---  --> LMP Network
         |                                                   |
         |                                                   |
         |                                                   |
   SONET/SDH Net <--  --> non-SONET/SDH Sub-Net <--  --> SONET/SDH Net
   Edge Node(X)           Node(1) ---- Node(N)           Edge Node(Y)
         |   |             |                |             |    |
         |    ---LMP-WDM---                  ---LMP-WDM---     |
         |                                                     |
          <-----------------------LMP------------------------->


   The usefulness of the proposed mechanism is illustrated by the
   following case description:

   SONET/SDH Node(X) <------------LMP-----------> SONET/SDH Node(Y)
      ^                                                         ^
      |                                                         |
      |LMP-WDM                                           LMP-WDM|
      |                                                         |
      v                                                         v
    Node(1) <------- Node(2) <-- Subnet --> Node(i)  -------> Node(N)

      \                                                         /
       -------------------------- OTN --------------------------


   Note that in order to achieve consistency one should ensure that
   Node(1) and Node(N) are necessarily synchronized concerning the
   information they exchange with both edge Node(X) and Node(Y).

   Here, the analogy with LMP-WDM (defined between OLS and PXC/OXC) can
   be drawn as follows: Node(X) and Node(Y) corresponds to PXC/OXC and
   Node(1) to Node(N) to Optical Line System (OLS); the only exception
   is that  the LMP capable nodes (i.e. Node(X) and Node(Y)) are not
   necessarily GMPLS-capable nodes. As such, LMP-WDM provides the
   mechanism enabling cross technology information exchange while LMP
   provides the peer information exchange.

D.Papadimitriou et al.   Expires December 2002                      12

draft-papadimitriou-ccamp-lmp-ls-applicability-00.txt        June 2002



   In this model, one assumes that the OTN border nodes are LMP-WDM
   capable only, while Node(X) and  Node(Y) are GMPLS capable (and in
   particular LMP capable). Using this LMP-WDM, Node(X) can set
   Performance Monitoring parameters (for instance BER thresholds) to
   Node(1) (the same occurs at the other side between Node(Y) and
   Node(N)); the border nodes  Node(1) and  Node(N) can report alarm
   (after correlation or not) to the SONET/SDH nodes.

   One gets also the capability to perform trail tracing between
   Node(1) and Node(N) without having to modify the hardware
   capabilities of any of the involved devices. Moreover, the LMP
   Session between the Node(X) and Node(Y) can be used to provide label
   association (and subsequently explicit label control if GMPLS is
   supported by the edge sub-networks).

   Note that the above Control Channel topology and LMP adjacencies can
   be modified in order to achieve nested LMP and LMP-WDM sessions:

       LMP Network <-- --- LMP(-WDM)Sub-Network  ---  --> LMP Network
           |                                                 |
           |                                                 |
     SONET/SDH Net <-- --> non-SONET/SDH Sub-Net <--  --> SONET/SDH Net
      Edge Node(X)          Node(1) --- Node(N)           Edge Node(Y)
                |           |   |         |   |           |
                |           |   |         |   |           |
                 --LMP-WDM-- === -- LMP -- === --LMP-WDM--

   This case is particularly interesting because SONET/SDH Network edge
   nodes are only LMP-WDM capable. Using the corresponding sessions
   would enable to bridge through the LMP session defined between
   Node(1) and Node(N), information such as the one that would be
   exchanged using a direct IP Control Channel between edge nodes (i.e.
   Node(X) and Node(Y)). This would be then equivalent to the
   architecture described here above where one additional and dedicated
   LMP session is defined between Node(X) and Node(Y).

   Here the LMP session between Node(1) and Node(N) (or its hop by hop
   equivalent) should be fast enough in order to avoid any mismatch of
   information exchanged when using the LMP-WDM and the LMP session.

   This scheme also enables a faster correlation of defect indications
   and notifications (such as the one exchanged through ChannelStatus
   message). The LMP-WDM session between Node(X) and Node(1) (and
   between Node(N) and Node(Y)) enables for the former  to determine
   whether or not the failure (a LoS or a LoL for instance, and this
   depending on the transport plane interface capabilities) is due to
   an internal sub-network failure or is localized outside this sub-
   network.

7.2 Control Channel



D.Papadimitriou et al.   Expires December 2002                      13

draft-papadimitriou-ccamp-lmp-ls-applicability-00.txt        June 2002


   Depending on the overhead termination of the edge SONET/SDH nodes
   either a Section/RS DCC or a Line/MS DCC in-band Control Channel
   implementation can be considered.

7.3 Link (Section) Verification

   Here, we can apply RS/Section trail tracing capabilities using J0
   byte of the RS/Section OH for contiguous Link Verification coupled
   with an out-of-band Test message exchange, as defined in [LMP-SONET-
   SDH]. When using RS/Section trail tracing in combination with an
   out-of-band Test message, the J0 Trace pattern mapping is performed
   between section termination points (i.e. at Node(X) and Node(Y)).

7.4 Link (Section) Property Correlation

   TBD.

8. Conclusion

   By adding the discussed extensions to LMP and LMP-WDM a seamless
   bridging of legacy network parts between GMPLS enabled nodes can be
   achieved. This will ease the introduction of GMPLS in todayÆs
   networks. This way, legacy parts of the network can be bridged
   without impacting procedures and mechanisms in the GMPLS Network.

9. Security Considerations

   This document does not introduce additional security considerations.

10. References

   [GMPLS-ARCH] E.Mannie (Editor) et al., æGeneralized Multi-Protocol
                Label Switching (GMPLS) ArchitectureÆ, Internet Draft,
                Work in progress, draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-architecture-
                02.txt, February 2002.

   [GMPLS-LDP]  L.Berger (Editor) et al., æGeneralized MPLS
                Signaling -CR-LDP ExtensionsÆ, Internet Draft, Work in
                progress, draft-ietf-mpls-generalized-cr-ldp-06.txt,
                April 2002.

   [GMPLS-RSVP] L.Berger (Editor) et al., æGeneralized MPLS Signaling -
                RSVP-TE ExtensionsÆ, Internet Draft, Work in progress,
                draft-ietf-mpls-generalized-rsvp-te-07.txt, April 2002.

   [GMPLS-SIG]  L.Berger (Editor) et al., æGeneralized MPLS - Signaling
                Functional DescriptionÆ, Internet Draft, Work in
                progress, draft-ietf-mpls-generalized-signaling-08.txt,
                April 2002.

   [GMPLS-SONET-SDH] E.Mannie and D.Papadimitriou (Editors) et al.,
                æGeneralized MPLS û SDH/Sonet SpecificsÆ, Internet


D.Papadimitriou et al.   Expires December 2002                      14

draft-papadimitriou-ccamp-lmp-ls-applicability-00.txt        June 2002


                Draft, Work in progress, draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-sonet-
                sdh-05.txt, May 2002.

   [LMP]        J.P.Lang (Editor) et al., ôLink Management Protocol,ö
                Internet Draft (work in progress), draft-ietf-ccamp-
                lmp-03.txt, March 2002.

   [LMP-SONET-SDH] S.Ansorge et al., ôLMP Extensions for Sonet and
                SDHö, Internet Draft (work in progress), draft-ansorge-
                ccamp-lmp-sonet-sdh-01.txt, February 2002.

   [LMP-WDM]    A.Fredette and J.P.Lang , (Editors), ôLink Management
                Protocol (LMP) for DWDM Optical Line Systems,ö Internet
                Draft (work in progress), draft-ietf-ccamp-lmp-wdm-
                00.txt, February 2002.

   [MPLS-BUND]  K.Kompella et al., ôLink Bundling in MPLS Traffic
                Engineeringö, Internet Draft (work in progress), draft-
                ietf-mpls-bundle-03.txt, May 2002.

   [MPLS-HIER]  K.Kompella et Y.Rekhter, ôLSP Hierarchy with
                Generalized MPLS TEö, Internet Draft (work in
                progress), draft-ietf-mpls-lsp-hierarchy-05.txt, May
                2002.

   [RFC2026]    S.Bradner, "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision
                3", RFC 2119, October 1996.

   [RFC2119]    S.Bradner, "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
                Requirement Levels," RFC 2119.

11. Author's Addresses

   Gert Grammel (Alcatel)
   Via Trento 30,
   I-20059 Vimercate, Italy
   Phone: +39 039 686-4453
   Email: gert.grammel@netit.alcatel.it

   Dimitri Papadimitriou (Alcatel)
   Francis Wellesplein 1,
   B-2018 Antwerpen, Belgium
   Phone: +32 3 240-8491
   Email: dimitri.papadimitriou@alcatel.be

   Stefan Ansorge (Alcatel)
   Lorenzstrasse 10
   70435, Stuttgart, Germany
   Phone: +49 7 11 821-33744
   Email: stefan.ansorge@ks.sel.alcatel.de

   Wojciech Bigos (AGH University of Technology)
   Department of Telecommunications

D.Papadimitriou et al.   Expires December 2002                      15

draft-papadimitriou-ccamp-lmp-ls-applicability-00.txt        June 2002


   Al. Mickiewicza 30,
   30-059 Krakow, Poland
   Phone: +48 12 617-3967
   Email: bigos@kt.agh.edu.pl

   F.-Joachim Westphal (T-Systems Nova)
   Technologiezentrum
   Address: Goslarer Ufer 35, D-10589 Berlin, Germany
   Phone: +49 30 3497-4380
   Email: fritz-joachim.westphal@t-systems.com

   Frank Tetzlaff (T-Systems Nova)
   Technologiezentrum
   Address: Goslarer Ufer 35, D-10589 Berlin, Germany
   Phone: +49 30 3497-4448
   Email: frank.tetzlaff@t-systems.com

Appendix I. SDH Supervision Capabilities

   Reference: ITU-T G.806

1. Continuity supervision

   Continuity supervision monitors the integrity of the continuity of a
   channel. This operation is performed by monitoring the presence/
   absence of the channel information. The monitoring process can check
   for the whole information (e.g. LOS at the physical layer) or a
   specific mandatory part of it (e.g. multiframe indication for SDH
   Tandem Connection Monitoring - TCM).

   At path layer networks a replacement signal might be generated by an
   open connection matrix (e.g. Unequipped signal for SDH). The
   detection of this replacement signal is then an indication of loss
   of continuity.

1.1 Loss Of Signal (LoS)

   LOS signal supervision is used at the physical layer. Detection of
   "incoming signal absent" occurs the incoming power level at the
   receiver has dropped to a level corresponding to a high error
   condition.

1.2 Unequipped (UNEQ)

   The Unequipped defect (UNEQ) shall be detected if n consecutive
   frames contain the unequipped activation pattern in the unequipped
   overhead. The UNEQ defect shall be cleared if in n consecutive
   frames the unequipped deactivation pattern is detected in the
   unequipped overhead. Note that Unequipped is only defined for paths
   and not for RS/Section or MS/Line trails.

1.3 TC Loss of Tandem Connection (LTC)


D.Papadimitriou et al.   Expires December 2002                      16

draft-papadimitriou-ccamp-lmp-ls-applicability-00.txt        June 2002


   The function shall detect for the presence/absence of the tandem
   connection overhead in the TCM overhead by evaluating the multiframe
   alignment signal in the TCM multiframe overhead. The loss of tandem
   connection defect (LTC) shall be detected if the multiframe
   alignment process is in the Out-Of-Multiframe state. The LTC shall
   be cleared if the multiframe alignment process is in the In-
   Multiframe state. Note that Unequipped defect is only defined for
   paths and not for RS/Section or MS/Line trails.

2. Connectivity Supervision

   Connectivity supervision monitors the integrity of the routing of
   the trail between sink and source. Connectivity is normally only
   required if the layer provides flexible connectivity, both
   automatically or manually (e.g. static configuration). The
   connectivity is supervised by attaching a unique identifier at the
   source. If the received identifier does not match this expected
   identifier a connectivity defect has occurred.

2.1 TTI Processing and Trace Identifier Mismatch

   TBD.

2.2 Loss of Sequence defect (SQM)

   SQM shall be detected if the accepted sequence number does not match
   the expected Sequence number. SQM shall be cleared if the accepted
   sequence number matches the expected sequence number.

2.3 Loss of Alignment (LOA)

   LOA shall be detected if the alignment process cannot perform the
   alignment of the individual VC-4s to a common multiframe start (e.g.
   LOA is activated if the differential delay exceeds the size of the
   alignment buffer).

   LOA is the generic defect term referring to loss of frame (LOF),
   loss of multiframe (LOM) or loss of pointer (LOP).

   Loss Of Frame (LOF)

        For STMn/STSn signals, if the out-of-frame state persists for 3
        milliseconds, a loss of frame (LOF) state shall be declared.
        Once in a LOF state, this state shall be left when the in-frame
        state persists continuously for 3 milliseconds.

   HOVC Loss Of Multiframe (LOM)

        If the multiframe alignment process is in the out-of-multiframe
        state and the H4 multiframe overhead byte is not recovered
        within N ms (not configurable and in the range 1 ms to 5 ms)),
        a LOM defect shall be declared. Once in a LOM state, this state
        shall be exited when the multiframe is recovered.

D.Papadimitriou et al.   Expires December 2002                      17

draft-papadimitriou-ccamp-lmp-ls-applicability-00.txt        June 2002



   Loss of Pointer (LOP)

        A LOP is declared if the pointer value cannot be interpreted in
        the right manner. This might be due to illegal values (out of
        range), or due to high frequency of value changes.

3. Signal quality supervision

   Signal quality supervision in general monitors the performance of a
   trail. If the performance crosses a certain threshold this might
   activate a defect.

3.1 Excessive error (EXC) and degraded signal (DEG)

   Excessive error and degraded signal defects are to be detected
   according to the following process:

   - An excessive error (EXC) shall be detected if the equivalent BER                                         
   exceeds a preset threshold of 10^(-x), x = 3, 4 or 5. The excessive
   error defect shall be cleared if the equivalent BER is better than
   10^(-x-1).

   - A degraded signal (DEG) shall be detected if the equivalent BER
   exceeds a preset threshold of 10^(-x), x = 5, 6, 7, 8 or 9. The
   degraded signal defect shall be cleared if the equivalent BER is
   better than 10^(-x-1). A DEG defect can be detected in æburstyÆ mode
   in case N consecutive seconds the Error Rate is greater than a
   provision-able threshold.

   SONET uses EXC detector types, while most AU-4 based SDH uses
   Alternative DEG detector types. (n consecutive seconds with at least
   M block failures per second).

4. Alignment supervision

   Alignment supervision checks that frame and frame start can be
   correctly recovered. The specific processes depend on the
   signal/frame structure and may include:
   û frame/multiframe alignment
   û pointer processing
   û alignment of several independent frames to a common frame start in
   case of inverse multiplexing.

   If one of these processes fails a related loss of alignment (LOA)
   shall be activated. The defect detection process shall be normally
   tolerant to single frame slips, but should detect for continuous
   frame slips.

5. Maintenance signal supervision

   Maintenance signal supervision is concerned with the detection of
   maintenance indications in the signal.

D.Papadimitriou et al.   Expires December 2002                      18

draft-papadimitriou-ccamp-lmp-ls-applicability-00.txt        June 2002



5.1 Alarm Indication Signal (AIS)

   If N consecutive frames contain the AIS activation pattern in the
   AIS overhead, an AIS failure is detected. The AIS defect shall be
   cleared if N consecutive frames contain the AIS deactivation pattern
   in the AIS overhead.

   For SDH MSn, the MS-AIS is transported over K2 byte while for
   VC3/VC4 the AU-AIS is transported over the H1, H2 bytes.












































D.Papadimitriou et al.   Expires December 2002                      19

draft-papadimitriou-ccamp-lmp-ls-applicability-00.txt        June 2002


   Full Copyright Statement

   "Copyright (C) The Internet Society (date). All Rights Reserved.
   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph
   are included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE."




























D.Papadimitriou et al.   Expires December 2002                      20
