  
MIP6 Working Group                                       Padmakumar A V 
Internet Draft                                                    Intel 
                                                              Bangalore 
Expires: June 23, 2007                                December 20, 2006 
    
    
         Multi-homed VPN Model for Automating Credit / Debit Cards  
           draft-padmakumar-mip6-mipv6vpnmodelforcreditcards-00.txt 
    
Status of this Memo 
    
   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any 
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware 
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes 
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79. 
    
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 
    
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt. 
    
    
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
    
   This document is a submission of the IETF MIP6 WG. Comments should be 
   directed to the MIP6 WG mailing list, mip6@ietf.org. 
    
Copyright Notice 
    
      Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006) 
    
    
    

 
 
Padmakumar A V         Expires – June 23, 2007               [Page 1] 
 
Internet Draft MIPv6-VPN Model for Automating Credit Cards December 2006 
 
 
 
Abstract 
    
   Credit Cards work on a 'trust model'. This document tries to replace 
   this 'Trust Model' with a 'Secure Model' and proposes a way to 
   cryptographically link Credit / Debit card identities to an end 
   device. 
    
    
Conventions used in this document 
    
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [i]. 
    
    
Table of Contents 
    
   1. Introduction...................................................2 
   2. Overview.......................................................3 
      2.1 Credit Card / Debit Card Registration......................3 
      2.2 Transaction Model..........................................4 
   3. Security Considerations........................................5 
   4. References.....................................................5 
      4.1 Normative References.......................................5 
      4.2 Informative References.....................................5 
    
    
1.   Introduction 
    
   Credit Cards work on a 'trust model'. This document tries to replace 
   this 'Trust Model' with a 'Secure Model' and proposes a way to 
   cryptographically link Credit / Debit card identities to an end 
   device. This association is achieved by correlating:  
      O End user's certificates 
      O Cryptographically Generated Address (CGA) [5] issued by the bank  
      O IPSec Security associations negotiated between end device and 
      Bank's Home Agents. 
    
   In this model, credit / debit card details are never revealed to 
   anyone. Even if the credit / debit card user level secrets like 
   passwords, login id are compromised by an attacker, the attacker 
   would not be able to use them. 
    
    
    
    

 
 
Padmakumar A V         Expires – June 23, 2007               [Page 2] 
 
Internet Draft MIPv6-VPN Model for Automating Credit Cards December 2006 
 
 
 
    
    
    
2.   Overview 
    
   This model suggests a way for banks to view their customers as part 
   of their corporate network connected via a VPN. This will help them 
   to implement corporate level security for their customers.  
    
   That means before doing any bank transactions, customers MUST have to 
   connect to the banks corporate network. Customer MUST use a 
   Cryptographically Generated IP addresses given by the bank to connect 
   to bank’s network. This address belongs to the bank’s network and 
   this model looks like a home address in Mobile IPv6 [2]. 
    
   Banks generate CGAs [5] using customer’s public key and bank’s own 
   prefix.  This makes the address cryptographically linked to address 
   owner’s Public key. Using this scheme, Bank’s can have up to 2^59 
   customer identities linked to their IPv6 [1] home prefix. 
    
   End point devices with MIPv6 and IPSec [3] support can use this 
   address as an additional Home Address and will behave like a 
   multihomed node. All transactions between bank and customers will be 
   IPSec protected by MIPv6 tunnels and reverse tunnels. Nodes inside 
   bank’s networks can be configured not to respond to Return 
   Routability procedure. This prevents the route optimization and all 
   traffic will be forward tunneled or reverse tunneled between MN and 
   HA. 
    
2.1    Credit Card / Debit Card Registration 
    
   O CGA Generation 
    
   Banks generate CGAs using customer’s public key and bank’s own 
   prefix. Refer to CGA RFC [RFC3972] for details about CGA generation. 
    
   Banks can link this CGA to their customers credit/debit card 
   identities. 
    
   The CGA generated is a permanent address and can be used as long as 
   the private key associated with this address is secure. This address 
   is also a home address and the packet originating with this home 
   address – after binding and VPN enabling – will always be enclosed 
   within another packet with current care of address as the source 
   address and Home agent address as destination address.  
    

 
 
Padmakumar A V         Expires – June 23, 2007               [Page 3] 
 
Internet Draft MIPv6-VPN Model for Automating Credit Cards December 2006 
 
 
 
   The application decides which home address to use. If the application 
   uses this CGA for web browsing, then those packets will get dropped 
   at banks firewalls. 
    
   O Multi-homed Mobile Nodes  
    
   Mobile Nodes will use this CGA as an additional home address.  This 
   address will be used on need basis. Mobile node will complete home 
   binding with bank’s home agent and setup the MIPv6 tunnels (by 
   disabling subsequent binding process with other correspondent nodes 
   in bank’s network) before it starts any application level bank 
   transactions. Customers MUST not be allowed to communicate with the 
   bank with any other address other than CGAs generated by the bank. 
   All messages sent from this address (CGA) have to be signed by CGA 
   signature. 
    
   Mobile Nodes disable subsequent binding procedure with Correspondent 
   Nodes in the Bank’s network to gain the VPN behavior. This can also 
   be achieved by disabling MIPv6 functionality at CN side. This would 
   results in all communications between Correspondent nodes and Mobile 
   node to flow through IPSec tunnels between Home Agent and Mobile 
   Node. This will create the expected VPN behavior for the access 
   model. 
    
2.2    Transaction Model 
    
   Merchant will certify the bill generated by him and forwards this to 
   the Customer’s device. At this stage customer device will initiate 
   binding with his Bank’s Home Agent and setup MIPv6 tunnels. 
   Additional messages have to be defined for standardizing Merchant 
   Customer communications. 
 
   After establishing VPN tunnels with Banks, customer can forward this 
   bill to the bank for payment. Banks can have additional application 
   level authentications at this stage for added security.  
    
   While establishing VPN tunnels Banks could verify the customer’s 
   identity based on the CGA that he had used for the binding. Only 
   authorized customers who have a CGA issued by the bank will be able 
   to establish this VPN tunnel. Banks can have additional application 
   level security, like login etc. on top of this. 
    
   Banks verify the account details and pay the bill by signing it. The 
   signed bill will be sent back to the customer and customer will 
   forward this one to the merchant. 
    

 
 
Padmakumar A V         Expires – June 23, 2007               [Page 4] 
 
Internet Draft MIPv6-VPN Model for Automating Credit Cards December 2006 
 
 
 
   Merchants can verify bank’s digital signature and accepts the 
   payment. An additional level of authentication can be achieved by 
   having customers signing it. 
    
    
3.   Security Considerations 
    
   It is important to note that the credit / debit card identities are 
   never revealed to anyone during the entire operation. Card identities 
   are utmost secret and there exists rare chances of someone stealing 
   the card details. 
   If someone really wants to misuse the details then he must: 
   1. Get the private key associated to the address owner. 
   2. He has to know the CGA associated to address owner’s Public key. 
   3. He has to overcome the application level security of the bank. 
   4. He has to overcome the default authentication mechanisms offered 
   by the end device. 
   5. No one really benefits by knowing application level credentials 
   like password and login id alone because he can not establish VPN 
   tunnels and hence can not do any transactions with the Bank without 
   knowing all of the above. 
    
    
4.   References 
 
4.1    Normative References 
 
   [1] Deering, S. and R. Hinden, "Internet Protocol, Version 6 (IPv6)   
      Specification", RFC 2460, December 1998. 
    
   [2] Johnson, D., Perkins, C. and J. Arkko, "Mobility Support in 
      IPv6", RFC 3775, June 2004. 
    
   [3] Arkko, J., Devarapalli, V. and F. Dupont, "Using IPsec to Protect 
      Mobile IPv6 Signaling Between Mobile Nodes and Home Agents", RFC 
      3776, June 2004. 
    
    
4.2    Informative References 
    
   [4] Kaufman, C., "Internet Key Exchange (IKEv2) Protocol", RFC 4306, 
      December 2005. 
    
   [5] Aura, T., "Cryptographically Generated Addresses (CGA)", RFC 
      3972, March 2005 
    
 
 
Padmakumar A V         Expires – June 23, 2007               [Page 5] 
 
Internet Draft MIPv6-VPN Model for Automating Credit Cards December 2006 
 
 
 
    
Acknowledgments 
   The author would like to thank Sridhar Rajagopal, Rajeev D Muralidhar 
   and Chinku Miandad for their input and discussions. 
    
    
    
Author's Addresses 
    
   Padmakumar A V 
   Intel 
   Bangalore 
   Email: Padmakumar.a.vasudevan.pillai@intel.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
Padmakumar A V         Expires – June 23, 2007               [Page 6] 
 
Internet Draft MIPv6-VPN Model for Automating Credit Cards December 2006 
 
 
 
   Full Copyright Statement 
    
      Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006). 
    
      This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions 
      contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors 
      retain all their rights. 
    
      This document and the information contained herein are provided on an 
      "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS 
      OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET 
      ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, 
      INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE 
      INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED 
      WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
    
   Intellectual Property 
    
      The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
      Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to 
      pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in 
      this document or the extent to which any license under such rights 
      might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has 
      made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information 
      on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be 
      found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 
    
      Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
      assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
      attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of 
      such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
      specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at 
      http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 
    
      The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
      copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
      rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
      this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at 
      ietf-ipr@ietf.org. 
    
   Acknowledgment 
    
      Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF 
      Administrative Support Activity (IASA). 
                     
    
 
 
Padmakumar A V         Expires – June 23, 2007               [Page 7] 
