Network Working Group                                      Scott Bradner
Internet-Draft                                        Harvard University

               A Memorandum of Understanding for an ICANN
                     Protocol Support Organization

                     <draft-poised-pso-mou-00.txt>

1. Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as work in progress.

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This document will expire before December, 1999. Distribution of this
   draft is unlimited.

2. Abstract
   This is the current draft of the MOU that will be used between the

Bradner                                                         [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                   PSO MOU                       June 1999

   standards development organizations that will form the Protocol
   Support Organization(PSO) within the Internet Corporation for
   Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN).  This draft has been developed by
   representatives of the IETF, ITU, W3C and ETSI with the help of Jorge
   Contreras of Hale and Dorr.

Bradner                                                         [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                   PSO MOU                       June 1999

                        MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING

                               _______, 1999

                  ICANN Protocol Supporting Organization

   (1)  Purpose and Scope

       (a)  The Protocol Support Organization (PSO) will be a consensus-
           based  advisory body within the ICANN framework.

       (b)  The PSO will establish a "Protocol Council" and host an
           annual open  meeting (the "General Assembly").

       (c)  The purpose of this Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) is to
           establish a set of principles that ICANN and the Standards
           Development Organizations who have signed below (the Signing
           SDOs) will  use in forming and operating the PSO

   (2)   Composition and Action of Protocol Council

       (a)  Size.  Each Signing SDO will appoint two (2) members to the
           Protocol  Council, each such member to serve for a time
           period determined by such  Signing SDO.

       (b)  Each Signing SDO shall be responsible for choosing  its two
           members of the Protocol Council in a manner of its own
           choosing, and in accordance with its own open procedures.
           Each Signing SDO may remove or replace one or both of its
           members on the Protocol Council in its discretion.

       (c)  Selection and Appointment.  Concurrently with the posting of
           notice of the date of the annual meeting of the PSO General
           Assembly on the PSO Web Site, ICANN and the Protocol Council
           shall make an open call for nominations to any potential
           vacancies on the Protocol Council.  Any nominations received

Bradner                                                         [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                   PSO MOU                       June 1999

           will be forwarded to the Signing SDOs eligible to appoint
           members (i.e., they do not already have two members on the
           Protocol Council) for their consideration.

       (d)  Action by Protocol Council.  Unless otherwise specified in
           this MOU, all actions of the Protocol Council shall be taken
           by majority vote of the total number of members.  Action may
           be taken at any meeting of the Protocol Council, which may be
           by telephone conference in which all participants can hear
           the others.  Meetings of the Protocol Council may be called
           by request of any three members of the Protocol Council,
           with at least fifteen (15) days prior written notice to each
           of the  other members.  In order to conduct business at any
           meeting of the Protocol Council, at least a quorum of members
           must be present; a quorum shall be present when at least
           majority of the members of the Protocol Council are present,
           and when such members represent at least 3/4ths of the
           Signing SDOs.

       (e)  Web Site.  The Protocol Council will arrange for the
           establishment and maintenance of a Web site devoted to PSO
           activities and news.

       (f)  Secretary.  The Protocol Council will have a Secretary to
           coordinate administrative matters relating to the PSO and
           Protocol Council.  The Secretary's term of office shall be
           one year.  The position of Secretary will rotate among the
           Signing SDOs, with the initial Secretary to be selected by
           ____, and subsequent Secretaries to be appointed by a
           randomly selected Signing SDO that has not appointed  the
           Secretary in the current rotation.

       (g)  No Compensation.  Neither the Secretary, nor any Protocol
           Council member or designated ICANN Board member shall be
           entitled to any compensation or reimbursement of expenses
           from the PSO.  The PSO shall not be required to obtain

Bradner                                                         [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                   PSO MOU                       June 1999

           insurance coverage for, or to indemnify, the members of the
           Protocol Council or persons acting in any other capacity by
           or for the PSO.

   (3)  ICANN Directors.

       (a)  The Protocol Council will appoint Directors to the ICANN
           Board of  Directors in accordance with the By-laws of ICANN,
           for such terms as  are specified by such By-laws.  ICANN will
           notify the Protocol Council of any vacancies on the ICANN
           Board which may be filled by the Protocol Council.

       (b)  The Protocol Council will conduct an open call for
           nominations for any open PSO seats on the ICANN Board.  Each
           Signing SDO is entitled to nominate candidates by procedures
           of its own choosing. Additionally, nominations from the
           public at large will be allowed under conditions to be
           defined by the Protocol Council.  The Protocol Council will
           select the PSO nominees to the ICANN Board from among these
           nominees.  ICANN Directors selected by the Protocol Council
           may, but need not, be members of the Protocol Council or any
           SDO.

       (c)  No more than 2 PSO-nominated Directors may be residents of
           the same Geographic Region (as defined in the ICANN By-laws).

       (d)  The ICANN Directors appointed by the Protocol Council will
           not represent the PSO on the ICANN Board, but will function
           as full Directors of ICANN.

   (4)  Duties of Protocol Council

       (a)  Advisory Role.  The Protocol Council will advise the ICANN
           Board on matters referred to the Protocol Council by the
           ICANN Board relating to the assignment of parameters for
           Internet protocols.

Bradner                                                         [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                   PSO MOU                       June 1999

       (b)  Policy Development.

           (i)   In the tradition of the Internet, standards development
               policies and conflict resolution mechanisms should be
               created by those institutions most directly involved,
               without undue interference from centralized bodies.

           (ii)  The ICANN By-laws vest in the PSO the primary
               responsibility for developing and recommending
               substantive policies in the area of protocol parameter
               assignment.

           (iii) The PSO is committed to the proposition that policies
               for parameter assignments for particular protocols are
               the responsibility of the individual Signing SDO that
               developed the protocol.

           (iv)  The Protocol Council, and, when requested, ICANN, will
               be available as needed by the Signing SDOs to develop
               policies and procedures for conflict resolution between
               Signing SDOs.
           (v)   Any such policies and procedures will be adopted only
               with the agreement of all SDOs.

    (5) Annual Open Meeting.

       (a)  The Protocol Council will periodically convene an open
           meeting  ("General Assembly") for promoting discussion and
           receiving input  regarding the work of the PSO.
       (b)  A General Assembly  will be held at least once per year, and
           will permit open participation by all interested individuals.
       (c)  Each annual General Assembly will be hosted by a Signing SDO
           in  conjunction with one of its major meetings, as determined
           by the  Protocol Council (with an effort to hold no 2
           consecutive General  Assemblies in the same Geographic
           Region.)

Bradner                                                         [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                   PSO MOU                       June 1999

       (d)  It is expected that the major organizations within the
           Internet  protocol standards development community will
           provide the  constituency of the General Assembly.

   (6) Open Proceedings and Documents.

       (a)  Communications between ICANN and the Protocol Council.  All
           official communications between ICANN and the Protocol
           Council will be made public on the PSO web site.  In the
           event that ICANN requests that a communication be kept
           confidential, the Protocol Council will honor this request
           for a fixed period of time not to exceed one year, and then
           make the communication public.

       (b)  Protocol Council Proceedings.  All meetings of the Protocol
           Council and official discussions of Protocol Council business
           will be conducted or reported on a publicly-archived mailing
           list accessible through the PSO web site.

       (c)  Meeting Announcements.  The schedule and agenda for the PSO
           General Assembly will be posted on the PSO Web Site at least
           90 days in advance of the meeting date.  Notice of Protocol
           Council meetings will be posted on the PSO Web at least
           fifteen (15) days before the meeting, or such shorter time
           period agreed upon by each of the Signing SDOs.  The minutes
           from all PSO meetings will be publicly posted on the PSO web
           site within 30 days of the meeting.

   (7)  Review and Modification of MOU.  ICANN and the Signing SDOs will
       periodically review the results and consequences of their
       cooperation under this MOU.  When appropriate, the signatories
       will consider the need for improvements in the MOU and make
       suitable proposals for modifying and updating the arrangements
       and scope of the MOU.  Any modification to the MOU must be
       approved by all signatories.

Bradner                                                         [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                   PSO MOU                       June 1999

   (8)  Standards Development Organizations

       (a)  The initial signatories to this MOU shall include ICANN and
           the Signing SDOs who have signed below.  Each Signing SDO
           must be an international, Internet-related standards
           development organization that establishes that it meets the
           criteria for SDOs set forth below.

           (i)  SDOs must be open, international, voluntary technical
               standard and technical specification development
               organizations which:

               (A)  Develop standards and/or specifications for use over
                   the public Internet.

               (B)  Can demonstrate active membership in the IP-related
                   standards and/or specification development process of
                   more than 800 individuals, if individual memberships
                   are used by the organization, or 80 companies, if
                   corporate memberships are used by the organization.

               (C)  Has been in operation for 3 or more years at the
                   time of their application.

               (D)  Can demonstrate that there is significant deployment
                   of its standards on the Internet.

               (E)  The significant protocols controlled by the
                   organization can be implemented without paying a
                   licensing fee to the organization.

           (ii)  Open, international, voluntary standards organizations
               are defined as international organizations that plan,
               develop or establish voluntary standards.  An
               organization shall be considered open and international
               if its standards and/or specifications development

Bradner                                                         [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                   PSO MOU                       June 1999

               process is open to any person or organization of any
               nationality on equitable terms.  An organization shall be
               considered voluntary if it makes no claim to compel use
               of its standards and specifications.  To be considered
               'international', an organization's voting (or other
               "full") membership must include individuals or companies
               primarily located in at least three different Geographic
               Regions and at least two different countries within each
               of those Geographic Regions.

       (b)    New Signatories.

           (i)    Any organization that believes it satisfies the SDO
               qualifications set forth above may apply in writing to
               the  Protocol Council to become a party to this MOU.  In
               order for an organization to become a party to this MOU,
               all then-existing MOU signatories must agree that such
               organization qualifies as  an SDO.
           (ii)   Rejected applicants can appeal to the ICANN Board,
               which may override such a rejection if the ICANN Board
               finds, by at least a two-thirds vote, that the
               organization meets the SDO criteria set forth above.
           (iii)  Any organization that is accepted as an SDO under this
               MOU  must execute a copy of this MOU, and agree to be
               bound by all of its terms and conditions, upon which it
               shall be considered  a Signing SDO for all purposes under
               this MOU.

       (9)  General.  This MOU does not constitute any of the parties as
           a partner, joint venture, agent, principal or franchisee of
           any other party. The waiver of any provision of this MOU on
           any occasion shall not constitute a waiver for purposes of
           any other occasion.  No party may transfer or assign any
           interest, right or obligation arising under this MOU without
           the prior written consent of each other party to this MOU.

Bradner                                                         [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                   PSO MOU                       June 1999

           IN WITNESS WHEREOF, this Memorandum of Understanding is
           executed this __ day of _____ 1999 by the undersigned, acting
           through their duly authorized representatives:

           INTERNET CORPORATION FOR ASSIGNED NAMES AND NUMBERS

            By: ________________________

            Name: _____________________

            Title: _______________________

    12. Security Considerations

       This type of non-protocol document does not directly effect the
       security of the Internet.

    13. Editor's Address

       Scott Bradner
       Harvard University
       1350 Mass Ave, rm 876
       Cambridge, MA
       02138
       USA

       phone: +1 617 495 3864
       sob@harvard.edu

Bradner                                                        [Page 10]
