


ENUM                                                          R. Stastny
Internet-Draft                                                     Oefeg
Expires: December 6, 2006                                   June 4, 2006


    IANA Registration for an Enumservice to Hint to E.164 Resolution
                            Namespaces (ERN)
                    <draft-stastny-enum-ern-00.txt>

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 6, 2006.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

Abstract

   This document registers the Enumservice type "ern" and subtype "http"
   using the URI scheme 'http', as well as the subtype "urn" using the
   URI scheme 'urn' as per the IANA registration process defined in the
   ENUM specification RFC 3761.  This Enumservice is used to provide a
   hint in ENUM to an E.164 Resolution Namespace a service provider
   chooses to populate with E.164 numbers to be shared within a limited
   group of other service providers.




Stastny                 Expires December 6, 2006                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft               Enumservice ERN                   June 2006


Table of Contents

   1.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3.  The Problem  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   4.  Proposed Solution  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   5.  E.164 Resolution Namespaces  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   6.  ENUM Service Registrations - ern . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     6.1.  "http" Subtype . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     6.2.  "urn" Subtype  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   7.  Examples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     7.1.  Providing hints to two different namespaces  . . . . . . .  7
     7.2.  Providing a hint to e164.arpa  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   8.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   9.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   10. Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   11. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     11.1. Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     11.2. Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 11






























Stastny                 Expires December 6, 2006                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft               Enumservice ERN                   June 2006


1.  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in BCP 14, RFC2119 [1].


2.  Introduction

   Infrastructure ENUM is defined as the use of the technology in
   RFC3761 [2] by the carrier-of-record (Voice service provider) for a
   specific E.164 [3] number to map a telephone number into an URI [4]
   that identifies a specific point of interconnection to that service
   provider's network that could enable the originating party to
   establish communication with the associated terminating party.  It is
   separate from any URIs that the end-user who registers his E.164
   number in ENUM may wish to associate with that E.164 number.

   The requirements, terms and definitions for Infrastructure ENUM are
   defined in [5], the DDDS application for Infrastructure ENUM in
   "e164.arpa" is specified in [6].

   Voice service providers use E.164 numbers currently as their main
   naming and routing vehicle.  Infrastructure ENUM in "ie164.arpa"
   allows service providers to link Internet based resources such as
   URIs to E.164 numbers.  This allows service providers in addition to
   interconnecting via the PSTN/PLMN (or exclusively) to peer via IP-
   based protocols.  Service providers may announce all E.164 numbers or
   number ranges they host, regardless of whether the final end-user
   device is on the Internet, on IP-based open or closed Next Generation
   Networks (NGNs) or on the PSTN/PLMN/ISDN, provided an access (e.g.,
   Session Border Controller (SBC) or gateway) to the destination
   service provider's network is available on the Internet.


3.  The Problem

   The Infrastructure ENUM requirements in [5] state the following:

   "There is also no guarantee that the originating service provider
   querying Infrastructure ENUM is able to access the ingress network
   element of the destination provider's network.  Additional peering
   and accounting agreements requiring authentication may be necessary.
   The access provided may also be to a shared network of a group of
   providers, resolving the final destination network within the shared
   network.





Stastny                 Expires December 6, 2006                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft               Enumservice ERN                   June 2006


   1.  Infrastructure ENUM SHALL provide a means for a provider to
       populate DNS resource records (RRs) for the E.164 numbering
       resources for which it is the carrier-of-record in a single
       common publicly accessible namespace.  The single common
       namespace ultimately designated may or may not be the same as
       that designated for user ENUM (e164.arpa.)
   2.  Queries of infrastructure ENUM fully qualified domain names MUST
       return a result, even if the result is NXDOMAIN.  Queries must
       not be rejected, e.g., based on access control lists.
   3.  Infrastructure ENUM SHALL support RRs providing a URI that can
       identify a point of interconnection for delivery to the carrier-
       of-record of communications addressed to the E.164 number."

   Particularly these requirements are currently preventing some voice
   service providers to publish their data in Infrastructure ENUM.  Some
   may not want do provide a point of interconnection on the public
   Internet at all, whilst some do not even want to publish a list of
   numbers they host.

   To avoid the problems mentioned above, voice service providers are
   joining private groups of providers providing E.164 resulution
   namespaces (ERN) based on different technologies, e.g.  ENUM, SIP
   redirect and others.  Currently many such groups have been
   established.

   These solutions have two serious drawbacks: a service provider
   participating in one specific private ERN group will never be able to
   resolve ALL E.164 numbers that a subscriber may dial, using only the
   resolution available within a particular private ERN group.
   Conversely, access to a given service provider's resources or
   customers may be available only via a limited number of other service
   providers rather than directly to all participating providers within
   an ERN group, and possibly not at all to providers outside that ERN
   group.

   Almost by definition, these schemes are limited in scope.  To
   increase the reachability via IP-networks for voice and other real-
   time services, a service provider is forced to participate in more
   then one of these private ERN groups.

   This has also a drawback for originating service providers, because
   they now have to query in sequence or in parallel all private ERN
   groups they are participating to find by chance one where the
   destination network hosting the dialed number is also participating.
   This is not very efficient.






Stastny                 Expires December 6, 2006                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft               Enumservice ERN                   June 2006


4.  Proposed Solution

   It is proposed to give service providers not willing to enter URIs
   into the system defined in Infrastructure ENUM [6] the optional
   possibility to enter hints into Infrastructure ENUM in which private
   ERN groups they are participating.

   This would reduce the number of queries an originating network has to
   do to a maximum of two:

   1.  A query in Infrastructure ENUM to find out in which private ERN
       groups the destination network participates.
   2.  If a match is found, the originating network now directly queries
       the private ERN in which it and the destination hosting providers
       both participate and can be sure to get a positive response.  If
       more than one match is found, it is the choice of the originating
       service provider which private ERN it uses to query the E.164
       number.  If no match is found, the PSTN must be used or the call
       cannot be established.

   This does not prevent the destination network entering a NAPTR with a
   normal enumservice e.g.  SIP, pointing directly to an AoR or to an
   ingress point of the destination network.  It is again the choice of
   the originating network how to establish the call.

   Note: the proposed Enumservice ERN merely hints at the E.164
   Resolution namespace that may help to resolve a given number.  It
   does define at the same time which peering federation is used to
   establish the call.  Whilst these groups may include the same
   members, the relationship between these members and the roles of the
   groups are quite different.  Whilst groups that share resolution
   namespaces are related to ENUM, Peering federations are a topic for
   other Working Groups and are out of scope of the ENUM WG.

   The main purpose of the Enumservice "ern" is to enhance the
   efficiency of the mapping of E.164 numbers to URIs and also to be a
   common anchor for all private E.164 Resolution Namespaces.


5.  E.164 Resolution Namespaces

   An E.164 Resolution Namespace is an agreed upon method between a
   defined group of VoIP service providers used to map E.164 numbers to
   URIs.  Typical examples are private ENUM trees, but also other
   mapping methods and databases may be used.

   This document does not define what these methods are and how the
   members of the group access the E.164 resolution namespace.  There is



Stastny                 Expires December 6, 2006                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft               Enumservice ERN                   June 2006


   no requirement to make these methods public.

   A specific E.164 resolution namespace SHALL be identified either as
   URN or as "http:" URI.

   For the purpose of the Enumservice "ern" the identifiers of the
   namespace are opaque strings in the form of domain names.  The only
   operations performed on these identifiers are string comparisons.
   The domain name in the URI is never queried in the DNS directly.

   It is up to entity controlling the E.164 resolution namespace to
   define an unique domain name or reqister a unique URN for its
   interpretation of the E.164 namespace.  The entity responsible may
   also define additional labels to provide additional information the
   private group considers of interest, e.g. a service provider ID
   (SPID).  The administration of these additional labels is an internal
   matter of the group using the namespace.

   Whilst it is possible for multiple ERNs to exist, there is of course
   a common "standard" namespace that may be used; the ENUM namespace
   defined in RFC 3761.  Thus a fixed definition for this namespace
   allows a provider to indicate that a particular number (or range) can
   be resolved using the standard ENUM technique.  To support this
   choice, the E.164 resolution namespace named "urn:ietf:rfc:3761"
   stands for the E.164 resolution namespace in e164.arpa as defined in
   RFC 3761.


6.  ENUM Service Registrations - ern

6.1.  "http" Subtype

   Enumservice Name: "ern"

   Enumservice Type: "ern"

   Enumservice Subtype: "http"

   URI Schemes: "http"

   Functional Specification:
      This Enumservice indicates that the mapping of the E.164 number
      queried in ENUM can be resolved in the private E.164 Resolution
      Namespace uniquely identified by the domain name given in the
      "http" URI.  For the purpose of the Enumservice "ern:http" the
      identifiers of the namespace are opaque strings in the form of
      domain names.  The only operations performed on these identifiers
      are case insensitive string comparisons.  The domain name in the



Stastny                 Expires December 6, 2006                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft               Enumservice ERN                   June 2006


      URI is never queried in the DNS directly.

   Security Considerations: see Section 8

   Intended Usage: COMMON

   Authors: Richard Stastny (see 'Authors' section for contact details)

6.2.  "urn" Subtype

   Enumservice Name: "ern"

   Enumservice Type: "ern"

   Enumservice Subtype: "urn"

   URI Schemes: "urn"

   Functional Specification:
      This Enumservice indicates that the mapping of the E.164 number
      queried in ENUM can be resolved in the private E.164 Resolution
      Namespace uniquely identified by the namespace given in the URN.
      To hint that the "standard" ENUM technique may be used, the E.164
      resolution namespace named "urn:ietf:rfc:3761" may be used.  This
      stands for the E.164 resolution namesspace in e164.arpa as defined
      in RFC 3761.

   Security Considerations: see Section 8

   Intended Usage: COMMON

   Authors: Richard Stastny (see 'Authors' section for contact details)


7.  Examples

7.1.  Providing hints to two different namespaces

   The service provider hosting the number +441632960048 participates in
   two different E.164 resolution namespaces and hints at this by
   placing the following entries in Infrastructure ENUM.  The preferred
   namespace is namespace1.example


    $ORIGIN 4.8.0.0.6.9.2.3.6.1.4.4.ie164.arpa.
          IN NAPTR 10 100  "u" "E2U+ern:http"
          "!^.*$!http:\/\/namespace1.example!" .




Stastny                 Expires December 6, 2006                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft               Enumservice ERN                   June 2006


          IN NAPTR 10 200  "u" "E2U+ern:http"
          "!^.*$!http:\/\/SP1234.namespace2.example!" .


   The second record shows that the provider have resolution entries in
   namespace2.

   Note: In this case, namespace2 is partitioned, and each provider uses
   its internal identifier as the name of its partition within that
   space.  With this partitioned structure, the identity of the service
   provider may be published within Infrastructure ENUM.  As already
   mentioned, the internal structure of the namespace is a matter for
   the group sharing the resolution name space; the URI is used only as
   an opaque identifier to that name space.

7.2.  Providing a hint to e164.arpa

   If an E.164 number is only defined within e164.arpa, e.g. for the
   number range +43780xxxxxx, the whole number block is hinted to
   e164.arpa.


   $ORIGIN 0.8.7.3.4.ie164.arpa.
          * IN NAPTR 10 100  "u" "E2U+ern:urn"
          "!^.*$!urn:ietf:rfc:3761!" .


   This hint is useful to point from Infrastructure ENUM or other E.164
   namespaces to "e164.arpa" for number ranges or numbers that are only
   defined in "e164.arpa" to avoid duplication of data.


8.  Security Considerations

   One of the prime intentions of the Enumservice "ern" is to cover
   security and privacy concerns service providers may have in using
   other Enumservices in Infrastructure ENUM, e.g. providing SIP URIs
   containing AoRs or ingress points to their network.

   The minimum information disclosed in using the Enumservice "ern" is
   the identification of the private E.164 Resolution Namespace(s) used.
   In addition, a provider may choose to provide his own identification
   within the given E.164 Resolution Namespace

   An analysis of threats specific to the dependence of ENUM on the DNS
   is provided in RFC3761 [2].





Stastny                 Expires December 6, 2006                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft               Enumservice ERN                   June 2006


9.  IANA Considerations

   This memo requests registration of the "ern" Enumservice according to
   the definitions in this document and RFC3761 [2].


10.  Acknowledgements

   Many thanks to Lawrence Conroy for his valuable input.


11.  References

11.1.  Normative References

   [1]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
        Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [2]  Faltstrom, P. and M. Mealling, "The E.164 to Uniform Resource
        Identifiers (URI) Dynamic Delegation Discovery System (DDDS)
        Application (ENUM)", RFC 3761, April 2004.

   [3]  ITU-T, "The International Public Telecommunication Number Plan",
        Recommendation E.164, May 1997.

   [4]  Berners-Lee, T., Fielding, R., and L. Masinter, "Uniform
        Resource Identifiers (URI): Generic Syntax", RFC 2396,
        August 1998.

11.2.  Informative References

   [5]  Lind, S. and P. Pfautz, "Infrastrucure ENUM Requirements",
        draft-ietf-enum-infrastructure-enum-reqs-02 (work in progress),
        April 2006.

   [6]  Livingood, J., "The E.164 to Uniform Resource Identifiers (URI)
        Dynamic Delegation Discovery  System (DDDS) Application for
        Infrastructure ENUM", draft-ietf-enum-infrastructure-00 (work in
        progress), April 2006.












Stastny                 Expires December 6, 2006                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft               Enumservice ERN                   June 2006


Author's Address

   Richard Stastny
   Oefeg
   Postbox 147
   1103 Vienna
   Austria

   Phone: +43-664-420-4100 
   Email: Richard.stastny@oefeg.at









































Stastny                 Expires December 6, 2006               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft               Enumservice ERN                   June 2006


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Stastny                 Expires December 6, 2006               [Page 11]


