
  INTERNET-DRAFT                                             Eric A. Hall 
  Document: draft-hall-email-srv-00.txt                   John C. Klensin 
  Expires: May, 2004                                        November 2003 
  Category: Standards Track                                               
      
      
                 Using SRV Resource Records to Automatically 
                           Configure Email Clients 
      
      
     Status of this Memo 
      
     This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
     all provisions of Section 10 of RFC 2026. 
      
     Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
     Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that 
     other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
     Drafts. 
      
     Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
     months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
     documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts 
     as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in 
     progress." 
      
     The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
     http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
      
     The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
     http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
      
      
     Copyright Notice 
      
     Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003).  All Rights Reserved. 
      
      
     Abstract 
      
     This document specifies SRV resource records for Internet-based 
     message-submission and message-retrieval services, and also 
     defines behavioral rules for messaging clients to use when 
     automatically locating the messaging servers associated with a 
     known mail domain. 
      
   
   
  Internet Draft       draft-hall-email-srv-00.txt       November 2003 
   
   
      
     Table of Contents 
      
     1.   Background and Overview...................................2 
     2.   Prerequisites and Terminology.............................4 
     3.   Messaging Resource Records................................4 
       3.1.  SRV Owner Names........................................5 
       3.2.  SRV Resource Record Data...............................5 
       3.3.  Address Resource Records...............................6 
     4.   Client Processing Algorithms..............................7 
       4.1.  Retrieval Server Lookups...............................8 
       4.2.  Submission Server Lookups.............................10 
     5.   Resource Record Caching..................................11 
     6.   Security Considerations..................................12 
     7.   IANA Considerations......................................13 
     8.   Normative References.....................................13 
     9.   Informative References...................................13 
     Acknowledgments...............................................14 
     Authors' Addresses............................................14 
     Full Copyright Statement......................................14 
      
  1.      Background and Overview 
      
     Email networks built around Internet messaging technologies 
     typically use a tiered message-transfer network model. In the 
     common scenario, messaging clients send outgoing email messages to 
     a default "submission" server, with these "first-hop" servers 
     typically performing tasks such as message preparation, routing 
     lookups, and next-hop transfers towards the final destination. 
     Meanwhile, messaging clients which work in the typical model will 
     also usually fetch incoming email messages from a default 
     "retrieval" server, with these "last-hop" servers usually acting 
     as the final delivery system for the user's mail domain. 
      
     Messaging networks built on this model have historically used the 
     Simple Message Transfer Protocol (SMTP) [RFC2821] and TCP port 25 
     for the first-hop submission service. However, RFC 2476 [RFC2476] 
     formally defined a variant of SMTP as an explicit message 
     submission service which more accurately reflects the behavioral 
     requirements of the common environment. RFC 2476 also reserved TCP 
     port 587 specifically for use with the formal submission service, 
     but also allows clients and servers to continue using full SMTP 
     over TCP port 25 if necessary or desired. 
      
     On the retrieval front, there are two standards-track services 
     available for use, which are the Post Office Protocol v3 (POP3) 
   
  Hall & Klensin          I-D Expires: May 2004               [page 2] 
  Internet Draft       draft-hall-email-srv-00.txt       November 2003 
   
   
     [STD53] and the Internet Message Access Protocol v4rev1 (IMAP4) 
     [RFC3501]. Unlike the submission services, POP3 and IMAP4 are 
     substantially different from each other, using different protocol 
     models, verb dictionaries, and even port numbers (POP3 servers 
     typically use TCP port 110, while IMAP4 servers typically use TCP 
     port 143). 
      
     Most messaging clients which work in these tiered environments 
     have historically used static configuration data to identify the 
     protocol, hostname and port number for each service, although a 
     variety of products have also attempted to use automated 
     configuration services in an effort to lessen the need for manual 
     administration. For example, some products have used the Dynamic 
     Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP) [RFC2131], the Interactive Mail 
     Support Protocol (IMSP) and the Application Configuration Access 
     Protocol (ACAP) [RFC2244], or even the Lightweight Directory 
     Access Protocol (LDAP) [RFC3377] to store configuration data 
     centrally, allowing clients to fetch the necessary configuration 
     information when they are first loaded. Unfortunately, many of 
     these services are unable to accommodate messaging networks that 
     don't use the default port numbers for the specified service, or 
     are unable to provide recovery information for when the specified 
     server becomes unavailable, are unable to support users on remote 
     networks due to security and bandwidth concerns, or have other 
     issues which make them unsuitable for use with automated 
     configuration management outside of specific environments. 
      
     Meanwhile, RFC 2782 [RFC2782] introduced a general-purpose 
     mechanism for storing service-specific connection identifiers in 
     the Domain Name System (DNS) [STD13] by way of a generalized 
     Service Location ("SRV") resource record. In the SRV model, a 
     network service can be identified by name within the scope of a 
     particular domain, with multiple SRV resource records identifying 
     the hostnames and port numbers of servers which provide the named 
     service within that domain scope, but with the caveat that these 
     resource records can only provide connection-level information, 
     and cannot provide comprehensive configuration data. 
      
     This approach can be useful for locating messaging servers in 
     general, but is particularly well-suited to large-scale and 
     diverse installations which cannot easily support the generalized 
     configuration services. In particular, this level of information 
     can be sufficient for automatically initiating messaging sessions 
     (modulo any additional input which may be needed from the user, 
     such as session passwords), determining the servers to use with a 
     new messaging profile, bootstrapping a more-detailed configuration 
   
  Hall & Klensin          I-D Expires: May 2004               [page 3] 
  Internet Draft       draft-hall-email-srv-00.txt       November 2003 
   
   
     process, or for use as recovery information when a pre-configured 
     messaging server has become unavailable. 
      
     In support of these kinds of scenarios, this specification defines 
     SRV resource records which can be used to identify the submission 
     and retrieval servers for a particular messaging network, and also 
     defines behavioral rules for messaging clients to use when 
     locating these messaging servers. Specifically, the model put 
     forth in this document uses SRV resource records which are mapped 
     to the domain element of an email address, so that messaging 
     clients can predictably discover the messaging servers that are 
     available to a particular email address. 
      
     Note that this model assumes that the presence of an email address 
     implies that the user has an account in the associated mail 
     domain, and that the user is therefore authorized to use the 
     servers associated with that domain. In those environments where 
     these assumptions do not reflect the actual messaging network, 
     manual or external configuration data will be needed. 
      
  2.      Prerequisites and Terminology 
      
     Readers of this document are expected to be familiar with the 
     specifications for message submission [RFC2476], POP3 [STD53], 
     IMAP4 [RFC3501], and SRV resource records [RFC2782]. 
      
     The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL 
     NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" 
     in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 
     [RFC2119]. 
      
  3.      Messaging Resource Records 
      
     SRV resource records have an owner domain name which uniquely 
     identifies a particular service within the scope of a particular 
     domain, and also have data structures which provide information 
     about the target hosts and their preference. Secondarily, the 
     target server hostnames may also need to be resolved into IP 
     addresses via additional lookups. 
      
   
  Hall & Klensin          I-D Expires: May 2004               [page 4] 
  Internet Draft       draft-hall-email-srv-00.txt       November 2003 
   
   
      
  3.1.    SRV Owner Names 
      
     The owner domain name of SRV resource records are a concatenated 
     sequence of labels which identify the service name, the transport 
     protocol associated with that service, and the domain scope, 
     respectively. 
      
     For SRV resource records which reference submission servers, the 
     first two labels in this sequence MUST be "_submission" and 
     "_tcp", while the domain scope sequence MUST be the same as the 
     mail domain which is used by the messaging clients. 
      
     For SRV resource records which reference IMAP4 servers, the first 
     two labels in this sequence MUST be "_imap" and "_tcp", while the 
     domain scope sequence MUST be the same as the mail domain which is 
     used by the messaging clients (note that the IANA protocol 
     registration for the IMAP4 service is "imap" and not "imap4"). 
      
     For SRV resource records which reference POP3 servers, the first 
     two labels in this sequence MUST be "_pop3" and "_tcp", while the 
     domain scope sequence MUST be the same as the mail domain which is 
     used by the messaging clients. 
      
     Note that the domain scope for these resource records is 
     explicitly defined as the mail domain element of the user's email 
     address, and is not tied to a hostname, a subnet, or any other 
     type of domain name. The client processing algorithms defined in 
     section 4 use the mail domain element of the user's email address 
     as the domain scope of the SRV resource record lookups, so the 
     resource records must be associated with the mail domain name in 
     order for the algorithm to succeed. 
      
     For example, a messaging client which had been configured to use 
     an email address of "user@example.net" and which needed to locate 
     the submission server for that user would issues lookups for the 
     SRV resource records bound to the "_submission._tcp.example.net" 
     domain name, while an email address of "user@bna.tn.example.net" 
     would cause lookups for "_submission._tcp.bna.tn.example.net" to 
     be issued. 
      
  3.2.    SRV Resource Record Data 
      
     The SRV resource record data structure is described in detail in 
     RFC 2782. In summary, the SRV resource record provides fields 
     which identify a target server hostname, the port number of the 
   
  Hall & Klensin          I-D Expires: May 2004               [page 5] 
  Internet Draft       draft-hall-email-srv-00.txt       November 2003 
   
   
     associated service on that server, and priority and weighting data 
     which reflect the overall preference of each particular server in 
     the answer set. 
      
     Note that the client-processing algorithms described in section 4 
     allows a target server to be chosen from among an equally weighted 
     set of answers by determining if any of the servers share the same 
     sub-domain as the messaging client. This mechanism may be useful 
     in those cases where a large and distributed messaging network 
     shares a common mail domain for all of its users, but where that 
     organization still needs to direct specific users towards servers 
     that are dedicated to particular sub-domains or regions. 
      
     In general terms, organizations which choose to support the use of 
     SRV resource records are encouraged to provide multiple servers 
     with different preference values, thereby allowing clients to 
     automatically discover alternate servers in case the preferred 
     server becomes unreachable or otherwise unavailable. 
      
  3.3.    Address Resource Records 
      
     Once a preferred server has been determined, its hostname will 
     need to be resolved into an IP address with a lookup for the IP 
     address resource records associated with the server's domain name. 
      
     Note that the client processing algorithms described in section 4 
     allows an IP address to be chosen from among an equally weighted 
     set of answers by allowing the client to determine which of the 
     servers are "closest", based on the IP addresses of the client and 
     the server(s). This mechanism may be useful in those cases where a 
     large and distributed messaging network shares a common mail 
     domain for all of its users, but where that organization still 
     needs to direct specific users towards servers which are dedicated 
     to particular subnets or regions. 
      
     For example, some organizations may be able to leverage resolvers 
     which attempt to locate the "closest" server through subnet-
     mapping or response-time monitors, while other organizations may 
     be able to use load-balancing technologies which control the 
     answer sets that are returned to the clients. Discussion of these 
     technologies is beyond the scope of this document, although 
     administrators should be aware of their potential use. 
      
   
  Hall & Klensin          I-D Expires: May 2004               [page 6] 
  Internet Draft       draft-hall-email-srv-00.txt       November 2003 
   
   
      
  4.      Client Processing Algorithms 
      
     This section describes the behavioral rules for messaging clients 
     which need to locate the messaging servers associated with a known 
     mail domain. 
      
     In general terms, messaging clients are expected to locate the 
     retrieval servers associated with a known mail domain whenever 
     incoming email messages need to be retrieved, and are expected to 
     locate the submission servers associated with a known mail domain 
     whenever outgoing email messages need to be sent. However, this is 
     an extremely simplistic overview of the process, with many 
     potential exceptions. 
      
     For example, a messaging client may be designed to use retrieval-
     service extensions to perform message submission (such as using a 
     POP3 "submission" extension), and in those cases, the client would 
     use the SRV resource records associated with the retrieval service 
     rather than the submission service. Furthermore, IMAP4 sessions 
     tend to be fairly long-lived, and may involve distinct connections 
     to different folders, but since changes to the resource record 
     data could theoretically result in different servers being chosen 
     for each specific folder, messaging clients need to reuse the 
     current IP address for all of the active IMAP4 connections instead 
     of issuing new lookups for each session. 
      
     Once a server has been located, messaging client MAY attempt to 
     automate any login or local configuration processes, as desired. 
     For example, clients MAY attempt to use the local-part element of 
     the email address as a login identifier for a given session, or 
     MAY attempt to probe for any service-specific configuration data 
     such as an IMAP4 namespace or subscription hierarchies. 
      
     However, attempts to automatically discover the configuration 
     information may have a high likelihood of failure, either because 
     some of the elements may not be predictable or accurate (E.G., the 
     session username may not be identical to the local-part element of 
     the email address), or because different server products may have 
     implemented features in slightly different ways. Since this 
     process is somewhat prone to failure, it is not defined in this 
     specification, although these probes are not prohibited. 
      
     Notwithstanding all of the above, whenever lookups for messaging 
     servers are generated, the messaging clients are expected to 
     generate DNS lookups for the SRV resource records associated with 
   
  Hall & Klensin          I-D Expires: May 2004               [page 7] 
  Internet Draft       draft-hall-email-srv-00.txt       November 2003 
   
   
     the user's known mail domains. Clients SHOULD NOT issue lookups 
     for the domain name associated with the local hostname, SHOULD NOT 
     issue lookups for networks they are attached to, and SHOULD only 
     issue lookups for the SRV resource records associated with a known 
     mail domain. 
      
     If multiple "identities" have been defined which use different 
     mail domains in the return email address, the process SHOULD be 
     repeated for each unique mail domain. 
      
     Also note that some DNS resolvers are known to filter and restrict 
     the resource record data which gets returned, and in those cases, 
     the messaging client may need to issue its own "raw" DNS queries 
     in order to ensure that all of the information is retrieved and 
     processed correctly. 
      
  4.1.    Retrieval Server Lookups 
      
     Messaging clients which support both IMAP4 and POP3 SHOULD first 
     attempt to locate the IMAP4 servers associated with the mail 
     domain, and SHOULD NOT attempt to locate POP3 servers unless no 
     IMAP4 servers can be located. Conversely, a messaging client which 
     only supports one or the other service SHOULD only issue lookups 
     for the retrieval service that the client supports, and SHOULD NOT 
     issue lookups for services that are not supported by the messaging 
     client itself. 
      
     Clients which claim to be compliant with this specification SHOULD 
     iterate at least once through the following steps for each 
     eligible identity: 
      
        a.  Determine if a retrieval server has been defined manually 
            or through another configuration service, and if that data 
            has been given preference. If so, only continue if those 
            servers are determined to be unreachable or unavailable 
            (potentially including any routing errors, TCP errors, or 
            session errors which indicate that the client cannot 
            currently use the server). 
      
        b.  Extract the mail domain element from the user's email 
            address, and append the "_imap" and "_tcp" labels to the 
            left of that domain name. 
      
        c.  Issue a DNS query for the SRV resource records associated 
            with the domain name formed in the preceding step. 
      
   
  Hall & Klensin          I-D Expires: May 2004               [page 8] 
  Internet Draft       draft-hall-email-srv-00.txt       November 2003 
   
   
        d.  If multiple resource records are returned, sort them 
            according to the rules specified in RFC 2782, and determine 
            the preferred target. 
      
            1.   If multiple candidate targets still exist, the client 
                 MAY give preference to any servers which have a 
                 hostname that appears to be in the same sub-domain as 
                 the client hostname. 
      
            2.   If multiple candidate targets still exist, choose one 
                 at random. 
      
        e.  Use the port number determined in step 4.1.d as the port 
            number for the retrieval server. 
      
        f.  Determine the IP address for the target server. 
      
            1.   If multiple IP addresses are discovered, the client 
                 MAY use any services at its disposal to determine the 
                 IP address which appears to be the closest match to 
                 the local client's IP address. 
      
            2.   If multiple candidate addresses still exist, choose 
                 one at random. 
      
        g.  Use the IP address determined in step 4.1.f as the IP 
            address for the retrieval server. 
      
        h.  If the currently-preferred server is unavailable, locate 
            the next-best target. 
      
            1.   If multiple addresses were associated with the 
                 currently-preferred server, restart the process at 
                 step 4.1.f to determine the next-best IP address. 
      
            2.   If all of the IP addresses for the currently-preferred 
                 target have been tried and multiple SRV resource 
                 records were discovered, use the next-preferred SRV 
                 resource record from step 4.1.d. Clients SHOULD NOT 
                 try the next-preferred target until all of the IP 
                 addresses associated with the currently-preferred 
                 target have been tried. 
      
   
  Hall & Klensin          I-D Expires: May 2004               [page 9] 
  Internet Draft       draft-hall-email-srv-00.txt       November 2003 
   
   
        i.  If no IMAP4 servers were discovered, extract the mail 
            domain element from the user's email address, append the 
            "_pop3" and "_tcp" labels to the left of that domain name, 
            and restart the process at step 4.1.c. If no POP3 servers 
            were discovered, exit the algorithm and report the failure 
            to the user. 
      
  4.2.    Submission Server Lookups 
      
     Since the submission and SMTP services can both be defined through 
     a single SRV resource record, only a single SRV resource record is 
     defined for use with the submission service. 
      
     Clients which claim to be compliant with this specification SHOULD 
     iterate through the following steps for each eligible identity: 
      
        a.  Determine if a submission server has been defined manually 
            or through another configuration service, and if that data 
            has been given preference. If so, only continue if those 
            servers are determined to be unreachable or unavailable 
            (potentially including any routing errors, TCP errors, or 
            session errors which indicate that the client cannot 
            currently use the server) 
      
        b.  Extract the mail domain element from the user's email 
            address, and append the "_submission" and "_tcp" labels to 
            the left of that domain name. 
      
        c.  Issue a DNS query for the SRV resource records associated 
            with the domain name formed in the preceding step. 
      
        d.  If multiple resource records are returned, sort them 
            according to the rules specified in RFC 2782, and determine 
            the preferred target. 
      
            1.   If multiple candidate targets still exist, the client 
                 MAY give preference to any servers which have a 
                 hostname that appears to be in the same sub-domain as 
                 the client hostname. 
      
            2.   If multiple candidate targets still exist, the client 
                 SHOULD give the highest preference to targets which 
                 use port 587, and SHOULD give the lowest preference to 
                 targets which use port 25. 
      
   
  Hall & Klensin          I-D Expires: May 2004              [page 10] 
  Internet Draft       draft-hall-email-srv-00.txt       November 2003 
   
   
            3.   If multiple candidate targets still exist, choose one 
                 at random. 
      
        e.  Use the port number determined in step 4.2.d as the port 
            number for the submission server. 
      
        f.  Determine the IP address for the target server. 
      
            1.   If multiple IP addresses are discovered, the client 
                 MAY use any services at its disposal to determine the 
                 IP address which appears to be the closest match to 
                 the local client's IP address. 
      
            2.   If multiple candidate addresses still exist, choose 
                 one at random. 
      
        g.  Use the IP address determined in step 4.2.f as the IP 
            address for the submission server. 
      
        h.  If the currently-preferred server is unavailable, locate 
            the next-best target. 
      
            1.   If multiple addresses were associated with the 
                 currently-preferred server, restart the process at 
                 step 4.2.f to determine the next-best IP address. 
      
            2.   If all of the IP addresses for the currently-preferred 
                 target have been tried and multiple SRV resource 
                 records were discovered, use the next-preferred SRV 
                 resource record from step 4.2.d. Clients SHOULD NOT 
                 try the next-preferred target until all of the IP 
                 addresses associated with the currently-preferred 
                 target have been tried. 
      
            3.   If all of the IP addresses for all of the SRV resource 
                 records have been tried, report the error to the user 
                 and exit the algorithm. 
      
  5.      Resource Record Caching 
      
     Messaging clients SHOULD NOT store the discovered configuration 
     information for a length of time greater than the Time-to-Live 
     values associated with the underlying resource records. Instead, 
     clients SHOULD delete the discovered information whenever the 
     underlying resource records have expired, and SHOULD NOT issue new 
     queries until a new connection needs to be established. This 
   
  Hall & Klensin          I-D Expires: May 2004              [page 11] 
  Internet Draft       draft-hall-email-srv-00.txt       November 2003 
   
   
     approach ensures that the messaging client will always get the 
     latest information when accuracy is most critical. 
      
     However, multiple lookups for IMAP4 servers SHOULD NOT be issued 
     unless no connections for that profile are already active. If a 
     profile already has an active (and working) connection 
     established, then all of the other connections for that profile 
     MUST reuse the existing server-specific socket tuple, and 
     additional lookups for that profile MUST NOT be generated unless 
     the current server becomes unavailable. 
      
     Zone operators SHOULD NOT use excessively small or excessively 
     small Time-to-Live values. As a general rule of thumb (subject to 
     operator-specific requirements, of course), Time-to-Live values 
     between a few hours and a few days tend to work the best. 
      
  6.      Security Considerations 
      
     Administrators should carefully consider if and how they want to 
     make the resource records described in this document available to 
     users, particularly those users who may be on remote networks. 
      
     Since this resource record provides information in a predictable 
     form, hostile parties with access to the resource records can 
     learn some operational details about the messaging infrastructure 
     simply by issuing predictable DNS queries. However, the potential 
     risks from exposing operational information about a messaging 
     network to external parties should not be overstated. In the usual 
     case, the same information can be learned by analyzing the 
     Received headers in email messages which have passed through that 
     same network. In this regard, providing this information in a 
     resource record is no more of a risk than providing the 
     information in a Received header of a message which has passed 
     through that network. 
      
     DNS domain names can be easily spoofed, and this is especially 
     easy when the victim uses a DNS server under the control of a 
     hostile party. By using a relatively simple technique, a hostile 
     party can provide SRV resource records which redirect a user 
     towards a hostile SMTP server, allowing the interloper to read and 
     act upon the user's outbound email at will. Strong authentication 
     services, transfer-layer encryption techniques, and message 
     encryption are usually cited as sufficient defenses against such 
     attacks, in that they can prevent illegitimate sessions from being 
     established and/or can make message contents unreadable. 
      
   
  Hall & Klensin          I-D Expires: May 2004              [page 12] 
  Internet Draft       draft-hall-email-srv-00.txt       November 2003 
   
   
     Refer to RFC 2782 for the security considerations associated with 
     the use of SRV resource records in general. 
      
     Refer to RFC 2476 for the security considerations associated with 
     the use of the message-submission service. 
      
  7.      IANA Considerations 
      
     This document does not create any IANA considerations. 
      
  8.      Normative References 
      
          [RFC2119]     Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to 
                         Indicate Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 
                         2119, March 1997. 
      
          [RFC2476]     Gellens, R., and J. Klensin, "Message 
                         Submission", RFC 2476, December 1998. 
      
          [RFC2782]     Gulbrandsen, A., Vixie, P., and L. Esibov, "A 
                         DNS RR for specifying the location of services 
                         (DNS SRV)", RFC 2782, February 2000. 
      
          [RFC3501]     M. Crispin, "Internet Message Access Protocol 
                         - Version 4rev1", RFC 3501, March 2003. 
      
          [STD53]       Myers, J., and M. Rose, "Post Office Protocol 
                         - Version 3", RFC 1939, May 1996. 
      
  9.      Informative References 
      
          [RFC2131]     Droms, R., "Dynamic Host Configuration 
                         Protocol", RFC 2131, March 1997. 
      
          [RFC2244]     Newman, C., and J. Myers, "ACAP -- Application 
                         Configuration Access Protocol", RFC 2244, 
                         November 1997. 
      
          [RFC2821]     J. Klensin, "Simple Mail Transfer Protocol", 
                         RFC 2821, April 2001. 
      
          [RFC3377]     Hodges, J., and R. Morgan, "Lightweight 
                         Directory Access Protocol (v3): Technical 
                         Specification", RFC 3377, September 2002. 
      
          [STD13]       Mockapetris, P. "Domain Names - Concepts and 
                         Facilities", STD 13, RFC 1034 and "Domain 
                         Names - Implementation and Specification", STD 
                         13, RFC 1035, November 1987. 
   
  Hall & Klensin          I-D Expires: May 2004              [page 13] 
  Internet Draft       draft-hall-email-srv-00.txt       November 2003 
   
   
      
  Acknowledgments 
      
     Funding for the RFC editor function is currently provided by the 
     Internet Society. 
      
      
  Authors' Addresses 
      
     Eric A. Hall 
     ehall@ehsco.com 
      
     John C. Klensin 
     john-ietf@jck.com 
      
      
  Full Copyright Statement 
      
     Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2003). All Rights Reserved. 
      
     This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished 
     to others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise 
     explain it or assist in its implementation may be prepared, 
     copied, published and distributed, in whole or in part, without 
     restriction of any kind, provided that the above copyright notice 
     and this paragraph are included on all such copies and derivative 
     works. However, this document itself may not be modified in any 
     way, such as by removing the copyright notice or references to the 
     Internet Society or other Internet organizations, except as needed 
     for the purpose of developing Internet standards in which case the 
     procedures for copyrights defined in the Internet Standards 
     process must be followed, or as required to translate it into 
     languages other than English. 
      
     The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not 
     be revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns. 
      
     This document and the information contained herein is provided on 
     an "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET 
     ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR 
     IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF 
     THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED 
     WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
      
   
  Hall & Klensin          I-D Expires: May 2004              [page 14] 

