





Network Working Group                                           E. Chen
Internet Draft                                                S. Sangli
Expiration Date: June 2006                                Cisco Systems


      Avoid BGP Best Path Transitions from One External to Another


                 draft-ietf-idr-avoid-transition-04.txt


Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.


Abstract

   In this document we propose a revision to the BGP route selection
   rules that would avoid unnecessary best path transitions between
   external paths under certain conditions. The proposed revision would
   help the overall network stability, and more importantly, would
   eliminate certain BGP route oscillations in which more than one
   external paths from one BGP speaker contribute to the churn.








Chen & Sangli                                                   [Page 1]





Internet Draft   draft-ietf-idr-avoid-transition-04.txt    December 2005


1. Introduction

   The last two steps of the BGP route selection (Sect. 9.1.2.2, [BGP])
   involve comparing the BGP identifiers and the peering addresses. The
   BGP identifier (treated either as an IP address, or just an integer
   [BGP-ID]) for a BGP speaker is allocated by the AS to which the
   speaker belongs. As a result, for a local BGP speaker, the BGP
   identifier of a route received from an external peer is just an
   random number. When routes under consideration are from external
   peers, the result from the last two steps of the route selection is
   therefore "random" as far as the local BGP speaker is concerned.

   It is based on this observation that we propose a revision to the BGP
   route selection rules that would avoid unnecessary best path
   transitions between external paths under certain conditions. The
   proposed revision would help the overall network stability, and more
   importantly, would eliminate certain BGP route oscillations in which
   more than one external paths from one BGP speaker contribute to the
   churn.


2. Specification of Requirements

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].


3. The Algorithm

   Consider the case in which the existing best path A is from an
   external peer, and another external path B is then selected as the
   new best path by the route selection algorithm described in [BGP].
   When comparing all the paths in route selection, if neither Path A
   nor Path B is eliminated by the route selection algorithm prior to
   Step f) - BGP identifier comparison (Sect. 9.1.2.2 [BGP]), we propose
   that the existing best path (Path A) be kept as the best path (thus
   avoiding switching the best path to Path B).

   This algorithm SHOULD NOT be applied when either path is from a BGP
   Confederation peer.

   In addition, the algorithm SHOULD NOT be applied when both paths are
   from peers with identical BGP identifier (i.e., there exist parallel
   BGP sessions between two BGP speakers). As the peering addresses for
   the parallel sessions are typically allocated by one AS (possibly
   with route selection considerations), the algorithm (if applied)
   could impact the existing routing setup. Furthermore, by not applying



Chen & Sangli                                                   [Page 2]





Internet Draft   draft-ietf-idr-avoid-transition-04.txt    December 2005


   the algorithm, the allocation of peering addresses would remain as a
   simple and effective tool in influencing route selection when
   parallel BGP sessions exist.


4. The Benefits

   The proposed revision to the BGP route selection rules avoids
   unnecessary best path transitions between external paths under
   certain conditions. Clearly the revision would help reduce routing
   and forwarding changes in a network, thus help the overall network
   stabilities.

   More importantly, as shown in the following example, the proposed
   revision can be used to eliminate certain BGP route oscillations in
   which more than one external paths from one BGP speaker contribute to
   the churn.  Note however, that there are permanent BGP route
   oscillation scenarios [RFC3345] that the mechanism described in this
   document does not eliminate.

   Consider the example in Fig. 1 where

      o R1, R2, R3 and R4 belong to one AS
      o R1 is a route reflector with R3 as its client.
      o R2 is a route reflector with R4 as its client.
      o The IGP metrics are as listed.
      o External paths (a), (b) and (c) are as described in Fig. 2.
























Chen & Sangli                                                   [Page 3]





Internet Draft   draft-ietf-idr-avoid-transition-04.txt    December 2005


                  +----+      40      +----+
                  | R1 |--------------| R2 |
                  +----+              +----+
                     |                   |
                     |                   |
                     | 10                | 10
                     |                   |
                     |                   |
                  +----+              +----+
                  | R3 |              | R4 |
                  +----+              +----+
                 /      \                |
                /        \               |
              (a)        (b)            (c)

                          Figure 1


                Path    AS     MED   Identifier
                 a       1       0        2
                 b       2      20        1
                 c       2      10        5

                          Figure 2


   Due to the interaction of route reflection [BGP-RR] and MEDs, the
   best path on R1 keeps churning between (a) and (c), and the best path
   on R3 keeps churning between (a) and (b).

   With the proposed algorithm R3 would not switch the best path from
   (a) to (b) even after R1 withdraws (c) toward its clients, and that
   is enough to stop the route oscillation.

   Although this type of route oscillations can also be eliminated by
   other route reflection enhancements being developed, the proposed
   algorithm is extremely simple and can be implemented and deployed
   immediately without introducing any backward compatibility issues.













Chen & Sangli                                                   [Page 4]





Internet Draft   draft-ietf-idr-avoid-transition-04.txt    December 2005


5. Remarks

   The proposed algorithm is backward-compatible, and can be deployed on
   a per-BGP-speaker basis. The deployment of the algorithm is highly
   recommended on a BGP speaker with multiple external BGP peers
   (especially the ones connecting to an inter-exchange point).

   Compared to the existing behavior, the proposed algorithm may
   introduce some "non-determinism" in the BGP route selection -
   although one can argue that the BGP Identifier comparison in the
   existing route selection has already introduced some "randomness" as
   described in the introduction section.  Such "non-determinism" has
   not been shown to be detrimental in practice, and can be completely
   eliminated by using the existing mechanisms (such as setting
   LOCAL_PREF or MED) if so desired.


6. IANA Considerations

   This extension does not require any action by IANA.


7. Security Considerations

   This extension does not introduce any security issues.


8. Acknowledgments

   The idea presented was inspired by a route oscillation case observed
   on the BBN/Genuity backbone in 1998. The algorithm was also
   implemented and deployed at that time.

   The authors would like to thank Yakov Rekhter and Ravi Chandra for
   their comments on the initial idea.
















Chen & Sangli                                                   [Page 5]





Internet Draft   draft-ietf-idr-avoid-transition-04.txt    December 2005


9. Normative References

   [BGP] Y. Rekhter, T. Li, and S. Hares, "A Border Gateway Protocol 4
   (BGP-4)", draft-ietf-idr-bgp4-26.txt, October 2004.

   [BGP-RR] T. Bates, R. Chandra, and E. Chen, "BGP Route Reflection -
   An Alternative to Full Mesh IBGP", RFC 2796, April 2000.

   [RFC2119] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
   Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.


10. Non-normative References

   [BGP-ID] E. Chen and J. Yuan, "AS-wide Unique BGP Identifier for
   BGP-4", Work in Progress, draft-ietf-idr-bgp-identifier-06.txt,
   November 2005.

   [RFC3345] D. McPherson, V, Gill, D. Walton, and A. Retana, "Border
   Gateway Protocol (BGP) Persistent Route Oscillation Condition", RFC
   3345, August 2002.


11. Author Information

   Enke Chen
   Cisco Systems, Inc.
   170 W. Tasman Dr.
   San Jose, CA 95134

   Email: enkechen@cisco.com


   Srihari R. Sangli
   Cisco Systems, Inc.
   170 W. Tasman Dr.
   San Jose, CA 95134

   Email: rsrihari@cisco.com












Chen & Sangli                                                   [Page 6]





Internet Draft   draft-ietf-idr-avoid-transition-04.txt    December 2005


12. Intellectual Property Considerations

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at ietf-
   ipr@ietf.org.


13. Full Copyright Notice


   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.










Chen & Sangli                                                   [Page 7]


