


MIPSHOP WG                                                     W. Haddad
Internet-Draft                                                  Qualcomm
Intended status: Standards Track                              M. Naslund
Expires: January 14, 2009                              Ericsson Research
                                                             P. Nikander
                                           Ericsson Research Nomadic Lab
                                                           July 13, 2008


           IP Tunneling Optimization in a Mobile Environment
             draft-haddad-mipshop-tunneling-optimization-01

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 14, 2009.















Haddad, et al.          Expires January 14, 2009                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft          IP Tunneling Optimization              July 2008


Abstract

   This memo introduces a simple tunneling optimization mechanism, which
   removes the need for inserting an additional header in the IP packet.
   The main goals are to minimize the packet size, provide a simpler
   protocol design and a better efficiency.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Conventions used in this document  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   4.  Tunneling Optimization for BT mode and HMIPv6  . . . . . . . .  7
   5.  Tunneling Optimization for RO mode . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   6.  Tunneling Optimization for DSMIPv6 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   7.  Bit and Options Formats  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   8.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   9.  Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   10. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
     10.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
     10.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 18



























Haddad, et al.          Expires January 14, 2009                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft          IP Tunneling Optimization              July 2008


1.  Introduction

   IP tunneling is a mechanism widely used for different purposes.  For
   example, it enables relying on a dedicated third party to modify the
   IP packet header, in order to re-route the packets to their new
   destination.  This is mainly the case in a mobile environment where
   IP tunneling is used in most protocols.  In fact, the mobile IPv6
   bidirectional tunneling (BT) mode described in [MIPv6]) uses IP
   tunneling to route data through the home agent (HA).  The same
   mechanism is applied between the mobility anchor point (MAP) and the
   mobile node (MN) in the hierarchical mobile IPv6 (HMIPv6) protocol
   (described in [HMIPv6]).  A modified IP tunneling version is also
   used in MIPv6 route optimization (RO) mode.

   This memo introduces a simple tunneling optimization (TO) mechanism,
   which virtualizes the IP tunnel concept often used in traffic
   exchange.  TO mechanism is based on securely exchanging a "pad
   translator" (PaT) between both sides of the (supposed) tunnel.
   The PaT main role is to translate incoming/outgoing packet header to
   another one before injecting it inside/outside the tunnel.  TO main
   goals include a reduced packet size, a simpler protocol design and a
   better efficiency.





























Haddad, et al.          Expires January 14, 2009                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft          IP Tunneling Optimization              July 2008


2.  Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [TERM].














































Haddad, et al.          Expires January 14, 2009                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft          IP Tunneling Optimization              July 2008


3.  Motivation

   The motivation behind this work is the widespread use of different
   forms of IP tunneling mechanisms in mobile environment and their
   negative impact on the protocol efficiency as translated in the data
   packet size, bandwidth usage and battery power consumption.

   In the following, we consider IPv6 mobility protocols only and start
   with a brief description of the IP tunneling mechanism used in both
   MIPv6 BT mode and HMIPv6 protocol.  Next, we describe the MIPv6 RO
   mode tunneling mechanism, then show in the next section how the TO
   mechanism completely eliminates the need for IP tunneling in these
   mobility protocols in a simple and elegant way.
   Other mobility related protocols, e.g., Fast MIPv6 described in
   [FMIPv6] and the ongoing work on proxy MIPv6 ([PMIPv6]) can also
   benefit from using TO mechanism, especially when the path between
   access routers (ARs) and/or between the HA and a PMIPv6 node(s)
   includes a wireless medium.

   A closer look on the tunneling mechanism used in the BT mode (i.e.,
   between the HA and the MN) and HMIPv6 protocol (i.e., between the MAP
   and the MN) highlights different issues that need to be addressed.  A
   first one is the expansion of the packet size due to the addition of
   a new IP header.  In the two protocols, such expansion is mainly
   equal to two IP addresses.  This means that the MN has to send at
   least an additional 256 bits each time it transmits a data packet to
   the CN.  The impact of such addition is very significant on the
   battery life.  In fact, it has been shown in [EALDC] that wireless
   transmission of a single bit can require over 1000 times more energy
   than a single 32-bit computation.
   Consequently, it would be more beneficial for the MN to avoid
   transmitting extra bits over the air interface in exchange for some
   additional computation only.

   A second issue is the impact of packet size on the available
   bandwidth.  In fact, as wireless bandwidths have gained the solid
   reputation of being always scarce, it would be of great importance to
   monitor carefully how they are managed, especially when real time
   multimedia applications are introduced on a larger scale.
   Consequently, eliminating the extra bits added to each IP packet
   header would also be highly beneficial for the network access
   provider.

   A third issue is related to privacy aspects.  In fact, when
   exchanging data traffic with the HA, the MN has to include its IPv6
   home address (HoA) in each data packet sent to the HA, in addition to
   its care-of address (CoA) (or its regional care-of address (RCoA)
   when sending data packets to the MAP in addition to the on-link CoA



Haddad, et al.          Expires January 14, 2009                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft          IP Tunneling Optimization              July 2008


   (LCoA)).  Similarly, the HA has to disclose the MN's HoA and CoA in
   each data packet sent to the MN (or the RCoA and LCoA in each data
   packet sent by the MAP to the MN).  It follows that having the two
   MN's addresses disclosed in the same data packet enables a malicious
   node located on path between the MN and the HA or between the MN and
   the MAP to easily identify, link and trace the MN's movements.  Note
   that the MN's privacy can be better protected if the traffic is
   encrypted, which may not be always possible for various reasons.

   When the RO mode is used, the tunneling mechanism applied between the
   MN and the CN differs from the one used in the BT mode and HMIPv6
   protocol in the fact that it adds only one additional IP address,
   i.e., the MN's HoA, in each data packet exchanged between the two
   endpoints.  This means that each data packet sent/received by the MN
   MUST carry three IP addresses instead of four: the MN's CoA, the CN's
   address and the MN's HoA.  For this purpose, the MN uses a Home
   Address Option (HAO) to carry its HoA in each data packet sent to the
   CN and the CN uses a Routing Header (RH) to carry the MN's HoA in
   each data packet sent to the MN.  The use of HAO and RH are in fact
   degenerated tunnels as shown in [TUN].  This form of tunneling is
   mandated as long as the MN's corresponding binding lifetime has not
   expired.
   The impact of the RO tunneling on the MN's privacy is the same as
   described earlier in the BT mode and HMIPv6 protocol.  The fact that
   each data packet discloses the MN's HoA and CoA enables a malicious
   node located on path between the two endpoints to identify, link and
   trace the MN's movements across the Internet.

   Note that using a PaT does not completely solve the privacy problem.
   However, it offers a significant advantage in the fact that it
   narrows the problem to the critical signaling messages, i.e., Binding
   Update and Acknowledgment (BU/BA) in the case of BT and RO modes and
   the Local BU (LBU) in the HMIPv6 case, where applying security
   measures is not just an option.  It follows that hiding/replacing the
   HoA in and encrypting the PaT sent in the BU message are two measures
   which can provide privacy protection for the MN against eavesdroppers
   located on path between the MN and the CN/HA/MAP.














Haddad, et al.          Expires January 14, 2009                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft          IP Tunneling Optimization              July 2008


4.  Tunneling Optimization for BT mode and HMIPv6

   TO mechanism addresses tunneling issues described earlier by keeping
   the original packet size unmodified and removing the need for an
   additional IP header.

   TO mechanism is based on using a PaT to easily translate IP packets
   headers to new ones which reflect the topologies of the new chosen
   origin and destination.  We limit the scope of the PaT in this
   document to IPv6 addresses only but it is important to note that its
   usefulness can also be expanded to translate content(s) of other
   particular field(s).  Another way to describe the PaT functionality
   is to consider it as a mechanism which virtualizes the need for
   explicit tunneling.

   In order to better describe the suggested mechanism, we apply it to
   the BT mode and describes the different steps required between the MN
   and the HA to implement it.  In case of HMIPv6 protocol, we note that
   the same approach can be applied but with HMIPv6 specific signaling
   messages and IPv6 addresses.  After that, we apply the suggested
   mechanism in the RO mode.

   The BT mode starts after the MN switches to a foreign network.  In
   this case, the MN configures a new CoA and notifies its HA by
   securely exchanging a BU and BA messages.  After creating the binding
   between the two MN's addresses, both nodes start tunneling data
   packets between them.  From the MN side, IP tunneling is applied on
   each data packet sent to the HA by attaching an outer IP header which
   contains the MN's CoA as source address and the HA's IP address as
   destination address.  The inner IP header carries the MN's HoA as
   source address and the CN's address as destination address.
   On the HA side, IP tunneling is applied on incoming data packets
   (i.e., sent by the CN to the MN's HoA) by attaching to each packet an
   outer which carries the MN and the HA IP addresses i.e., the source
   address becomes the HA's address and the destination address is the
   MN's CoA.

   The data packet tunneling format on the MN and HA sides is as
   follows:

     <-- outer IPv6 header -> <-- inner IPv6 header ->
     +----+--------+--------+ +----+--------+--------+ +------------
     |    |        |        | |    |        |        | |
     |oNAF|  oSRC  |  oDEST | |iNAF|  iSRC  |  iDEST | |  iPAYLOAD
     |    |        |        | |    |        |        | |
     +----+--------+--------+ +----+--------+--------+ +------------

   where:



Haddad, et al.          Expires January 14, 2009                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft          IP Tunneling Optimization              July 2008


   - NAF represents the non-address fields of an IPv6 header (I.e., the
   first 8 octets of an IPv6 header)

   - SRC is an IPv6 source address

   - DEST is an IPv6 destination address

   - EXT is zero or more IPv6 extension headers

   - the prefix "o" means "outer"

   In the HMIPv6 case, the MN attaches an outer header which contains
   its LCoA as source address and the selected MAP's IP address as
   destination address.  The inner header contains the MN's RCoA as
   source address and the CN's IP address as destination address.
   Similarly, the MAP attaches an outer header to all data packets sent
   by the CN to the MN's RCoA.  The outer header is the same as the one
   used by the MN but with the two addresses inverted.

   The first step towards implementing the TO mechanism consists on
   building the PaT at the MN's side.  Since we limit the PaT
   functionality in this document to the IP addresses only, the PaT will
   consist on two different 128-bit translator parameters (TPs):
   PaT = {TP_Source (TPS) , TP_Destination (TPD)}

   In the BT mode, TPS and TPD are computed in the following way:

   - TPS = oSrc_Addr XOR iSrc_Addr

   Where:
   - oSrc_Addr is the Outer header Source Address (CoA)
   - iSrc_Addr is the Inner header Source Address (HoA)

   - TPD = oDst_Addr XOR iDst_Addr

   Where:
   - oDst_Addr is the Outer header Destination Address (HA's IP address)
   - iDst_Addr is the Inner header Destination Address (CN's IP address)

   In HMIPv6 protocol, the PaT is computed in the same way as in the BT
   mode but with using the appropriate IP addresses defined in HMIPv6:

   - CoA = LCoA
   - HoA = RCoA
   - HA's IP address = MAP's IP address

   The next step after building the PaT is to securely share it with the
   HA or the MAP (i.e., HMIPv6 case).  This is done by inserting the PaT



Haddad, et al.          Expires January 14, 2009                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft          IP Tunneling Optimization              July 2008


   components in two new options (called PaT Source (PaTS) and PaT
   Destination (PaTD)) carried by the BU message.  The two options MUST
   be sent encrypted.
   Another way to share the PaT would consist on using the BU message
   (e.g., by setting a new bit) to request the HA to build the PaT.  In
   such case, the MN has to send the CN's IP address(es) in the BU
   message.  For privacy purpose, the CN's address SHOULD be sent
   encrypted.

   It follows from the above description, that each time the MN
   configures a new CoA, it has to build a new PaT and send it in a BU/
   LBU (i.e., with the new CoA/LCoA) to the HA/MAP.

   If the MN is communicating with multiple CNs, then it SHOULD
   configure one CoA per CN and build the corresponding PaT before
   sending it to the HA.  Such step is required in order to avoid any
   confusion over which PaT to apply at the HA side on data packets sent
   by the MN.  The same requirement arises in the HMIPv6 case which
   means that the MN has to configure one LCoA per CN, build the
   corresponding PaT then send it to the MAP.
   Consequently, the HA/MAP SHOULD create one entry in its BCE for each
   MN's CoA/LCoA and SHOULD add the corresponding CN's IP address
   together with the corresponding PaT.

   Upon receiving a BU message carrying a PaT, the HA creates first a
   binding between the two MN's addresses and stores them together with
   the PaT in its binding cache entries (BCE) table.  Then, the HA sends
   back a BA message to the MN.
   It follows that, when the MN has multiple CoAs, then the HA SHOULD
   create one entry in its BCE for each MN's CoA and SHOULD add the
   corresponding CN's IP address to the MN's addresses and the
   corresponding PaT.
   Similarly, in an HMIPv6 domain, the MN sends the PaT encrypted in the
   LBU message to its MAP and waits for the BA message before applying
   the PaT on data packets.

   After creating the binding and sharing the PaT with the HA/MAP, the
   MN applies it on each data packet sent to the CN (i.e., via the HA/
   MAP) and on each data packet received from the HA/MAP.  The HA/MAP
   applies the PaT on each data packet received from the MN before
   sending it to the CN and on each data packet sent by the CN to the
   MN's HoA/RCoA before sending it to the MN.

   When the MN needs to send a data packet to the CN, it applies the PaT
   on the IP header in the following way (Eq. 1):

   - Src_Addr = iSrc_Addr XOR TPS
   - Dst_Addr = iDst_Addr XOR TPD



Haddad, et al.          Expires January 14, 2009                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft          IP Tunneling Optimization              July 2008


   Where Src_Addr is the source address disclosed in the IP header and
   Dst_Addr is the destination address used in the IP header.  It
   becomes obvious at this stage that the Src_Addr is the MN's CoA (or
   LCoA in HMIPv6) and the Dst_Addr is the HA's IP address (or MAP's IP
   address in HMIPv6).

   When the HA/MAP receives a data packet from the MN, it retrieves the
   corresponding PaT on the IP header and translates the IP addresses to
   new ones.  Since the PaT used by the HA is the same as the one used
   by the MN and the required operation is only a XOR, then the
   resulting IP addresses are the ones used as iSrc_Addr and iDst_Addr
   in (Eq. 1).  This means:

   - nSrc_Addr = Src_Addr XOR TPS (= iSrc_Addr)
   - nDst_Addr = Dst_Addr XOR TPD (= iDst_Addr)

   Where the nSrc_Addr is the new IP source address and nDst_Addr is the
   new IP destination address used in the data packet sent by the HA to
   the CN.

   Similarly, when the CN sends a data packet to the MN's HoA, the HA/
   MAP applies the MN's corresponding PaT to the IP packet header and
   translates the two IP addresses to new ones before sending the data
   packet to the MN.

   Finally, when the MN gets a data packet from its HA/MAP, it checks
   first if the data packet is encapsulated or not.  In the latter case,
   the MN applies the PaT to the IP packet header.  Otherwise, the MN
   follows the BT mode to process the packet.
   Note that in the current design, the HA SHOULD always tunnel any new
   data packet sent by a new CN according to the BT mode rules and
   SHOULD NOT apply any PaT until it receives one from the MN.  However,
   further optimizations are possible and will be introduced in future
   version of this document.

















Haddad, et al.          Expires January 14, 2009               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft          IP Tunneling Optimization              July 2008


5.  Tunneling Optimization for RO mode

   As mentioned earlier, MIPv6 RO mode uses a different form of IP
   tunnel between the two endpoints (i.e., MN and CN) than the one used
   in the BT mode (i.e., between the MN and its HA).  The modified IP
   tunnel discloses three IP addresses to the receiver and is used by
   both sides when exchanging data packets.  Consequently, the TO
   mechanism requires a slight modification in order to adapt it to the
   degenerated tunnel used in the RO mode.

   For this purpose, when the RO mode is used, the PaT components SHOULD
   be computed by both endpoints in the following way:

   - TPS = CoA XOR HoA
   - TPD = 0000:0000:0000:0000:0000:0000:0000:0000

   Where the CoA and HoA are the MN's IP addresses.  Note that when the
   RO mode is used, the MN does not need to send the PaT in the BU
   message since the CN can build it.  However, the MN SHOULD send an
   explicit request to the CN to check if both endpoints can use the PaT
   when exchanging data packets.  For this purpose, the request consists
   on setting a new bit in the BU message sent by the MN to the CN and
   getting an explicit acknowledgment to the request from the CN in the
   BA message.  If the CN is able to use the PaT, then it SHOULD set a
   new bit in the BA message.  Otherwise, it can only send the BA
   message without any further action.

   It follows from the above, that each time the MN needs to send a data
   packet to the CN following the RO mode rules, it SHOULD apply the PaT
   to the IP packet header in order to translate it to the right IP
   address, i.e., the MN's CoA.  The same rule applies when receiving a
   data packet from the CN (i.e., sent to the MN's CoA).  On the CN
   side, the PaT is applied each time a data packet needs to be sent to
   the MN or each time a data packet is received from the MN.

   It should be noted that when the RO mode is in use, the PaT can be
   applied only as long as the MN's CoA binding lifetime has not
   expired.  In addition, the MN SHOULD set the PaT bit in each BU
   message sent to the CN as long as it prefers to use the TO mechanism
   during the ongoing session.  This also means that a new PaT needs to
   be built after each BU message carrying a new CoA.










Haddad, et al.          Expires January 14, 2009               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft          IP Tunneling Optimization              July 2008


6.  Tunneling Optimization for DSMIPv6

   TBD
















































Haddad, et al.          Expires January 14, 2009               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft          IP Tunneling Optimization              July 2008


7.  Bit and Options Formats

   TBD
















































Haddad, et al.          Expires January 14, 2009               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft          IP Tunneling Optimization              July 2008


8.  Security Considerations

   This memo describes a TO mechanism which is mainly used to avoid
   explicit IP tunneling in mobility protocols.

   The proposed mechanism enhances the MN's privacy by removing the need
   to disclose the MN's two IP addresses in the same data packet.
   Consequently, it simplifies and narrows the privacy problem in a
   mobile environment.

   In the current memo, the PaT is only applied on the IPv6 addresses
   and as such it does not create nor amplify any new or existing
   threats.






































Haddad, et al.          Expires January 14, 2009               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft          IP Tunneling Optimization              July 2008


9.  Acknowledgments

   The authors would like to thank Laurent Marchand, Conny Larsson,
   Shinta Sugimoto, Suresh Krishnan, Hesham Soliman and George Tsirtsis
   for their valuable comments.














































Haddad, et al.          Expires January 14, 2009               [Page 15]

Internet-Draft          IP Tunneling Optimization              July 2008


10.  References

10.1.  Normative References

   [MIPv6]   Johnson, D., Perkins, C., and J. Arkko, "Mobility Support
             for IPv6", RFC 3775, June 2004.

   [TERM]    Bradner, S., "Key Words for Use in RFCs to Indicate
             Requirement Levels", RFC 2119, BCP , March 1997.

10.2.  Informative References

   [EALDC]   Barr, K. and K. Asanovic, "Energy-Aware Lossless Data
             Compression", ACM Transactions Computer Systems,
             August 2006.

   [FMIPv6]  Koodli, R., "Fast Handovers for Mobile IPv6", RFC 5268,
             March 2007.

   [HMIPv6]  Soliman, H., Castelluccia, C., ElMalki, K., and L. Bellier,
             "Hierarchical Mobile IPv6", Internet
             Draft, draft-ietf-mipshop-4140bis-03.txt, June 2008.

   [PMIPv6]  Gundavelli, S., Leung, K., Devarapalli, V., Chowdhury, K.,
             and B. Patil, "Proxy Mobile IPv6", Internet
             Draft, draft-ietf-netlmm-proxymip6-18.txt, May 2008.

   [TUN]     Deering, S. and B. Zill, "Redundant Address Deletion when
             Encapsulating IPv6 in IPv6", Internet
             Draft, draft-deering-ipv6-encap-addr-deletion-00.txt,
             November 2001.




















Haddad, et al.          Expires January 14, 2009               [Page 16]

Internet-Draft          IP Tunneling Optimization              July 2008


Authors' Addresses

   Wassim Haddad
   Qualcomm
   500 Somerset Corporate Blvd
   Bridgewater, NJ  08807
   USA

   Phone: +1 908 9385027
   Email: whaddad@qualcomm.com


   Mats Naslund
   Ericsson Research
   Torshamnsgatan 23
   SE-164 80 Stockholm
   Sweden

   Phone: +46 8 58533739
   Email: Mats.Naslund@ericsson.com


   Pekka Nikander
   Ericsson Research Nomadic Lab
   Jorvas FI-02420
   Finland

   Phone: +358 9 299 1
   Email: Pekka.Nikander@nomadiclab.com






















Haddad, et al.          Expires January 14, 2009               [Page 17]

Internet-Draft          IP Tunneling Optimization              July 2008


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2008).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.











Haddad, et al.          Expires January 14, 2009               [Page 18]

