
Network Working Group                                       M. Wasserman
Internet-Draft                                                ThingMagic
Expires: April 17, 2005                                        L. Daigle
                                                                VeriSign
                                                        October 17, 2004



     Proposed Transition Plan for IETF Administrative Restructuring
                  draft-wasserman-adminrest-plan-00.txt


Status of this Memo


   This document is an Internet-Draft and is subject to all provisions
   of section 3 of RFC 3667.  By submitting this Internet-Draft, each
   author represents that any applicable patent or other IPR claims of
   which he or she is aware have been or will be disclosed, and any of
   which he or she become aware will be disclosed, in accordance with
   RFC 3668.


   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.


   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."


   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.


   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.


   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 17, 2005.


Copyright Notice


   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).


Abstract


   This document proposes a transition plan and schedule for the
   administrative restructuring effort currently underway in the IETF.
   This transition plan was originally put forth in an e-mail message,
   but has been moved to an Internet-Draft because that seems to be the
   simplest way to produce a well-formatted, version-controlled document
   that is accessible to everyone in the IETF community.




Wasserman & Daigle       Expires April 17, 2005                 [Page 1]
Internet-Draft         AdminRest Transition Plan            October 2004



   If the IETF community reaches consensus to pursue some version of
   this plan, this plan will become a living document that will be
   updated from time-to-time to reflect community feedback and/or to
   track the actual progress of our administrative restructuring
   efforts.  It is not expected that any version of this document will
   be published as an RFC.


Table of Contents


   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Transition Plan Goals  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3.  Transition Plan Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     3.1   Approval by the IETF Community and ISOC  . . . . . . . . .  4
     3.2   Selecting IASA Leadership  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
       3.2.1   Seating the Interim IAOC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
       3.2.2   Recruiting the IETF Administrative Director  . . . . .  6
     3.3   Establishing Agreement with Service Providers  . . . . . .  6
   4.  Establishing a 2005 Operating Budget . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   5.  Proposed Schedule for IASA Transition  . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   6.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
       Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
       Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . 10






























Wasserman & Daigle       Expires April 17, 2005                 [Page 2]
Internet-Draft         AdminRest Transition Plan            October 2004



1.  Introduction


   This document proposes a work plan and schedule for formalizing the
   IETF Administrative Support Activity (IASA) as described in a
   proposed BCP (draft-wasserman-iasa-bcp-00.txt) that will be submitted
   for publication along with this document.  The BCP is based on the
   original "Scenario O" proposal that was sent to the IETF list as an
   e-mail message.  The original message can be found at:


   http://www1.ietf.org/mail-archive/web/ietf/current/msg31326.html


   This transition plan was originally put forth as part of the e-mail
   message cited above, but has been moved to an Internet-Draft because
   that seems to be the simplest way to produce a well-formatted,
   version-controlled document that is accessible to everyone in the
   IETF community.


   If the IETF community reaches consensus to pursue some version of
   this plan, this plan will become a living document that will be
   updated from time-to-time to reflect community feedback and/or to
   track the actual progress of our administrative restructuring
   efforts.  It is not expected that any version of this document will
   be published as an RFC.


2.  Transition Plan Goals


   This transition plan is intended to satisfy four goals:


   o  Satisfy the IETF's need for support functions through 2005 and
      beyond, with a careful transition that minimizes the risk of
      substantial disruption to the IETF standards process.


   o  Establish IETF community consensus and ISOC approval of a BCP
      formalizing the IASA as described in this scenario before any
      actions are taken that will have long term effects (hiring,
      contacts, etc.)


   o  Make sure that decisions with long term impact, such as hiring the
      IAD and establishing contracts for administrative support, are
      made by people chosen for that purpose who will be responsible to
      the community for the effectiveness of this effort (the IAD and
      members of the IAOC) -- not by our already overloaded technical
      leadership.


   o  Within the above constraints, move as quickly as possible towards
      a well-defined administrative support structure that is
      transparent and accountable to the IETF community.





Wasserman & Daigle       Expires April 17, 2005                 [Page 3]
Internet-Draft         AdminRest Transition Plan            October 2004



   Community feedback is requested on the appropriateness of these goals
   and whether or not they are likely to be met by following the plan
   described below.


3.  Transition Plan Overview


   There are three major elements to this transition plan which can, to
   some degree, take place in parallel only after we establish IETF
   community consensus to pursue an administrative structure similar to
   that described in the "Scenario O"-based BCP proposal:


   o  Finalizing the BCP text and getting it approved by the IETF
      community and ISOC.


   o  Selecting IASA leadership.  This includes appointing the IAOC, and
      recruiting and hiring the IAD.


   o  Negotiating agreements with service providers.  This includes
      determining the structure and work flow of the IASA, deciding
      which portions of the IASA should be staffed via an open request
      for proposals (RFP) process, and issuing a RFP for those portions.
      It may also include establishing sole source contracts or MOUs for
      other portions of the IASA.


   Each of the three items listed above is described in more detail in
   the following sections.


3.1  Approval by the IETF Community and ISOC


   The IASA will be formalized in a "Scenario O"-based BCP that is
   approved by the IETF community and accepted by the ISOC Board of
   Trustees.  There are three steps in this process:


   1.  Establishment of IETF community consensus that we should pursue a
       "Scenario O"-based approach, as discussed in a joint IAB/IESG
       recommendation that was also published simultaneously with this
       proposal.  This consensus will be established through community
       discussion and a formal two-week consensus call issued by the
       IETF chair on the IETF mailing list.


   2.  Establishment of IETF community consensus on a BCP that
       formalizes the IASA as described.  This consensus would be
       established through public discussion, a four week IETF Last Call
       and IESG review and approval.  A -00 version of this BCP is
       available now (see above).


   3.  ISOC approval of the BCP and acceptance of ISOC's
       responsibilities as described therein.  This approval and




Wasserman & Daigle       Expires April 17, 2005                 [Page 4]
Internet-Draft         AdminRest Transition Plan            October 2004



       acceptance would be signified by an ISOC Board resolution.


   The timeline for these three approval steps is rather long, but there
   is significant progress that can be made in other areas once we have
   established IETF community consensus to pursue this scenario.


3.2  Selecting IASA Leadership


   Once we have IETF consensus to pursue the basic proposal, we can
   appoint an interim IAOC to begin working on the IASA transition.  The
   interim IAOC could do substantial work on non-binding tasks, such as
   beginning the recruitment process for an IAD, determining the
   structure of the IASA work, issuing RFPs and negotiating potential
   agreements with service providers.  The interim IAOC would not be
   empowered to make binding agreements, but could work with appropriate
   consultants and advisors to make a lot of progress towards
   determining the initial structure and work flow of the IASA.


3.2.1  Seating the Interim IAOC


   Because the IETF Nominations Committee (NomCom) process for new
   positions will consume a lot of resources and take a long time to
   complete, we propose that the interim IAOC consist of:


   o  1 IESG selected member


   o  1 IAB selected member


   o  1 ISOC selected member


   o  The IETF Chair


   o  The ISOC President/CEO


   The IAB chair will serve as a non-voting liaison, as described in the
   BCP.


   If the interim IAOC chooses to do so, they may appoint an interim
   IAOC chair from among the appointed members to serve until the full
   IAOC is seated.


   The IESG and ISOC Board appointees will be expected to serve until
   the first IETF meeting of 2006, and the IAB appointment will be
   expected to serve until the first IETF meeting of 2007, assuming that
   the BCP is approved and the IAOC continues to have appointed members
   from these bodies.


   The IAOC will shift from interim to non-interim status when the BCP




Wasserman & Daigle       Expires April 17, 2005                 [Page 5]
Internet-Draft         AdminRest Transition Plan            October 2004



   is formally approved by the IETF and ISOC.


   When the BCP is approved, if the BCP indicates that there will be
   NomCom-selected IAOC members the NomCom selection process will begin
   at that time.  Any adjustments to appointed members based on the BCP
   contents will also be made at that time.  After all members are
   seated, the IAOC will choose a chair, as described in the BCP.


3.2.2  Recruiting the IETF Administrative Director


   The interim IAOC should appoint an IAD selection committee to recruit
   and select the IETF Administrative Director.  This committee will
   consist entirely of IAOC members or liaisons, and will, at minimum,
   include the IETF chair and the ISOC President.  If the IAOC chooses,
   this committee could include the entire interim IAOC.


   The IAD selection committee should determine a job description for
   the IAD, in consultation with other IETF leaders and the IETF
   community.  Once the job description is established, the IAD
   selection committee should start recruiting candidates for the
   position.


   Although the interim IAOC is not empowered to hire the IAD as a
   full-time employee, it might be possible for the IAOC to ask ISOC to
   engage the potential IAD as a consultant to help with other tasks
   during the interim period.


3.3  Establishing Agreement with Service Providers


   The most important activity of the IAOC during late 2004 and early
   2005 will be to determine the structure and work flow of the IASA and
   to establish contracts or other agreements with service providers to
   do the required work.  This work includes the following functions as
   defined in the consultant's report:


   o  Technical infrastructure


   o  Meeting management


   o  Clerk's office


   o  Internet-Drafts administration


   o  RFC Editor services to support IETF standards publication


   o  IANA services to support IETF standards publication


   The interim IAOC should work with IETF leaders and other




Wasserman & Daigle       Expires April 17, 2005                 [Page 6]
Internet-Draft         AdminRest Transition Plan            October 2004



   knowledgeable members of the community to determine the structure and
   work flow required for the IASA activity and make corresponding
   adjustments to the above list, if necessary.  The interim IAOC can
   also identify which areas of IASA work should continue to be provided
   by existing IETF service providers, and work with those providers to
   establish proposed contracts or agreements for later approval by the
   non-interim IAOC.  The IAOC can also choose to start an RFP process
   for any services that they believe should be filled through an open
   RFP process.


4.  Establishing a 2005 Operating Budget


   Because the ISOC 2005 budgeting process will be finalized before the
   final BCP approval, the interim IAOC should work with the ISOC staff
   and President/CEO to establish a proposed 2005 operating budget for
   the IASA.  Since this will happen in advance of full knowledge
   regarding the costs of 2005 operations, it may be subject to
   significant adjustment later.


5.  Proposed Schedule for IASA Transition


   As described above, the three stages of the IETF community and ISOC
   approval process will take some time.  If the community chooses to
   pursue a "Scenario O"-based approach and we reach quick consensus on
   the details, a highly optimistic schedule for this approval would be:


   1.  IETF discussion of this proposal and other scenarios through
        17-Oct-2005.  IAB/IESG discusses this proposal with ISOC Board.


   2.  IAB/IESG joint recommendation and the -00 version of a proposed
        BCP both issued on 18-Oct-04.


   3.  Community discussion of the joint IAB/IESG recommendation through
        25-Oct-04.


   4.  Two-week community consensus call issued on the IETF list on
        25-Oct-04 (through 8-Nov-04) regarding rough community consensus
        to pursue this direction and appoint an interim IAOC.  IAOC
        selecting bodies will begin a search for potential IAOC members
        in parallel, based on expected community consensus.


   5.  Rough community consensus declared on 8-Nov-04 to pursue Scenario
        O and appoint the interim IAOC.


   6.  Interim IAOC seated on 15-Nov-04.  Interim IAOC begins interim
        work outlined above, including establishment of estimated 2005
        budget and IAD recruitment.





Wasserman & Daigle       Expires April 17, 2005                 [Page 7]
Internet-Draft         AdminRest Transition Plan            October 2004



   7.  BCP text discussed by community, IETF leadership and ISOC Board
        until we have something that represents rough community
        consensus that is acceptable to all.  We hope that this could be
        completed by 15-Nov-04.


   8.  Four week IETF Last Call issued for BCP on 15-Nov-04 -- extends
        through 13-Dec-04.


   9.  Simultaneous IESG and ISOC Board approvals by 17-Dec-04.  IAOC
        moves from interim to non-interim status.


   10.  IAD hired in Jan 2005.


   11.  NomCom seats remaining IAOC members as quickly as possible,
        definitely by the first IETF meeting of 2005.


   12.  Formal agreements with all service providers in-place by June
        2005.



6  References


   [RFC2026]  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision
              3", BCP 9, RFC 2026, October 1996.


   [RFC3667]  Bradner, S., "IETF Rights in Contributions", BCP 78, RFC
              3667, February 2004.


   [RFC3668]  Bradner, S., "Intellectual Property Rights in IETF
              Technology", BCP 79, RFC 3668, February 2004.



Authors' Addresses


   Margaret Wasserman
   ThingMagic
   One Broadway, 14th Floor
   Cambridge, MA  02142
   USA


   Phone: +1 617 758-4177
   EMail: margaret@thingmagic.com
   URI:   http://www.thingmagic.com









Wasserman & Daigle       Expires April 17, 2005                 [Page 8]
Internet-Draft         AdminRest Transition Plan            October 2004



   Leslie Daigle
   VeriSign
   21355 Ridgetop Circle
   Dulles, VA  20176
   USA


   EMail: leslie@verisignlabs.com, leslie@thinkingcat.com













































Wasserman & Daigle       Expires April 17, 2005                 [Page 9]
Internet-Draft         AdminRest Transition Plan            October 2004



Intellectual Property Statement


   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.


   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.


   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.



Disclaimer of Validity


   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.



Copyright Statement


   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.



Acknowledgment


   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.





Wasserman & Daigle       Expires April 17, 2005                [Page 10]



