

iptel                                                     C. Sivachelvan
Internet-Draft                                       Cisco Systems, Inc.
Intended status: Informational                         September 6, 2006
Expires: March 10, 2007


 The Call Type tel URI Parameter for Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)
                  draft-sivachelvan-iptel-call-type-00

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on March 10, 2007.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

Abstract

   This document describes a standardized mechanism to convey the "Call
   Type" parameter in tel Uniform Resource Identifiers (URIs).  A new
   extension to the tel URI is defined for this purpose.

   Call Type is a form of classification of a dialed number in a
   telephony call; it classifies the call as a Local-Call, Toll-Call,
   International-Call, etc.  A definition of each Call Type addressed in
   this specification is provided in Section 2.



Sivachelvan              Expires March 10, 2007                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft           Tel Call Type Parameter          September 2006


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3.  Definitions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   4.  Problem Statement  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   5.  Parameter Definition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   6.  Usage  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   7.  Security Consideration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   8.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   9.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   10. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     10.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     10.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 10



































Sivachelvan              Expires March 10, 2007                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft           Tel Call Type Parameter          September 2006


1.  Introduction

   This specification defines a tel URI parameter for carrying Call Type
   information between VoIP network elements within a service provider's
   administrative domain.  In the PSTN, the originating switch types the
   call as a Local-Call, Toll-Call, Inter-Lata Call, etc., for billing,
   call screening and routing purposes.  In a VoIP network, these
   functions are performed by different VoIP network elements (such as
   Softswitches/Outbound Proxies, Application Servers, MGCs, etc.).
   Hence, the Call Type may be determined as necessary at any of the
   hops in the signaling path; this requires that the necessary
   configuration (dial plan) information be provisioned at each network
   element that requires the Call Type information.

   Some Call Types are derived from the called number and caller's
   message rate center (or locale), while others are derived solely from
   the called number itself.  The data used to derive the Call Type
   information varies country by country, therefore, the provisioning
   data required to derive the Call Type information is considered
   outside the scope of this specification.  Traditionally, the Call
   Type information of a dialed number is derived from the dial plan
   provisioned at the outbound proxy, originating switch or B2BUA, or at
   the network element to which the called user is homed.

   Some of the examples and definitions of terms defined in this
   specification may be USA centric; however, an attempt is made to
   define the Call Types in a generic manner.


2.  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119. [1]


3.  Definitions

   The terms defined in this section include various Call Types and
   related terms:

   Call Type:   Call Type is a form of characterization of a called
      number of a telephony call.  See below for details.








Sivachelvan              Expires March 10, 2007                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft           Tel Call Type Parameter          September 2006


   Carrier-Operator-Call:   A call is identified as a "Carrier-Operator-
      Call" when a user dials a specific code ("00" - in the US) to
      reach a carrier operator.

   Directory-Assistance-Call:   A call is identified as a "Directory-
      Assistance-Call" when a user dials a service code (telephony
      number) to reach the directory assistance service.  In the US,
      "(1)+ 411" or "1+555+1212" code is used to reach the directory
      assistance service, which provides customer listing information
      (telephone number, address information, etc.).

   Emergency-Call:   A Call is identified as an "Emergency Call" when a
      user has dialed a specific code to reach the emergency operator.

   Information-Service-Call:   A call is identified as an "Information-
      Service-Call" when a user dials a service code to reach
      information services such as time, weather, traffic report, etc.

   Inter-LATA-Call:   A call is identified as an "Inter-LATA" call, when
      a call originates in one Local Access and Transport Area (LATA)
      and terminates in another LATA.  This Call Type applies to the USA
      only.  Sometimes it is referred to as a "long distance call."

   International-Call:   A call is identified as an "International-Call"
      when a call is made from one country to another country, provided
      that either or both of the calling and called numbers are not part
      of the "World Zone 1" (North America and the Caribbean).

   International-World-Zone1-Call:   A call is identified as an
      "International-World-Zone1-Call" when a call is made from one
      country to another country within the "World Zone 1"(North America
      and the Caribbean).

   Local-Call:   A call is identified as a "local-call" when the called
      number is in the same local serving area (or charging zone) as the
      calling user.

   Operator-Assist-International-Call:   A call is identified as an
      "Operator-Assist-International-Call" when a user dials a specific
      code ("01 + International" - in the USA) plus the international
      number.

   Operator-Assist-National-Call:   A call is identified as a "Operator-
      Assist-National-Call" when a user dials a specific code ( "0 +
      National number" - in the USA) plus the national number.






Sivachelvan              Expires March 10, 2007                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft           Tel Call Type Parameter          September 2006



   Operator-Call:   A call is identified as an "Operator-Call" when a
      user dials a specific code ('0' - in the USA) to reach a local
      operator.

   PCS-Call:   A call is identified as a "PCS-Call" when a user has
      dialed a code for accessing PCS (Personal Communication Service).
      In the USA, NPA 500 is a special numbering resource established by
      the INC for PCS [INC-95-0407-009].

   Premium-Rate-call:   A call is identified as a "Premium-Rate-Call"
      when a user diales a premium telephone number for accessing
      certain services for which the charges are higher than for a
      normal toll or Inter-LATA call.  In the USA, the "Premium-Rate"
      telephony number is of the format 1.900.xxx.xxxx.  It is also
      referred to as a "900 call."

   Relay-Service-Call:   A call is identified as a "Relay-Service-Call"
      when a user has dialed a service code (telephone number) to reach
      the telecommunication relay service.  In the USA, 711 code is used
      to reach the relay service which provides the ability for an
      individual who has hearing or speech disability to engage in a
      communication with a hearing individual.

   Repair-Service-Call:   A call is identified as a "Repair-Service-
      Call" when a user has dialed a service code (telephony number) to
      reach the service provider's repair service center.  In the USA
      611 code is used to reach the repair service.

   Toll-Call:   A call is identified as a "Toll-Call" when the called
      number is outside of the calling user's local serving area
      (charging zone).


4.  Problem Statement

   In a VoIP network, the functions of a typical PSTN switch are
   decomposed into various VoIP network elements (such as a Proxy/B2BUA,
   AS, MGC, etc.) based on the roles they play in the call establishment
   process.  As such, certain call-related information, such as Call
   Type, must be derived in each of the network element in the signaling
   path for billing and call screening purposes.  The Call Type also
   plays an important role in the call routing process for calls that
   are destined for the PSTN.  A typical reference model is shown Figure
   1.






Sivachelvan              Expires March 10, 2007                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft           Tel Call Type Parameter          September 2006


                  +-------+
                  |       |
                  |  AS   |
                  |       |
                  +-------+
                    ^   |
                    |   |
                 SIP|   |SIP
                    |   |
                    |   V
                  +-------+                    +--------+              +-------+
                  |       |        SIP         |        |              |       |
                  |Proxy/ |------------------->|  MGC   |------------->| PSTN  |
                  |B2BUA  |                    |        |              |       |
                  |       |                    +--------+              +-------+
                  +-------+
                      /
                     /
                    /
                   / SIP
           \__/   /
            /\   /
           /  \ /                     KEY:
          /    \                           AS     - Application Server
         /  UA  \                          B2BUA  - Back-to-Back-User-Agent
         +------+                          MGC    - Media Gateway Controller
           SIP UA                          UA     - User Agent


                         Figure1: A Typical Reference Model



   In the above scenario, the outbound proxy ( or B2BUA) may derive the
   Call Type of a telephone call, for Call Detail Recording (CDR)
   purposes.  Then it proxies the INVITE request to the Application
   Server (AS) for service/feature invocations.  Some services, such as
   call barring or Class of Service Restriction, may require the Call
   Type information for screening the call.  Hence the AS also needs to
   derive the Call Type information for call screening purposes.

   After the AS has finished with its role, it proxies the INVITE
   request back to the outbound proxy for subsequent handling of the
   call.  It then proxies the INVITE request to the MGC.  Here we assume
   that the call is destined for the PSTN.  The MGC then derives the
   call type to select the appropriate outbound route (or Trunk Group)
   towards the PSTN interconnect.




Sivachelvan              Expires March 10, 2007                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft           Tel Call Type Parameter          September 2006


   In the above scenario, the Call Type information may be derived at
   three network elements.  To do this, a considerable amount of dial
   plan information must be provisioned at each of these network
   elements.  In order to alleviate this provisioning burden at each hop
   in the call path, this specification provides a mechanism to transmit
   the Call Type information from one element to another.  Currently,
   there is no standardized means for transporting the Call Type
   information between VoIP network elements.  This leads to
   provisioning overhead.  The exact provisioning data that is required
   for deriving the Call Type information is outside the scope of this
   specification; this is primarily because the dial plan
   (configuration) data varies from country to country, and in some
   cases, it may vary from service provider to service provider.


5.  Parameter Definition

   The Call Type shall be represented as a tel URI parameter because it
   is an attribute of the called party number.  The ABNF RFC 2234 [2]
   syntax is defined as follows:



            call-type       = ct-tag EQUAL ct-value
            ct-tag          = "ct"
            call-type-value = "carrier-opr"/"dir-assist"/"emergency"/
                              "info-svc"/"inter-lata"/"international"/
                              "international-world-zone1"/"local"/
                              "opr-assist-international"/
                              "opr-assist-national"/"opr"/"pcs"/
                              "premium"/"relay"/"repair"/"toll"/
                               token



   An example of the syntax of the Call Type parameter is given below:

                    INVITE tel:+1-214-469-0000; ct=local


   The normative procedures of Section 19.1.6 of RFC 3261 [3] can be
   used to derive an equivalent sip URI from a tel URI.


6.  Usage

   The Call Type is used to characterize the dialed number of a
   telephone call, hence when used in the context of SIP signaling, it



Sivachelvan              Expires March 10, 2007                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft           Tel Call Type Parameter          September 2006


   is carried in the Request-URI of a SIP message.  It can appear only
   once, if present.  It is anticipated that this parameter will be
   primarily used by the Softswitches (or Call Agents), SIP proxies,
   Application servers and PSTN GWs for billing, call screening and call
   routing purposes.

   As such, it SHALL be first derived by an outbound proxy, B2BUA or a
   Softswitch which receives the SIP INVITE request from a UA.  Various
   SIP intermediary network elements SHOULD consult the Call Type
   information for performing call screening and/or making routing
   decisions.  Therefore, inclusion of this parameter in the INVITE
   message towards a downstream element is a local policy based on the
   trust realtionship, and MAY be controlled via the provisioning
   mechanism.

   The consumers of this parameter MUST discard this parameter, if the
   INVITE request was received from an untrusted source.  When an
   intermediary rewrites the Request-URI due to redirection services, it
   MUST discard the received Call Type parameter and MAY elect to derive
   the Call Type parameter using the redirected to number.

   Intermediaries that do not support or recognize this parameter MAY
   elect to forward it to the downstream node according to the policy
   for handing unrecognized parameters.


7.  Security Consideration

   The Call Type parameter is carried in the Request-URI, and this
   information is intended to be used within a given service provider's
   administrative domain.  Maliciously modifying the Call Type Parameter
   by the intermediaries or "the man in the middle" could result in
   incorrect call screening, billing and/or call routing.

   Although this specification imparts additional information to the
   Request-URI, the class of attacks and possible protection mechanism
   are the same as that specified for baseline SIP systems in RFC 3261
   [3].  Transport Layer Security (TLS) SHOULD be used to provide
   integrity protection, thereby mitigating these attacks.


8.  IANA Considerations

   This specification requires no action by IANA.







Sivachelvan              Expires March 10, 2007                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft           Tel Call Type Parameter          September 2006


9.  Acknowledgements

   The author would like to thank Dave Auerbach, Sankar Manepalli, Sean
   Riley, Paul Kyzivat, Randy Ethier, Yiu Lee (Comcast) and Vijey Jenhal
   (Comcast) for their comments.


10.  References

10.1.  Normative References

   [1]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
        Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [2]  Crocker, D., Ed. and P. Overell, "Augmented BNF for Syntax
        Specifications: ABNF", RFC 2234, November 1997.

   [3]  Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston, A.,
        Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley, M., and E. Schooler, "SIP:
        Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261, June 2002.

10.2.  Informative References


Author's Address

   Chelliah Sivachelvan
   Cisco Systems, Inc.
   2200 East President George Bush HWY
   Richardson, TX  75006
   USA

   Email: chelliah@cisco.com


















Sivachelvan              Expires March 10, 2007                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft           Tel Call Type Parameter          September 2006


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2006).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Sivachelvan              Expires March 10, 2007                [Page 10]


