





Internet Draft                                             L. Huang
<draft-licanhuang-dnsop-urnresolution-00.txt>        ZST University

Expires   April 2008                               October 29, 2007

Distributed Universal Resource Name Resolution based on Distributed DNS
             <draft-licanhuang-dnsop-urnresolution-00.txt>

Status of this Memo

   Distribution of this memo is unlimited.

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

Abstract

   This file is a proposal for P2P based Universal Resource Name
   resolution based on Internet draft --Distributed DNS Implementation
   in IpV6[lican].














Huang, Lican               Expires April 2008           FORMFEED[Page 1]





Internet Draft     Universal Resource Name Resolution  October 30, 2007


Table of Contents

   1. Introduction ................................................2
   2. Syntax for Universal Resource Name...........................2
   3. Universal Resource Name Resolution framework.................2
      3.1 Universal Resource Name Resolution.......................3
      3.2 Hierarchical Management of global-hier-part .............3
   4. References ..................................................4
      4.1.  Normative References ..................................4
      4.2.  Informative References ................................4
1. Introduction

   This file is a proposal for P2P based Universal Resource Name
   resolution based on Internet draft --Distributed DNS Implementation
   in IpV6[lican].

   In Internet, every resource needs an uniform name. There are RFCs
   URI[RFC2396] ,URL[RFC1738] and URN[RFC2611]. Assuming there are so
   huge number of resource name, to resolute these resource name is a
   difficult task.  Here we argue that the resource can be classified as
   a hierarchical structure, and we can store the resolution information
   in a distributed virtual hierachical architechture which is similar
   to Distributed DNS Implementation in IpV6[lican].

   2. Syntax for Universal Resource Name

     functionscheme ":"global-hier-part"/"local-name

     The functionscheme is type or function or schema for the resource.
     The global-hier-part is the global hierachical name similar as
     Domain name.
     The local-name is the local name for the resource.

     for example
         blog:Britney.popular.music/storyofBritney

          This is a resource name for a blog article about the story of
   Britney Spears

         song:Britney.popular.music/Lonely

         This is a resource name for the song Lonely by Britney Spears.

         Britney Spears is classified as Britney.popular.music.


   3.  Universal Resource Name Resolution framework




Huang, Lican               Expires April 2008           FORMFEED[Page 2]





Internet Draft     Universal Resource Name Resolution  October 30, 2007


       We treat global-hier-part in Universal Resource Name as domain
   name. So, the Virtual Hierarchical Overlay Network for  Universal
   Resource Name Resolution is the same as [lican].

   In [lican],Domain Name Server is a node which keeps local domain
   RRs[RFC1035].  Here, extension RRs are required to store the
   information about resource such as its location, etc.


   The location information for
   blog:Britney.popular.music/storyofBritney is stored on the server of
   Britney.popular.music.  Route Tables in servers are the same as
   [lican].

   3.1 Universal Resource Name Resolution

   For the Universal Resource Name Resolution, we first locate the
   domain name server as[lican]. For example, to resolute resource
   "blog:Britney.popular.music/storyofBritney", we first locate the
   server Britney.popular.music, then in the server
   Britney.popular.music, we check its extension RRs for the resource
   blog:Britney.popular.music/storyofBritney for its location, etc.

   We can use "?:Britney.popular.music" to query all functionschema of
   Britney.popular.music.  We can   also use
   "song:Britney.popular.music/?" to query all songs by Britney Spears.
   Because the hierarchical structure and the protocals in [lican], we
   can query all popular singers by query "song:?.popular.music".







   3.2  Hierarchical Management of global-hier-part

   To be a unique resource name for global scope, The Internet
   Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN) may govern the
   root of global-hier-part in Universal Resource Name organized by the
   users automatically. For example, in www.Madonna.popular.music, music
   is managed by music virtual organization, which reports to ICANN to
   approve, popular.music   is controlled by  popular music virtual
   organization,which reports to music virtual organization to approve.
   The request of   www.Madonna.popular.music is sent to virtual
   organization of popular music to be approved. In
   www.Beethoven.classic.music, classic.music   is controlled by classic
   music virtual organization, which reports to music virtual



Huang, Lican               Expires April 2008           FORMFEED[Page 3]





Internet Draft     Universal Resource Name Resolution  October 30, 2007


   organization to approve. The request of www.Beethoven.classic.music
   is managed by virtual organization of classic music.





4.  References

4.1.  Normative References

   [RFC1035]  Mockapetris, P., "DOMAIN NAMES - IMPLEMENTATION AND
              SPECIFICATION",Specification," RFC1035,
              USC/Information Sciences Institute,November, 1987.

   [Lican]    Lican Huang, "draft-licanhuang-dnsop-distributeddns-02.txt"
             (work in progress) , October 2007.




4.2.  Informative References


   [RFC2396]  T. Berners-Lee,R. Fielding,U.C. Irvine,L. Masinter,
              "Uniform Resource Identifiers (URI): Generic Syntax",
              RFC 2396, August 1998
   [RFC1738]  T. Berners-Lee, L. Masinter,M. McCahill,
              "Uniform Resource Locators (URL)",RFC 1738, December 1994

   [RFC2611]  L. Daigle,D. van Gulik,R. Iannella,P. Faltstrom,
             "URN Namespace Definition Mechanisms",RFC 2611, June 1999





Authors' Addresses


   Lican Huang
   Current Address:
   Institute of Network & Distributed Computing,
   Zhejiang Sci_Tech University,
   Hangzhou, P.R.China
   EMail: licanhuang@zist.edu.cn; huang_lican@yahoo.co.uk





Huang, Lican               Expires April 2008           FORMFEED[Page 4]





Internet Draft     Universal Resource Name Resolution  October 30, 2007


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2007).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST, AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR
   IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed
   to pertain to the implementation or use of the technology
   described in this document or the extent to which any license
   under such rights might or might not be available; nor does it
   represent that it has made any independent effort to identify any
   such rights.  Information on the procedures with respect to
   rights in RFC documents can be found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use
   of such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository
   at http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention
   any copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other
   proprietary rights that may cover technology that may be required
   to implement this standard.  Please address the information to the
   IETF at ietf-ipr@ietf.org.

Acknowledgement

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.







Huang, Lican               Expires April 2008           FORMFEED[Page 5]


